{"id": "57877", "revid": "50479220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57877", "title": "Sodium hydroxide", "text": "Caustic soda, with formula NaOH\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nSodium hydroxide, also known as lye and caustic soda, is an inorganic compound with the formula . It is a white solid ionic compound consisting of sodium cations and hydroxide anions .\nSodium hydroxide is a highly corrosive base and alkali that decomposes lipids and proteins at ambient temperatures, and may cause severe chemical burns at high concentrations. It is highly soluble in water, and readily absorbs moisture and carbon dioxide from the air. It forms a series of hydrates . The monohydrate crystallizes from water solutions between 12.3 and 61.8\u00a0\u00b0C. The commercially available \"sodium hydroxide\" is often this monohydrate, and published data may refer to it instead of the anhydrous compound.\nAs one of the simplest hydroxides, sodium hydroxide is frequently used alongside neutral water and acidic hydrochloric acid to demonstrate the pH scale to chemistry students.\nSodium hydroxide is used in many industries: in the making of wood pulp and paper, textiles, drinking water, soaps and detergents, and as a drain cleaner. Worldwide production in 2022 was approximately 83\u00a0million tons.\nProperties.\nPhysical properties.\nPure sodium hydroxide is a colorless crystalline solid that melts at without decomposition and boils at . It is highly soluble in water, with a lower solubility in polar solvents such as ethanol and methanol. Sodium hydroxide is insoluble in ether and other non-polar solvents.\nSimilar to the hydration of sulfuric acid, dissolution of solid sodium hydroxide in water is a highly exothermic reaction where a large amount of heat is liberated, posing a threat to safety through the possibility of splashing. The resulting solution is usually colorless and odorless. As with other alkaline solutions, it feels slippery with skin contact due to the process of saponification that occurs between and natural skin oils.\nViscosity.\nConcentrated (50%) aqueous solutions of sodium hydroxide have a characteristic viscosity, 78 mPa\u00b7s, that is much greater than that of water (1.0 mPa\u00b7s) and near that of olive oil (85 mPa\u00b7s) at room temperature. The viscosity of aqueous , as with any liquid chemical, is inversely related to its temperature, i.e., its viscosity decreases as temperature increases, and vice versa. The viscosity of sodium hydroxide solutions plays a direct role in its application as well as its storage.\nHydrates.\nSodium hydroxide can form several hydrates , which result in a complex solubility diagram that was described in detail by Spencer Umfreville Pickering in 1893. The known hydrates and the approximate ranges of temperature and concentration (mass percent of NaOH) of their saturated water solutions are:\nEarly reports refer to hydrates with \"n\" = 0.5 or \"n\" = 2/3, but later careful investigations failed to confirm their existence.\nThe only hydrates with stable melting points are (65.10\u00a0\u00b0C) and (15.38\u00a0\u00b0C). The other hydrates, except the metastable ones and (\u03b2) can be crystallized from solutions of the proper composition, as listed above. However, solutions of NaOH can be easily supercooled by many degrees, which allows the formation of hydrates (including the metastable ones) from solutions with different concentrations.\nFor example, when a solution of NaOH and water with 1:2 mole ratio (52.6% NaOH by mass) is cooled, the monohydrate normally starts to crystallize (at about 22\u00a0\u00b0C) before the dihydrate. However, the solution can easily be supercooled down to \u221215\u00a0\u00b0C, at which point it may quickly crystallize as the dihydrate. When heated, the solid dihydrate might melt directly into a solution at 13.35\u00a0\u00b0C; however, once the temperature exceeds 12.58\u00a0\u00b0C it often decomposes into solid monohydrate and a liquid solution. Even the \"n\" = 3.5 hydrate is difficult to crystallize, because the solution supercools so much that other hydrates become more stable.\nA hot water solution containing 73.1% (mass) of NaOH is a eutectic that solidifies at about 62.63\u00a0\u00b0C as an intimate mix of anhydrous and monohydrate crystals.\nA second stable eutectic composition is 45.4% (mass) of NaOH, that solidifies at about 4.9\u00a0\u00b0C into a mixture of crystals of the dihydrate and of the 3.5-hydrate.\nThe third stable eutectic has 18.4% (mass) of NaOH. It solidifies at about \u221228.7\u00a0\u00b0C as a mixture of water ice and the heptahydrate .\nWhen solutions with less than 18.4% NaOH are cooled, water ice crystallizes first, leaving the NaOH in solution.\nThe \u03b1 form of the tetrahydrate has density 1.33 g/cm3. It melts congruously at 7.55\u00a0\u00b0C into a liquid with 35.7% NaOH and density 1.392 g/cm3, and therefore floats on it like ice on water. However, at about 4.9\u00a0\u00b0C it may instead melt incongruously into a mixture of solid and a liquid solution.\nThe \u03b2 form of the tetrahydrate is metastable, and often transforms spontaneously to the \u03b1 form when cooled below \u221220\u00a0\u00b0C. Once initiated, the exothermic transformation is complete in a few minutes, with a 6.5% increase in volume of the solid. The \u03b2 form can be crystallized from supercooled solutions at \u221226\u00a0\u00b0C, and melts partially at \u22121.83\u00a0\u00b0C.\nThe \"sodium hydroxide\" of commerce is often the monohydrate (density 1.829 g/cm3). Physical data in technical literature may refer to this form, rather than the anhydrous compound.\nCrystal structure.\nNaOH and its monohydrate form orthorhombic crystals with the space groups Cmcm (oS8) and Pbca (oP24), respectively. The monohydrate cell dimensions are a = 1.1825, b = 0.6213, c = 0.6069 nm. The atoms are arranged in a hydrargillite-like layer structure, with each sodium atom surrounded by six oxygen atoms, three each from hydroxide ions and three from water molecules. The hydrogen atoms of the hydroxyls form strong bonds with oxygen atoms within each O layer. Adjacent O layers are held together by hydrogen bonds between water molecules.\nChemical properties.\nReaction with acids.\nSodium hydroxide reacts with protic acids to produce water and the corresponding salts. For example, when sodium hydroxide reacts with hydrochloric acid, sodium chloride is formed:\nIn general, such neutralization reactions are represented by one simple net ionic equation:\nThis type of reaction with a strong acid releases heat, and hence is exothermic. Such acid\u2013base reactions can also be used for titrations. However, sodium hydroxide is not used as a primary standard because it is hygroscopic and absorbs carbon dioxide from air.\nReaction with acidic oxides.\nSodium hydroxide also reacts with acidic oxides, such as sulfur dioxide. Such reactions are often used to \"scrub\" harmful acidic gases (like and ) produced in the burning of coal and thus prevent their release into the atmosphere. For example,\nReaction with metals and oxides.\nGlass reacts slowly with aqueous sodium hydroxide solutions at ambient temperatures to form soluble silicates. Because of this, glass joints and stopcocks exposed to sodium hydroxide have a tendency to \"freeze\". Flasks and glass-lined chemical reactors are damaged by long exposure to hot sodium hydroxide, which also frosts the glass. Sodium hydroxide does not attack iron at room temperature, since iron does not have amphoteric properties (i.e., it only dissolves in acid, not base).\nNevertheless, at high temperatures (e.g. above 500\u00a0\u00b0C), iron can react endothermically with sodium hydroxide to form iron(III) oxide, sodium metal, and hydrogen gas. This is due to the lower enthalpy of formation of iron(III) oxide (\u2212824.2 kJ/mol) compared to sodium hydroxide (\u2212500 kJ/mol) and positive entropy change of the reaction, which implies spontaneity at high temperatures (\u0394ST &gt; \u0394H, \u0394G &lt; 0) and non-spontaneity at low temperatures (\u0394ST &lt; \u0394H, \u0394G &gt; 0). Consider the following reaction between molten sodium hydroxide and finely divided iron filings:\nA few transition metals, however, may react quite vigorously with sodium hydroxide under milder conditions.\nIn 1986, an aluminium road tanker in the UK was mistakenly used to transport 25% sodium hydroxide solution, causing pressurization of the contents and damage to tankers. The pressurization is due to the hydrogen gas which is produced in the reaction between sodium hydroxide and aluminium:\nPrecipitant.\nUnlike sodium hydroxide, which is soluble, the hydroxides of most transition metals are insoluble, and therefore sodium hydroxide can be used to precipitate transition metal hydroxides. The following colours are observed:\nZinc and lead salts dissolve in excess sodium hydroxide to give a clear solution of or .\nAluminium hydroxide is used as a gelatinous flocculant to filter out particulate matter in water treatment. Aluminium hydroxide is prepared at the treatment plant from aluminium sulfate by reacting it with sodium hydroxide or bicarbonate.\n\nSaponification.\nSodium hydroxide can be used for the base-driven hydrolysis of esters (also called saponification), amides and alkyl halides. However, the limited solubility of sodium hydroxide in organic solvents means that the more soluble potassium hydroxide (KOH) is often preferred. Touching a sodium hydroxide solution with bare hands, while not recommended, produces a slippery feeling. This happens because oils on the skin such as sebum are converted to soap.\nDespite solubility in propylene glycol it is unlikely to replace water in saponification due to propylene glycol's primary reaction with fat before reaction between sodium hydroxide and fat.\nProduction.\nSodium hydroxide is industrially produced, first as a 32% solution, and then evaporated to a 50% solution by variations of the electrolytic chloralkali process. Chlorine gas is the main by-product from this process. Solid sodium hydroxide is obtained from this solution by the evaporation of water. Solid sodium hydroxide is most commonly sold as flakes, prills, and cast blocks.\nIn 2022, world production was estimated at 83 million dry tonnes of sodium hydroxide, and demand was estimated at 51\u00a0million tonnes. In 1998, total world production was around 45\u00a0million tonnes. North America and Asia each contributed around 14\u00a0million tonnes, while Europe produced around 10\u00a0million tonnes. In the United States, the major producer of sodium hydroxide is Olin, which has annual production around 5.7\u00a0million tonnes from sites at Freeport, Texas; Plaquemine, Louisiana; St. Gabriel, Louisiana; McIntosh, Alabama; Charleston, Tennessee; Niagara Falls, New York; and B\u00e9cancour, Canada. Other major US producers include Oxychem, Westlake, Shintech, and Formosa. All of these companies use the chloralkali process.\nHistorically, sodium hydroxide was produced by treating sodium carbonate with calcium hydroxide (slaked lime) in a metathesis reaction which takes advantage of the fact that sodium hydroxide is soluble, while calcium carbonate is not. This process was called causticizing.\nThe sodium carbonate for this reaction was produced by the Leblanc process in the early 19th century, or the Solvay process in the late 19th century. The conversion of sodium carbonate to sodium hydroxide was superseded entirely by the chloralkali process, which produces sodium hydroxide in a single process.\nSodium hydroxide is also produced by combining pure sodium metal with water. The byproducts are hydrogen gas and heat, often resulting in a flame.\nThis reaction is commonly used for demonstrating the reactivity of alkali metals in academic environments; however, it is not used commercially aside from a reaction within the mercury cell chloralkali process where sodium amalgam is reacted with water.\nUses.\nSodium hydroxide is a popular strong base used in industry. Sodium hydroxide is used in the manufacture of sodium salts and detergents, pH regulation, and organic synthesis. In bulk, it is most often handled as an aqueous solution, since solutions are cheaper and easier to handle.\nSodium hydroxide is used in many scenarios where it is desirable to increase the alkalinity of a mixture, or to neutralize acids. For example, in the petroleum industry, sodium hydroxide is used as an additive in drilling mud to increase alkalinity in bentonite mud systems, to increase the mud viscosity, and to neutralize any acid gas (such as hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide) which may be encountered in the geological formation as drilling progresses. Another use is in salt spray testing where pH needs to be regulated. Sodium hydroxide is used with hydrochloric acid to balance pH. The resultant salt, NaCl, is the corrosive agent used in the standard neutral pH salt spray test.\nPoor quality crude oil can be treated with sodium hydroxide to remove sulfurous impurities in a process known as \"caustic washing\". Sodium hydroxide reacts with weak acids such as hydrogen sulfide and mercaptans to yield non-volatile sodium salts, which can be removed. The waste which is formed is toxic and difficult to deal with, and the process is banned in many countries because of this. In 2006, Trafigura used the process and then dumped the waste in Ivory Coast.\nOther common uses of sodium hydroxide include:\nChemical pulping.\nSodium hydroxide is also widely used in pulping of wood for making paper or regenerated fibers. Along with sodium sulfide, sodium hydroxide is a key component of the white liquor solution used to separate lignin from cellulose fibers in the kraft process. It also plays a key role in several later stages of the process of bleaching the brown pulp resulting from the pulping process. These stages include oxygen delignification, oxidative extraction, and simple extraction, all of which require a strong alkaline environment with a pH &gt; 10.5 at the end of the stages.\nTissue digestion.\nIn a similar fashion, sodium hydroxide is used to digest tissues, as in a process that was used with farm animals at one time. This process involved placing a carcass into a sealed chamber, then adding a mixture of sodium hydroxide and water (which breaks the chemical bonds that keep the flesh intact). This eventually turns the body into a liquid with a dark brown color, and the only solids that remain are bone hulls, which can be crushed between one's fingertips.\nSodium hydroxide is frequently used in the process of decomposing roadkill dumped in landfills by animal disposal contractors. Due to its availability and low cost, it has been used by criminals to dispose of corpses. Italian serial killer Leonarda Cianciulli used this chemical to turn dead bodies into soap. In Mexico, a man who worked for drug cartels admitted disposing of over 300 bodies with it.\nSodium hydroxide is a dangerous chemical due to its ability to hydrolyze protein. If a dilute solution is spilled on the skin, burns may result if the area is not washed thoroughly and for several minutes with running water. Splashes in the eye can be more serious and can lead to blindness.\nDissolving amphoteric metals and compounds.\nStrong bases attack aluminium. Sodium hydroxide reacts with aluminium and water to release hydrogen gas. The aluminium takes an oxygen atom from sodium hydroxide, which in turn takes an oxygen atom from water, and releases two hydrogen atoms. The reaction thus produces hydrogen gas and sodium aluminate. In this reaction, sodium hydroxide acts as an agent to make the solution alkaline, which aluminium can dissolve in.\n \u2192 2 + \nSodium aluminate is an inorganic chemical that is used as an effective source of aluminium hydroxide for many industrial and technical applications. Pure sodium aluminate (anhydrous) is a white crystalline solid having a formula variously given as , , , or . Formation of sodium tetrahydroxoaluminate(III) or hydrated sodium aluminate is given by:\nO \nThis reaction can be useful in etching, removing anodizing, or converting a polished surface to a satin-like finish, but without further passivation such as anodizing or alodining the surface may become degraded, either under normal use or in severe atmospheric conditions.\nIn the Bayer process, sodium hydroxide is used in the refining of alumina containing ores (bauxite) to produce alumina (aluminium oxide) which is the raw material used to produce aluminium via the electrolytic Hall-H\u00e9roult process. Since the alumina is amphoteric, it dissolves in the sodium hydroxide, leaving impurities less soluble at high pH such as iron oxides behind in the form of a highly alkaline red mud.\nOther amphoteric metals are zinc and lead which dissolve in concentrated sodium hydroxide solutions to give sodium zincate and sodium plumbate respectively.\nEsterification and transesterification reagent.\nSodium hydroxide is traditionally used in soap making (cold process soap, saponification). It was made in the nineteenth century for a hard surface rather than liquid product because it was easier to store and transport.\nFor the manufacture of biodiesel, sodium hydroxide is used as a catalyst for the transesterification of methanol and triglycerides. This only works with anhydrous sodium hydroxide, because combined with water the fat would turn into soap, which would be tainted with methanol. NaOH is used more often than potassium hydroxide because it is cheaper and a smaller quantity is needed. Due to production costs, NaOH, which is produced using common salt is cheaper than potassium hydroxide.\nSkincare ingredient.\nSodium hydroxide is an ingredient used in some skin care and cosmetic products, such as facial cleansers, creams, lotions, and makeup. It is typically used in low concentration as a pH balancer, due its highly alkaline nature.\nFood preparation.\nFood uses of sodium hydroxide include washing or chemical peeling of fruits and vegetables, chocolate and cocoa processing, caramel coloring production, poultry scalding, soft drink processing, and thickening ice cream. Olives are often soaked in sodium hydroxide for softening; pretzels and German lye rolls are glazed with a sodium hydroxide solution before baking to make them crisp. Owing to the difficulty in obtaining food grade sodium hydroxide in small quantities for home use, sodium carbonate is often used in place of sodium hydroxide. It is known as E number E524.\nSpecific foods processed with sodium hydroxide include:\nCleaning agent.\nSodium hydroxide is frequently used as an industrial cleaning agent where it is often called \"caustic\". It is added to water, heated, and then used to clean process equipment, storage tanks, etc. It can dissolve grease, oils, fats and protein-based deposits. It is also used for cleaning waste discharge pipes under sinks and drains in domestic properties. Surfactants can be added to the sodium hydroxide solution in order to stabilize dissolved substances and thus prevent redeposition. A sodium hydroxide soak solution is used as a powerful degreaser on stainless steel and glass bakeware. It is also a common ingredient in oven cleaners.\nA common use of sodium hydroxide is in the production of parts washer detergents. Parts washer detergents based on sodium hydroxide are some of the most aggressive parts washer cleaning chemicals. The sodium hydroxide-based detergents include surfactants, rust inhibitors and defoamers. A parts washer heats water and the detergent in a closed cabinet and then sprays the heated sodium hydroxide and hot water at pressure against dirty parts for degreasing applications. Sodium hydroxide used in this manner replaced many solvent-based systems in the early 1990s when trichloroethane was outlawed by the Montreal Protocol. Water and sodium hydroxide detergent-based parts washers are considered to be an environmental improvement over the solvent-based cleaning methods.\nSodium hydroxide is used in the home as a type of drain openers to unblock clogged drains, usually in the form of a dry crystal or as a thick liquid gel. The alkali reacts with greases to produce water soluble soap and glycerol. It also hydrolyzes proteins, such as those found in hair, which may block waste water pipes. Dissolving sodium hydroxide in water is an exothermic reaction producing considerable quantities of heat which assists in speeding up the reactions with grease and other organic matter. Such alkaline drain cleaners and their acidic versions are highly corrosive and should be handled with great caution.\nRelaxer.\nSodium hydroxide is used in some relaxers to straighten hair. However, because of the high incidence and intensity of chemical burns, manufacturers of chemical relaxers use other alkaline chemicals in preparations available to consumers. Sodium hydroxide relaxers are still available, but they are used mostly by professionals.\nPaint stripper.\nA solution of sodium hydroxide in water was traditionally used as the most common paint stripper on wooden objects. Its use has become less common, because it can damage the wood surface, raising the grain and staining the colour.\nWater treatment.\nSodium hydroxide is sometimes used during water purification to raise the pH of water supplies. Increased pH makes the water less corrosive to plumbing and reduces the amount of lead, copper and other toxic metals that can dissolve into drinking water.\nHistorical uses.\nSodium hydroxide has been used for detection of carbon monoxide poisoning, with blood samples of such patients turning to a vermilion color upon the addition of a few drops of sodium hydroxide. Today, carbon monoxide poisoning can be detected by CO oximetry.\nIn cement mixes, mortars, concrete, grouts.\nSodium hydroxide is used in some cement mix plasticisers. This helps homogenise cement mixes, preventing segregation of sands and cement, decreases the amount of water required in a mix and increases workability of the cement product, be it mortar, render or concrete.\nSafety.\nLike other corrosive acids and alkalis, a few drops of sodium hydroxide solutions can readily decompose proteins and lipids in living tissues via amide hydrolysis and ester hydrolysis, which consequently cause chemical burns and may induce permanent blindness upon contact with eyes. Solid alkali can also express its corrosive nature if there is water, such as water vapor. Thus, protective equipment, like rubber gloves, safety clothing and eye protection, should always be used when handling this chemical or its solutions. The standard first aid measures for alkali spills on the skin is, as for other corrosives, irrigation with large quantities of water. Washing is continued for at least ten to fifteen minutes.\nMoreover, dissolution of sodium hydroxide is highly exothermic, and the resulting heat may cause heat burns or ignite flammables. It also produces heat when reacted with acids.\nSodium hydroxide is mildly corrosive to glass, which can cause damage to glazing or cause ground glass joints to bind. Sodium hydroxide is corrosive to several metals, like aluminium which reacts with the alkali to produce flammable hydrogen gas on contact.\nSodium hydroxide's toxicity level for fish etc. is around 20\u2014200 mg/L and is associated with increased pH value. However as it is quickly neutralized and does not accumulate, its effect on the environment is usually easily handled.\nStorage.\nCareful storage is needed when handling sodium hydroxide for use, especially bulk volumes. Following proper NaOH storage guidelines and maintaining worker/environment safety is always recommended given the chemical's burn hazard.\nSodium hydroxide is often stored in bottles for small-scale laboratory use, within intermediate bulk containers (medium volume containers) for cargo handling and transport, or within large stationary storage tanks with volumes up to 100,000 gallons for manufacturing or waste water plants with extensive NaOH use. Common materials that are compatible with sodium hydroxide and often utilized for NaOH storage include: polyethylene (HDPE, usual, XLPE, less common), carbon steel, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), stainless steel, and fiberglass reinforced plastic (FRP, with a resistant liner).\nSodium hydroxide must be stored in airtight containers to preserve its normality as it will absorb water and carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.\nHistory.\nSodium hydroxide was first prepared by soap makers. A procedure for making sodium hydroxide appeared as part of a recipe for making soap in an Arab book of the late 13th century: (Inventions from the Various Industrial Arts), which was compiled by al-Muzaffar Yusuf ibn 'Umar ibn 'Ali ibn Rasul (d. 1295), a king of Yemen. \nThe recipe called for passing water repeatedly through a mixture of \"alkali\" (Arabic: , where is ash from saltwort plants, which are rich in sodium; hence \"alkali\" was impure sodium carbonate) and quicklime (calcium oxide, CaO), whereby a solution of sodium hydroxide was obtained. European soap makers also followed this recipe. When in 1791 the French chemist and surgeon Nicolas Leblanc (1742\u20131806) patented a process for mass-producing sodium carbonate, natural \"soda ash\" (impure sodium carbonate that was obtained from the ashes of plants that are rich in sodium) was replaced by this artificial version. However, by the 20th century, the electrolysis of sodium chloride had become the primary method for producing sodium hydroxide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57879", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57879", "title": "In vitro fertilization", "text": ""}
{"id": "57880", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57880", "title": "In vitro fertilisation", "text": "Assisted reproductive technology procedure\nIn vitro fertilisation (IVF) is a process of fertilisation in which an egg is combined with sperm in vitro (\"in glass\"). The process involves monitoring and stimulating the ovulatory process, then removing an ovum or ova (egg or eggs) from the ovaries and enabling sperm to fertilise them in a culture medium in a laboratory. After a fertilised egg (zygote) undergoes embryo culture for 2\u20136 days, it is transferred by catheter into the uterus, with the intention of establishing a successful pregnancy.\nIVF is a type of assisted reproductive technology (ART) used to treat infertility, enable gestational surrogacy, and, in combination with pre-implantation genetic testing, avoid the transmission of abnormal genetic conditions. When a fertilised egg from egg and sperm donors implants in the uterus of a genetically unrelated surrogate, the resulting child is also genetically unrelated to the surrogate. Some countries have banned or otherwise regulated the availability of IVF treatment, giving rise to fertility tourism. Financial cost and age may also restrict the availability of IVF as a means of carrying a healthy pregnancy to term.\nIn July 1978, Louise Brown was the first child successfully born after her mother received IVF treatment. Brown was born as a result of natural-cycle IVF, where no stimulation was made. The procedure took place at Dr Kershaw's Cottage Hospital in Royton, Oldham, England. Robert Edwards, surviving member of the development team, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2010.\nWhen assisted by egg donation and IVF, many women who have reached menopause, have infertile partners, or have idiopathic female-fertility issues, can still become pregnant. After the IVF treatment, some couples get pregnant without any fertility treatments. In 2023, it was estimated that twelve million children had been born worldwide using IVF and other assisted reproduction techniques. A 2019 study that evaluated the use of 10 adjuncts with IVF (screening hysteroscopy, DHEA, testosterone, GH, aspirin, heparin, antioxidants, seminal plasma and PRP) suggested that (with the exception of hysteroscopy) these adjuncts should be avoided until there is more evidence to show that they are safe and effective.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTerminology.\nThe Latin term in vitro, meaning \"in glass\", is used because early biological experiments involving cultivation of tissues outside the living organism were carried out in glass containers, such as beakers, test tubes, or Petri dishes. The modern scientific term \"in vitro\" refers to any biological procedure that is performed outside the organism in which it would normally have occurred, to distinguish it from an in vivo procedure (such as in vivo fertilisation), where the tissue remains inside the living organism in which it is normally found.\nA colloquial term for babies conceived as the result of IVF, \"test tube babies\", refers to the tube-shaped containers of glass or plastic resin, called test tubes, that are commonly used in chemistry and biology labs. However, IVF is usually performed in Petri dishes, which are both wider and shallower and often used to cultivate cultures.\nIVF is a form of assisted reproductive technology.\nHistory.\nThe first successful birth of a child after IVF treatment, Louise Brown, occurred in 1978. Louise Brown was born as a result of natural cycle IVF where no stimulation was made. The procedure took place at Dr Kershaw's Cottage Hospital (now Dr Kershaw's Hospice) in Royton, Oldham, England. Robert G. Edwards, the physiologist who co-developed the treatment, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2010. His co-workers, Patrick Steptoe and Jean Purdy, were not eligible for consideration as the Nobel Prize is not awarded posthumously.\nThe second successful birth of a 'test tube baby' occurred in India on October 3, 1978, just 67 days after Louise Brown was born. The girl, named Durga, was conceived in vitro using a method developed independently by Subhash Mukhopadhyay, a physician and researcher from Hazaribag. Mukhopadhyay had been performing experiments on his own with primitive instruments and a household refrigerator. However, state authorities prevented him from presenting his work at scientific conferences, and it was many years before Mukhopadhyay's contribution was acknowledged in works dealing with the subject.\nAdriana Iliescu held the record as the oldest woman to give birth using IVF and a donor egg, when she gave birth in 2004 at the age of 66, a record passed in 2006. After the IVF treatment some couples are able to get pregnant without any fertility treatments. In 2018 it was estimated that eight million children had been born worldwide using IVF and other assisted reproduction techniques.\nMedical uses.\nIndications.\nIVF may be used to overcome female infertility when it is due to problems with the fallopian tubes, making in vivo fertilisation difficult. It can also assist in male infertility, in those cases where there is a defect in sperm quality; in such situations intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) may be used, where a sperm cell is injected directly into the egg cell. This is used when sperm has difficulty penetrating the egg. ICSI is also used when sperm numbers are very low. When indicated, the use of ICSI has been found to increase the success rates of IVF.\nAccording to UK's National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines, IVF treatment is appropriate in cases of unexplained infertility for people who have not conceived after 2 years of regular unprotected sexual intercourse.\nIn people with anovulation, it may be an alternative after 7\u201312 attempted cycles of ovulation induction, since the latter is expensive and more easy to control.\nSuccess rates.\nIVF success rates are the percentage of all IVF procedures that result in favourable outcomes. Depending on the type of calculation used, this outcome may represent the number of confirmed pregnancies, called the pregnancy rate, or the number of live births, called the live birth rate. Due to advances in reproductive technology, live birth rates by cycle five of IVF have increased from 76% in 2005 to 80% in 2010, despite a reduction in the number of embryos being transferred (which decreased the multiple birth rate from 25% to 8%).\nThe success rate depends on variable factors such as age of the woman, cause of infertility, embryo status, reproductive history, and lifestyle factors. Younger candidates of IVF are more likely to get pregnant. People older than 41 are more likely to get pregnant with a donor egg. People who have been previously pregnant are in many cases more successful with IVF treatments than those who have never been pregnant.\nLive birth rate.\nThe live birth rate is the percentage of all IVF cycles that lead to a live birth. This rate does not include miscarriage or stillbirth; multiple-order births, such as twins and triplets, are counted as one pregnancy.\nA 2021 summary compiled by the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology (SART) which reports the average IVF success rates in the United States per age group using non-donor eggs compiled the following data:\nIn 2006, Canadian clinics reported a live birth rate of 27%. Birth rates in younger patients were slightly higher, with a success rate of 35.3% for those 21 and younger, the youngest group evaluated. Success rates for older patients were also lower and decrease with age, with 37-year-olds at 27.4% and no live births for those older than 48, the oldest group evaluated. Some clinics exceeded these rates, but it is impossible to determine if that is due to superior technique or patient selection, since it is possible to artificially increase success rates by refusing to accept the most difficult patients or by steering them into oocyte donation cycles (which are compiled separately). Further, pregnancy rates can be increased by the placement of several embryos at the risk of increasing the chance for multiples.\nBecause not each IVF cycle that is started will lead to oocyte retrieval or embryo transfer, reports of live birth rates need to specify the denominator, namely IVF cycles started, IVF retrievals, or embryo transfers. The SART summarised 2008\u20139 success rates for US clinics for fresh embryo cycles that did not involve donor eggs and gave live birth rates by the age of the prospective mother, with a peak at 41.3% per cycle started and 47.3% per embryo transfer for patients under 35 years of age.\nIVF attempts in multiple cycles result in increased cumulative live birth rates. Depending on the demographic group, one study reported 45% to 53% for three attempts, and 51% to 71% to 80% for six attempts.\nAccording to the 2021 National Summary Report compiled by the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology (SART), the mean number of embryos transfers for patients achieving live birth go as follows:\nEffective from 15 February 2021 the majority of Australian IVF clinics publish their individual success rate online via YourIVFSuccess.com.au. This site also contains a predictor tool.\nPregnancy rate.\nPregnancy rate may be defined in various ways. In the United States, SART and the Centers for Disease Control (and appearing in the table in the Success Rates section above) include statistics on positive pregnancy test and clinical pregnancy rate.\nThe 2019 summary compiled by the SART the following data for non-donor eggs (first embryo transfer) in the United States:\nIn 2006, Canadian clinics reported an average pregnancy rate of 35%. A French study estimated that 66% of patients starting IVF treatment finally succeed in having a child (40% during the IVF treatment at the centre and 26% after IVF discontinuation). Achievement of having a child after IVF discontinuation was mainly due to adoption (46%) or spontaneous pregnancy (42%).\nMiscarriage rate.\nAccording to a study done by the Mayo Clinic, miscarriage rates for IVF are somewhere between 15 and 25% for those under the age of 35. In naturally conceived pregnancies, the rate of miscarriage is between 10 and 20% for those under the age of 35. Risk of miscarriage, regardless of the method of conception, does increase with age.\nPredictors of success.\nThe main potential factors that influence pregnancy (and live birth) rates in IVF have been suggested to be maternal age, duration of infertility or subfertility, bFSH and number of oocytes, all reflecting ovarian function. Optimal age is 23\u201339 years at time of treatment.\nBiomarkers that affect the pregnancy chances of IVF include:\nOther determinants of outcome of IVF include:\nAspirin is sometimes prescribed to people for the purpose of increasing the chances of conception by IVF, but as of 2016[ [update]] there was no evidence to show that it is safe and effective.\nA 2013 review and meta analysis of randomised controlled trials of acupuncture as an adjuvant therapy in IVF found no overall benefit, and concluded that an apparent benefit detected in a subset of published trials where the control group (those not using acupuncture) experienced a lower than average rate of pregnancy requires further study, due to the possibility of publication bias and other factors.\nA Cochrane review came to the result that endometrial injury performed in the month prior to ovarian induction appeared to increase both the live birth rate and clinical pregnancy rate in IVF compared with no endometrial injury. There was no evidence of a difference between the groups in miscarriage, multiple pregnancy or bleeding rates. Evidence suggested that endometrial injury on the day of oocyte retrieval was associated with a lower live birth or ongoing pregnancy rate.\nIntake of antioxidants (such as N-acetyl-cysteine, melatonin, vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin E, folic acid, myo-inositol, zinc or selenium) has not been associated with a significantly increased live birth rate or clinical pregnancy rate in IVF according to Cochrane reviews. The review found that oral antioxidants given to the sperm donor with male factor or unexplained subfertility may improve live birth rates, but more evidence is needed.\nA Cochrane review in 2015 came to the result that there is no evidence identified regarding the effect of preconception lifestyle advice on the chance of a live birth outcome.\nMethod.\nTheoretically, IVF could be performed by collecting the contents from the fallopian tubes or uterus after natural ovulation, mixing it with sperm, and reinserting the fertilised ova into the uterus. However, without additional techniques, the chances of pregnancy would be extremely small. The additional techniques that are routinely used in IVF include ovarian hyperstimulation to generate multiple eggs, ultrasound-guided transvaginal oocyte retrieval directly from the ovaries, co-incubation of eggs and sperm, as well as culture and selection of resultant embryos before embryo transfer into a uterus.\nOvarian hyperstimulation.\nOvarian hyperstimulation is the stimulation to induce development of multiple follicles of the ovaries. It should start with response prediction based on factors such as age, antral follicle count and level of anti-M\u00fcllerian hormone. The resulting prediction (e.g. poor or hyper-response to ovarian hyperstimulation) determines the protocol and dosage for ovarian hyperstimulation.\nOvarian hyperstimulation also includes suppression of spontaneous ovulation, for which two main methods are available: Using a (usually longer) GnRH agonist protocol or a (usually shorter) GnRH antagonist protocol. In a standard long GnRH agonist protocol the day when hyperstimulation treatment is started and the expected day of later oocyte retrieval can be chosen to conform to personal choice, while in a GnRH antagonist protocol it must be adapted to the spontaneous onset of the previous menstruation. On the other hand, the GnRH antagonist protocol has a lower risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS), which is a life-threatening complication.\nFor the ovarian hyperstimulation in itself, injectable gonadotropins (usually FSH analogues) are generally used under close monitoring. Such monitoring frequently checks the estradiol level and, by means of gynecologic ultrasonography, follicular growth. Typically approximately 10 days of injections will be necessary.\nWhen stimulating ovulation after suppressing endogenous secretion, it is necessary to supply exogenous gonadotropines. The most common one is the human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG), which is obtained by donation of menopausal women. Other pharmacological preparations are FSH+LH or coripholitropine alpha.\nNatural IVF.\nThere are several methods termed natural cycle IVF:\nIVF using no drugs for ovarian hyperstimulation was the method for the conception of Louise Brown. This method can be successfully used when people want to avoid taking ovarian stimulating drugs with its associated side-effects. HFEA has estimated the live birth rate to be approximately 1.3% per IVF cycle using no hyperstimulation drugs for women aged between 40 and 42.\nMild IVF is a method where a small dose of ovarian stimulating drugs are used for a short duration during a natural menstrual cycle aimed at producing 2\u20137 eggs and creating healthy embryos. This method appears to be an advance in the field to reduce complications and side-effects for women, and it is aimed at quality, and not quantity of eggs and embryos. One study comparing a mild treatment (mild ovarian stimulation with GnRH antagonist co-treatment combined with single embryo transfer) to a standard treatment (stimulation with a GnRH agonist long-protocol and transfer of two embryos) came to the result that the proportions of cumulative pregnancies that resulted in term live birth after 1 year were 43.4% with mild treatment and 44.7% with standard treatment. Mild IVF can be cheaper than conventional IVF and with a significantly reduced risk of multiple gestation and OHSS.\nFinal maturation induction.\nWhen the ovarian follicles have reached a certain degree of development, induction of final oocyte maturation is performed, generally by an injection of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Commonly, this is known as the \"trigger shot.\" hCG acts as an analogue of luteinising hormone, and ovulation would occur between 38 and 40 hours after a single HCG injection, but the egg retrieval is performed at a time usually between 34 and 36 hours after hCG injection, that is, just prior to when the follicles would rupture. This avails for scheduling the egg retrieval procedure at a time when the eggs are fully mature. HCG injection confers a risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Using a GnRH agonist instead of hCG eliminates most of the risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, but with a reduced delivery rate if the embryos are transferred fresh. For this reason, many centers will freeze all oocytes or embryos following agonist trigger.\nEgg retrieval.\nThe eggs are retrieved from the patient using a transvaginal technique called transvaginal ultrasound aspiration involving an ultrasound-guided needle being injected through follicles upon collection. Through this needle, the oocyte and follicular fluid are aspirated and the follicular fluid is then passed to an embryologist to identify ova. It is common to remove between ten and thirty eggs. The retrieval process, which lasts approximately 20 to 40 minutes, is performed under conscious sedation or general anesthesia to ensure patient comfort. Following optimal follicular development, the eggs are meticulously retrieved using transvaginal ultrasound guidance with the aid of a specialised ultrasound probe and a fine needle aspiration technique. The follicular fluid, containing the retrieved eggs, is expeditiously transferred to the embryology laboratory for subsequent processing.\nEgg and sperm preparation.\nIn the laboratory, for ICSI treatments, the identified eggs are stripped of surrounding cells (also known as cumulus cells) and prepared for fertilisation. An oocyte selection may be performed prior to fertilisation to select eggs that can be fertilised, as it is required they are in metaphase II. There are cases in which if oocytes are in the metaphase I stage, they can be kept being cultured so as to undergo a posterior sperm injection. In the meantime, semen is prepared for fertilisation by removing inactive cells and seminal fluid in a process called sperm washing. If semen is being provided by a sperm donor, it will usually have been prepared for treatment before being frozen and quarantined, and it will be thawed ready for use.\nCo-incubation.\nThe sperm and the egg are incubated together at a ratio of about 75,000:1 in a culture media in order for the actual fertilisation to take place. A review in 2013 came to the result that a duration of this co-incubation of about 1 to 4 hours results in significantly higher pregnancy rates than 16 to 24 hours. In most cases, the egg will be fertilised during co-incubation and will show two pronuclei. In certain situations, such as low sperm count or motility, a single sperm may be injected directly into the egg using intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). The fertilised egg is passed to a special growth medium and left for about 48 hours until the embryo consists of six to eight cells.\nIn gamete intrafallopian transfer, eggs are removed from the woman and placed in one of the fallopian tubes, along with the man's sperm. This allows fertilisation to take place inside the woman's body. Therefore, this variation is actually an in vivo fertilisation, not in vitro.\nEmbryo culture.\nThe main durations of embryo culture are until cleavage stage (day two to four after co-incubation) or the blastocyst stage (day five or six after co-incubation). Embryo culture until the blastocyst stage confers a significant increase in live birth rate per embryo transfer, but also confers a decreased number of embryos available for transfer and embryo cryopreservation, so the cumulative clinical pregnancy rates are increased with cleavage stage transfer. Transfer day two instead of day three after fertilisation has no differences in live birth rate. There are significantly higher odds of preterm birth (odds ratio 1.3) and congenital anomalies (odds ratio 1.3) among births having from embryos cultured until the blastocyst stage compared with cleavage stage.\nEmbryo selection.\nLaboratories have developed grading methods to judge ovocyte and embryo quality. In order to optimise pregnancy rates, there is significant evidence that a morphological scoring system is the best strategy for the selection of embryos. Since 2009 where the first time-lapse microscopy system for IVF was approved for clinical use, morphokinetic scoring systems has shown to improve to pregnancy rates further. However, when all different types of time-lapse embryo imaging devices, with or without morphokinetic scoring systems, are compared against conventional embryo assessment for IVF, there is insufficient evidence of a difference in live-birth, pregnancy, stillbirth or miscarriage to choose between them. Active efforts to develop a more accurate embryo selection analysis based on Artificial Intelligence and Deep Learning are underway. Embryo Ranking Intelligent Classification Assistant (ERICA), is a clear example. This Deep Learning software substitutes manual classifications with a ranking system based on an individual embryo's predicted genetic status in a non-invasive fashion. Studies on this area are still pending and current feasibility studies support its potential.\nEmbryo transfer.\nThe number to be transferred depends on the number available, the age of the patient and other health and diagnostic factors. In countries such as Canada, the UK, Australia and New Zealand, a maximum of two embryos are transferred except in unusual circumstances. In the UK and according to HFEA regulations, a woman over 40 may have up to three embryos transferred, whereas in the US, there is no legal limit on the number of embryos which may be transferred, although medical associations have provided practice guidelines. Most clinics and country regulatory bodies seek to minimise the risk of multiple pregnancy, as it is not uncommon for multiple embryos to implant if multiple embryos are transferred. Embryos are transferred to the patient's uterus through a thin, plastic catheter, which goes through their vagina and cervix. Several embryos may be passed into the uterus to improve chances of implantation and pregnancy.\nLuteal support.\nLuteal support is the administration of medication, generally progesterone, progestins, hCG, or GnRH agonists, and often accompanied by estradiol, to increase the success rate of implantation and early embryogenesis, thereby complementing and/or supporting the function of the corpus luteum. A Cochrane review found that hCG or progesterone given during the luteal phase may be associated with higher rates of live birth or ongoing pregnancy, but that the evidence is not conclusive. Co-treatment with GnRH agonists appears to improve outcomes, by a live birth rate RD of +16% (95% confidence interval +10 to +22%). On the other hand, growth hormone or aspirin as adjunctive medication in IVF have no evidence of overall benefit.\nExpansions.\nThere are various expansions or additional techniques that can be applied in IVF, which are usually not necessary for the IVF procedure itself, but would be virtually impossible or technically difficult to perform without concomitantly performing methods of IVF.\nPreimplantation genetic screening or diagnosis.\nPreimplantation genetic screening (PGS) or preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) has been suggested to be able to be used in IVF to select an embryo that appears to have the greatest chances for successful pregnancy. However, a systematic review and meta-analysis of existing randomised controlled trials came to the result that there is no evidence of a beneficial effect of PGS with cleavage-stage biopsy as measured by live birth rate. On the contrary, for those of advanced maternal age, PGS with cleavage-stage biopsy significantly lowers the live birth rate. Technical drawbacks, such as the invasiveness of the biopsy, and non-representative samples because of mosaicism are the major underlying factors for inefficacy of PGS.\nStill, as an expansion of IVF, patients who can benefit from PGS/PGD include:\nPGS screens for numeral chromosomal abnormalities while PGD identifies the specific molecular defect of the inherited disease. In both PGS and PGD, individual cells from a pre-embryo, or preferably trophectoderm cells biopsied from a blastocyst, are analysed during the IVF process. Before the transfer of a pre-embryo back to a person's uterus, one or two cells are removed from the pre-embryos (8-cell stage), or preferably from a blastocyst. These cells are then evaluated for normality. Typically within one to two days, following completion of the evaluation, only the normal pre-embryos are transferred back to the uterus. Alternatively, a blastocyst can be cryopreserved via vitrification and transferred at a later date to the uterus. In addition, PGS can significantly reduce the risk of multiple pregnancies because fewer embryos, ideally just one, are needed for implantation.\nCryopreservation.\nCryopreservation can be performed as oocyte cryopreservation before fertilisation, or as embryo cryopreservation after fertilisation.\nThe Rand Consulting Group has estimated there to be 400,000 frozen embryos in the United States in 2006. The advantage is that patients who fail to conceive may become pregnant using such embryos without having to go through a full IVF cycle. Or, if pregnancy occurred, they could return later for another pregnancy. Spare oocytes or embryos resulting from fertility treatments may be used for oocyte donation or embryo donation to another aspiring parent, and embryos may be created, frozen and stored specifically for transfer and donation by using donor eggs and sperm. Also, oocyte cryopreservation can be used for those who are likely to lose their ovarian reserve due to undergoing chemotherapy.\nBy 2017, many centres have adopted embryo cryopreservation as their primary IVF therapy, and perform few or no fresh embryo transfers. The two main reasons for this have been better endometrial receptivity when embryos are transferred in cycles without exposure to ovarian stimulation and also the ability to store the embryos while awaiting the results of preimplantation genetic testing.\nThe outcome from using cryopreserved embryos has uniformly been positive with no increase in birth defects or development abnormalities.\nSperm selection.\nIntracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) is where a single sperm is injected directly into an egg. Its main usage as an expansion of IVF is to overcome male infertility problems, although it may also be used where eggs cannot easily be penetrated by sperm, and occasionally in conjunction with sperm donation. It can be used in teratozoospermia, since once the egg is fertilised abnormal sperm morphology does not appear to influence blastocyst development or blastocyst morphology.\nPhysiological intracytoplasmic sperm injection (PICSI) is a variation of ICSI that uses hyaluronic acid binding to select mature sperm with better DNA integrity. Since only mature sperm bind to hyaluronic acid, PICSI may help reduce the risk of chromosomal abnormalities and improve fertilisation and pregnancy outcomes.\nMagnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) is a sperm selection technique used in assisted reproductive technologies to remove apoptotic sperm with compromised DNA integrity. The method involves using magnetic microbeads coated with annexin V, a protein that binds to phosphatidylserine \u2014 an early marker of apoptosis. When passed through a magnetic field, sperm bound to the beads are retained, allowing only viable, non-apoptotic sperm to be collected for fertilisation. MACS is often combined with conventional sperm preparation methods and is used in cases of recurrent miscarriage, male factor infertility, or high DNA fragmentation levels. \nMicrofluidic sperm sorting devices are designed to isolate highly motile, morphologically normal, and DNA-intact sperm. They are intended to improve ICSI and IVF outcomes by reducing the risk of injecting sperm with high DNA fragmentation into the oocyte.\nThese technologies aim to improve fertilisation rates, embryo quality, and overall IVF success by enhancing gamete selection at the cellular level.\nComplications and health effects.\nMultiple births.\nThe major complication of IVF is the risk of multiple births. This is directly related to the practice of transferring multiple embryos at embryo transfer. Multiple births are related to increased risk of pregnancy loss, obstetrical complications, prematurity, and neonatal morbidity with the potential for long term damage. Strict limits on the number of embryos that may be transferred have been enacted in some countries (e.g. Britain, Belgium) to reduce the risk of high-order multiples (triplets or more), but are not universally followed or accepted. Spontaneous splitting of embryos in the uterus after transfer can occur, but this is rare and would lead to identical twins. A double blind, randomised study followed IVF pregnancies that resulted in 73 infants, and reported that 8.7% of singleton infants and 54.2% of twins had a birth weight of less than . There is some evidence that making a double embryo transfer during one cycle achieves a higher live birth rate than a single embryo transfer; but making two single embryo transfers in two cycles has the same live birth rate and would avoid multiple pregnancies.\nSex ratio distortions.\nCertain kinds of IVF have been shown to lead to distortions in the sex ratio at birth. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), which was first applied in 1991, leads to slightly more female births (51.3% female). Blastocyst transfer, which was first applied in 1984, leads to significantly more male births (56.1% male). Standard IVF done at the second or third day leads to a normal sex ratio.\nEpigenetic modifications caused by extended culture leading to the death of more female embryos has been theorised as the reason why blastocyst transfer leads to a higher male sex ratio; however, adding retinoic acid to the culture can bring this ratio back to normal. A second theory is that the male-biased sex ratio may due to a higher rate of selection of male embryos. Male embryos develop faster in vitro, and thus may appear more viable for transfer.\nSpread of infectious disease.\nBy sperm washing, the risk that a chronic disease in the individual providing the sperm would infect the birthing parent or offspring can be brought to negligible levels.\nIf the sperm donor has hepatitis B, The Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine advises that sperm washing is not necessary in IVF to prevent transmission, unless the birthing partner has not been effectively vaccinated. In women with hepatitis B, the risk of vertical transmission during IVF is no different from the risk in spontaneous conception. However, there is not enough evidence to say that ICSI procedures are safe in women with hepatitis B in regard to vertical transmission to the offspring.\nRegarding potential spread of HIV/AIDS, Japan's government prohibited the use of IVF procedures in which both partners are infected with HIV. Despite the fact that the ethics committees previously allowed the Ogikubo, Tokyo Hospital, located in Tokyo, to use IVF for couples with HIV, the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan decided to block the practice. Hideji Hanabusa, the vice president of the Ogikubo Hospital, states that together with his colleagues, he managed to develop a method through which scientists are able to remove HIV from sperm.\nIn the United States, people seeking to be an embryo recipient undergo infectious disease screening required by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and reproductive tests to determine the best placement location and cycle timing before the actual embryo transfer occurs. The amount of screening the embryo has already undergone is largely dependent on the genetic parents' own IVF clinic and process. The embryo recipient may elect to have their own embryologist conduct further testing.\nOther risks to the egg provider/retriever.\nA risk of ovarian stimulation is the development of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, particularly if hCG is used for inducing final oocyte maturation. This results in swollen, painful ovaries. It occurs in 30% of patients. Mild cases can be treated with over the counter medications and cases can be resolved in the absence of pregnancy. In moderate cases, ovaries swell and fluid accumulated in the abdominal cavities and may have symptoms of heartburn, gas, nausea or loss of appetite. In severe cases, patients have sudden excess abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and will result in hospitalisation.\nDuring egg retrieval, there exists a small chance of bleeding, infection, and damage to surrounding structures such as bowel and bladder (transvaginal ultrasound aspiration) as well as difficulty in breathing, chest infection, allergic reactions to medication, or nerve damage (laparoscopy).\nEctopic pregnancy may also occur if a fertilised egg develops outside the uterus, usually in the fallopian tubes and requires immediate destruction of the foetus.\nIVF does not seem to be associated with an elevated risk of cervical cancer, nor with ovarian cancer or endometrial cancer when neutralising the confounder of infertility itself. Nor does it seem to impart any increased risk for breast cancer.\nRegardless of pregnancy result, IVF treatment is usually stressful for patients. Neuroticism and the use of escapist coping strategies are associated with a higher degree of distress, while the presence of social support has a relieving effect. A negative pregnancy test after IVF is associated with an increased risk for depression, but not with any increased risk of developing anxiety disorders. Pregnancy test results do not seem to be a risk factor for depression or anxiety among men in the case of relationships between two cisgender, heterosexual people. Hormonal agents such as gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRH agonist) are associated with depression.\nStudies show that there is an increased risk of venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism during the first trimester of IVF. When looking at long-term studies comparing patients who received or did not receive IVF, there seems to be no correlation with increased risk of cardiac events. There are more ongoing studies to solidify this.\nSpontaneous pregnancy has occurred after successful and unsuccessful IVF treatments. Within 2 years of delivering an infant conceived through IVF, subfertile patients had a conception rate of 18%.\nBirth defects.\nA review in 2013 came to the result that infants resulting from IVF (with or without ICSI) have a relative risk of birth defects of 1.32 (95% confidence interval 1.24\u20131.42) compared to naturally conceived infants. In 2008, an analysis of the data of the National Birth Defects Study in the US found that certain birth defects were significantly more common in infants conceived through IVF, notably septal heart defects, cleft lip with or without cleft palate, esophageal atresia, and anorectal atresia; the mechanism of causality is unclear. However, in a population-wide cohort study of 308,974 births (with 6,163 using assisted reproductive technology and following children from birth to age five) researchers found: \"The increased risk of birth defects associated with IVF was no longer significant after adjustment for parental factors.\" Parental factors included known independent risks for birth defects such as maternal age, smoking status, etc. Multivariate correction did not remove the significance of the association of birth defects and ICSI (corrected odds ratio 1.57), although the authors speculate that underlying male infertility factors (which would be associated with the use of ICSI) may contribute to this observation and were not able to correct for these confounders. The authors also found that a history of infertility elevated risk itself in the absence of any treatment (odds ratio 1.29), consistent with a Danish national registry study and \"implicates patient factors in this increased risk.\" The authors of the Danish national registry study speculate: \"our results suggest that the reported increased prevalence of congenital malformations seen in singletons born after assisted reproductive technology is partly due to the underlying infertility or its determinants.\"\nOther risks to the offspring.\nIf the underlying infertility is related to abnormalities in spermatogenesis, male offspring will have a higher risk for sperm abnormalities. In some cases genetic testing may be recommended to help assess the risk of transmission of defects to progeny and to consider whether treatment is desirable.\nIVF does not seem to confer any risks regarding cognitive development, school performance, social functioning, and behaviour. Also, IVF infants are known to be as securely attached to their parents as those who were naturally conceived, and IVF adolescents are as well-adjusted as those who have been naturally conceived.\nLimited long-term follow-up data suggest that IVF may be associated with an increased incidence of hypertension, impaired fasting glucose, increase in total body fat composition, advancement of bone age, subclinical thyroid disorder, early adulthood clinical depression and binge drinking in the offspring. It is not known, however, whether these potential associations are caused by the IVF procedure in itself, by adverse obstetric outcomes associated with IVF, by the genetic origin of the children or by yet unknown IVF-associated causes. Increases in embryo manipulation during IVF result in more deviant fetal growth curves, but birth weight does not seem to be a reliable marker of fetal stress.\nIVF, including ICSI, is associated with an increased risk of imprinting disorders (including Prader\u2013Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome), with an odds ratio of 3.7 (95% confidence interval 1.4 to 9.7).\nAn IVF-associated incidence of cerebral palsy and neurodevelopmental delay are believed to be related to the confounders of prematurity and low birthweight. Similarly, an IVF-associated incidence of autism and attention-deficit disorder are believed to be related to confounders of maternal and obstetric factors.\nOverall, IVF does not cause an increased risk of childhood cancer. Studies have shown a decrease in the risk of certain cancers and an increased risks of certain others including retinoblastoma, hepatoblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma.\nControversial cases.\nMix-ups.\nIn some cases, laboratory mix-ups (misidentified gametes, transfer of wrong embryos) have occurred, leading to legal action against the IVF provider and complex paternity suits. An example is the case of a woman in California who received the embryo of another couple and was notified of this mistake after the birth of her son. This has led to many authorities and individual clinics implementing procedures to minimise the risk of such mix-ups. The HFEA, for example, requires clinics to use a double witnessing system, the identity of specimens is checked by two people at each point at which specimens are transferred. Alternatively, technological solutions are gaining favour, to reduce the manpower cost of manual double witnessing, and to further reduce risks with uniquely numbered RFID tags which can be identified by readers connected to a computer. The computer tracks specimens throughout the process and alerts the embryologist if non-matching specimens are identified. Although the use of RFID tracking has expanded in the US, it is still not widely adopted.\nPreimplantation genetic diagnosis or screening.\nPre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is criticised for giving select demographic groups disproportionate access to a means of creating a child possessing characteristics that they consider \"ideal\". Many fertile couples now demand equal access to embryonic screening so that their child can be just as healthy as one created through IVF. Mass use of PGD, especially as a means of population control or in the presence of legal measures related to population or demographic control, can lead to intentional or unintentional demographic effects such as the skewed live-birth sex ratios seen in China following implementation of its one-child policy.\nWhile PGD was originally designed to screen for embryos carrying hereditary genetic diseases, the method has been applied to select features that are unrelated to diseases, thus raising ethical questions. Examples of such cases include the selection of embryos based on histocompatibility (HLA) for the donation of tissues to a sick family member, the diagnosis of genetic susceptibility to disease, and sex selection.\nThese examples raise ethical issues because of the morality of eugenics. It becomes frowned upon because of the advantage of being able to eliminate unwanted traits and selecting desired traits. By using PGD, individuals are given the opportunity to create a human life unethically and rely on science and not by natural selection.\nFor example, a deaf British couple, Tom and Paula Lichy, have petitioned to create a deaf baby using IVF. Some medical ethicists have been very critical of this approach. Jacob M. Appel wrote that \"intentionally culling out blind or deaf embryos might prevent considerable future suffering, while a policy that allowed deaf or blind parents to select \"for\" such traits intentionally would be far more troublesome.\"\nIndustry corruption.\nRobert Winston, professor of fertility studies at Imperial College London, had called the industry \"corrupt\" and \"greedy\" stating that \"one of the major problems facing us in healthcare is that IVF has become a massive commercial industry,\" and that \"what has happened, of course, is that money is corrupting this whole technology\", and accused authorities of failing to protect couples from exploitation: \"The regulatory authority has done a consistently bad job. It's not prevented the exploitation of people, it's not put out very good information to couples, it's not limited the number of unscientific treatments people have access to\". The IVF industry has been described as a market-driven construction of health, medicine and the human body.\nThe industry has been accused of making unscientific claims, and distorting facts relating to infertility, in particular through widely exaggerated claims about how common infertility is in society, in an attempt to get as many couples as possible and as soon as possible to try treatments (rather than trying to conceive naturally for a longer time). This risks removing infertility from its social context and reducing the experience to a simple biological malfunction, which not only \"can\" be treated through bio-medical procedures, but should be treated by them.\nOlder patients.\nAll pregnancies can be risky, but there are greater risk for mothers who are older and are over the age of 40. As people get older, they are more likely to develop conditions such as gestational diabetes and pre-eclampsia. If the mother does conceive over the age of 40, their offspring may be of lower birth weight, and more likely to requires intensive care. Because of this, the increased risk is a sufficient cause for concern. The high incidence of caesarean in older patients is commonly regarded as a risk.\nThose conceiving at 40 have a greater risk of gestational hypertension and premature birth. The offspring is at risk when being born from older mothers, and the risks associated with being conceived through IVF.\nAdriana Iliescu held the record for a while as the oldest woman to give birth using IVF and a donor egg, when she gave birth in 2004 at the age of 66. In September 2019, a 74-year-old woman became the oldest-ever to give birth after she delivered twins at a hospital in Guntur, Andhra Pradesh.\nPregnancy after menopause.\nAlthough menopause is a natural barrier to further conception, IVF has allowed people to be pregnant in their fifties and sixties. People whose uteruses have been appropriately prepared receive embryos that originated from an egg donor. Therefore, although they do not have a genetic link with the child, they have a physical link through pregnancy and childbirth. Even after menopause, the uterus is fully capable of carrying out a pregnancy.\nSame-sex couples, single and unmarried parents.\nA 2009 statement from the ASRM found no persuasive evidence that children are harmed or disadvantaged solely by being raised by single parents, unmarried parents, or homosexual parents. It did not support restricting access to assisted reproductive technologies on the basis of a prospective parent's marital status or sexual orientation. A 2018 study found that children's psychological well-being did not differ when raised by either same-sex parents or heterosexual parents, even finding that psychological well-being was better amongst children raised by same-sex parents.\nEthical concerns include reproductive rights, the welfare of offspring, nondiscrimination against unmarried individuals, homosexual, and professional autonomy.\nA controversy in California focused on the question of whether physicians opposed to same-sex relationships should be required to perform IVF for a lesbian couple. Guadalupe T. Benitez, a lesbian medical assistant from San Diego, sued doctors Christine Brody and Douglas Fenton of the North Coast Woman's Care Medical Group after Brody told her that she had \"religious-based objections to treating her and homosexuals in general to help them conceive children by artificial insemination,\" and Fenton refused to authorise a refill of her prescription for the fertility drug Clomid on the same grounds. The California Medical Association had initially sided with Brody and Fenton, but the case, \"North Coast Women's Care Medical Group v. Superior Court\", was decided unanimously by the California State Supreme Court in favour of Benitez on 19 August 2008.\nNadya Suleman came to international attention after having twelve embryos implanted, eight of which survived, resulting in eight newborns being added to her existing six-child family. The Medical Board of California sought to have fertility doctor Michael Kamrava, who treated Suleman, stripped of his licence. State officials allege that performing Suleman's procedure is evidence of unreasonable judgment, substandard care, and a lack of concern for the eight children she would conceive and the six she was already struggling to raise. On 1 June 2011 the Medical Board issued a ruling that Kamrava's medical licence be revoked effective 1 July 2011.\nTransgender parents.\nThe research on transgender reproduction and family planning is limited. A 2020 comparative study of children born to a transgender father and cisgender mother via donor sperm insemination in France showed no significant differences to IVF and naturally conceived children of cisgender parents.\nTransgender men can experience challenges in pregnancy and birthing from the cis-normative structure within the medical system, as well as psychological challenges such as renewed gender dysphoria. The effect of continued testosterone therapy during pregnancy and breastfeeding is undetermined. Ethical concerns include reproductive rights, reproductive justice, physician autonomy, and transphobia within the health care setting.\nAnonymous donors.\nAlana Stewart, who was conceived using donor sperm, began an online forum for donor children called AnonymousUS in 2010. The forum welcomes the viewpoints of anyone involved in the IVF process. In May 2012, a court ruled making anonymous sperm and egg donation in British Columbia illegal.\nIn the UK, Sweden, Norway, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, and some Australian states, donors are not paid and cannot be anonymous.\nIn 2000, a website called Donor Sibling Registry was created to help biological children with a common donor connect with each other.\nLeftover embryos or eggs, unwanted embryos.\nThere may be leftover embryos or eggs from IVF procedures if the person for whom they were originally created has successfully carried one or more pregnancies to term, and no longer wishes to use them. With the patient's permission, these may be donated to help others conceive by means of third party reproduction.\nIn embryo donation, these extra embryos are given to others for transfer, with the goal of producing a successful pregnancy. Embryo recipients have genetic issues or poor-quality embryos or eggs of their own. The resulting child is considered the child of whoever birthed them, and not the child of the donor, the same as occurs with egg donation or sperm donation. As per The National Infertility Association, typically, genetic parents donate the eggs or embryos to a fertility clinic where they are preserved by oocyte cryopreservation or embryo cryopreservation until a carrier is found for them. The process of matching the donation with the prospective parents is conducted by the agency itself, at which time the clinic transfers ownership of the embryos to the prospective parent(s).\nAlternatives to donating unused embryos are destroying them (or having them transferred at a time when pregnancy is very unlikely), keeping them frozen indefinitely, or donating them for use in research (rendering them non-viable). Individual moral views on disposing of leftover embryos may depend on personal views on the beginning of human personhood and the definition and/or value of potential future persons, and on the value that is given to fundamental research questions. Some people believe donation of leftover embryos for research is a good alternative to discarding the embryos when patients receive proper, honest and clear information about the research project, the procedures and the scientific values.\nDuring the embryo selection and transfer phases, many embryos may be discarded in favour of others. This selection may be based on criteria such as genetic disorders or the sex. One of the earliest cases of special gene selection through IVF was the case of the Collins family in the 1990s, who selected the sex of their child.\nThe ethic issues remain unresolved as no worldwide consensus exists in science, religion, and philosophy on when a human embryo should be recognised as a person. For those who believe that this is at the moment of conception, IVF becomes a moral question when multiple eggs are fertilised, begin development, and only a few are chosen for uterus transfer.\nIf IVF were to involve the fertilisation of only a single egg, or at least only the number that will be transferred, then this would not be an issue. However, this has the chance of increasing costs dramatically as only a few eggs can be attempted at a time. As a result, the couple must decide what to do with these extra embryos. Depending on their view of the embryo's humanity or the chance the couple will want to try to have another child, the couple has multiple options for dealing with these extra embryos. Couples can choose to keep them frozen, donate them to other infertile couples, thaw them, or donate them to medical research. Keeping them frozen costs money, donating them does not ensure they will survive, thawing them renders them immediately unviable, and medical research results in their termination. In the realm of medical research, the couple is not necessarily told what the embryos will be used for, and as a result, some can be used in stem cell research.\nIn February 2024, the Alabama Supreme Court ruled in \"LePage v. Center for Reproductive Medicine\" that cryopreserved embryos were \"persons\" or \"extrauterine children\". After Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization (2022), some antiabortionists had hoped to get a judgement that fetuses and embryos were \"person[s]\".\nGender selection.\nGender selection, also known as sex selection, in the context of IVF involves the use of preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) to determine the sex of embryos prior to transfer into the uterus, allowing prospective parents to choose embryos of a preferred sex. This is typically achieved by means of a biopsy of cells from embryos at the blastocyst stage and analysing them for sex chromosomes (XX for female, XY for male), alongside screening for genetic abnormalities. The primary aim of IVF remains assisting those with fertility issues to achieve pregnancy, but gender selection adds an elective dimension for reasons such as family balancing \u2013 where parents with children of one sex seek the opposite \u2013 or medical purposes, like avoiding sex-linked disorders such as haemophilia or Duchenne muscular dystrophy that predominantly affect males.\nThe process integrates with standard IVF protocols: ovarian stimulation to produce multiple eggs, retrieval, fertilisation in the lab, embryo culture to day five, biopsy for PGT (which identifies gender via chromosomal analysis), and transfer of selected embryos. PGT can also screen for conditions like Down syndrome, cystic fibrosis or Tay\u2013Sachs disease, enhancing the medical utility of the procedure. Success rates for accurate gender determination approach 100%, though overall pregnancy success varies by factors like maternal age, with rates around 40-50% for women under 35. Costs typically add $3,000-$5,000 for PGT to a base IVF cycle of $10,000-$15,000, totalling over $20,000, though variations depend on location and clinic.\nNon-medical gender selection remains controversial, with ethical concerns including potential reinforcement of gender stereotypes, societal imbalances (as seen in regions preferring sons), and the commodification of children. Legally, it is prohibited for elective reasons in countries like Canada, the UK, Australia, and much of Europe, permitted only for medical indications to prevent genetic diseases. In the United States, it is legal without federal restrictions, though guided by ethical guidelines from bodies like the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, which allows clinics discretion. Destinations like Mexico and Cyprus permit both medical and non-medical selection, attracting fertility tourism. These disparities raise questions about equity, autonomy, and cross-border ethical standards in reproductive medicine.\nReligious response.\nChristianity.\nThe Catholic Church opposes all kinds of assisted reproductive technology and artificial contraception, on the grounds that they separate the procreative goal of marital sex from the goal of uniting married couples.\nThe Catholic Church permits the use of a small number of reproductive technologies and contraceptive methods such as natural family planning, which involves charting ovulation times, and allows other forms of reproductive technologies that allow conception to take place from normative sexual intercourse, such as a fertility lubricant. Pope Benedict XVI had publicly re-emphasised the Catholic Church's opposition to in vitro fertilisation, saying that it replaces love between a husband and wife. The Catechism of the Catholic Church, in accordance with the Catholic understanding of natural law, teaches that reproduction has an \"inseparable connection\" to the sexual union of married couples. In addition, the church opposes IVF because it might result in the disposal of embryos; in Catholicism, an embryo is viewed as an individual with a soul that must be treated as a person. The Catholic Church maintains that it is not objectively evil to be infertile, and advocates adoption as an option for such couples who still wish to have children.\nThe Lutheran Council in the United States of America, organised by the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod and parent bodies of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, produced an authoritative document on the issue of in-vitro fertilisation, which \"unanimously concluded that IVF does not \"in and of itself\" violate the will of God as reflected in the Bible, when the wife's egg and husband's sperm are used\" (LCUSA n.d.:31). The Lutheran Churches approve of artificial insemination by a husband (AIH), though representatives from the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod hold that such IVF is only unobjectionable if the sperm and egg come from husband and wife and all of the fertilised eggs are implanted in the womb of the wife. With regard to artificial insemination by a donor (AID), the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America teaches that it is a \"cause for moral concern\", while the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod rejects it.\nIslam.\nRegarding the response to IVF by Islam, a general consensus from the contemporary Sunni scholars concludes that IVF methods are immoral and prohibited. However, Gad El-Hak Ali Gad El-Hak's ART fatwa includes that:\nJudaism.\nWithin the Orthodox Jewish community the concept is debated as there is little precedent in traditional Jewish legal textual sources. Regarding laws of sexuality, religious challenges include masturbation (which may be regarded as \"seed wasting\"), laws related to sexual activity and menstruation (niddah) and the specific laws regarding intercourse. An additional major issue is that of establishing paternity and lineage. For a baby conceived naturally, the father's identity is determined by a legal presumption (chazakah) of legitimacy: \"rov bi'ot achar ha'baal\" \u2013 a woman's sexual relations are assumed to be with her husband. Regarding an IVF child, this assumption does not exist and as such Rabbi Eliezer Waldenberg (among others) requires an outside supervisor to positively identify the father. Reform Judaism has generally approved IVF.\nSociety and culture.\nMany women of sub-Saharan Africa choose to foster their children to infertile women. IVF enables these infertile women to have their own children, which imposes new ideals to a culture in which fostering children is seen as both natural and culturally important. Many infertile women are able to earn more respect in their society by taking care of the children of other mothers, and this may be lost if they choose to use IVF instead. As IVF is seen as unnatural, it may even hinder their societal position as opposed to making them equal with fertile women. It is also economically advantageous for infertile women to raise foster children as it gives these children greater ability to access resources that are important for their development and also aids the development of their society at large. If IVF becomes more popular without the birth rate decreasing, there could be more large family homes with fewer options to send their newborn children. This could result in an increase of orphaned children and/or a decrease in resources for the children of large families. This would ultimately stifle the children's and the community's growth.\nIn the US, the pineapple has emerged as a symbol of IVF users, possibly because some people thought, without scientific evidence, that eating pineapple might slightly increase the success rate for the procedure.\nEmotional involvement with children.\nStudies have indicated that IVF mothers show greater emotional involvement with their child, and they enjoy motherhood more than mothers by natural conception. Similarly, studies have indicated that IVF fathers express more warmth and emotional involvement than fathers by adoption and natural conception and enjoy fatherhood more. Some IVF parents become overly involved with their children.\nMen and IVF.\nResearch has shown that men largely view themselves as \"passive contributors\", since they have \"less physical involvement\" in IVF treatment. Despite this, many men feel distressed after seeing the toll of hormonal injections and ongoing physical intervention on their female partner. Fertility was found to be a significant factor in a man's perception of his masculinity, driving many to keep the treatment a secret. In cases where a man did share that he and his partner were undergoing IVF, they reported to have been teased, mainly by other men, although some viewed this as an affirmation of support and friendship. For others, this led to feeling socially isolated. In comparison with females, males showed less deterioration in mental health in the years following a failed treatment. However, many men did feel guilt, disappointment and inadequacy, stating that they were simply trying to provide an \"emotional rock\" for their partners.\nThe onset of mental health problems that some men experience during and after IVF treatment has various causes and negative influences. These include religious and cultural pressures which can cause stress and mental health strains. Interviews with Polish men who were undergoing or had undergone IVF treatment found that many men held strong feelings about previous public discourse. Maria Reimann argues that these showcases of strong emotions could be one of the limited outlets for long-held suppressed emotions. Engagement in public discourse may also act as a 'battle ground', with acts that showcase anger and hate being a means for men to fight for their partner, which could act as a reassurance of common notions of masculinity. The tendency to react with hate or anger is heavily influenced by common notions of masculinity. Many men hold the perception that their role is for emotional stability, often leading to the concealment of emotional suffering and stress. When men experience instability in IVF treatment from continued failures or setbacks, the reaction is commonly further isolation, with men often pursuing distractions in work or other activities, often ones that grant feelings of control. As seen in Polish men's experience with IVF, the lack of proper social support and a significant social stigma around IVF treatment contribute to a growing mental health issue.\nAbility to withdraw consent.\nIn certain countries, including Austria, Italy, Estonia, Hungary, Spain and Israel, the male does not have full rights to withdraw consent to storage or use of embryos once they are fertilised. In the United States, the matter has been left to the courts on a more or less ad hoc basis. If embryos are implanted and a child is born contrary to the wishes of the male, he still has the legal and financial responsibilities of a father.\nAvailability and utilisation.\nCost.\nCosts of IVF can be divided into direct and indirect costs. Direct costs include the medical treatments themselves, including doctor consultations, medications, ultrasound scanning, laboratory tests, the actual IVF procedure, and associated hospital charges and administrative costs. Indirect costs include the cost of addressing any complications, compensation for the gestational surrogate, patient travel costs, and lost hours of productivity. These costs can be exaggerated by higher age in the woman undergoing IVF treatment (particularly those over the age of 40), and the increased costs associated with multiple births. For instance, a pregnancy with twins can cost up to three times that of a singleton pregnancy. While some insurances cover one cycle of IVF, it takes multiple cycles of IVF to have a successful outcome. A study completed in Northern California reveals that the IVF procedure alone that results in a successful outcome costs $61,377, and this can be more costly with the use of a donor egg.\nThe cost of IVF reflects the costliness of the underlying healthcare system rather than the regulatory or funding environment, and ranges, on average for a standard IVF cycle and in 2006 United States dollars, between $12,500 in the United States to $4,000 in Japan. In Ireland, IVF costs around \u20ac4,000, with fertility drugs, if required, costing up to \u20ac3,000. The cost per live birth is highest in the United States ($41,000) and United Kingdom ($40,000) and lowest in Scandinavia and Japan (both around $24,500).\nThe high cost of IVF is also a barrier to access for disabled individuals, who typically have lower incomes, face higher health care costs, and seek health care services more often than non-disabled individuals.\nNavigating insurance coverage for transgender expectant parents presents a unique challenge. Insurance plans are designed to cater towards a specific population, meaning that some plans can provide adequate coverage for gender-affirming care but fail to provide fertility services for transgender patients. Additionally, insurance coverage is constructed around a person's legally recognised sex and not their anatomy; thus, transgender people may not get coverage for the services they need, including transgender men for fertility services.\nUse by LGBT individuals.\nSame-sex couples.\nIn larger urban centres, studies have found that lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ+) populations are among the fastest-growing users of fertility care. IVF is increasingly being used to allow lesbian and other LGBT couples to share in the reproductive process through a technique called reciprocal IVF. The eggs of one partner are used to create embryos which the other partner carries through pregnancy. For gay male couples, many elect to use IVF through gestational surrogacy, where one partner's sperm is used to fertilise a donor ovum, and the resulting embryo is transplanted into a surrogate carrier's womb. There are IVF options available for same-sex couples including, but not limited to, IVF with donor sperm, IVF with a partner's oocytes, reciprocal IVF, IVF with donor eggs, and IVF with gestational surrogate. IVF with donor sperm can be considered traditional IVF for lesbian couples, but reciprocal IVF or using a partner's oocytes are other options for lesbian couples trying to conceive to include both partners in the biological process. Using a partner's oocytes is an option for partners who are unsuccessful in conceiving with their own, and reciprocal IVF involves undergoing reproduction with a donor egg and sperm that is then transferred to a partner who will gestate. Donor IVF involves conceiving with a third party's eggs. Typically, for gay male couples hoping to use IVF, the common techniques are using IVF with donor eggs and gestational surrogates.\nTransgender parents.\nMany LGBT communities centre their support around cisgender gay, lesbian and bisexual people and neglect to include proper support for transgender people. The same 2020 literature review analyses the social, emotional and physical experiences of pregnant transgender men. A common obstacle faced by pregnant transgender men is the possibility of gender dysphoria. Literature shows that transgender men report uncomfortable procedures and interactions during their pregnancies as well as feeling misgendered due to gendered terminology used by healthcare providers. Outside of the healthcare system, pregnant transgender men may experience gender dysphoria due to cultural assumptions that all pregnant people are cisgender women. These people use three common approaches to navigating their pregnancy: passing as a cisgender woman, hiding their pregnancy, or being out and visibly pregnant as a transgender man. Some transgender and gender diverse patients describe their experience in seeking gynaecological and reproductive health care as isolating and discriminatory, as the strictly binary healthcare system often leads to denial of healthcare coverage or unnecessary revelation of their transgender status to their employer.\nMany transgender people retain their original sex organs and choose to have children through biological reproduction. Advances in assisted reproductive technology and fertility preservation have broadened the options transgender people have to conceive a child using their own gametes or a donor's. Transgender men and women may opt for fertility preservation before any gender affirming surgery, but it is not required for future biological reproduction. It is also recommended that fertility preservation is conducted before any hormone therapy. Additionally, while fertility specialists often suggest that transgender men discontinue their testosterone hormones prior to pregnancy, research on this topic is still inconclusive. However, a 2019 study found that transgender male patients seeking oocyte retrieval via assisted reproductive technology (including IVF) were able to undergo treatment four months after stopping testosterone treatment, on average. All patients experienced menses and normal AMH, FSH and E2 levels and antral follicle counts after coming off testosterone, which allowed for successful oocyte retrieval. Despite assumptions that the long-term androgen treatment negatively impacts fertility, oocyte retrieval, an integral part of the IVF process, does not appear to be affected.\nBiological reproductive options available to transgender women include, but are not limited to, IVF and IUI with the trans woman's sperm and a donor or a partner's eggs and uterus. Fertility treatment options for transgender men include, but are not limited to, IUI or IVF using his own eggs with a donor's sperm and/or donor's eggs, his uterus, or a different uterus, whether that is a partner's or a surrogate's.\nUse by disabled individuals.\nPeople with disabilities who wish to have children are equally or more likely than the non-disabled population to experience infertility, yet disabled individuals are much less likely to have access to fertility treatment such as IVF. There are many extraneous factors that hinder disabled individuals access to IVF, such as assumptions about decision-making capacity, sexual interests and abilities, heritability of a disability, and beliefs about parenting ability. These same misconceptions about people with disabilities that once led health care providers to sterilise thousands of women with disabilities now lead them to provide or deny reproductive care on the basis of stereotypes concerning people with disabilities and their sexuality.\nNot only do misconceptions about disabled individuals parenting ability, sexuality, and health restrict and hinder access to fertility treatment such as IVF, structural barriers such as providers uneducated in disability healthcare and inaccessible clinics severely hinder disabled individuals access to receiving IVF.\nBy country.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, the average age of women undergoing ART treatment is 35.5 years among those using their own eggs (one in four being 40 or older) and 40.5 years among those using donated eggs. While IVF is available in Australia, Australians using IVF are unable to choose their baby's gender.\nCameroon.\nErnestine Gwet Bell supervised the first Cameroonian child born by IVF in 1998.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, one cycle of IVF treatment can cost between $7,750 and $12,250 CAD, and medications alone can cost from $2,500 to over $7,000 CAD. The funding mechanisms that influence accessibility in Canada vary by province and territory, with some provinces providing full, partial or no coverage.\nNew Brunswick provides partial funding through their Infertility Special Assistance Fund \u2013 a one-time grant of up to $5,000. Patients may only claim up to 50% of treatment costs or $5,000 (whichever is less) incurred after April 2014. Eligible patients must be full-time New Brunswick residents with a valid Medicare card and have an official medical infertility diagnosis by a physician.\nIn December 2015, the Ontario provincial government enacted the Ontario Fertility Program for patients with medical and non-medical infertility, regardless of sexual orientation, gender or family composition. Eligible patients for IVF treatment must be Ontario residents under the age of 43 and have a valid Ontario Health Insurance Plan card and have not already undergone any IVF cycles. Coverage is extensive, but not universal. Coverage extends to certain blood and urine tests, physician/nurse counselling and consultations, certain ultrasounds, up to two cycle monitorings, embryo thawing, freezing and culture, fertilisation and embryology services, single transfers of all embryos, and one surgical sperm retrieval using certain techniques only if necessary. Drugs and medications are not covered under this program, along with psychologist or social worker counselling, storage and shipping of eggs, sperm or embryos, and the purchase of donor sperm or eggs.\nIn October 2025 the Ontario provincial government expanded the OFP to include an additional $250 million investment as well as a fertility tax credit. The tax credit is effective as of January 2025 and covers 25% of eligible fertility-related expenses up to $20,000, providing a maximum annual credit of $5,000. The scheme is available to Ontario residents with a valid OHIP card and eligible fertility expenses paid on or after 1 January 2025, who are not being reimbursed by private insurance.\nChina.\nIVF is expensive in China and not generally accessible to unmarried women. In August 2022, China's National Health Authority announced that it will take steps to make assisted reproductive technology more accessible, including by guiding local governments to include such technology in its national medical system.\nCroatia.\nNo egg or sperm donations take place in Croatia, however using donated sperm or egg in ART and IUI is allowed. With donated eggs, sperm or embryo, a heterosexual couple and single women have legal access to IVF. Male or female couples do not have access to ART as a form of reproduction. The minimum age for males and females to access ART in Croatia is 18 there is no maximum age. Donor anonymity applies, but the born child can be given access to the donor's identity at a certain age\nIndia.\nThe penetration of the IVF market in India is quite low, with only 2,800 cycles per million infertile people in the reproductive age group (20\u201344 years), as compared to China, which has 6,500 cycles. The key challenges are lack of awareness, affordability and accessibility. Since 2018, however, India has become a destination for fertility tourism, because of lower costs than in the Western world. In December 2021, the Lok Sabha passed the Assisted Reproductive Technology (Regulation) Bill 2020, to regulate ART services including IVF centres, sperm and egg banks.\nIsrael.\nIsrael has the highest rate of IVF in the world, with 1,657 procedures performed per million people per year. Couples without children can receive funding for IVF for up to two children. The same funding is available for people without children who will raise up to two children in a single parent home. IVF is available for people aged 18 to 45. The Israeli Health Ministry says it spends roughly $3450 per procedure.\nSweden.\nOne, two or three IVF treatments are government subsidised for people who are younger than 40 and have no children. The rules for how many treatments are subsidised, and the upper age limit for the people, vary between different county councils. Single people are treated, and embryo transfers (so-called \"embryo adoptions\") are allowed. There are also private clinics that offer the treatment for a fee.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAvailability of IVF in England is determined by Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs). The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends up to 3 cycles of treatment for people under 40 years old with minimal success conceiving after 2 years of unprotected sex. Cycles will not be continued for people who are older than 40 years. CCGs in Essex, Bedfordshire and Somerset have reduced funding to one cycle, or none, and it is expected that reductions will become more widespread. Funding may be available in \"exceptional circumstances\" \u2013 for example if a male partner has a transmittable infection or one partner is affected by cancer treatment. According to the campaign group Fertility Fairness \"at the end of 2014 every CCG in England was funding at least one cycle of IVF\". Prices paid by the NHS in England varied between under \u00a33,000 to more than \u00a36,000 in 2014/5. In February 2013, the cost of implementing the NICE guidelines for IVF along with other treatments for infertility was projected to be \u00a3236,000 per year per 100,000 members of the population.\nIVF increasingly appears on NHS treatments blacklists. In August 2017 five of the 208 CCGs had stopped funding IVF completely and others were considering doing so. By October 2017 only 25 CCGs were delivering the three recommended NHS IVF cycles to eligible people under 40. Policies could fall foul of discrimination laws if they treat same sex couples differently from heterosexual ones. In July 2019 Jackie Doyle-Price said that women were registering with surgeries further away from their own home in order to get around CCG rationing policies.\nThe Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority said in September 2018 that parents who are limited to one cycle of IVF, or have to fund it themselves, are more likely choose to implant multiple embryos in the hope it increases the chances of pregnancy. This significantly increases the chance of multiple births and the associated poor outcomes, which would increase NHS costs. The president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists said that funding 3 cycles was \"the most important factor in maintaining low rates of multiple pregnancies and reduce(s) associated complications\".\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, overall availability of IVF in 2005 was 2.5 IVF physicians per 100,000 population, and utilisation was 236 IVF cycles per 100,000. 126 procedures are performed per million people per year. Utilisation highly increases with availability and IVF insurance coverage, and to a significant extent also with percentage of single persons and median income. In the US, an average cycle, from egg retrieval to embryo implantation, costs $12,400, and insurance companies that do cover treatment, even partially, usually cap the number of cycles they pay for. As of 2015, more than 1 million babies had been born utilising IVF technologies.\nIn the US, as of September 2023, 21 states and the District of Columbia had passed laws for fertility insurance coverage. In 15 of those jurisdictions, some level of IVF coverage is included, and in 17, some fertility preservation services are included. Eleven states require coverage for both fertility preservation and IVF: Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland, Maine, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, Utah, and Washington D.C. The states that have infertility coverage laws are Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Montana, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Rhode Island, Texas, Utah, and West Virginia. As of July 2023, New York was reportedly the only state Medicaid program to cover IVF. These laws differ by state but many require an egg be fertilised with sperm from a spouse and that in order to be covered you must show you cannot become pregnant through penile-vaginal sex. These requirements are not possible for a same-sex couple to meet.\nMany fertility clinics in the United States limit the upper age at which people are eligible for IVF to 50 or 55 years. These cut-offs make it difficult for people older than fifty-five to utilise the procedure.\nLegal status.\nGovernment agencies in China passed bans on the use of IVF in 2003 by unmarried people or by couples with certain infectious diseases.\nIn India, the use of IVF as a means of sex selection (preimplantation genetic diagnosis) is banned under the Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques Act, 1994.\nSunni Muslim nations generally allow IVF between married couples when conducted with their own respective sperm and eggs, but not with donor eggs from other couples. But Iran, which is Shi'a Muslim, has a more complex scheme. Iran bans sperm donation but allows donation of both fertilised and unfertilised eggs. Fertilised eggs are donated from married couples to other married couples, while unfertilised eggs are donated in the context of mut'ah or temporary marriage to the father.\nBy 2012 Costa Rica was the only country in the world with a complete ban on IVF technology, it having been ruled unconstitutional by the nation's Supreme Court because it \"violated life.\" Costa Rica had been the only country in the western hemisphere that forbade IVF. A law project sent reluctantly by the government of President Laura Chinchilla was rejected by parliament. President Chinchilla has not publicly stated her position on the question of IVF. However, given the massive influence of the Catholic Church in her government any change in the status quo seems very unlikely. In spite of Costa Rican government and strong religious opposition, the IVF ban has been struck down by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in a decision of 20 December 2012. The court said that a long-standing Costa Rican guarantee of protection for every human embryo violated the reproductive freedom of infertile couples because it prohibited them from using IVF, which often involves the disposal of embryos not implanted in a woman's uterus. On 10 September 2015, President Luis Guillermo Sol\u00eds signed a decree legalising in-vitro fertilisation. The decree was added to the country's official gazette on 11 September. Opponents of the practice have since filed a lawsuit before the country's Constitutional Court.\nAll major restrictions on single but infertile people using IVF were lifted in Australia in 2002 after a final appeal to the Australian High Court was rejected on procedural grounds in the Leesa Meldrum case. A Victorian federal court had ruled in 2000 that the existing ban on all single women and lesbians using IVF constituted sex discrimination. Victoria's government announced changes to its IVF law in 2007 eliminating remaining restrictions on fertile single women and lesbians, leaving South Australia as the only state maintaining them.\nUnited States.\nDespite strong popular support (7 out of 10 adults consider IVF access a good thing and 67% believe that health insurance plans should cover IVF), IVF can involve complicated legal issues and has become a contentious issue in US politics. Federal regulations include screening requirements and restrictions on donations, but these generally do not affect heterosexually intimate partners. Doctors may be required to provide treatments to unmarried or LGBTQ couples under non-discrimination laws, as for example in California. The state of Tennessee proposed a bill in 2009 that would have defined donor IVF as adoption. During the same session, another bill proposed barring adoption from any unmarried and cohabitating couple, and activist groups stated that passing the first bill would effectively stop unmarried women from using IVF. Neither of these bills passed.\nIn 2023, the Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) updated its guidelines for the definition of \"infertility\" to include those who need medical interventions \"in order to achieve a successful pregnancy either as an individual or with a partner.\" In many states, legal and financial decisions about provision of infertility treatments reference this \"official\" definition. On September 29, 2024, California Governor Gavin Newsom signed SB 729, legislation which aligns with the ASRM definition of \"infertility\".\nIn the United States, much of the opposition to the use of IVF is associated with the anti-abortion movement, evangelicals, and denominations such as the Southern Baptists. Current legal opposition to IVF and other fertility treatment access has stemmed from recent court rulings regarding women's reproductive healthcare. In the 2022 \"Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization\" decision, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the 1973 \"Roe v. Wade\" decision which had federally protected the right to abortion. The 2024 Alabama Supreme Court decision regarding IVF has since threatened IVF access and legality in the U.S. Frozen embryos at an IVF clinic were accidentally destroyed, resulting in a lawsuit during which the attorneys for the plaintiff sought damages under the Wrongful Death of a Minor Act. The court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, setting a state-level precedent that embryos and fetuses are given the same rights as minors/children, regardless of whether they are in utero or not. This has created confusion over the status of unused embryos and questions surrounding when life begins. After the court's decision, numerous IVF clinics in Alabama halted IVF treatment services for fears of civil and criminal liability associated with the new rights granted to embryos. Since, laws proposing embryonic personhood have been proposed in 13 other states, creating fear of further state restrictions. This ruling raised concerns from The National Infertility Association and the American Society for Reproductive Medicine that the decision would mean Alabama's bans on abortion prohibit IVF as well, while the University of Alabama at Birmingham health system paused IVF treatments. Eight days later the Alabama legislature voted to protect IVF providers and patients from criminal or civil liability.\nThe Right to IVF Act, federal legislation that would have codified a right to fertility treatments and provided insurance coverage for in vitro fertilisation treatments, was twice brought to a vote in the Senate in 2024. Both times it was blocked by Senate Republicans, of whom only Lisa Murkowski and Susan Collins voted to move the bill forward.\nFew American courts have addressed the issue of the \"property\" status of a frozen embryo. This issue might arise in the context of a divorce case, in which a court would need to determine which spouse would be able to decide the disposition of the embryos. It could also arise in the context of a dispute between a sperm donor and egg donor, even if they were unmarried. In 2015, an Illinois court held that such disputes could be decided by reference to any contract between the parents-to-be. In the absence of a contract, the court would weigh the relative interests of the parties.\nOn February 18, 2025, President Donald Trump signed an executive order which, according to the White House website, \"directs policy recommendations to protect IVF access and aggressively reduce out-of-pocket and health plan costs for such treatments\". Trump has expressed support for IVF programs in the past, aiming to reduce the cost of such procedures.\nAnthropological perspectives.\nOverview.\nHuman reproduction from an anthropological perspective is not considered as a wholly biological mechanism, as it is influenced by the surrounding culture and society. These societal beliefs control what are classified as suitable methods of human reproduction. Since its development in the 1970s, IVF has become a socially approved method of reproduction in many cultures. The acceptance of IVF technology in different societies has changed its perception from a 'stigmatised' medical tool to a new way to bring human life into the world. Its acceptance can be based on sociological and anthropological models of reproduction as these societies have changed their classification of reproduction to include this technology as a valid form of procreation, just like traditional methods of conception.\nWhilst IVF allows for women facing hardship with 'natural' methods to conceive, its use extends beyond that. People may seek the technology to satisfy societal and familial pressures of repopulation, ensuring that they use everything available to them to increase the chance of conception, or even as a means to strengthen affinal or kinship relations by procreating. These external pressures are the inception of differing attitudes in cultures towards IVF technology being used on a regular basis as an aid in human reproduction.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, IVF has become a widely used form of assisted reproduction, shaped by culture, ethics and policy as the nation's birth rates decline and marriages and pregnancy occur later in life. Cultural values deeply influence the practice; embryos are not viewed simply as biological matter but rather are ingrained with social and moral meaning. Based on the interviews of 58 women in Japan who underwent IVF treatment, anthropologists suggest that the embryos' status is underexplored in Japanese public discourse due to the widespread belief that their social and emotional significance is unimportant. These interviews, however, revealed that women attribute emotional, familial and spiritual values to embryos, which largely influence the decisions around their use, storage and disposal.\nThe commodification of IVF is reflected in the private and unregulated nature of the fertility industry in Japan. Access to IVF is often limited by societal norms and financial means, with most treatments not being covered by health insurance, hindering access for women who are unmarried, in same-sex relationships, or with limited finances. Such practices reveal how broader social expectations, such as maintaining traditional family values and genetic lineage, can influence who can and cannot access assisted reproduction.\nAlternatives.\nSome alternatives to IVF are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57881", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57881", "title": "California State University System", "text": ""}
{"id": "57884", "revid": "51065739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57884", "title": "Tap dance", "text": "Type of dance involving percussive shoes\nTap dance (or tap) is a form of dance that uses the sounds of tap shoes striking the floor as a form of percussion; it is often accompanied by music. Tap dancing can also be performed with no musical accompaniment; the sound of the taps is its own music.\nIt is an American artform that evolved alongside the advent of jazz music. Tap is a type of step dance that began with the combination of Southern American and Irish dance traditions, such as Irish soft-shoe and hard-shoe step dances, and a variety of both slave and freeman step dances. The fusion of African rhythms and performance styles with European techniques of footwork led to the creation of tap dance. This fusion began in the mid-17th century but did not become popular until the mid-19th century.\nThere are two major versions of tap dance: rhythm (jazz) tap and Broadway tap. Broadway tap focuses on dance; it is widely performed in musical theater. Rhythm tap focuses on musicality, and practitioners consider themselves to be a part of the jazz tradition.\nThe sound is made by shoes that have a metal \"tap\" on the heel and toe. Different shoes may differ in their sound.\nHistory.\nTap dance is an American dance form with roots that go back 300 years to Irish and West African musical and step dance traditions, which themselves have medieval and ancient roots. During the 17th \u2013 19th centuries, it was primarily developed from European step dance forms, such as jigs and clogs. These dances were brought to the American continent by immigrants and eventually grew to incorporate African rhythms and styles. These fused and evolved into a form of dance called \"jigging\", which was taken up by minstrel show dancers in the 1800s. Tap dance then became a popular stage entertainment.\nAs minstrel shows began to decline in popularity, tap dance moved to the increasingly popular Vaudeville stage. Due to Vaudeville's unspoken \"two-colored rule\", which forbade blacks to perform solo, many Vaudeville tap acts were duets. One such duo was \"Buck and Bubbles,\" which consisted of John \"Bubbles\" Sublett tap dancing and Ford \"Buck\" Washington playing a piano. The duo performed a \"Class Act\", a routine in which the performers wore tuxedos, effectively distinguishing them from the older minstrel show concept of tap dancers as \"grinning-and-dancing clowns.\"\nAnother notable figure during this period is Bill \"Bojangles\" Robinson, a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Alice Whitman of The Whitman Sisters around 1904 (then known as \"Willie Robinson\"). Well versed in both Buck and Wing dancing and Irish Step dancing, Robinson joined the Vaudeville circuit in 1902 in a duo with George W. Cooper. The act quickly became famous, headlining events across the country, and touring England as well. In 1908, the partnership ended and Robinson began dancing solo, which was extremely rare for a black man at that time. Despite this, he had tremendous success and soon became a world-famous celebrity. He went on to have a leading role in many films, notably in the Shirley Temple franchise.\nShortly thereafter, the Nicholas Brothers came on the scene. Consisting of real life brothers Fayard and Harold, this team wowed audiences with their acrobatic feats incorporated into their classy style of dancing. A notable scene in the movie \"Stormy Weather\" features the pair dancing up a staircase and then descending the staircase in a series of leapfrogs over each other into a full split from which they rise with no hands. \"Stormy Weather\" was a six-minute performance performed in one go with no retakes. The Nicholas Brothers danced on pianos and many other structures during this performance.\nDuring the 1930s, tap dance mixed with Lindy Hop. \"Flying swing outs\" and \"flying circles\" are Lindy Hop moves with tap footwork. In the mid-to-late 1950s, the style of entertainment changed. Jazz music and tap dance declined, while rock and roll and the new jazz dance emerged. What is called \"jazz dance\" evolved out of \"tap dance\", so both dances have many moves in common. But jazz evolved separately from tap dance to become a new form in its own right. Well known dancers during the 1960s and 1970s included Arthur Duncan and Tommy Tune.\n\"No Maps on My Taps\", the Emmy award winning PBS documentary of 1979, helped begin the recent revival of tap dance. The outstanding success of the animated film, \"Happy Feet\", has further reinforced the popular appeal. National Tap Dance Day in the United States, celebrated May 25, was signed into law by President George Bush on November 7, 1989. (May 25 was chosen because it is the birthday of famous tapper Bill \"Bojangles\" Robinson.) Prominent modern tap dancers have included Sarah Reich, Brenda Bufalino, Melinda Sullivan, The Clark Brothers, James \"Buster\" Brown, Savion Glover, Gregory and Maurice Hines, LaVaughn Robinson, Jason Samuels Smith, Chloe Arnold, Michelle Dorrance, Dormeshia Sumbry-Edwards, and Dianne \"Lady Di\" Walker. Indie-pop band Tilly and the Wall also features a tap dancer, Jamie Pressnall, tapping as percussion, Sammie Davis Jr.\nOne recent innovation in the world of tap dance is the development of the long form \"tap opera,\" which tells an entire story during single performance, similar to a story ballet. This format was initially developed by Mark Yonally, founder and artistic director of dance company Chicago Tap Theatre in the early 2000s.\nSegregation's impact.\nDuring the 1930s and the 1940s, Americans were able to watch tap dancers perform on film. However, black tap dancers found it difficult to be a part of white films because segregation was prominent in America. This led to the creation of two different styles of tap dance: white tap dancers evolved up to a Broadway style and black dancers continued with the traditional rhythm based style. Broadway tap dance was performed in mainly Broadway musicals and film, and it did not emphasize classic jazz rhythms. Rhythm tap integrated more of the classic African roots of tap dance, and it emphasized jazz rhythms, musicality, and improvisation. Musicality is the dancer's understanding of the music they are performing to. Improvisation is where a dancer makes up the movement as they perform, and the choreography is not prepared beforehand.\nThere was also the \"two-color rule,\" which made sure that black tap dancers were not able to perform solos onstage. This led to some tap dancers performing comedic tap duets. There were stereotypes placed on black Americans such as the \"Uncle Tom\" stereotype, and many tap dancers were forced to wear \"black-face\" onstage to perform. One of the first black tap dancers to be acknowledged by America was Bill \"Bojangles\" Robinson, who performed duets with Shirley Temple. However, Bill Robinson's career was reduced to \"minstrelsy,\" which can be defined as white performers using makeup to mock black culture or using black stereotypes in a performance. Black Americans joined these minstrel performances, where they would be forced to act on black stereotypes in their performances. James \"Buster\" Brown, got his start in the segregated clubs of the 1930s, but eventually earned international mainstream recognition and mentored younger more modern tap dancers in the 1990s.\nCharacteristics.\nTap dancers make frequent use of syncopation. Choreography typically starts on the eighth or first beat count. Another aspect of tap dancing is improvisation. Tap dancing can either be done with music following the beats provided, or without musical accompaniment; the latter is known as \"a cappella\" tap dancing.\nHoofers are tap dancers who dance primarily \"closer to the floor\", using mostly footwork and not showing very much arm or body movement. This kind of tap dancing, also called \"rhythm tap\", was employed by slaves in America.\nSteve Condos developed an innovative rhythmic tap style that influenced the work of later tap dancers such as Gregory Hines and Savion Glover. The majority of early hoofers, such as Sammy Davis Jr., Glover, Hines, and LaVaughn Robinson were African American men. Savion Glover helped bring tap dance into mainstream media by choreographing \"Happy Feet\", a film about a tap dancing penguin. Another well-known tap film is 1989's \"Tap\", starring Gregory Hines and many old-time hoofers.\nEarly tappers like Fred Astaire provided a more ballroom look to tap dancing, while Gene Kelly introduced ballet elements and style into tap. This style of tap led to what is today known as \"Broadway style\", which is popular in American culture. It often involves high heeled tap shoes and show music, and is usually the type of tap first taught to beginners. Examples of this style are found in Broadway musicals such as \"Anything Goes\" and \"42nd Street\".\n\"Soft-Shoe\" is a rhythm form of tap dancing that does not require special shoes, and though rhythm is generated by tapping of the feet, it also uses sliding of the feet (even sometimes using scattered sand on the stage to enhance the sound of sliding feet) more often than modern rhythm tap. It preceded what is currently considered to be modern tap, but has since declined in popularity.\nTap Steps.\nBasic tap steps are known as \"one-sound steps\" and are either weight shifting or non-weight-shifting steps. Common basic tap steps include heel drops, toe drops, heel digs, toe taps, a brush, scuff, chug, pull, hop, leap and step.\nIn advanced tap dancing, basic steps are often combined together to create new steps. Many steps also have single, double, and triple variations, or can have a variation with a pickup, which is essentially adding an additional brush sound. Popular steps with many variations include pullbacks, timesteps, riffs, and drawbacks.\nTime steps is an umbrella term that is widely used in tap for any combination of steps that follows a specific rhythm or pattern. These consist of a rhythm that is changed to make new time steps by adding or removing steps. There are many variations of the basic time step, including the single, double, and triple time steps. Time steps consist of single- and multi-sound step combinations.\nIn tap, various types of turns can be done, including step heel turns, Maxi Ford turns, cramp-roll turns, and drag turns. All tap turns can be practiced in both directions.\nOther common tap steps include the shuffle, shuffle ball change, double shuffle, leap shuffle, flap, flap ball change, running flaps, flap heel, cramp-roll, buffalo, Maxi Ford, Maxi Ford with a pullback, pullbacks, wings, Cincinnati, the shim sham shimmy (also called the Lindy), Irish, Waltz Clog, the paddle roll, the paradiddle, stomp, brushes, scuffs, spanks, single and double toe punches, hot steps, heel clicks, toe stands, over-the-tops, military time step, back to broadway, toe stand turns, New Yorkers, Tag Annies and Shiggy Bops.\nTap shoes.\nIn the earliest years of tap dancing, tap shoes often had wooden soles. The soles of modern tap shoes are either full-sole or split-sole. A full-sole tap shoe has a continuous base material along the underside of the shoes; a split-sole tap shoe has a gap in the base material under the arch of the foot, making them more flexible. Modern tap shoes have soles with heels of varying height (one inch or more) and are commonly made of wood or stacked leather. Some beginner tap shoes have heels made of plastic. The toe box of the tap shoe is located on the front of the shoe for the purpose of reinforcing the shoe; however there are tap shoes that use a soft leather instead. A single tap shoe has two taps: one under the heel, and another under the toes.\nPopular tap shoe makers include Bloch and Capezio.\nStyles.\nThere are several styles of tap shoes:\nTaps.\nDepending on manufacturer and model, tap characteristics can vary considerably. For example, some taps have relatively low weight and small footprint whereas others may be thicker and fill out the edge of the shoe more, making them heavier as a result. A tap's \"tone\" is influenced by its weight as well as its surface shape, which may be concave or convex. The tonal quality of a tap can also be influenced by the material it is made from, and the presence of a soundboard.\nTaps are mounted to the sole of the shoe with screws, and sometimes adhesive as well. The screws are driven into a \"soundboard\" \u2013 a thin fiberboard integrated into the sole that can be firmly \"gripped\" by the screws \u2013 to reliably attach the tap to the shoe. When no adhesive is used, the screws can be loosened or tightened to produce different sounds, whereas tonal quality is fixed when adhesive is used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57885", "revid": "42246436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57885", "title": "Soil retrogression and degradation", "text": "Two processes associated with loss of stable soil equilibrium\nSoil retrogression and degradation are two regressive evolution processes associated with the loss of equilibrium of a stable soil. Retrogression is primarily due to soil erosion and corresponds to a phenomenon where succession reverts the land to its natural physical state. Degradation or \"pedolysis\" is an evolution, different from natural evolution, related to the local climate and vegetation. It is due to the replacement of primary plant communities (known as climax vegetation) by the secondary communities. This replacement modifies the humus composition and amount, and affects the formation of the soil. It is directly related to human activity. Soil degradation may also be viewed as any change or ecological disturbance to the soil perceived to be deleterious or undesirable.\nAccording to the Center for Development Research at the University of Bonn and the International Food Policy Research Institute in Washington, the quality of 33% of pastureland, 25% of arable land and 23% of forests has deteriorated globally over the last 30 years. 3.2 billion people are dependent on this land.\nGeneral.\nAt the beginning of soil formation, the bare rock outcrops are gradually colonized by pioneer species (lichens and mosses). They are succeeded by herbaceous vegetation, shrubs, and finally forest. In parallel, the first humus-bearing horizon is formed (the A horizon), followed by some mineral horizons (B horizons). Each successive stage is characterized by a certain association of soil/vegetation and environment, which defines an ecosystem.\nAfter a certain time of parallel evolution between the ground and the vegetation, a state of steady balance is reached. This stage of development is called climax by some ecologists and \"natural potential\" by others. Succession is the evolution towards climax. Regardless of its name, the equilibrium stage of primary succession is the highest natural form of development that the environmental factors are capable of producing.\nThe cycles of evolution of soils have very variable durations, between tens, hundreds, or thousands of years for quickly evolving soils (A horizon only) to more than a million years for slowly developing soils. The same soil may achieve several successive steady state conditions during its existence, as exhibited by the Pygmy forest sequence in Mendocino County, California. Soils naturally reach a state of high productivity, from which they naturally degrade as mineral nutrients are removed from the soil system. Thus older soils are more vulnerable to the effects of induced retrogression and degradation.\nEcological factors influencing soil formation.\nThere are two types of ecological factors influencing the evolution of a soil (through alteration and humification). These two factors are extremely significant to explain the evolution of soils of short development.\nBiorhexistasy theory.\nThe destruction of the vegetation implies the destruction of evoluted soils, or a regressive evolution. Cycles of succession-regression of soils follow one another within short intervals of time (human actions) or long intervals of time (climate variations).\nThe climate role in the deterioration of the rocks and the formation of soils lead to the formulation of the theory of the biorhexistasy.\nPerturbations of the balance of a soil.\nWhen the state of balance, characterized by the ecosystem climax is reached, it tends to be maintained stable in the course of time. The vegetation installed on the ground provides the humus and ensures the ascending circulation of the matters. It protects the ground from erosion by playing the role of barrier (for example, protection from water and wind). Plants can also reduce erosion by binding the particles of the ground to their roots.\nA disturbance of climax will cause retrogression, but often, secondary succession will start to guide the evolution of the system after that disturbance. Secondary succession is much faster than primary because the soil is already formed, although deteriorated and needing restoration as well.\nHowever, when a significant destruction of the vegetation takes place (of natural origin such as an avalanche or human origin), the disturbance undergone by the ecosystem is too important. In this latter case, erosion is responsible for the destruction of the upper horizons of the ground, and is at the origin of a phenomenon of reversion to pioneer conditions. The phenomenon is called retrogression and can be partial or total (in this case, nothing remains beside bare rock). For example, the clearing of an inclined ground, subjected to violent rains, can lead to the complete destruction of the soil. Man can deeply modify the evolution of the soils by direct and brutal action, such as clearing, abusive cuts, forest pasture, litters raking. The climax vegetation is gradually replaced and the soil modified (example: replacement of leafy tree forests by moors or pines plantations). Retrogression is often related to very old human practices.\nInfluence of human activity.\nSoil erosion is the main factor for soil degradation and is due to several mechanisms: water erosion, wind erosion, chemical degradation and physical degradation.\nErosion can be influenced by human activity. For example, roads which increase impermeable surfaces lead to streaming and ground loss. Improper agriculture practices can also accelerate soil erosion, including by way of:\nConsequences of soil regression and degradation.\nHere are a few of the consequences of soil regression and degradation:\nSoil enhancement, rebuilding, and regeneration.\nProblems of soil erosion can be fought, and certain practices can lead to soil enhancement and rebuilding. Even though simple, methods for reducing erosion are often not chosen because these practices outweigh the short-term benefits. Rebuilding is especially possible through the improvement of soil structure, addition of organic matter and limitation of runoff. \nHowever, these techniques will never totally succeed to restore a soil (and the fauna and flora associated to it) that took more than a 1000 years to build up. Soil regeneration is the reformation of degraded soil through biological, chemical, and or physical processes.\nWhen productivity declined in the low-clay soils of northern Thailand, farmers initially responded by adding organic matter from termite mounds, but this was unsustainable in the long-term. Scientists experimented with adding bentonite, one of the smectite family of clays, to the soil. In field trials, conducted by scientists from the International Water Management Institute (IWMI) in cooperation with Khon Kaen University and local farmers, this had the effect of helping retain water and nutrients. Supplementing the farmer's usual practice with a single application of 200\u00a0kg bentonite per rai (6.26 rai = 1 hectare) resulted in an average yield increase of 73%. More work showed that applying bentonite to degraded sandy soils reduced the risk of crop failure during drought years.\nIn 2008, three years after the initial trials, IWMI scientists conducted a survey among 250 farmers in northeast Thailand, half who had applying bentonite to their fields and half who had not. The average output for those using the clay addition was 18% higher than for non-clay users. Using the clay had enabled some farmers to switch to growing vegetables, which need more fertile soil. This helped to increase their income. The researchers estimated that 200 farmers in northeast Thailand and 400 in Cambodia had adopted the use of clays, and that a further 20,000 farmers were introduced to the new technique.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57886", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57886", "title": "Reims, France", "text": ""}
{"id": "57887", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57887", "title": "Emergency preparedness", "text": ""}
{"id": "57891", "revid": "38557371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57891", "title": "Adelaide (disambiguation)", "text": "Adelaide is the capital city of South Australia.\nAdelaide may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "57892", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57892", "title": "Helen Atkinson-Wood", "text": "English actress and comedian\nHelen Atkinson-Wood (born 14 March 1955) is an English actress and comedian born in Cheadle Hulme, Cheshire.\nEarly life.\nShe attended Beech Lane Primary School in Macclesfield, which closed in 1967. She is a former head girl of Macclesfield County High School for Girls, on Fence Avenue. She grew up in Tytherington, Cheshire, being the daughter of Frederick Atkinson-Wood, who later lived at Lower Withington in the 1980s, and mother Barbara.\n Her mother also attended the high school. She has twin brothers Christopher and Peter.\nShe has been a horse rider for many years; aged 16 she fell off her pony and was unconscious for three days. It took two terms at school to learn to read and talk, and it affected her memory. Before moving to London, she lived in Siddington, Cheshire, near Congleton.\nShe studied fine art at the Ruskin School, Oxford University, where she performed with Rowan Atkinson (no relation). She also performed at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe, where she met Ben Elton. Whilst at Oxford, she took part in an OUDS production of \"Richard II\". Also in this production was Tim McInnerny, who played the lead. She later appeared together with McInnerny in an episode of \"Blackadder the Third\".\nCareer.\nAtkinson-Wood was a regular presenter of Central Television's short-lived \"O.T.T.\" and had a small role in the 1984 \"Young Ones\" episode \"Nasty\". She appeared as Mrs Miggins in \"Blackadder the Third\".\u200a\nShe was the only regular female cast member on the radio comedy programme \"Radio Active\", where she played Anna Daptor and other roles, and also participated in the programme's televisual equivalent, \"KYTV\". She also appeared in the final episode of \"Joking Apart\" as a morning television presenter. In 2007, she guest-starred in the \"Doctor Who\" audio play \"I.D.\". She played the role of Sybil Ramkin in a BBC radio adaptation of \"Guards! Guards!\" by Terry Pratchett.\nAtkinson-Wood has been a regular presenter for the Channel 4 series \"Collector's Lot\" and has made guest appearances on programmes such as \"Call My Bluff\". She was a guest in episode 9 of the C series of \"QI\", when she answered a question deemed almost impossible by host Stephen Fry by correctly naming a chemical reaction equation as an explosion of custard powder, earning 200 points. This was because, she claimed, she had studied domestic science at school. Through answering this single question, she held the highest cumulative total of any \"QI\" panellist at the time (this is no longer the case - for example, in the K Series episode \"Knowledge\", Alan Davies scored 689.66 points).\nPersonal life.\nWhile at grammar school in Macclesfield, she was friends with Ian Curtis. He gave her a copy of David Bowie's \"The Man Who Sold the World\".\nAt Oxford University she dated Angus Deayton. While touring with the Hee Bee Gee Bees in Australia in the 1980s, Deayton saved Atkinson-Wood's life when he rescued her after she was caught in a rip current while swimming off Sydney's Manly Beach.\nCraig Ferguson wrote in his book \"American on Purpose\" that he and Atkinson-Wood were in a romantic relationship that lasted five years. He acknowledges that she changed his life \"beyond recognition\" by improving his health and his career. She left him because of his alcoholism, saying, \u201cI love you, but I won\u2019t watch you kill yourself.\u201d \nShe married the writer and director John Morton in 1997, first meeting after she rang to tell him how much she liked his radio comedy \"People Like Us\" and he replied, \"Thanks a lot. Fancy getting married?\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57893", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57893", "title": "Ficus", "text": "Genus of flowering plants in the mulberry family Moraceae\nFicus ( or ) is a genus of about 850 species of woody trees, shrubs, vines, epiphytes and hemiepiphytes in the family Moraceae. Collectively known as fig trees or figs, they are native throughout the tropics with a few species extending into the semi-warm temperate zone. The common fig (\"F.\u00a0carica\") is a temperate species native to southwest Asia and the Mediterranean region (from Afghanistan to Portugal), which has been widely cultivated from ancient times for its fruit, also referred to as figs. The fruit of most other species are also edible though they are usually of only local economic importance or eaten as bushfood. However, they are extremely important food resources for wildlife. Figs are also of considerable cultural importance throughout the tropics, both as objects of worship and for their many practical uses.\nDescription.\n\"Ficus\" is a pantropical genus of trees, shrubs, and vines occupying a wide variety of ecological niches; most are evergreen, but some deciduous species are found in areas outside of the tropics and to higher elevations. Fig species are characterized by their unique inflorescence and distinctive pollination syndrome, which uses wasp species belonging to the family Agaonidae for pollination. Adult plants vary in size from \"Ficus benghalensis\" (the Indian banyan), a tall and speading tree with many adventitious roots which may cover a hectare (2.5 acres) or more of ground to \"Ficus nana\" of New Guinea which never exceeds one meter (forty inches) in height and width.\nSpecific identification of many of the species can be difficult, but members of the genus \"Ficus\" are relatively easy to recognize. Many have aerial roots and a distinctive shape or habit, and their fruits distinguish them from other plants. The aerial roots according to Adrian Forsyth can hang down freely as much as . The fruit of \"Ficus\" is an inflorescence enclosed in an urn-like structure called a syconium, which is lined on the inside with the fig's tiny flowers that develop into multiple ovaries on the inside surface. In essence, the fig fruit is a fleshy stem with multiple tiny flowers that fruit and coalesce.\nNotably, three vegetative traits together are unique to figs. All figs present a white to yellowish latex, some in copious quantities; the twig shows paired stipules or stipular scars; the lateral veins at the base of the leaf are steep, forming a tighter angle with the midrib than the other lateral veins, a feature referred to as \"triveined\".\nCurrent molecular clock estimates indicate that \"Ficus\" is a relatively ancient genus, being at least 60 million years old, and possibly as old as 80 million years. The main radiation of extant species, however, may have taken place more recently, between 20 and 40 million years ago.\nSome better-known species that represent the diversity of the genus include, alongside the common fig, whose fingered fig leaf is well known in art and iconography: the weeping fig (\"F.\u00a0benjamina\"), a hemiepiphyte with thin, tough leaves on pendulous stalks adapted to its rain forest habitat; the rough-leaved sandpaper figs from Australia; and the creeping fig (\"F.\u00a0pumila\"), a vine whose small, hard leaves form a dense carpet of foliage over rocks or garden walls.\nMoreover, figs with different plant habits have undergone adaptive radiation in different biogeographic regions, leading to very high levels of alpha diversity. In the tropics, \"Ficus\" commonly is the most species-rich plant genus in a particular forest. In Asia, as many as 70 or more species can co-exist. \"Ficus\" species richness declines with an increase in latitude in both hemispheres.\nA description of fig tree cultivation is set out in Ibn al-'Awwam's 12th-century agricultural work titled, \"Book on Agriculture\".\nEcology.\nFigs are keystone species in many tropical forest ecosystems. Their fruit are a key resource for frugivores including fruit bats, capuchin monkeys, langurs, gibbons, and mangabeys. They are even more important for birds such as Asian barbets, pigeons, hornbills, fig-parrots, and bulbuls, which may subsist almost entirely on figs when these are plentiful. Many Lepidoptera caterpillars feed on fig leaves, for example several \"Euploea\" species (crow butterflies), the plain tiger (\"Danaus chrysippus\"), the giant swallowtail (\"Papilio cresphontes\"), the brown awl (\"Badamia exclamationis\"), and \"Chrysodeixis eriosoma\", Choreutidae and Copromorphidae moths. The larvae of the citrus long-horned beetle (\"Anoplophora chinensis\"), for example, feed on the wood of the fig tree; the species can become a pest in fig plantations. Similarly, the sweet potato whitefly (\"Bemisia tabaci\") is frequently found as a pest on figs grown as potted plants and can be spread through the export of these plants to other localities. For a list of other diseases common to fig trees, see List of foliage plant diseases (Moraceae).\nFig fruit and reproduction system.\nMany fig species are grown for their fruits, though only \"Ficus carica\" is cultivated to any extent for this purpose. A fig \"fruit\" is a type of multiple fruit known as a syconium, derived from an arrangement of many small flowers on an inverted, nearly closed receptacle. The many small flowers are unseen unless the fig is cut open.\nThe fruit typically has a bulbous shape with a small opening (the ostiole) at the outward end that allows access to pollinators. The flowers are pollinated by very small wasps such as \"Pegoscapus\" that crawl through the opening in search of a suitable place to lay eggs. Without this pollinator service fig trees could not reproduce by seed. In turn, the flowers provide a safe haven and nourishment for the next generation of wasps. This accounts for the frequent presence of wasp larvae in the fruit, and has led to a coevolutionary relationship. Technically, a fig fruit proper would be only one of the many tiny matured, seed-bearing gynoecia found inside one fig \u2013 if you cut open a fresh fig, individual fruit will appear as fleshy \"threads\", each bearing a single seed inside. The genus \"Dorstenia\", also in the fig family (Moraceae), exhibits similar tiny flowers arranged on a receptacle but in this case the receptacle is a more or less flat, open surface.\nFig plants can be monoecious (hermaphrodite) or gynodioecious (hermaphrodite and female). Nearly half of fig species are gynodioecious, and therefore have some plants with inflorescences (syconium) with long styled pistillate flowers, and other plants with staminate flowers mixed with short styled pistillate flowers. The long-styled flowers tend to prevent wasps from laying their eggs within the ovules, while the short-styled flowers are accessible for egg laying.\nAll the native fig trees of the American continent are hermaphrodites, as well as species like Indian banyan (\"F.\u00a0benghalensis\"), weeping fig (\"F.\u00a0benjamina\"), Indian rubber plant (\"F.\u00a0elastica\"), fiddle-leaved fig (\"F.\u00a0lyrata\"), Moreton Bay fig (\"F.\u00a0macrophylla\"), Chinese banyan (\"F.\u00a0microcarpa\"), sacred fig (\"F.\u00a0religiosa\") and sycamore fig (\"F.\u00a0sycomorus\"). The common fig (\"Ficus carica\") is a gynodioecious plant, as well as lofty fig or clown fig (\"F.\u00a0aspera\"), Roxburgh fig (\"F.\u00a0auriculata\"), mistletoe fig (\"F.\u00a0deltoidea\"), \"F.\u00a0pseudopalma\", creeping fig (\"F.\u00a0pumila\") and related species. The hermaphrodite common figs are called \"inedible figs\" or \"caprifigs\"; in traditional culture in the Mediterranean region they were considered food for goats (\"Capra aegagrus\"). In the female fig trees, the male flower parts fail to develop; they produce the \"'edible figs\". Fig wasps grow in common fig caprifigs but not in the female syconiums because the female flower is too long for the wasp to successfully lay her eggs in them. Nonetheless, the wasp pollinates the flower with pollen from the caprifig it grew up in. In many situations, the wasp pollinator is unable to escape and dies within the fruit. When the wasp dies, it is broken down by enzymes (Ficain) inside the fig. Fig wasps are not known to transmit any diseases harmful to humans.\nWhen a caprifig ripens, another caprifig must be ready to be pollinated. In temperate climes, wasps hibernate in figs, and there are distinct crops. Caprifigs have three crops per year; common figs have two. The first crop (breba) is larger and juicier, and usually eaten fresh. In cold climates the breba crop is often destroyed by spring frosts. Some parthenocarpic cultivars of common figs do not require pollination at all, and will produce a crop of figs (albeit sterile) in the absence of caprifigs and fig wasps. According to Ziegler and Leigh, syconia \"sweat\" on hot days to keep the pollinating wasps from overheating. They also state that Ficus spp are the most efficient producers of sugar \"of any other tree yet known\".\nDepending on the species, each fruit can contain hundreds or even thousand of seeds. Figs can be propagated by seeds, cuttings, air-layering or grafting. However, as with any plant, figs grown from seed are not necessarily genetically identical to the parent and are only propagated this way for breeding purposes.\nMutualism with the pollinating fig wasps.\nThe unique fig pollination system involves tiny, highly specific wasps, known as fig wasps, that enter via ostiole these subclosed inflorescences to both pollinate and lay their own eggs. Each species of fig is pollinated by one or a few specialised wasp species, and therefore plantings of fig species outside of their native range results in effectively sterile individuals. For example, in Hawaii, some 60 species of figs have been introduced, but only four of the wasps that fertilize them, so only those species of figs produce viable seeds there and can become invasive species. This is an example of mutualism, in which each organism (fig plant and fig wasp) benefit each other, in this case reproductively.\nThe intimate association between fig species and their wasp pollinators, along with the high incidence of a one-to-one plant-pollinator ratio have long led scientists to believe that figs and wasps are a clear example of coevolution. Morphological and reproductive behavior evidence, such as the correspondence between fig and wasp larvae maturation rates, have been cited as support for this hypothesis for many years. Additionally, recent genetic and molecular dating analyses have shown a very close correspondence in the character evolution and speciation phylogenies of these two clades.\nAccording to meta-analysis of molecular data for 119 fig species 35% (41) have multiple pollinator wasp species. The real proportion is higher because not all wasp species were detected. On the other hand, species of wasps pollinate multiple host fig species. Molecular techniques, like microsatellite markers and mitochondrial sequence analysis, allowed a discovery of multiple genetically distinct, cryptic wasp species. Not all these cryptic species are sister taxa and thus must have experienced a host fig shift at some point. These cryptic species lacked evidence of genetic introgression or backcrosses indicating limited fitness for hybrids and effective reproductive isolation and speciation.\nThe existence of cryptic species suggests that neither the number of symbionts nor their evolutionary relationships are necessarily fixed ecologically. While the morphological characteristics that facilitate the fig-wasp mutualisms are likely to be shared more fully in closer relatives, the absence of unique pairings would make it impossible to do a one-to-one tree comparison and difficult to determine cospeciation.\nCalcium-oxalate fixation.\nSeveral species of \"Ficus\" have been observed to sequester atmospheric CO2 as calcium oxalate in the presence of oxalotrophic bacteria and fungi, which catabolize the oxalate, which produces calcium carbonate. The calcium carbonate is precipitated throughout the tree, which also alkanalizes the surrounding soil. This process was first observed in the \"Iroko\" tree, which can sequester up to a ton of calcium carbonate in the soil over its lifespan. These species are current candidates for carbon sequestration agroforestry.\nSystematics.\nWith over 800 species, \"Ficus\" is by far the largest genus in the Moraceae, and is one of the largest genera of flowering plants currently described. The species currently classified within \"Ficus\" were originally split into several genera in the mid-1800s, providing the basis for a subgeneric classification when reunited into one genus in 1867. This classification put functionally dioecious species into four subgenera based on floral characters. In 1965, E. J. H. Corner reorganized the genus on the basis of breeding system, uniting these four dioecious subgenera into a single dioecious subgenus \"Ficus\". Monoecious figs were classified within the subgenera \"Urostigma\", \"Pharmacosycea\" and \"Sycomorus\".\nThis traditional classification has been called into question by recent phylogenetic studies employing genetic methods to investigate the relationships between representative members of the various sections of each subgenus. Of Corner's original subgeneric divisions of the genus, only \"Sycomorus\" is supported as monophyletic in the majority of phylogenetic studies. Notably, there is no clear split between dioecious and monoecious lineages. One of the two sections of \"Pharmacosycea\", a monoecious group, form a monophyletic clade basal to the rest of the genus, which includes the other section of \"Pharmacosycea\", the rest of the monoecious species, and all of the dioecious species. These remaining species are divided into two main monophyletic lineages (though the statistical support for these lineages is not as strong as for the monophyly of the more derived clades within them). One consists of all sections of \"Urostigma\" except for section \"Urostigma s. s.\". The other includes section \"Urostigma s. s.\", subgenus \"Sycomorus\", and the species of subgenus \"Ficus\", though the relationships of the sections of these groups to one another are not well resolved.\nSelected species.\nAs of \u00a02025[ [update]], there are 881 accepted \"Ficus\" species according to Plants of the World Online.\nSubgenus \"Ficus\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSubgenus \"Pharmacosycea\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSubgenus \"Sycidium\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSubgenus \"Sycomorus\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSubgenus \"Synoecia\".\nThe following species are typically spreading or climbing lianas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSubgenus \"Urostigma\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnplaced species.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUses.\nThe wood of fig trees is often soft and the latex precludes its use for many purposes. It was used to make mummy caskets in Ancient Egypt. Certain fig species (mainly \"F.\u00a0cotinifolia\", \"F.\u00a0insipida\" and \"F.\u00a0padifolia\") are traditionally used in Mesoamerica to produce \"papel amate\" (Nahuatl: \"\u0101matl\"). \"Mutuba\" (\"F.\u00a0natalensis\") is used to produce barkcloth in Uganda. One of the standard \"kbach rachana\" decorative elements in Cambodian architecture was inspired by the shapes of the leaves of \"Pou\" (\"F.\u00a0religiosa\"). Indian banyan (\"F.\u00a0benghalensis\") and the Indian rubber plant, as well as other species, have use in herbalism. The inner bark of an unknown type of wild fig, locally known as \"ur\u00fa\", was once used by the Mor\u00e9 people of Bolivia to produce a fibrous cloth used for clothing.\nFigs have figured prominently in some human cultures. There is evidence that figs, specifically the common fig (\"F.\u00a0carica\") and sycamore fig (\"Ficus sycomorus\"), were among the first plant species that were deliberately bred for agriculture in the Middle East, starting more than 11,000 years ago. Nine subfossil \"F.\u00a0carica\" figs dated to about 9400\u20139200 BCE were found in the early Neolithic village Gilgal I (in the Jordan Valley, 13\u00a0km, or 8.1\u00a0mi, north of Jericho). These were a parthenogenetic type and thus apparently an early cultivar. This find predates the first known cultivation of grain in the Middle East by many hundreds of years.\nCultivation.\nNumerous species of fig are found in cultivation in domestic and office environments, including:\nCultural and spiritual significance.\nFig trees have profoundly influenced culture through several religious traditions. Among the more famous species are the sacred fig tree (Pipal, bodhi, bo, or po, \"Ficus religiosa\") and other banyan figs such as \"Ficus benghalensis\". The oldest living plant of known planting date is a \"Ficus religiosa\" tree known as the Sri Maha Bodhi planted in the temple at Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka by King Tissa in 288 BCE. In Asia, figs are important in Buddhism and Hinduism. The Buddha is traditionally held to have found \"bodhi\" (enlightenment) while meditating for 49 days under a sacred fig. The same species was \"Ashvattha\", the \"world tree\" of Hinduism. The \"Plaksa Pra-sravana\" was said to be a fig tree between the roots of which the Sarasvati River sprang forth; it is usually held to be a sacred fig but more probably is \"Ficus virens\". In Jainism, the consumption of any fruit belonging to this genus is prohibited. The common fig is one of two significant trees in Islam, and there is a sura in Quran named \"The Fig\" or At-Tin (\u0633\u0648\u0631\u0647 \u062a\u06cc\u0646). The common fig tree is first mentioned in the Bible when Adam and Eve, after gaining knowledge of their nakedness, sew fig leaves together for coverings. Throughout the Hebrew Bible, the fig tree symbolizes peace, prosperity, and divine blessing. It is often paired with the grapevine as a key agricultural product of ancient Israel and is listed among the Seven Species with which the land was blessed. Its sweet fruit was highly valued, and the tree appears in parables and prophetic texts, sometimes as a symbol of abundance, and at other times, when withered or destroyed, as a metaphor for judgment and desolation. The fig tree was sacred in ancient Greece and Cyprus, where it was a symbol of fertility.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nVideo"}
{"id": "57895", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57895", "title": "Sayan Mountains", "text": "Mountain range in southern Siberia, Russia and northern Mongolia\nThe Sayan Mountains (, ; ) are a mountain range in southern Siberia spanning southeastern Russia (Buryatia, Irkutsk Oblast, Krasnoyarsk Krai, Tuva and Khakassia) and northern Mongolia. Before the rapid expansion of the Tsardom of Russia, the mountain range served as the border between Mongolian and Russian cultures and cultural influences.\nThe Sayan Mountains' towering peaks and cool lakes southwest of Tuva give rise to the tributaries that merge to become one of Siberia's major rivers, the Yenisei River, which flows north over 3,400 kilometres (2000\u00a0mi) to the Arctic Ocean. This is a protected and isolated area, having been kept closed by the Soviet Union since 1944.\nGeography.\nWestern Sayan.\nAt 92\u00b0E the Western Sayan system is pierced by the Ulug-Khem () or Upper Yenisei River, and at 106\u00b0, at its eastern extremity, it terminates above the depression of the Selenga-Orkhon Valley. It stretches almost at a right angle to the Western Sayan for in a roughly northeast/southwest direction between the Shapshal Range of the Eastern Altai in the west and the Abakan Range of the Kuznetsk Alatau in the east. From the Mongolian plateau the ascent is on the whole gentle, but from the plains of Siberia it is much steeper. The range includes a number of subsidiary ranges of an Alpine character, such as the Aradan, Borus, Oy, Kulumys, Mirsky, Kurtushibin, Uyuk, Sheshpir-Taiga, Ergak-Targak-Taiga, Kedran and Nazarovsky ranges. The most important peaks are Kyzlasov Peak (), Aradansky Peak (), Bedelig Golets (), Samzhir (), Borus () and Zvezdny Peak ().\nBetween the breach of the Yenisei and Lake Kh\u00f6vsg\u00f6l at 100\u00b0 30' E. the system bears also the name of Yerghik-Taiga. The flora is on the whole poor, although the higher regions carry good forests of larch, pine, juniper, birch, and alder, with rhododendrons and species of \"Berberis\" and \"Ribes\". Lichens and mosses clothe many of the boulders that are scattered over the upper slopes.\nEastern Sayan.\nThe Eastern Sayan stretches almost at a right angle to the Western Sayan for in a northwest/southeast direction, from the Yenisei to the Angara Range. Some subranges of the northwest form a system of \"White Mountains\" (\u0411\u0435\u043b\u043e\u0433\u043e\u0440\u044c\u0435) or \"Belki\", such as Manskoye Belogorye, Kanskoye Belogorye, Kuturchinskoye Belogorye, as well as Agul Belki (\u0410\u0433\u0443\u043b\u044c\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0435 \u0411\u0435\u043b\u043a\u0438), with permanent snow on the peaks. In the central part, towards the upper reaches of the Kazyr and Kizir rivers, several ridges, such as the Kryzhin Range form a cluster culminating in the high Grandiozny Peak, the highest point in Krasnoyarsk Krai. \nTo the southeast rise the highest and most remote subranges, including the Bolshoy Sayan and Kropotkin Range, as well as \"Goltsy\" type of mountains, such as the Tunka Goltsy, Kitoy Goltsy, Botogolsky Goltsy, among others. The highest point of the Eastern Sayan, as well as the highest point of the whole Sayan system, high Mount Munku-Sardyk, is located in the range of the same name in this area. high Pik Tofalariya is the highest point of Irkutsk Oblast. The mountains of the Eastern Sayan characteristically display alpine relief forms. In general, rivers flowing down from the ranges form gorges and there is an abundance of waterfalls in the area.\nThe Ice Age Period.\nIn this area that currently shows only small cirque glaciers, at glacial times glaciers have flowed down from the 3492 m high Munku Sardyk massif situated west of Lake Baikal and from the 12.100\u00a0km2 extended completely glaciated granite-gneiss plateau (2300 m asl) of the East-Sayan mountains as well as the east-connected 2600 \u2013 3110 m-high summits in the Tunkinskaya Dolina valley, joining to a c. 30\u00a0km-wide parent glacier. Its glacier tongue that flowed down to the east, to Lake Baikal, came to an end at 500 m asl (51\u00b048\u201928.98\"N/103\u00b00\u201929.86\"E). The Khamar Daban mountains were covered by a large-scale ice cap filling up the valley relief. \nFrom its valley heads, e.g. the upper Slujanka valley (51\u00b032\u2019N/103\u00b037\u2019E), but also through parallel valleys like the Snirsdaja valley, outlet glaciers flowed to the north to Lake Baikal. The Snirsdaja-valley-outlet glacier has calved, among other outlet glaciers, at c. 400 m asl into Lake Baikal (51\u00b027\u2019N/104\u00b051\u2019E). The glacial (W\u00fcrm ice age = Last Glacial Period = MIS 2) glacier snowline (ELA) as altitude limit between glacier feeding area and ablation zone has run in these mountains between 1450 and 1250 m asl. This corresponds to a snowline depression of 1500 m against the current height of the snowline. Under the condition of a comparable precipitation ratio there might result from this a glacial depression of the average annual temperature of 7.5 to 9\u00a0\u00b0C for the Last Ice Age against today.\nOrigins of reindeer husbandry.\nAccording to Sev\u2019yan I. Vainshtein, Sayan reindeer herding, as historically practiced by the Evenks, is \"the oldest form of reindeer herding and is associated with the earliest domestication of the reindeer by the Samoyedic taiga population of the Sayan Mountains at the turn of the first millennium A.D.\"\nThe Sayan region was apparently the origin of the economic and cultural complex of reindeer hunters-herdsmen that we now see among the various Evenki groups and the peoples of the Sayan area.\nThe ancestors of modern Evenki groups inhabited areas adjacent to the Sayan Mountains, and it is highly likely that they took part in the process of reindeer domestication along with the Samoyedic population.\" The local indigenous groups that have retained their traditional lifestyle nowadays live almost exclusively in the area of the Eastern Sayan mountains. However, the local reindeer herding communities were greatly affected by russification and sovietization, with many Evenks losing their traditional lifestyle and groups like the Mator and Kamas peoples being assimilated altogether.\nAccording to Juha Janhunen, and other linguists, the homeland of the Uralic languages is located in South-Central Siberia in the Sayan Mountains region. Meanwhile, Turkologist Peter Benjamin Golden locates the Proto-Turkic Urheimat in the southern taiga-steppe zone of the Sayan-Altay region. Alternatively, the Proto-Uralic homeland is located farther westwards (e.g. in the Volga-Kama region) while the Proto-Turkic homeland is located farther eastwards (e.g. \"in the southern fringe of the [Northern Eurasian Greenbelt] in Northeast Asia ... near eastern Mongolia\"). \nScience.\nThe is located in these mountains () at an altitude of 2,000 meters.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57897", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57897", "title": "Ambridge (The Archers)", "text": ""}
{"id": "57898", "revid": "48723608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57898", "title": "Norfolk, Virginia", "text": "Norfolk ( ) is an independent city in the U.S. commonwealth of Virginia. It had a population of 238,005 at the 2020 census, making it the third-most populous city in Virginia and 100th-most populous city in the United States. The city holds a strategic position as the historical, urban, financial, and cultural center of the Hampton Roads metropolitan area (sometimes called \"Tidewater\"), which has more than 1.8 million inhabitants and is the 37th-largest metropolitan area in the U.S.\nNorfolk was established in 1682 as a colonial seaport. Strategically located at the confluence of the Elizabeth River and Chesapeake Bay, it quickly developed into a major center for trade and shipbuilding. During the American Revolution and War of 1812, its port and naval facilities made it a critical military target. Norfolk's prominence grew in the 20th century with the expansion of the U.S. Navy, particularly through the establishment of Naval Station Norfolk in 1917, which remains the world's largest naval base.\nNorfolk is an important contributor to the Port of Virginia and houses one of NATO's two Strategic Command headquarters. It is home to Maersk Line, Limited, which manages the world's largest fleet of US-flag vessels. The city has numerous cultural institutions including the Nauticus maritime museum, Chrysler Museum of Art, and Virginia Zoo. Norfolk has many miles of riverfront and bayfront areas, including beaches on the Chesapeake Bay.\nHistory.\nBefore 1607.\nIn the late sixteenth century, the area that is now Norfolk was inhabited by the Chesepian people, who referred to the land as \"K'che-sepi-ack.\" According to historical accounts from William Strachy, the Chesepian settlements were destroyed by the Powhatan shortly before the establishment of Jamestown in 1607.\nColonial era.\nNorfolk's lands were some of the first to draw settlers from the Virginia Colony, although Norfolk would not be incorporated as a town until the 1700s. When the establishment of the House of Burgesses introduced representative government to the colony in 1619, governor Sir George Yeardley divided the developed portion of the colony into four incorporated jurisdictions, termed \"citties.\" The land on which Norfolk now sits fell under Elizabeth Cittie incorporation.\nIn 1634 King Charles I reorganized the colony into a system of shires, and Elizabeth Cittie became Elizabeth City Shire. Elizabeth City Shire (now the city of Hampton) included all land that today comprises the cities of Hampton, Norfolk, Virginia Beach, Portsmouth, Chesapeake and Suffolk. After persuading 105 people to settle in the colony, Adam Thoroughgood (who had immigrated to Virginia in 1622 from King's Lynn, Norfolk, England) was granted a large land holding, through the head rights system, along the Lynnhaven River in 1636.\nWhen the South Hampton Roads portion of the shire was separated, Thoroughgood suggested the name of his birthplace for the newly formed New Norfolk County. One year later, it was divided into two counties, Upper Norfolk and Lower Norfolk (the latter now incorporated into the City of Norfolk), chiefly on Thoroughgood's recommendation. This area of Virginia became known as the place of entrepreneurs, including men of the Virginia Company of London.\nNorfolk developed in the late-seventeenth century as a \"Half Moone\" fort was constructed and were acquired from local natives of the Powhatan Confederacy in exchange for 10,000 pounds of tobacco. The House of Burgesses established the \"Towne of Lower Norfolk County\" in 1680. In 1691, a final county subdivision took place when Lower Norfolk County split to form Norfolk County (included in present-day cities of Norfolk, Chesapeake, and parts of Portsmouth) and Princess Anne County (present-day Virginia Beach).\nNorfolk was incorporated in 1705. In 1730, a tobacco inspection site was located here. According to the Tobacco Inspection Act, the inspection was \"At Norfolk Town, upon the fort land, in the County of Norfolk; and Kemp's Landing, in Princess Anne, under one inspection.\" In 1736 George II granted it a royal charter as a borough. It was an important port for exporting goods to the British Isles and beyond.\nAfter the American Revolution forced the Royal Governor of Virginia, John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, to flee from Williamsburg, he made Norfolk the new capital of Virginia in 1775. Norfolk's 6,250 residents were primarily Loyalist because the British government had granted trade monopolies to many of their businesses. After losing at the Battle of Great Bridge that December, Lord Dunmore partially destroyed the city with naval cannonading. On January 16, 1776, the Patriots' Fourth Virginia Convention agreed to destroy most remaining homes to prevent Dunmore from using the city to amass British troops and runaway slaves.\nUltimately, Colonel Woodford drove Dunmore into exile, ending more than 168 years of British rule in Virginia. Only the walls of Saint Paul's Episcopal Church survived the bombardment and subsequent fires. A cannonball from the bombardment (fired by the \"Liverpool\") remains within the wall of Saint Paul's.\nNineteenth century.\nWhen the British occupied Norfolk, Thomas Jefferson ordered its destruction by fire. Following recovery from the Revolutionary War's burning, Norfolk and its citizens struggled to rebuild. In 1804, another serious fire along the city's waterfront destroyed some 300 buildings and the city suffered a serious economic setback. In the War of 1812 between America and Great Britain, Norfolk saw action between American militia led by Richard Lawson and the British navy. On July 13, 1813. A British landing party of 8 marines and 16 sailors landed at the beaches of Norfolk to construct a well and gather water. Richard Lawson concealed his company of militia behind a benign looking sandhill. Richard Lawson and his militia sprang their ambush by opening fire from their concealment behind the Sandhills. The British landing party who suffered three marines killed surrendered. Richard Lawson, who suffered none killed, had his militia destroy the British boat, take all provisions, and take the brass cannon. The American militia under Lawson returned to town with their prisoners. During the 1820s, agrarian communities across the American South suffered a prolonged recession, which caused many families to migrate to other areas. Many moved west into the Piedmont, or further into Kentucky and Tennessee. This migration also followed the exhaustion of soil due to tobacco cultivation in the Tidewater, where it had been the primary commodity crop for generations.\nVirginia made some attempts to phase out slavery and manumissions increased in the two decades following the war. Thomas Jefferson Randolph gained passage of an 1832 resolution for gradual abolition in the state. However, by that time the increased demand from the settlement of the lower South states had created a large internal market for slavery. The invention of the cotton gin in the late-eighteenth century had made profitable the cultivation of short-staple cotton in the uplands, which was widely practiced.\nThe American Colonization Society proposed to \"repatriate\" free blacks and freed slaves to Africa by establishing the new colony of Liberia and paying for transportation. But most African Americans wanted to stay in their birthplace of the United States and achieve freedom and rights there. For a period, many emigrants to Liberia from Virginia and North Carolina embarked from the port of Norfolk. Joseph Jenkins Roberts, a free person of color native to Norfolk, emigrated via the American Colonization Society and later was elected as the first president of Liberia, establishing a powerful family.\nIn 1845, Norfolk was incorporated as a city. On June 7, 1855, the 183-foot vessel \"Benjamin Franklin\" put into Hampton Roads for repairs. The ship had just sailed from the West Indies, where there had been an outbreak of yellow fever. The port health officer ordered the ship quarantined. After eleven days, a second inspection found no issues, so it was allowed to dock. A few days later, the first cases of yellow fever were discovered in Norfolk, and a machinist died from the disease on July 8. By August, several people were dying per day, and a third of the city's population had fled in the hopes of escaping the epidemic. No one understood how the disease was transmitted. With both Norfolk and Portsmouth being infected, New York banned all traffic from those sites. Neighboring cities also banned residents from Norfolk. The epidemic spread through the city via mosquitoes and poor sanitation, affecting every family and causing widespread panic. The number of infected reached 5,000 in September, and by the second week, 1,500 had died in Norfolk and Portsmouth. As the weather cooled, the outbreak began to wane, leaving a final tally of about 3,200 dead. It took the city some time to recover.\nOn April 4, 1861, Norfolk city delegate to the Virginia Secession Convention, George Blow, voted against secession. Following the Battle of Fort Sumter, another vote occurred on April 17, where Blow voted for secession, the vote passed and Virginia seceded from the Union. In the spring of 1862, the Battle of Hampton Roads took place off the northwest shore of the city's Sewell's Point Peninsula, marking the first fight between two ironclads, the USS \"Monitor\" and the CSS \"Virginia\". The battle ended in a stalemate but changed the course of naval warfare; from then on, warships were fortified with metal.\nIn May 1862, Norfolk Mayor William Lamb surrendered the city to Union General John E. Wool and his forces. They held the city under martial law for the duration of the Civil War. Thousands of slaves from the region escaped to Union lines to gain freedom; they quickly set up schools in Norfolk to start learning how to read and write, years before the end of the war.\n20th century to present.\n1907 brought both the Virginian Railway and the Jamestown Exposition to Sewell's Point. The large Naval Review at the Exposition demonstrated the peninsula's favorable location and laid the groundwork for the world's largest naval base. Southern Democrats in Congress gained its location here. Commemorating the tricentennial anniversary of the founding of Jamestown, the exposition featured many prominent officials, including President Theodore Roosevelt, members of Congress, and diplomats from twenty-one countries. By 1917, as the US prepared to enter World War I, the Naval Air Station Hampton Roads had been constructed on the former exposition grounds. This facility was established as an air training station and a patrol base to conduct experimental work in seaplane operations at the Naval Operation Base.\nIn the first half of the twentieth century, the city of Norfolk expanded its borders through annexation. In 1906, the city annexed the incorporated town of Berkley, making the city cross the Elizabeth River. In 1923, the city expanded to include Sewell's Point, Willoughby Spit, the town of Campostella, and the Ocean View area. The city included the Navy Base and miles of beach property fronting on Hampton Roads and the Chesapeake Bay. After a smaller annexation in 1959, and a 1988 land swap with Virginia Beach, the city assumed its current boundaries.\nThe establishment of the Interstate Highway System following World War II brought new highways to the region. A series of bridges and tunnels, constructed during fifteen years, linked Norfolk with the Peninsula, Portsmouth, and Virginia Beach. In 1952, the Downtown Tunnel opened to connect Norfolk with the city of Portsmouth. The highways also stimulated the development of new housing suburbs, leading to the population spreading out. Additional bridges and tunnels included the Hampton Roads Bridge-Tunnel in 1957, the Midtown Tunnel in 1962, and the Virginia Beach-Norfolk Expressway (Interstate 264 and State Route 44) in 1967. In 1991, the new Downtown Tunnel/Berkley Bridge complex opened a new system of multiple lanes of highway and interchanges connecting Downtown Norfolk and Interstate 464 with the Downtown Tunnel tubes.\nIn 1954 the Supreme Court ruled in \"Brown v. Board of Education\" that segregated public schools were unconstitutional, as the public system was supported by all taxpayers. It ordered integration, but Virginia pursued a policy of \"massive resistance\". (At this time, most black citizens were still disfranchised under the state's turn-of-the-century constitution and discriminatory practices related to voter registration and elections.) The Virginia General Assembly prohibited state funding for integrated public schools.\nIn 1958, United States district courts in Virginia ordered schools to open for the first time on a racially integrated basis. In response, Governor J. Lindsay Almond ordered the schools closed. The Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals declared the state law to be in conflict with the state constitution and ordered all public schools to be funded, whether integrated or not. About ten days later, Almond capitulated and asked the General Assembly to rescind several \"massive resistance\" laws. In February 1959, seventeen black children entered six previously segregated Norfolk public schools. \"Virginian-Pilot\" editor Lenoir Chambers editorialized against massive resistance and earned the Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Writing.\nWith new suburban developments beckoning, many white middle-class residents moved out of the city along new highway routes, and Norfolk's population declined, a pattern repeated in numerous cities during the postwar era independently of segregation issues. In the late-1960s and early-1970s, the advent of newer suburban shopping destinations along with freeways spelled demise for the fortunes of downtown's Granby Street commercial corridor, located just a few blocks inland from the waterfront. The opening of malls and large shopping centers drew off retail business from Granby Street.\nPeople for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) has been based in Norfolk since 1996.\nNorfolk's city leaders began a long push to revive its urban core. While Granby Street underwent decline, Norfolk city leaders focused on the waterfront and its collection of decaying piers and warehouses. Many obsolete shipping and warehousing facilities were demolished. In their place, planners created a new boulevard, Waterside Drive, along which many of the high-rise buildings in Norfolk's skyline have been erected. In 1983, the city and The Rouse Company developed the Waterside festival marketplace to attract people back to the waterfront and catalyze further downtown redevelopment. Waterside was redeveloped in 2017. Additionally, the waterfront area hosts the Nauticus maritime museum and science center, Hampton Roads Naval Museum, Half-Moone Cruise and Celebration Center, and the USS \"Wisconsin\". Other facilities opened in the ensuing years, including the Harbor Park baseball stadium, home of the Norfolk Tides Triple-A minor league baseball team. In 1995, the park was named the finest facility in minor league baseball by \"Baseball America\". Norfolk's efforts to revitalize its downtown have attracted acclaim from economic development and urban planning circles throughout the country. Downtown's rising fortunes helped to expand the city's revenues and allowed the city to direct attention to other neighborhoods.\nGeography.\nThe city is located at the southeastern corner of Virginia at the junction of the Elizabeth River and the Chesapeake Bay. The Hampton Roads Metropolitan Statistical Area (officially known as the Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC MSA) is the 37th largest in the United States, with an estimated population of 1,716,624 in 2014. The area includes the Virginia cities of Norfolk, Virginia Beach, Chesapeake, Hampton, Newport News, Poquoson, Portsmouth, Suffolk, Williamsburg, and the counties of Gloucester, Isle of Wight, James City, Mathews, and York, as well as the North Carolina counties of Currituck and Gates. The city of Norfolk is recognized as the central business district, while the Virginia Beach oceanside resort district and Williamsburg are primarily centers of tourism. Virginia Beach is the most populated city within the MSA though it functions more as a suburb. Additionally, Norfolk is part of the Virginia Beach-Norfolk, VA-NC Combined Statistical Area, which includes the Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC MSA, the Elizabeth City, North Carolina Micropolitan Statistical Area, and the Kill Devil Hills, NC Micropolitan Statistical Area. The CSA is the 32nd largest in the nation with an estimated population in 2013 of 1,810,266.\nIn addition to extensive riverfront property, Norfolk has miles of bayfront resort property and beaches in the Willoughby Spit and Ocean View communities.\nSea level rise and subsidence.\nBeing low-lying and largely surrounded by water, Norfolk is particularly vulnerable to rising sea levels caused by climate change. In addition, the land on which it is built is slowly subsiding. Some areas already flood regularly at high tide, and the city commissioned a study in 2012 to investigate how to address the issue in the future: it reported the cost of dealing with a sea-level rise of one foot would be around $1,000,000,000. Since then, scientists at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science in 2013 have estimated that if current trends hold, the sea in Norfolk will rise by 5 and 1/2 feet or more by the end of this century.\nCityscape.\nWhen Norfolk was first settled, homes were made of wood and frame construction, similar to most medieval English-style homes. These homes had wide chimneys and thatch roofs. Some decades after the town was first laid out in 1682, the Georgian architectural style, which was popular in the South at the time, was used. Brick was considered more substantial construction; patterns were made by brick laid and Flemish bond. This style evolved to include projecting center pavilions, Palladian windows, balustraded roof decks, and two-story porticoes. By 1740, homes, warehouses, stores, workshops, and taverns began to dot Norfolk's streets.\nNorfolk was burned down during the Revolutionary War. After the Revolution, Norfolk was rebuilt in the Federal style, based on Roman ideals. Federal-style homes kept Georgian symmetry, though they had more refined decorations to look like New World homes. Federal homes had features such as narrow sidelights with an embracing fanlight around the doorway, giant porticoes, gable or flat roofs, and projecting bays on exterior walls. Rooms were oval, elliptical or octagonal. Few of these federal rowhouses remain standing today. A majority of buildings were made of wood and had a simple construction.\nIn the early nineteenth century, Neoclassical architectural elements began to appear in the federal style row homes, such as ionic columns in the porticoes and classic motifs over doorways and windows. Many Federal-style row houses were modernized by placing a Greek-style porch at the front. Greek and Roman elements were integrated into public buildings such as the old City Hall, the old Norfolk Academy, and the Customs House.\nGreek-style homes gave way to Gothic Revival in the 1830s, which emphasized pointed arches, steep gable roofs, towers and tracer-lead windows. The Freemason Baptist Church and St. Mary's Catholic Church are examples of Gothic Revival. Italianate elements emerged in the 1840s including cupolas, verandas, ornamental brickwork, or corner quoins. Norfolk still had simple wooden structures among its more ornate buildings.\nHigh-rise buildings were first built in the late nineteenth century when structures such as the current Commodore Maury Hotel and the Royster Building were constructed to form the initial Norfolk skyline. Past styles were revived during the early years of the twentieth century. Bungalows and apartment buildings became popular for those living in the city.\nAs the Great Depression wore on, Art Deco emerged as a popular building style, as evidenced by the Post Office building downtown. Art Deco consisted of streamlined concrete faced appearance with smooth stone or metal, with terracotta, and trimming consisting of glass and colored tiles.\nNeighborhoods.\nNorfolk has a variety of historic neighborhoods, notably Freemason and West Freemason. Some neighborhoods, such as Berkley, were formerly cities and towns. Others, including Willoughby Spit and Ocean View, have a long history tied to the Chesapeake Bay. The city's revitalization in recent decades has transformed neighborhoods such as Downtown, Ghent and Fairmount Park. Popular residential neighborhoods include Ghent, Colonial Place, Larchmont, North Shore, Edgewater, and Lafayette Shores.\nClimate.\nNarrative below is based on climate data from the 1991\u20132020 period. Norfolk has a humid subtropical climate, typical of the Southern United States, and its USDA Hardiness Zone is 8a. Spring arrives in March with mild days and cool nights, and by late May, the temperature has warmed up considerably to herald warm summer days. Summers are consistently warm and humid, but the nearby Atlantic Ocean often exercises a slight cooling effect on daytime high temperatures, but a slight warming effect on nighttime low temperatures (compared to areas farther inland). As such, temperatures reach or higher on an average 35\u00a0days annually, and are uncommon, occurring in fewer than one-third of all years. On average, July is the warmest month, with a normal mean temperature of . On average, July and August are the wettest months, due to frequent summer thunderstorm activity. In August and September, rainfall remains high, due to rising frequency of tropical activity (hurricanes and tropical storms), which can bring high winds and heavy rains. These usually brush Norfolk and only occasionally make landfalls in the area; the highest-risk period is mid-August to the end of September. Fall is marked by mild to warm days and cooler nights. Winter is usually mild in Norfolk, with average winter days featuring lows near or slightly above freezing and highs in the upper-40s to mid-50s (8 to 13\u00a0\u00b0C). On average, the coldest month of the year is January, with a normal mean temperature of , Snow occurs sporadically, with an average winter accumulation of . Norfolk's record high was on August 7, 1918, and July 24 and 25, 2010, and the record low was recorded on January 21, 1985.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 238,005 people living in Norfolk.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 242,803 people, 86,210 households, and 51,898 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 94,416 dwelling units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 47.1% White, 43.1% African American, 0.5% Native American, 3.3% Asian, 0.2% Pacific Islander, 2.2% from other races, and 3.6% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 6.6% of the population. Non-Hispanic Whites were 44.3% of the population in 2010, down from 68.5% in 1970.\nThere were 86,210 households, out of which 30.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 36.9% were married couples living together, 18.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.8% were non-families. 30.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 3.06.\nThe age distribution was 24.0% under the age of 18, 18.2% from 18 to 24, 29.9% from 25 to 44, 16.9% from 45 to 64, and 10.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females, there were 104.6 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 104.8 males. This large gender imbalance is due to the military presence in the city, most notably Naval Station Norfolk.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $31,815, and the median income for a family was $36,891. Males had a median income of $25,848 versus $21,907 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,372. About 15.5% of families and 19.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 27.9% of those under age 18 and 13.2% of those ages 65 or over.\nFor the year of 2007, Norfolk had a total crime index of 514.7 per 100,000 residents. This was above the national average of 320.9 that year. For 2007, the city experienced 48 homicides, for a murder rate of 21.1 per 100,000 residents. Total crime had decreased when compared to the year 2000, which the city had a total crime index of 546.3. The highest murder rate Norfolk has experienced for the 21st century was in 2005 when its rate was 24.5 per 100,000 residents. For the year 2007 per 100,000, Norfolk experienced 21.1 murders, 42.6 rapes, 399.3 robberies, 381.3 assaults, 743.3 burglaries, and 450.6 automobile thefts. According to the Congressional Quarterly Press '2008 City Crime Rankings: Crime in Metropolitan America, Norfolk, Virginia, ranked as the 87th most dangerous city larger than 75,000 inhabitants.\nEthnic groups.\nIn 2010, 4,727 people of Filipino ancestry lived in Norfolk.\nChinese immigration occurred after 1885, and, in 1995, 300 families were members of the Chinese Community Association.\nEconomy.\nSince Norfolk serves as the commercial and cultural center for the unusual geographical region of Hampton Roads (and in its political structure of independent cities), it can be difficult to separate the economic characteristics of Norfolk from that of the region as a whole.\nThe waterways which almost completely surround the Hampton Roads region play an important part in the local economy. As a strategic location at the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay, its protected deep-water channels serve as a major trade artery for the import and export of goods from across the Mid-Atlantic, Mid-West, and internationally.\nIn addition to commercial activities, Hampton Roads is a major military center, particularly for the United States Navy, and Norfolk serves as the home for Naval Station Norfolk, the world's largest naval installation. Located on Sewell's Point Peninsula, in the northwest corner of the city, the station is the headquarters of the United States Fleet Forces Command (formerly known as the Atlantic Fleet), which compromises over 62,000 active-duty personnel, 75 ships, and 132 aircraft. The base also serves as the headquarters to NATO's Allied Command Transformation.\nThe region also plays an important role in defense contracting, with particular emphasis in the shipbuilding and ship repair businesses for the city of Norfolk. Major private shipyards located in Norfolk or the Hampton Roads area include: Huntington Ingalls Industries (formerly Northrop Grumman Newport News) in Newport News, BAE Systems Norfolk Ship Repair, General Dynamics NASSCO Norfolk, and Colonna's Shipyard Inc., while the US Navy's Norfolk Naval Shipyard is just across the Downtown Tunnel in Portsmouth. Most contracts fulfilled by these shipyards are issued by the Navy, though some private commercial repair also takes place. Over 35% of Gross Regional Product (which includes the entire Norfolk-Newport News-Virginia Beach MSA), is attributable to defense spending, and that 75% of all regional growth since 2001 is attributable to increases in defense spending.\nAfter the military, the second largest and most important industry for Hampton Roads and Norfolk based on economic impact are the region's cargo ports. Headquartered in Norfolk, the Virginia Port Authority (VPA) is a Commonwealth of Virginia owned entity that, in turn, owns and operates three major port facilities in Hampton Roads for break-bulk and container type cargo. In Norfolk, Norfolk International Terminals (NIT) represents one of those three facilities and is home to the world's largest and fastest container cranes. Together, the three terminals of the VPA handled a total of over 2 million TEUs and 475,000 tons of breakbulk cargo in 2006, making it the second busiest port on the east coast of North America by total cargo volume after the Port of New York and New Jersey.\nIn addition to NIT, Norfolk is home to the Lambert's Point docks, the largest coal trans-shipment point in the Northern Hemisphere, with an annual capacity of approximately 48,000,000 tons. Bituminous coal is primarily sourced from the Appalachian mountains in western Virginia, West Virginia, and Kentucky. The coal is loaded onto trains and sent to the port where it is unloaded onto large breakbulk cargo ships and destined for New England, Europe, and Asia.\nBetween 1925 and 2007, Ford Motor Company operated Norfolk Assembly, a manufacturing plant located on the Elizabeth River that had produced the Model-T, sedans and station wagons before building F-150 pick-up trucks. Before it closed, the plant employed more than 2,600 people at the facility.\nMost major shipping lines have a permanent presence in the region with some combination of sales, distribution, and/or logistical offices, many of which are located in Norfolk. In addition, many of the largest international shipping companies have chosen Norfolk as their North American headquarters. These companies are either located at the Norfolk World Trade Center building or have constructed buildings in the Lake Wright Executive Center office park. The French firm CMA CGM, the Israeli firm Zim Integrated Shipping Services, and Maersk Line Limited, a subsidiary of the world's largest shipping line, A. P. Moller-Maersk Group, have their North American headquarters in Norfolk. Major companies headquartered in Norfolk include Norfolk Southern, Landmark Communications, Dominion Enterprises, FHC Health Systems (parent company of ValueOptions), Portfolio Recovery Associates, and BlackHawk Products Group.\nThough Virginia Beach and Williamsburg have traditionally been the centers of tourism for the region, the rebirth of downtown Norfolk and the construction of a cruise ship pier at the foot of Nauticus in downtown has driven tourism to become an increasingly important part of the city's economy. The number of cruise ship passengers who visited Norfolk increased from 50,000 in 2003, to 107,000 in 2004 and 2005. Also in April 2007, the city completed construction on a $36 million state-of-the-art cruise ship terminal alongside the pier. Partly due to this construction, passenger counts dropped to 70,000 in 2006, but is expected to rebound to 90,000 in 2007, and higher in later years. Unlike most cruise ship terminals which are located in industrial areas, the downtown location of Norfolk's terminal has received favorable reviews from both tourists and the cruise lines who enjoy its proximity to the city's hotels, restaurants, shopping, and cultural amenities.\nHampton Roads is home to four Fortune 500 companies. Representing the food industry, transportation, retail and shipbuilding, these four companies are located in Smithfield, Norfolk, Chesapeake and Newport News.\n*213 Smithfield Foods\n*247 Norfolk Southern\n*346 Dollar Tree\n*380 Huntington Ingalls Industries\n26% of the 130,000 people working in Norfolk live in the city, while 74% commute in. 37% of those come from Virginia Beach and 20% come from Chesapeake. An additional 51,575 people commute outside for work, with 35% going to Virginia Beach and 20% going to Chesapeake.\nTop employers.\nAccording to a report published by the Virginia Employment Commission, below are the top employers in Norfolk:\nArts and culture.\nDue to its urban density, Norfolk acts as the cultural hub of the Hampton Roads region. In addition to its museums, Norfolk is the principal home for several major performing arts organizations. The city hosts numerous annual festivals and parades, many in Town Point Park or elsewhere in downtown.\nMuseums and galleries.\nThe nationally acclaimed Chrysler Museum of Art, the area's most comprehensive art museum, has its campus at the intersection of the Ghent district, the Freemason neighborhood, and the NEON district. Since opening in 1933, the museum's main building has been expanded six times to allow for larger glass galleries, generous space for Impressionist and Baroque works, and more. Major improvements were completed in 2014, and today the museum features more than 50 galleries, a restaurant, and catering facilities, as well as galleries for traveling exhibits. Of particular note are the American neoclassical marble sculptures, the extensive glass collection, and the Glass Studio, which has live demonstrations daily.\nThe Chrysler Museum of Art also administers the 1792 Moses Myers House Museum in the Freemason District, next to MacArthur Mall. This museum interprets Norfolk's history and the lives and legacy of Norfolk's first Jewish family. Seventy percent of the objects in the home are original to the Myers in the early nineteenth century. The museum offers weekend tours and special monthly programming. In October 2022, the council of City of Norfolk, which owns the property, voted to proceed with the possibility of selling it, conjecturing the entirety of the property\u2014the main house, the attached dwelling of the Myers\u2019 enslaved servants, and the historic garden\u2014could be sold as part of a package to developers, perhaps to operate as a bed and breakfast. Multiple entities, including the Norfolk Historical Society, have expressed distress and outrage.\nThe Hermitage Foundation Museum, located in an early 20th-century Tudor-style home on a estate fronting the Lafayette River, is found in the Lochaven neighborhood near the northern terminus of the Elizabeth River Trail that connects many of the city's sites of cultural interest. The Hermitage features an eclectic collection of Asian and Western art, including Chinese bronze and ceramics, Persian rugs, and ivory carvings, as well as changing exhibitions, arts classes, and special events. The Hermitage Foundation Museum is the only Smithsonian Affiliate in the Hampton Roads region.\nDowntown Norfolk has several other museums of national significance.\nNauticus, the National Maritime Center, opened on the downtown waterfront in 1994. It features hands-on exhibits, interactive theaters, aquaria, digital high-definition films and an extensive variety of educational programs. Since 2000, Nauticus has been home to the battleship USS \"Wisconsin\", the last battleship to be built in the United States. It served briefly in World War II and later in the Korean and Gulf Wars. Wisconsin Square is nearby.\nThe MacArthur Memorial, located in the nineteenth-century Norfolk courthouse and city hall in downtown, contains the tombs of General Douglas MacArthur and his wife, a museum and a vast research library, personal belongings (including his famous corncob pipe) and a short film that chronicles his life.\nSpeciality museums include the Hunter House Victorian Museum in the Freemason neighborhood and the Norfolk Southern Museum in downtown.\nPublic art.\nThe city is known for its \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Mermaids on Parade,\" a public art program launched in 2002 to place mermaid statues all over the city. Tourists can take a walking tour of downtown and locate 17 mermaids while others can be found further afield.\nThe NEON district has dozens of murals, many of which are supported through the City of Norfolk's Public Arts Commission.\nPerforming arts.\nNorfolk has a variety of performing groups with regular seasons and which also make appearances in the city's annual festivals. The Virginia Symphony Orchestra, founded in 1920, has been leader in the regional arts scene. Directed by JoAnn Falletta from 1991 until 2020, the orchestra's music director is now Erik Jacobsen. Most Norfolk performances take place at Chrysler Hall in the Scope complex downtown. The orchestra provides musicians for many other performing arts organizations in the area.\nThe Virginia Stage Company, founded in 1968, is one of the country's leading regional theaters and produces a full season of plays in the Wells Theatre downtown. The company shares facilities with the Governor's School for the Arts.'\nThe Virginia Opera was founded in Norfolk in 1974. Its artistic director since its inception has been Peter Mark, who conducted his 100th opera production for the VOA in 2008. Though performances are staged statewide, the company's principal venue is the Harrison Opera House in the Ghent district.\nLarge-scale concerts are held at either the Norfolk Scope arena or the Ted Constant Convocation Center at ODU, while The Norva provides a more intimate atmosphere for smaller groups. Other Norfolk cultural venues include the Attucks Theatre, the Jeanne and George Roper Performing Arts Center (formerly the Loew's State Theater) and the Naro Expanded Cinema.\nFestivals.\nA range of arts and cultural festivals take place annually in Norfolk. The Virginia Arts Festival, founded in 1997, is based in Norfolk and has events throughout the region, drawing in arts from around the world and featuring local talent. One of the key events of the festival is the Virginia International Tattoo. The Norfolk NATO Festival, formerly the International Azela Festival, has taken place each spring since 1951 and is the longest continually running festival in the Hampton Roads Region. The Norfolk NATO Festival highlights Norfolk's role as the North American Headquarters of NATO and fosters cultural exchange and appreciation of NATO allies. The Stockley Gardens Art Festival, which takes place in parks the historic Ghent neighborhood, occurs twice yearly, in May and October. The festival draws vendors from well beyond the region and attracts upwards of 20,000 visitors. The St. Patrick's Day annual parade in the city's Ocean View neighborhood, on the northern edge of the city, celebrates Ocean View's rich Irish heritage.\nHarborfest, the region's largest annual festival, celebrated its thirtieth anniversary in 2006. It is held during the first weekend of June in Town Point Park and celebrates the region's proximity and attachment to the water. The Parade of Sails (numerous tall sailing ships from around the world form in line and sail past downtown before docking at the marina), music concerts, regional food, and a large fireworks display highlight this three-day festival. Bayou Boogaloo and Cajun Food Festival, a celebration of the Cajun people and culture, had small beginnings. This three-day festival during the third week of June has become one of the largest in the region and, in addition to serving up Cajun cuisine, also features Cajun music. Norfolk's Fourth of July celebration of American independence contains a spectacular fireworks display and a special Navy reenlistment ceremony. The Norfolk Jazz Festival, though smaller by comparison to some of the big city jazz festivals, still manages to attract the country's top jazz performers. It is held in August. The Town Point Virginia Wine Festival has become a showcase for Virginia-produced wines and has enjoyed increasing success over the years. Virginia's burgeoning wine industry has become noted both within the United States and on an international level. The festival has grown with the industry. Wines can be sampled and then purchased by the bottle and/or case directly from the winery kiosks. This event takes place during the third weekend of October. There is also a Spring Wine Festival held during the second weekend of May.\nRole in revitalization.\nThe revitalization of downtown Norfolk has helped to improve the Hampton Roads cultural scene. Many of Norfolk's attractions are now connected by the long Elizabeth River Trail, a pedestrian and bike trail that winds along the city's waterfront. The trail's first segment of opened in 2003 on land donated by Norfolk Southern. A large number of clubs, representing a wide range of music interests and sophistication now line the lower Granby Street area. The nearby Waterside Festival Marketplace has also continued to be successful as a nightclub and bar venue.\nParks and recreation.\nNorfolk has a variety of parks and open spaces in its city parks system. The city maintains three beaches on its north shore in the Ocean View area. Five additional parks contain picnic facilities and playgrounds for children. The city also has some community pools open to city residents. Town Point Park in downtown plays host to a wide variety of annual events from early spring through late fall.\nThe Norfolk Botanical Garden, opened in 1939, is a botanical garden and arboretum located near the Norfolk International Airport. It is open year-round.\nThe Virginia Zoo, opened in 1900, is a zoo with hundreds of animals on display, including the critically endangered Siberian tiger and threatened white rhino.\nSports.\nNorfolk serves as home to the two highest level professional franchises in the state of Virginia \u2014 the Norfolk Tides play baseball in the International League, and the Norfolk Admirals play ice hockey in the ECHL.\nNorfolk has two universities with Division I sports teams \u2014 the Old Dominion Monarchs and the Norfolk State University Spartans \u2014 which provide many sports including football, basketball, and baseball.\nFrom 1970 to 1976, Norfolk served as the home court (along with Hampton, Richmond, and Roanoke) for the Virginia Squires regional professional basketball franchise of the now-defunct American Basketball Association (ABA). From 1970 to 1971, the Squires played their Norfolk home games at the Old Dominion University Fieldhouse. In November 1971, the Squires played their Norfolk home games at the new Norfolk Scope arena, until the team and the ABA league folded in May 1976.\nIn 1971, Norfolk built an entertainment and sports complex, featuring Chrysler Hall and the 13,800-seat Norfolk Scope indoor arena, located in the northern section of downtown. Norfolk Scope has served as a venue for major events including the American Basketball Association All-Star Game in 1974, and the first and second NCAA Women's Division I Basketball Championships (also known as the \"Women's Final Four\") in 1982 and 1983.\nNorfolk is also home to the Norfolk Blues Rugby Football Club. Their home playing fields are Lafayette Park in Norfolk and the Virginia Beach Sportsplex in Virginia Beach.\nVirginia Beach City FC is an American professional soccer club based in Norfolk playing in the National Premier Soccer League (NPSL) in the Mid-Atlantic Conference of the Northeast Region. Home matches are played at Powhatan Field.\nNational Wrestling Alliance, Jim Crockett Promotions, World Championship Wrestling, and World Wrestling Entertainment have all presented wrestling shows at Norfolk Arena and the Scope from the 1960s to today, with many of these being Pay Per View events. Six-time World Heavyweight Wrestling Champion Lou Thesz lived in Norfolk and opened a wrestling school, Virginia Wrestling Academy, downtown in 1988.\nGovernment.\nNorfolk is heavily Democratic. Since 1900 it has only voted Republican in four elections, each of which was a national landslide. The last time it supported a Republican presidential candidate was in 1972, and since the turn of the century it has voted Democratic by over 60% in every election.\nNorfolk is an independent city with services that both counties and cities in Virginia provide, such as a sheriff, social services, and a court system. Norfolk operates under a council-manager form of government.\nNorfolk city government consists of a city council with representatives from seven districts serving in a legislative and oversight capacity, as well as a popularly elected, at-large mayor. The city manager serves as head of the executive branch and supervises all city departments and executing policies adopted by the council. Citizens in each of the five wards elect one council representative each to serve a four-year term. There are two additional council members elected from two citywide \"superwards.\" The city council meets at City Hall weekly and, as of May 2023, consists of: Mayor Kenneth Cooper Alexander; Mamie Johnson, Ward 3; Danica Royster, Superward 7; John E. Paige, Ward 4; Courtney Doyle, Ward 2; Vice-Mayor Martin Thomas, Ward 1; Andria McClellan, Superward 6; Thomas R. Smigiel Jr. Ward 5.\nThe city government has an infrastructure to create close working relationships with its citizens. Norfolk's city government provides services for neighborhoods, including service centers and civic leagues that interact directly with members of city council. Such services include preserving area histories, home rehabilitation centers, outreach programs, and a university that trains citizens in neighborhood clean-up, event planning, neighborhood leadership, and financial planning. Norfolk's police department also provides support for neighborhood watch programs including a citizens' training academy, security design, a police athletic program for youth, and business watch programs.\nNorfolk also has a federal courthouse for the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia. The Walter E. Hoffman U.S. Courthouse in Norfolk has four judges, four magistrate judges, and two bankruptcy judges. Additionally, Norfolk has its own general district and circuit courts, which convene downtown. It is considered a Democratic stronghold.\nSince redistricting Norfolk is located in congressional district, served by U.S. representative Robert C. Scott (Democrat).\nEducation.\nNorfolk City Public Schools, the public school system, comprises five high schools, eight middle schools, 34 elementary schools, and nine special-purpose/preschools. In 2005, Norfolk Public Schools won the $1 million Broad Prize for Urban Education for having demonstrated, \"the greatest overall performance and improvement in student achievement while reducing achievement gaps for poor and minority students\". The city had previously been nominated in 2003 and 2004. There are also a number of private schools located in the city, the oldest of which, Norfolk Academy, was founded in 1728. Religious schools located in the city include St. Pius X Catholic School, Alliance Christian School, Christ the King School, Norfolk Christian Schools and Trinity Lutheran School. The city also hosts the Governor's School for the Arts which holds performances and classes at the Wells Theatre.\nNorfolk is home to three public universities and one private. It also hosts a community college campus in downtown. Old Dominion University, founded as the Norfolk Division of the College of William &amp; Mary in 1930, became an independent institution in 1962 and now offers degrees in 68 undergraduate and 95 (60 masters/35 doctoral) graduate degree programs. Eastern Virginia Medical School, founded as a community medical school by the surrounding jurisdictions in 1973, is noted for its research into reproductive medicine and is located in the region's major medical complex in the Ghent district. Norfolk State University, founded in 1935 is the second largest HBCU, in Virginia. Norfolk State offers degrees in a wide variety of liberal arts, Social Work, Nursing, and Engineering. Virginia State University being the first largest HBCU in Virginia, which was founded in 1882. Virginia Wesleyan College is a small private liberal arts college and shares its eastern border with the neighboring city of Virginia Beach. Tidewater Community College offers two-year degrees and specialized training programs and is located in downtown. Additionally, several for-profit schools operate in the city.\nNorfolk Public Library.\nNorfolk Public Library, Virginia's first public library, consists of one main library, two anchor libraries, nine branch libraries and a bookmobile. The library also has a local history and genealogy room and contains government documents dating back to the 19th century. The libraries offer services such as computer classes, book reviews, tax forms, and online book clubs.\nThe Slover Library, centrally located in the heart of downtown Norfolk, holds over 133,000 books and resources available for borrowing, hosts numerous classes and community events, houses the history Sargeant Memorial Collection, and offers patrons the use of cutting-edge technologies and studio spaces. Technology areas include a Sound Studio, Design Studio, Production Studio, YOUmedia lab, Maker Studio (Selden Market), and Computer Room and Training Lab.\nMedia.\nNorfolk's daily newspaper is \"The Virginian-Pilot\". Its alternative papers include the (now defunct) \"Port Folio Weekly\", the \"New Journal and Guide\", and the online AltDaily.com. \"Inside Business\" serves the regional business community with local business news.\n\"Norfolk Post\" was published 13 January 1921 to 1 February 1924.\nLocal universities publish their own newspapers: Old Dominion University's \"Mace and Crown\", Norfolk State University's \"The Spartan Echo\", and Virginia Wesleyan College's \"Marlin Chronicles\".\n\"Coastal Virginia Magazine\" is a bi-monthly regional magazine for Norfolk and the Hampton Roads area.\n\"Hampton Roads Times\" is an online magazine for Norfolk and the Hampton Roads area.\nNorfolk is served by a variety of radio stations on the AM and FM dials, with towers located around the Hampton Roads area. These cater to many different interests, including news, talk radio, and sports, as well as an eclectic mix of musical interests.\nNorfolk is served by several television stations. The Hampton Roads designated market area (DMA) is the 42nd largest in the U.S. with 712,790 homes (0.64% of the total U.S.). Major network television affiliates include:\nNorfolk residents also can receive independent stations, such as WSKY broadcasting on channel 4 from the Outer Banks of North Carolina and WGBS-LD broadcasting on channel 11 from Hampton. Norfolk is served by Cox Cable which provides LNC 5, a local 24-hour cable news television network. DirecTV and Dish Network are also very popular as an alternative to cable television in Norfolk.\nSeveral major motion pictures have been filmed in and around Norfolk, including \"Rollercoaster\" (filmed at the former Ocean View Amusement Park), \"Navy Seals\", and \"\" (partially filmed at the Chesapeake Bay Bridge Tunnel).\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nThe city has a long history as a strategic military and transportation point, where many railroad lines started. Norfolk was the terminus of the Atlantic and Danville Railway in 1890. It is linked to its neighbors by an extensive network of interstate highways, bridges, tunnels, and three bridge-tunnel complexes, which are the only bridge-tunnels in the United States. The city was the corporate headquarters of Norfolk Southern Railway, one of North America's principal Class I railroads, before the company relocated their headquarters to Atlanta, Georgia.\nNorfolk is linked with its neighbors through an extensive network of arterial and Interstate highways, bridges, tunnels, and bridge-tunnel complexes. The major east\u2013west routes are Interstate 64, U.S. Route 58 (Virginia Beach Boulevard) and U.S. Route 60 (Ocean View Avenue). The major north\u2013south routes are U.S. Route 13 and U.S. Route 460, also known as Granby Street. Other main roadways in Norfolk include Newtown Road, Waterside Drive, Tidewater Drive, and Military Highway. The Hampton Roads Beltway (I-64 and I-664) makes a loop around Norfolk.\nNorfolk is primarily served by the Norfolk International Airport (), now the region's major commercial airport. The airport is located near the Chesapeake Bay, along with the city limits straddling neighboring Virginia Beach. Seven airlines provide nonstop services to twenty five destinations. ORF had 3,703,664 passengers take off or land at its facility and 68,778,934 pounds of cargo were processed through its facilities. Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport also provides commercial air service for the Hampton Roads area.&lt;ref name=\"Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; NNWIA is also the only airport in the region with direct international flights, as of February 2013. The Chesapeake Regional Airport provides general aviation services and is located outside the city limits.\nNorfolk is served by Amtrak's Northeast Regional service through the Norfolk station, located in downtown Norfolk adjacent to Harbor Park stadium. The line runs west along Norfolk Southern trackage, paralleling the US Route 460 corridor to Petersburg, thence on to Richmond and beyond.\nA high-speed rail connection at Richmond to both the Northeast Corridor and the Southeast High-Speed Rail Corridor are also under study.\nGreyhound Lines provides service from a central bus terminal in downtown Norfolk.\nIn April 2007, construction of the new $36 million Half Moone Cruise Terminal was completed downtown adjacent to the Nauticus Museum, providing a state-of-the-art permanent structure for various cruise lines and passengers wishing to embark from Norfolk. Previously, makeshift structures were used to embark/disembark passengers, supplies, and crew.\nThe Intracoastal Waterway passes through Norfolk. Norfolk also has extensive frontage and port facilities on the navigable portions of the Western and Southern Branches of the Elizabeth River.\nLight rail, bus, ferry and paratransit services are provided by Hampton Roads Transit (HRT), the regional public transport system headquartered in Hampton. HRT buses operate throughout Norfolk and South Hampton Roads and onto the Peninsula all the way up to Williamsburg. Other routes travel to Smithfield. HRT's ferry service connects downtown Norfolk to Old Town Portsmouth. Additional services include an HOV express bus to the Norfolk Naval Base, paratransit services, park-and-ride lots, and the Norfolk Electric Trolley, which provides service in the downtown area.\nThe Tide light rail service began operations in August 2011. The light rail is a starter route running along the southern portion of Norfolk, commencing at Newtown Road and passing through stations serving areas such as Norfolk State University and Harbor Park before going through the heart of downtown Norfolk and terminating at Sentara Norfolk General Hospital. Hampton Roads Transportation, Inc. dispatches Black and White Cabs of Norfolk, Yellow Cab of Norfolk and Norfolk Checker Cab.\nUtilities.\nWater and sewer services are provided by the city's Department of Utilities. Norfolk receives its electricity from Dominion Virginia Power which has local sources including the Chesapeake Energy Center (a gas power plant), coal-fired plants in Chesapeake and Southampton County, and the Surry Nuclear Power Plant. Norfolk-headquartered Virginia Natural Gas, a subsidiary of AGL Resources, distributes natural gas to the city from storage plants in James City County and Chesapeake.\nNorfolk's water quality has been recognized one of the cleanest water systems in the United States and ranked as the fourth best in the United States by \"Men's Health\". The city of Norfolk has a tremendous capacity for clean fresh water. The city owns nine reservoirs: Lake Whitehurst, Little Creek Reservoir, Lake Lawson, Lake Smith, Lake Wright, Lake Burnt Mills, Western Branch Reservoir, Lake Prince and Lake Taylor. The Virginia tidewater area has grown faster than the local freshwater supply. The river water has always been salty, and the fresh groundwater is no longer available in most areas. Currently, water for the cities of Chesapeake and Virginia Beach is pumped from Lake Gaston (which straddles the Virginia-North Carolina border) into the City of Norfolk's reservoir system and then diverted to the City of Chesapeake for treatment by the City of Chesapeake. Virginia Beach's portion of water is treated by the City of Norfolk at Moores Bridges water treatment plant and then piped into Virginia Beach. The pipeline is long and in diameter. Much of its follows the former right-of-way of an abandoned portion of the Virginian Railway. It is capable of pumping 60 million gallons of water per day; Virginia Beach and Chesapeake are partners in the project.\nThe city provides wastewater services for residents and transports wastewater to the regional Hampton Roads Sanitation District treatment plants.\nHealthcare.\nBecause of the prominence of the Naval Medical Center Portsmouth and the Hampton VA Medical Center in Hampton, Norfolk has had a strong role in medicine. Norfolk is served by Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, Sentara Leigh Hospital, and Bon Secours DePaul Medical Center. The city is also home to the Children's Hospital of The King's Daughters and Lake Taylor Transitional Care Hospital.\nNorfolk is home to Eastern Virginia Medical School (EVMS), which is known for its specialists in diabetes, dermatology, and obstetrics. It achieved international fame on March 1, 1980, when Drs. Georgianna and Howard Jones opened the first in vitro fertilization clinic in the U.S. at EVMS. The country's first in-vitro test-tube baby was born there in December 1981.\nThe international headquarters of Operation Smile, a nonprofit organization that specializes in repairing facial deformities in underprivileged children from around the globe, is located in the city.\nPhysicians for Peace, a non-profit that focuses on providing training and education to medical professionals in the developing world, is based in Norfolk.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSister cities.\nCurrent sister cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer sister cities:\nWilhelmshaven is Germany's largest military harbor and naval base, and Toulon is France's largest military harbor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57902", "revid": "47935673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57902", "title": "Yakutsk", "text": "Yakutsk is the capital and largest city of Sakha, Russia, located about south of the Arctic Circle. Fueled by the mining industry, Yakutsk has become one of Russia's most rapidly growing regional cities, with a population of 355,443 at the 2021 census.\nYakutsk has an average annual temperature of , winter high temperatures consistently well below , and a record low of has been recorded. \nAs a result, Yakutsk is the coldest \"major city\" in the world (although a number of smaller towns in that region are slightly colder). Yakutsk is also the largest city located in continuous permafrost; the only other large city is Norilsk, also in Siberia. Yakutsk is in the Central Yakutian Lowland and is a major port on the Lena River. It is served by the Yakutsk Airport as well as the smaller Magan Airport.\nEtymology.\nThe city was founded in 1632 by the Cossacks and was originally called either the Lensky fortress or the Yakutsk fortress. The first version of the toponym came from the hydronym \"Lena\"; the second, from \"Yakutia\", a synonym for Sakha, eventually became the main one in use. In 1708 it received city status as Yakutsk.\nHistory.\nThe territory upon which the city of Yakutsk now lies on was inhabited long before the founding of the Russian Lensky Fortress. According to archaeological data (more than 200 sites, settlements, burial sites, and other archaeological monuments have been explored within the city), the oldest of them, the Yubileinaya site, is estimated to be 20,500-10,000 years old. According to legend, the ancestors of the Yakuts, Elley Bootur and Omogoy Bai, settled on the territory of the modern city Archaeological evidence shows the Yakuts settled the Tuymaada Valley in the 13th-16th centuries, as can bee seen in the old settlements of Zernovaya-II, Orbita-16, and Vladimirovka-IV, which belong to the Kulun-Atakh archaeological culture, associated with the ancestors of the Yakuts.\nWhen the Yakuts, also known as the Sakha people, migrated to the area from other parts of Siberia, they mixed with other indigenous Siberians such as the Evenk and Yukagir. The Russian settlement of Yakutsk was originally founded in 1632 as an \"ostrog\" (fortress) by Pyotr Beketov. In 1643, when Pyotr Golovin was governor, the fort was moved to the left bank of the River Lena, in the Tuymaada Valley near Lake Saisary. It was at this location that the fort would become a town known as Yakutsk. \nIn 2024, a corpus of written documents was discovered in Yakutsk, including 14 birch bark letters written in ink in a 17th-century cursive script (with numbers written in letters). Archaeologists believe they belong to the archives of the voivode's chancery, lost in a fire in 1700. One fragment speaks of the collection of yasak. In 2025, a paper letter-appeal was found addressed to Archimandrite Feofan, who was the abbot of the Spassky Monastery in Yakutsk from 1714 to 1719.\nClimate.\nWith an intensely continental subarctic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfd\", Trewartha \"Ecbd\"), Yakutsk has the coldest winter temperatures for any city its size or larger on Earth. Average monthly temperatures in Yakutsk range from in January to in July. Yakutsk is the largest city built on continuous permafrost, and many houses there are built on concrete piles.\nThe lowest temperatures ever recorded on Earth outside Antarctica and Greenland have occurred in the basin of the Yana River to the northeast of Yakutsk. Winters are extremely cold and long: Yakutsk has never recorded a temperature above freezing between November 10 and March 14. Summers are sunny, warm and occasionally hot (though short), with daily maximum temperatures exceeding , making the seasonal temperature differences for the region the greatest in the world at . The lowest temperature recorded in Yakutsk was on February 5, 1891, and the highest temperatures on July 17, 2011, and on July 15, 1942. The hottest month in records going back to 1834 has been July 1894, with a mean of , and the coldest, January 1900, which averaged . Yakutsk is the largest city in the world with an average winter temperature of below .\nYakutsk is an inland location, being almost from the Pacific Ocean, which coupled with the high latitude, means exposure to severe winters and lack of temperature moderation. July temperatures soar to an above-normal average for this latitude, with the average being several degrees hotter than more southerly Far East cities such as Vladivostok or Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk. The July daytime temperatures are even hotter than some maritime subtropical areas. The warm summers ensure that Yakutsk, despite its freezing winters, is far south of the tree line. \nThe climate is quite dry, with most of the annual precipitation occurring in the summer months, due to the intense Siberian High forming around the very cold continental air during the winter. However, summer precipitation is not heavy since the moist southeasterly winds from the Pacific Ocean lose their moisture over the coastal mountains well before reaching the Lena Valley.\nEconomy.\nThe primary economic activity stems from mining activities in the region, particularly coal, gold, and diamonds, with multiple mining companies having set up their headquarters in the city. Precious stones and metals, particularly diamonds, as well as coal, are Yakutsk's major exports. The export volume was $5.55\u00a0billion in 2021, making it the 16th largest out of eighty-five of Russia's federal subjects, although it contracted sharply (under $1\u00a0billion) in 2022.\nYakutsk Airport is the main airport, and Yakutia Airlines has its head office in the city, operating flights between Yakutsk and other main Russian cities.\nTourism as an economic sector plays a small but growing role, thanks to the city's unique cultural heritage and natural attractions such as the Lena Pillars Nature Park, a UNESCO World Heritage site, and the Permafrost Kingdom, which is a tourist complex dedicated to showcasing the unique features of the region's permafrost. With the Lena River navigable in the summer, there are boat cruises offered, including upriver to the Lena Pillars, and downriver tours which visit spectacular scenery in the lower reaches and the Lena Delta.\nIn recent years, housing construction, with an emphasis on providing affordable housing, has been a focus, which was accompanied by the growth in the construction materials manufacturing.\nA sizeable portion of the republic's agricultural sector is in Yakutsk, which accounts for 89% of the republic's meat and 34% of the republic's dairy production.\nCulture.\nThere are several theaters in Yakutsk: the State Russian Drama Theater, named after A. S. Pushkin; the Sakha Theater, named after P. A. Oiyunsky; the Suorun Omoloon Young Spectator's Theater; and the State Academic Opera and Ballet Theater, named after D. K. Sivtsev.\nMuseums include the National Fine Arts Museum of Sakha; the Museum of Local Lore and History, named after E. Yaroslavsky; and the only museums in the world dedicated to the khomus and permafrost. In September 2020, the Gagarin Center for Culture and Contemporary Art was opened in the Gagarin District of Yakutsk.\nIn 2021, the construction of the \"State Philharmonic of Yakutia. The Arctic Center of Epos and Arts\" began.\nThe annual Ysyakh summer festival takes place the last weekend in June. The traditional Yakut summer solstice festivities include a celebration of the revival and renewal of the nature, fertility and beginning of a new year. It is accompanied by national Yakut rituals and ceremonies, folk dancing, horse racing, Yakut ethnic music and singing, national cuisine, and competitions in traditional Yakut sports.\nThere is a local punk scene in Yakutsk, with many bands.\nThe city has an increasingly vibrant film industry that has been gaining international recognition over recent years for its unique style and the way its filmmakers portray the region and its people. The regional film industry has come to be nicknamed \"Sakhawood\".\nPeople in Yakutsk wear very fluffy and fuzzy clothing, and in extremely cold weather they cope by sheltering indoors in warm housing, which is believed to lower Yakutsk's increase in winter mortality rates compared to the seasonal rise in mortality seen in milder regions of the world.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to Rosstat estimates for 2025, the population of Yakutsk is 372,801 in the city proper and 390,236 in the city's urban area, which is more than one third of the total population of Sakha.\nIn the 2021 Census, the following ethnic groups were listed:\nReligion.\nOrthodox Christianity is the most widely professed faith in Yakutsk, with significant populations of the adherents of Shamanism and Rodnovery. A sizeable share of the city's residents is non-religious. The city's two main ethnic groups, the Turkic speaking Yakuts and the Slavic speaking Russians, are primarily Christian. The world largest temple of the Aiyy Faith is also located in Yakutsk. There is also a mosque in Yakutsk.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nYakutsk is the capital of the Sakha Republic. As an inhabited locality, Yakutsk is classified as a city under republic jurisdiction. Within the framework of administrative divisions, it is, together with the settlement of Zhatay and eleven rural localities, incorporated as the city of republic significance of Yakutsk\u2014an administrative unit with a status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, Yakutsk and the eleven rural localities are incorporated as Yakutsk Urban Okrug. The settlement of Zhatay is not a part of Yakutsk Urban Okrug and is independently incorporated as Zhatay Urban Okrug.\nTransportation.\nYakutsk is a destination of the Lena Highway. The city's connection to that highway is only usable by ferry in the summer, or in the dead of winter, by driving directly over the frozen Lena River, since Yakutsk lies entirely on its western bank, and there is no bridge anywhere in the Sakha Republic that crosses the Lena. In the dead of winter, the frozen Lena River makes for a passable highway for ice truckers using its channel to deliver provisions to far-flung outposts. The river is impassable for long periods of the year when it contains loose ice, when the ice cover is not thick enough to support traffic, or when the water level is too high and the river is turbulent with spring flooding. The highway ends on the eastern bank of Lena in Nizhny Bestyakh (\u041d\u0438\u0436\u043d\u0438\u0439 \u0411\u0435\u0441\u0442\u044f\u0445), an urban-type settlement of some four thousand people. Nizhny Bestyakh is connected with Magadan by the Kolyma Highway.\nConstruction of a highway bridge over the River Lena to Yakutsk was approved by president Vladimir Putin on November 9, 2019. Based upon a design submitted in 2008, it will be over long and constructed upriver at Staraya Tabaga, where the river narrows and does not create a wide flooded area in spring. The cost of the bridge and its of approaches was estimated at 63.7\u00a0billion Rubles (83\u00a0billion rubles including VAT [\u041d\u0414\u0421]), of which a grant of 54.2\u00a0billion Rubles was to be provided, with the remainder to be sourced from investors. The bridge will be toll-free for cars, with a toll for trucks. Work commenced in 2024, with an estimated cost of 130\u00a0billion Rubles and a proposed completion date of 2028.\nThe bridge had originally been planned to be a dual-use railroad and highway bridge so the Amur\u2013Yakutsk Mainline, the North\u2013South railroad being extended from the south, could connect the city with the East\u2013West Baikal\u2013Amur Mainline. The railroad reached the settlement of Nizhny Bestyakh, on the opposite bank of the Lena from Yakutsk, in November 2011.\nThe 2019 completion of a new rail line to the eastern bank of the Lena permitted the start of passenger rail services between Yakutsk and the rest of Russia.\nYakutsk is also connected to other parts of Russia by Yakutsk Airport.\nEducation and research.\nM.K.Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University is in the city. There is also a branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, which contains, among other things, the \"Institute of Cosmophysical Research\", which runs the Yakutsk Extensive Air Shower installation (one of the largest cosmic-ray detector arrays in the world), and the Melnikov Permafrost Institute, founded in 1960 with the aim of solving the serious and costly problems associated with construction of buildings on frozen soil. In 2020, with global heating thawing the ground, the institute has the only [the only?] permafrost tunnel in Russia, and is measuring the rate at which the permafrost is thawing, which affects the city as well as the climate.\nAt the primary and secondary levels, the city has a number of UNESCO Associated Schools, including the Sakha-Turkish College, Sakha-French School, Sakha-Korean School, and School#16.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nYakutsk is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57904", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57904", "title": "Yakutsk, Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "57905", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57905", "title": "Sakha Republic", "text": "Administrative division of eastern Russia\nSakha, officially the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia), is a republic of Russia, and the largest federal subject of Russia by area. It is located in the Russian Far East, along the Arctic Ocean, with a population of one million. Sakha comprises half of the area of its governing Far Eastern Federal District, and is the world's largest country subdivision, covering over 3,083,523 square kilometers (1,190,555 sq mi). Yakutsk, which is the world's coldest major city, is its capital and largest city.\nThe republic has a reputation for an extreme and severe climate, with the second lowest temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere being recorded in Verkhoyansk and Oymyakon (second only to Summit Camp, Greenland), and regular winter averages commonly dipping below in Yakutsk. The hypercontinental tendencies also result in warm summers for much of the republic.\nSakha was first home to hunting-gathering and reindeer herding Tungusic and Paleosiberian peoples such as the Evenks and Yukaghir. Migrating from the area around Lake Baikal, the Turkic Sakha people first migrated to the middle Lena River sometime between the 9th and 16th centuries, likely in several waves, bringing the pastoral economic system of Central Asia with them.\nThe Russians colonised and incorporated the area as the Yakutsk Oblast into the Tsardom of Russia in the early-mid 17th century, obliging the indigenous peoples of the area to pay fur tribute. While the initial period following the Russian conquest saw the Sakha population drop by 70%, the Imperial period also saw the expansion of the native Yakuts from the middle Lena along the Vilyuy River to the north and the east displacing other indigenous groups. Yakutia saw some of the last battles of the Russian Civil War, and the Bolshevik authorities re-organized Yakutsk Oblast into the autonomous Yakut ASSR in 1922. The Soviet era saw the migration of many Slavs, specifically Russians and Ukrainians, into the area.\nOn 27 September 1990, the area became the Yakutskaya-Sakha Soviet Socialist Republic, and on 27 December 1991, it became the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia).\nEtymology.\nThe exonym \"Yakut\" comes from the Evenk term \"Yako\" (also \"yoqo\", \"\u00f1oqa\", or \"\u00f1oka\"), which was the term the Evenks used to describe the Sakha. This was in turn picked up by the Russians. The Yukaghirs, another neighboring people in Siberia, use the exonym \"yoqol\" ~ \"yoqod-\" ~ \"yoqon-\" (Tundra Yukaghir) or \"yaqal ~ yaqad- ~ yaqan-\" (Kolyma Yukaghir).\nThe self-designation \"Sakha\" may be of the same origin (*\"jaqa\" &gt; \"Sakha\" following regular sound changes in the course of development of the Yakut language) as the Evenk and Yukaghir exonyms for the Yakuts. It is pronounced as \"Haka\" by the Dolgans, whose language is a close relative of the Yakut language.\nGeography.\nSakha stretches to the Henrietta Island in the far north and is washed by the Laptev and Eastern Siberian Seas of the Arctic Ocean. These waters, the coldest and iciest of all seas in the Northern Hemisphere, are covered by ice for 9\u201310\u00a0months of the year. New Siberian Islands are a part of the republic's territory. After Nunavut was separated from Canada's Northwest Territories in 1999, Sakha became the largest subnational entity (statoid) in the world, with an area of , slightly smaller than the territory of India (3.3\u00a0million km2), but still slightly larger than Argentina.\nSakha can be divided into three great vegetation belts. About 40% of Sakha lies above the Arctic Circle and all of it is covered by permafrost which greatly influences the region's ecology and limits forests in the southern region. Arctic and subarctic tundra define the middle region, where lichen and moss grow as great green carpets and are favorite pastures for reindeer. In the southern part of the tundra belt, scattered stands of dwarf Siberian pine and larch grow along the rivers. Below the tundra is the vast taiga forest region. Larch trees dominate in the north and stands of fir and pine begin to appear in the south. Taiga forests cover about 47% of Sakha and almost 90% of the cover is larch.\nThe Sakha Republic is the site of Pleistocene Park, a project directed at recreating Pleistocene tundra grasslands by stimulating the growth of grass with the introduction of animals which thrived in the region during the late Pleistocene\u00a0\u2013 early Holocene period.\nTime zones.\nSakha is the only federal subject of Russia which uses more than one time zone. Sakha spans three time zones. Like the rest of Russia, it does not use daylight saving time.\nRivers.\nThe largest river is the navigable Lena River (4,400\u00a0km). As it moves northward, it includes hundreds of small tributaries located in the Verkhoyansk Range.\nLakes.\nThere are over 800,000\u00a0lakes in the republic. Major lakes and reservoirs include:\nMountains.\nSakha's greatest mountain range, the Verkhoyansk Range, runs parallel and east of the Lena River, forming a great arc that begins in the Sea of Okhotsk and ends in the Laptev Sea.\nThe Chersky Range runs east of the Verkhoyansk Range and has the highest peak in Sakha, Peak Pobeda (3,003\u00a0m - 9,852\u00a0ft). The second highest peak is Peak Mus-Khaya reaching 2,959\u00a0m (9,708\u00a0ft).\nThe Stanovoy Range borders Sakha in the south.\nPeninsulas.\nThe Republic's extensive coastline contains a number of peninsulas; from west to east the most prominent are:\nIslands.\nFrom west to east, the main islands of Sakha are:\nNatural resources.\nSakha is well endowed with raw materials. The soil contains large reserves of oil, gas, coal, diamonds, gold, silver, tin, tungsten and many others. Sakha produces 99% of all Russian diamonds and over 25% of the diamonds mined in the world.\nClimate.\nSakha is known for its climate extremes, with the Verkhoyansk Range being the coldest area in the Northern Hemisphere. Some of the lowest natural temperatures ever recorded have been here. The Northern Hemisphere's Pole of Cold is at Verkhoyansk, where the temperatures reached as low as in 1892 and 1885, and at Oymyakon, where the temperatures reached as low as in February 1934.\n\"Average annual precipitation\": 200\u00a0mm (central parts) to 700\u00a0mm (mountains of Eastern Sakha).\nHistory.\nPre-history.\nSiberia, and particularly Sakha, is of paleontological significance, as it contains bodies of prehistoric animals from the Pleistocene Epoch, preserved in ice or permafrost. In 2015, the frozen bodies of Dina and Uyan the cave lion cubs were found. Bodies of Yuka and another woolly mammoth from Oymyakon, a woolly rhinoceros from the Kolyma River, and bison and horses from Yukagir have also been found. In June 2019, the severed yet preserved head of a large wolf from the Pleistocene, dated to over 40,000 years ago, was found close to the Tirekhtyakh River.\nYmyakhtakh culture (c.\u20092200\u20131300 BC) was a Late Neolithic culture of Siberia, with a very large archaeological horizon. Its origins were in Sakha, in the Lena River basin. From there it spread both to the east and to the west.\nEarly history.\nThe Turkic Sakha people or \"Yakuts\" may have settled the area as early as the 9th century or as late as the 16th century, though most likely there were several migrations. They migrated up north from around Lake Baikal to the middle Lena due to pressure by the Buryats, a Mongolic group.\nThe Sakha displaced earlier, much smaller populations who lived on hunting and reindeer herding, introducing the pastoralist economy of Central Asia. The indigenous populations of Paleosiberian and Tungusic stock\nwere mostly assimilated to the Sakha by the 17th century.\nRussian conquest.\nThe Tsardom of Russia began its conquest of the region in the 17th century, moving east after the defeat of the Khanate of Sibir. Tygyn, a king of the Khangalassky Sakha, granted territory for Russian settlement in return for a military pact that included war against indigenous rebels of all North Eastern Asia (Magadan, Chukotka, Kamchatka and Sakhalin). Kull, a king of the Megino-Khangalassky Sakha, began a Sakha conspiracy by allowing the first stockade construction.\nIn August 1638, the Moscow Government formed a new administrative unit with the administrative center of Lensky Ostrog (Fort Lensky), the future city of Yakutsk, which had been founded by Pyotr Beketov in 1632.\nThe arrival of Russian settlers at the remote Russkoye Ustye in the Indigirka delta is also believed to date from the 17th century. The Siberian Governorate was established as part of the Russian Empire in 1708.\nRussian settlers began to form a community in the 18th century, which adopted certain Sakha customs and was often called \"Yakutyane\" (\u042f\u043a\u0443\u0442\u044f\u0301\u043d\u0435) or Lena Early Settlers (\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0435 \u0441\u0442\u0430\u0440\u043e\u0436\u0438\u043b\u044b). However, the influx of later settlers had assimilated themselves into the Russian mainstream by the 20th century.\nRussian Empire.\nIn an administrative reform of 1782, Irkutsk Governorate was created. In 1805, Yakutsk Oblast was split from Irkutsk Governorate.\nYakutsk Oblast in the early 19th century marked the easternmost territory of the Russian Empire, including such Far Eastern (Pacific) territories as were acquired, known as Okhotsk Okrug within Yakutsk Oblast. With the formation of Primorskaya Oblast in 1856, the Russian territories of the Pacific were detached from Sakha.\nThe Russians established agriculture in the Lena River basin. The members of religious groups who were exiled to Sakha in the second half of the 19th century began to grow wheat, oats, and potatoes. The fur trade established a cash economy. Industry and transport began to develop at the end of the 19th century and in the beginning of the Soviet period. This was also the beginning of geological prospecting, mining, and local lead production. The first steam-powered ships and barges arrived.\nSakha's remoteness, compared to the rest of Siberia, made it a place of exile of choice for both Tsarist and Communist governments of Russia. Among the famous Tsarist-era exiles were the democratic writer Nikolay Chernyshevsky; Doukhobors, conscientious objectors whose story was told to Leo Tolstoy by Vasily Pozdnyakov; the Socialist Revolutionary Party member and writer Vladimir Zenzinov, who left an account of his Arctic experiences; and Polish socialist activist Wac\u0142aw Sieroszewski, who pioneered in ethnographic research on the Sakha people.\nA Sakha national movement first emerged during the 1905 Revolution. A Yakut Union was formed under the leadership of a Sakha lawyer and city councilor by the name of Vasily Nikiforov, which criticized the policies and effects of Russian colonialism, and demanded representation in the State Duma. The Yakut Union acted to make the city council of Yakutsk stand down and was joined by thousands of Sakha from the countryside, but the leaders were arrested and the movement fizzled out by April 1906. Their demand for a Sakha representative in the Duma, however, was granted.\nSoviet era.\nSakha was home to the last stage of the Russian Civil War, the Yakut Revolt. On April 27, 1922, former Yakutsk Oblast was proclaimed the Yakut ASSR, although in fact the eastern part of the territory, including the city of Yakutsk, was controlled by the White Russians.\nThe early Soviet period saw a flourishing of Sakha literature as men such as Platon Oyunsky wrote down in writing the traditionally oral and improvised olonkho, in addition to composing their own works. Many early Sakha leaders, including Oyunsky, died in the Great Purge.\nSakha experienced significant collectivization between 1929 and 1934, with the number of households experiencing collectivization rising from 3.6% in 1929 to 41.7% in 1932. Policies by which the Sakha were harshly affected resulted in the population dropping from 240,500 in 1926 down to 236,700 at the 1959 census.\nSakha's demographics shifted wildly during the Soviet period as ethnic Russians and Ukrainians, among other groups, settled the area en masse, primarily in Yakutsk and the industrial south. Previously, even Yakutsk had been primarily Sakha and Sakha-speaking. With the end of korenizatsiya, usage of the Sakha language was restricted in urban areas such as Yakutsk, which became primarily Russian-speaking.\nPost-Soviet era.\nFollowing the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991, the Yakut Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was officially reconstituted as the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia), a federal subject within the newly formed Russian Federation. In April 1992, Moscow formally recognized this status, granting Sakha significant autonomy; most notably, a 1992 agreement allowing the republic to retain 20% of its diamond industry profits, a landmark concession deviating from decades of centralized resource extraction.\nDuring the early 1990s, Sakha saw a rise in ethnic and nationalist activism. Political movements such as \"Sakha Omuk\" (founded 1990) and the more radical \"Sakha Keskile\" promoted Yakut sovereignty, resource self\u2011management, and cultural revival. These movements led to the republic's 1990 declaration of sovereignty (celebrated each year on September\u202f27) and a gradual shift away from the ethnic suppression of the Soviet era.\nEconomically, Sakha faced the tumultuous transition to a market economy amid systemic Soviet collapse. The regional government actively supported privatization of state enterprises, offered tax incentives, subsidies, and direct investment to buffer the population from economic shocks. The republic also passed legislation in the 1990s to protect Indigenous land use rights and foster the creation of clan-based communities, reinforcing traditional livelihoods.\nIn 2000, Sakha was incorporated into the newly created Far Eastern Federal District, one of eight federal districts established by President Vladimir Putin to centralize administrative oversight. While this shift integrated Sakha into Far East economic development initiatives\u2014including tax incentives, special economic zones, and infrastructure investments\u2014these programs have often favoured industrial and extractive interests, occasionally sidelining Indigenous land rights.\nUnder Putin, federal centralization increased. Regional autonomy has been curtailed through legal reforms\u2014such as a 2009 removal of sovereignty references from the republic\u2019s constitution and renaming the republic\u2019s presidential post in 2014\u2014and through restrictions on local veto powers regarding resource projects. At the same time, Sakha\u2019s economy, driven by mining (diamonds, gold, uranium, oil, and natural gas), has shown resilience. Wages in the region now outpace national averages when adjusted for cost of living. Yakutsk remains the hub of administrative and economic leadership, buoyed by tourism and essential infrastructure projects, though remote areas still lag behind.\nDemographics.\nPopulation: \u2009(2021 census); \u2009(2010 census); \u2009(2002 census); \u2009(1989 Soviet census) Population density is 0.31 per km2 (2019), which is one of the lowest among Russian districts. Urban population: 65,45% (2018).\nSettlements.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVital statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource: https://\nEthnic groups.\nAccording to the 2021 Census, the ethnic composition was:\nHistorical population figures are shown below:\nLanguages.\nThe official languages are both Russian and Sakha, also known as Yakut, which is spoken by roughly half of the republic's population. In the 2021 census, 95% of Yakuts, 72% of Evenks and 60% of Evens declared Sakha as their native language. The Sakha language is a member of the Turkic language family, belonging to the Siberian branch. It is closely related to the Dolgan language of the former Taymyr Dolgano-Nenets Autonomous Okrug.\nThe Sakha Republic is also home to many of the world's speakers of Tungusic languages, primarily of Evenki and Even. Additionally, Chukchi and the lects of the Yukaghir language family are spoken in the northeast.\nReligion.\nBefore the arrival of the Russian Empire, the majority of the local population was Tengrist, similar to the other Turkic people of Central Asia, or in Paleoasian indigenous shamanism with both 'light' (community leading) and 'dark' (healing through spirit journey) shamans. Under the Russians, the local population was converted to the Russian Orthodox Church and required to take Orthodox Christian names, but in practice generally continued to follow traditional religions. During the Soviet era, most or all of the shamans died without successors.\nIn the 1990s, a neopagan shamanist movement called \"aiyy yeurekh\u00e9\" was founded by the controversial journalist Ivan Ukhkhan and a philologist calling himself T\u00e9ris. This group and others cooperated to build a shaman temple in downtown Yakutsk in 2002.\nCurrently, while Orthodox Christianity maintains a following (however, with very few priests willing to be stationed outside of Yakutsk), there is interest and activity toward renewing the traditional religions. As of 2008, Orthodox leaders described the worldview of the republic's indigenous population (or, rather, those among the population who are not completely indifferent to religion) as \"dvoyeverie\" (dual belief system), or a \"tendency toward syncretism\", as evidenced by the locals sometimes first inviting a shaman, and then an Orthodox priest to carry out their rites in connection with some event in their life.\nAccording to the Information Center under the President of Sakha Republic (\u0418\u043d\u0444\u043e\u0440\u043c\u0430\u0446\u0438\u043e\u043d\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u0446\u0435\u043d\u0442\u0440 \u043f\u0440\u0438 \u041f\u0440\u0435\u0437\u0438\u0434\u0435\u043d\u0442\u0435 \u0420\u0421(\u042f)), the religious demography of the republic was as follows: Orthodoxy: 44.9%, Shamanism: 26.2%, Non-religious: 23.0%, New religious movements: 2.4%, Islam: 1.2%, Buddhism: 1.0%, Protestantism: 0.9%, Catholicism: 0.4%.\nAccording to a 2012 survey, 37.8% of the population of Sakha adheres to the Russian Orthodox Church, 13% to Tengrism or Sakha shamanism, 2% to Islam, 1% are unaffiliated Christians, 1% to forms of Protestantism, and 0.4% to Tibetan Buddhism. In addition, 26% of the population deems itself atheist, 17% is \"spiritual but not religious\", and 1.8% follows other religions or did not give an answer to the question.\nEducation.\nThe most important facilities of higher education include North-Eastern Federal University (previously Yakutsk State University) and Yakutsk State Agricultural Academy.\nPolitics.\nThe head of government in Sakha is the Head (previously President). The first Head of the Sakha Republic was Mikhail Yefimovich Nikolayev. As of 2021, the head is Aysen Nikolayev, who took office on May\u00a028, 2018.\nThe supreme legislative body of state authority in Sakha is a unicameral State Assembly known as the \"Il Tumen\". The government of the Sakha (Yakutia) Republic is the executive body of state authority.\nThe republic fosters close cultural, political, economic, and industrial relations with the independent Turkic states through membership in organizations such as the Turkic Council and the Joint Administration of Turkic Arts and Culture.\nEconomy.\nThe largest companies in the region include Alrosa, Yakutugol, Yakutskenergo, and Yakutia Airlines.\nControversial social support policy in the area is largely afforded to people less at need despite rural poverty remaining high.\nMining.\nThe Mirny diamond mine and other diamond mines are important sources of exports for the region. In additon, tin and gold mining have been major but controversial industries for over 100 years.\nTransportation.\nWater transport ranks first for cargo turnover. There are six river ports, two seaports (Tiksi and Zelyony Mys). Four shipping companies, including the Arctic Sea Shipping Company, operate in the republic. The republic's main waterway is the Lena River, which links Yakutsk with the rail station of Ust-Kut in Irkutsk Oblast.\nAir transport is the most important for transporting people. Airlines connect the republic with most regions of Russia. Yakutsk Airport has an international terminal.\nTwo federal roads pass the republic. They are Nizhny Bestyakh\u2013Skovorodino (A360 Lena highway) and Nizhny Bestyakh\u2013Magadan (M56 Kolyma Highway).\nHowever, due to the presence of permafrost, use of asphalt was formerly impractical, and therefore the roads were made of clay until being paved by 2014. Prior to the paving of these roads, when heavy rains blew over the region, the roads often turned to mud, sometimes stranding hundreds of travelers in the process. The Lena Bridge is under construction across the Lena, which will connect Yakutsk to Nizhny Bestyakh, and thus the rest of the Russian road network, year-round. Construction began in 2024, and is planned to last until 2028.\nThe Berkakit\u2013Tommot railroad is currently in operation. It links the Baikal-Amur Mainline with the industrial centers in South Sakha. Construction of the Amur\u2013Yakutsk Mainline continues northward; the railway was completed to Nizhny Bestyakh, across the river from Yakutsk, in 2013. Though this one-track railroad from Tommot to Nizhny Bestyakh was under temporary operation (30% of its full capacity), the federal agency for railways declared that this railroad would be in full operation in fall 2015. Since 2019, there have been passenger trains between Nizhny Bestyakh and the rest of Russia.\nMedia.\nNVK Sakha (national broadcaster company Sakha, \u041d\u0430\u0446\u0438\u043e\u043d\u0430\u043b\u044c\u043d\u0430\u044f \u0432\u0435\u0449\u0430\u0442\u0435\u043b\u044c\u043d\u0430\u044f \u043a\u043e\u043c\u043f\u0430\u043d\u0438\u044f \u0421\u0430\u0445\u0430, \"\u0421\u0430\u0445\u0430\" \u043a\u04e9\u0440\u0434\u04e9\u0440\u04e9\u0440 \u0438\u04bb\u0438\u0442\u0438\u043d\u043d\u044d\u0440\u044d\u0440 \u0442\u044d\u0440\u0438\u043b\u0442\u044d\u0442\u044d), the largest media company in the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia). The company owns dozens of TV channels in Yakutia, Russia, and other countries. The main broadcasting languages are Yakut, English, Russian and Evenk. It was founded in 1992 after the collapse of the USSR. 70% of the shares are owned by the Russian VGTRK, 25% are owned by Yakutia, and 5% are in free float. NVK Sakha owns its own animation and film production studios, and some music studios. Since 2018, it has also been streaming 24/7 on YouTube.\nCulture.\nPoints of interest in the city of Yakutsk include:\nThere are a number of museums as well. These include the National Fine Arts Museum of Sakha, the Museum of Local Lore and History named after E. Yaroslavsky, and the Khomus Museum and Museum of Permafrost. In September 2020, the Gagarin Center for Culture and Contemporary Art was opened in the Gagarin District of Yakutsk.\nThe Yakuts have fully preserved their native language, which differs significantly from other Turkic languages by the presence of a layer of unique Paleo-Asiatic vocabulary. The Yakut language has a developed literary tradition with many styles and genres, and the ancient Sakha epic Olonkho is recognized by UNESCO as a masterpiece of the oral and intangible heritage of humanity.\nIn the 2010s, a movie boom began in Yakutia. The local film industry was nicknamed \"Sakhawood\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57906", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57906", "title": "Metz", "text": "City in Grand Est, France\n \nMetz ( ; ; , then ) is a city in northeast France located at the confluence of the Moselle and the Seille rivers. Metz is the prefecture of the Moselle department and the seat of the parliament of the Grand Est region. Located near the tripoint along the junction of France, Germany and Luxembourg, the city forms a central part of the European Greater Region and the SaarLorLux euroregion.\nMetz has a rich 3,000-year history, having variously been a Celtic \"oppidum\", an important Gallo-Roman city, the Merovingian capital of Austrasia, the birthplace of the Carolingian dynasty, a cradle of the Gregorian chant, and one of the oldest republics in Europe. The city has been steeped in French culture, but has been strongly influenced by German culture due to its location and history.\nBecause of its historical, cultural and architectural background, Metz has been submitted on France's UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List. The city features noteworthy buildings such as the Gothic Saint-Stephen Cathedral with its largest expanse of stained-glass windows in the world, the Basilica of Saint-Pierre-aux-Nonnains being the oldest church in France, its Imperial Station Palace displaying the apartment of the German Kaiser, or its Opera House, the oldest one working in France. Metz is home to some world-class venues including the Arsenal Concert Hall and the Centre Pompidou-Metz museum.\nA basin of urban ecology, Metz gained its nickname of The Green City (), as it has extensive open grounds and public gardens. The historic city centre is one of the largest commercial pedestrian areas in France.\nA historic garrison town, Metz is the economic heart of the Lorraine region, specialising in information technology and automotive industries. Metz is home to the University of Lorraine, Georgia Tech Europe, and a centre for applied research and development in the materials sector, notably in metallurgy and metallography, the heritage of the Lorraine region's past in the iron and steel industry.\nEtymology.\nIn ancient times, the town was known as \"city of Mediomatrici\", being inhabited by the tribe of the same name. After its integration into the Roman Empire, the city was called \"Divodurum Mediomatricum\", meaning Holy Village or Holy Fortress of the Mediomatrici, then it was known as \"Mediomatrix\". During the 5th century AD, the name evolved to \"Mettis\", which gave rise to the current spelling, Metz, but also spellings such as \"M\u00e8s\", which are no longer used, but reflect its actual pronunciation in French (like \"mess\").\nHistory.\nMetz has a recorded history dating back over 2,000 years. Before the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar in 52 BC, it was the oppidum of the Celtic Mediomatrici tribe. Integrated into the Roman Empire, Metz became quickly one of the principal towns of Gaul with a population of 40,000, until the barbarian depredations and its transfer to the Franks about the end of the 5th century. Between the 6th and 8th centuries, the city was the residence of the Merovingian kings of Austrasia. After the Treaty of Verdun in 843, Metz became the capital of the Kingdom of Lotharingia and was ultimately integrated into the Holy Roman Empire, being granted semi-independent status. During the 12th century, Metz became a republic and the Republic of Metz stood until the 15th century.\nWith the signature of the Treaty of Chambord in 1552, Metz passed into the hands of the Kings of France. As the German Protestant Princes who traded Metz (alongside Toul and Verdun) for the promise of French military assistance, had no authority to cede territory of the Holy Roman Empire, the change of jurisdiction was not recognised by the Holy Roman Empire until the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648. Under French rule, Metz was selected as capital of the Three Bishoprics and became a strategic fortified town. With creation of the departments by the Estates-General of 1789, Metz was chosen as capital of the Department of Moselle.\nAlthough largely French-speaking, after the Franco-Prussian War and under the Treaty of Frankfurt of 1871 the city became part of the German Empire, being part of the Imperial Territory of Alsace-Lorraine and serving as capital of the Bezirk Lothringen.\nMetz remained German until the end of the First World War, when it reverted to France. However, after the Battle of France during the Second World War, the city was annexed by Nazi Germany. In 1944, the attack on the city by the U.S. Third Army removed the city from German rule and Metz reverted one more time to France after World War II.\nDuring the 1950s, Metz was chosen to be the capital of the newly created Lorraine region. With the creation of the European Community and the later European Union, the city has become central to the Greater Region and the SaarLorLux Euroregion.\nGeography.\nMetz is located on the banks of the Moselle and the Seille rivers, from the Schengen tripoint where the borders of France, Germany and Luxembourg meet. The city was built in a place where many branches of the Moselle river create several islands, which are encompassed within the urban planning.\nThe terrain of Metz forms part of the Paris Basin and presents a plateau relief cut by river valleys presenting cuestas in the north\u2013south direction. Metz and its surrounding countryside are included in the forest and crop Lorraine Regional Natural Park, covering a total area of .\nClimate.\nLorraine has an oceanic climate. tending to continental humid. The summers are warm and humid, sometimes stormy, and the warmest month of the year is July, when daytime temperatures average approximately . The winters are cold but not often snowy with temperature dropping to an average low of in January. Lows can be much colder through the night and early morning and rare snow can fall during a period extending from November to February.\nThe length of the day varies significantly over the course of the year. The shortest day is 21 December with 7:30 hours of sunlight; the longest day is 20 June with 16:30 hours of sunlight. The median cloud cover is 93% and does not vary substantially over the course of the year.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nThe inhabitants of Metz are called \"Messin(e)s\". Statistics on the ethnic and religious make up of the population of Metz are haphazard, as the French Republic prohibits making distinctions between citizens regarding race, beliefs, and political and philosophic opinions in the process of census taking.\nThe French national census of 2018 estimated the population of Metz to be 116,581, while the population of Metz metropolitan area was about 368,000. Through history, Metz's population has been affected by the vicissitudes of the wars and annexations involving the city, which have prevented continuous population growth. More recently, the city has suffered from the restructuring of the military and the metallurgy industry. The historical population for the current area of Metz municipality is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\nSeveral well-known figures have been linked to the city of Metz throughout its history. Renowned \"Messins\" include poet Paul Verlaine, composer Ambroise Thomas and mathematician Jean-Victor Poncelet; numerous well-known German figures were also born in Metz notably during the annexation periods. Moreover, the city has been the residence of people such as writer Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais, Cardinal Mazarin, political thinker Alexis de Tocqueville, artist and the inventor of the motion picture camera Louis Le Prince, French patriot and American Revolutionary War hero Marquis Gilbert du Motier de La Fayette, and Luxembourg-born German-French statesman Robert Schuman.\nLaw and government.\nLocal law.\nThe \"local law\" () applied in Metz is a legal system that operates in parallel with French law. Created in 1919, it preserves the French laws applied in France before 1870 and maintained by the Germans during the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine, but repealed in the rest of France after 1871. It also maintains German laws enacted by the German Empire between 1871 and 1918, specific provisions adopted by the local authorities, and French laws that have been enacted after 1919 to be applicable only in Alsace-Lorraine. This specific local legislation encompasses different areas including religion, social work and finance.\nThe most striking of the legal differences between France and Alsace-Lorraine is the absence in Alsace-Lorraine of strict secularism, even though a constitutional right of freedom of religion is guaranteed by the French government. Alsace-Lorraine is still governed by a pre-1905 law established by the Concordat of 1801, which provides for the public subsidy of the Roman Catholic, Lutheran and Calvinist churches and the Jewish religion.\nAdministration.\nLike every commune of the present French Republic, Metz is managed by a mayor () and a municipal council (), democratically elected by two-round proportional voting for six years. The mayor is assisted by 54 municipal councillors, and the municipal council is held on the last Thursday of every month. Since 2008, the mayor of Metz has been socialist Dominique Gros.\nThe city belongs to the Metz Metropole union of cities, which includes the 40 cities of the Metz urban agglomeration. Metz is the prefecture of the Moselle based in the former Intendant Palace. In addition, Metz is the seat of the parliament of the Grand Est region, hosted in the former Saint-Clement Abbey.\nCity administrative divisions.\nThe city of Metz is divided into 14 administrative divisions:\nCityscape and environmental policy.\nMetz contains a mishmash of architectural layers, bearing witness to centuries of history at the crossroads of different cultures, and features a number of architectural landmarks. The city possesses one of the largest Urban Conservation Areas in France, and more than 100 of the city's buildings are classified on the list. Because of its historical and cultural background, Metz is designated as French Town of Art and History, and has been submitted on to France's UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List.\nThe city is famous for its yellow limestone architecture, a result of the extensive use of Jaumont stone. The historic district has kept part of the Gallo-Roman city with Divodurum's Cardo Maximus, then called Via Scarponensis (today the Trinitaires, Taison and Serpenoise streets), and the Decumanus Maximus (today En Fournirue and d'Estr\u00e9es streets). At the Cardo and Decumanus intersection was situated the Roman forum, today the Saint-Jacques Square.\nArchitecture.\nFrom its Gallo-Roman past, the city preserves vestiges of the thermae (in the basement of the Golden Courtyard museum), parts of the aqueduct, and the Basilica of Saint-Pierre-aux-Nonnains.\nSaint Louis' square with its vaulted arcades and a Knights Templar chapel remains a major symbol of the city's High Medieval heritage. The Gothic Saint-Stephen Cathedral, several churches and H\u00f4tels, and two remarkable municipal granaries reflect the Late Middle Ages. Examples of Renaissance architecture can be seen in H\u00f4tels from the 16th century, such as the House of Heads ().\nThe H\u00f4tel de Ville (City Hall) and the buildings surrounding the town square are by French architect Jacques-Fran\u00e7ois Blondel, who was awarded the task of redesigning and modernizing the centre of Metz by the Royal Academy of Architecture in 1755 the context of the Enlightenment. Neoclassical buildings from the 18th century, such as the Opera House, the Intendant Palace (the present-day prefecture), and the Royal Governor's Palace (the present-day courthouse) built by Charles-Louis Cl\u00e9risseau, are also found in the city.\nThe Imperial District was built during the first annexation of Metz by the German Empire. In order to \"germanise\" the city, Emperor Wilhelm II decided to create a new district shaped by a distinctive blend of Germanic architecture, including Renaissance, neo-Romanesque and neo-Classical, mixed with elements of Art Nouveau, Art Deco, Alsatian and mock-Bavarian styles. Instead of Jaumont stone, commonly used everywhere else in the city, stone used in the Rhineland, such as pink and grey sandstone, granite and basalt were used. The district features noteworthy buildings including the rail station and the Central Post Office by German architect J\u00fcrgen Kr\u00f6ger.\nModern architecture can also be seen in the town with works of French architects Roger-Henri Expert (Sainte-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se-de-l'Enfant-J\u00e9sus church, 1934), Georges-Henri Pingusson (Fire Station, 1960) and Jean Dubuisson (subdivisions, 1960s). The refurbishment of the former Ney Arsenal as a Concert Hall in 1989 and the erection of the Metz Arena in 2002, by Spanish and French architects Ricardo Bofill and French Paul Chemetov represent the Postmodern movement.\nThe Centre Pompidou-Metz museum in the Amphitheatre District represents a strong architectural initiative to mark the entrance of Metz into the 21st century. Designed by Japanese architect Shigeru Ban, the building is remarkable for the complex, innovative carpentry of its roof, and integrates concepts of sustainable architecture. The project encompasses the architecture of two recipients of the Pritzker Architecture Prize, Shigeru Ban (2014) and French Christian de Portzamparc (1994). The Amphitheatre District is also conceived by French architects Nicolas Michelin, Jean-Paul Viguier and Jean-Michel Wilmotte, and designer Philippe Starck. The urban project is expected to be completed by 2023. Further, a contemporary music venue designed by contextualist French architect Rudy Ricciotti stands in the Borny District.\nUrban ecology.\nUnder the leadership of such people as botanist Jean-Marie Pelt, Metz pioneered a policy of urban ecology during the early 1970s. Because of the failure of post-war urban planning and housing estate development in Europe during the 1960s, mostly based on the concepts of CIAM, Jean-Marie Pelt, then municipal councillor of Metz, initiated a new approach to the urban environment.\nBased initially on the ideas of the Chicago School, Pelt's theories pleaded for better integration of humans into their environment and developed a concept centered on the relationship between \"stone and water\". His policy was realized in Metz by the establishment of extensive open areas surrounding the Moselle and the Seille rivers and the development of large pedestrian areas. As a result, Metz has over of open areas per inhabitant in the form of numerous public gardens in the city.\nThe principles of urban ecology are still applied in Metz with the implementation of a local Agenda 21 action plan. The municipal ecological policy encompasses the sustainable refurbishment of ancient buildings, the erection of sustainable districts and buildings, green public transport, and the creation of public gardens by means of landscape architecture.\nAdditionally, the city has developed its own combined heat and power station, using waste wood biomass from the surrounding forests as a renewable energy source. With a thermal efficiency above 80%, the 45MW boiler of the plant provides electricity and heat for 44,000 dwellings. The Metz power station is the first local producer and distributor of energy in France.\nMilitary architecture.\nAs a historic garrison town, Metz has been heavily influenced by military architecture throughout its history. From ancient history to the present, the city has been successively fortified and modified to accommodate the troops stationed there. Defensive walls from classical antiquity to the 20th century are still visible today, incorporated into the design of public gardens along the Moselle and Seille rivers. A medieval bridge castle from the 13th century, named Germans' Gate (), today converted into a convention and exhibition centre, has become one of the landmarks of the city. It is still possible to see parts of the 16th century citadel, as well as fortifications built in the 1740s by Louis de Cormontaigne but based on designs by Vauban. Important barracks, mostly from the 18th and 19th centuries, are spread around the city: some, which are of architectural interest, have been converted to civilian use, such as the Arsenal Concert Hall by Spanish architect Ricardo Bofill.\nThe extensive fortifications of Metz, which ring the city, include early examples of S\u00e9r\u00e9 de Rivi\u00e8res system forts. Other forts were incorporated into the Maginot Line. A hiking trail on the Saint-Quentin plateau passes through a former military training zone and ends at the now abandoned military forts, providing a vantage point from which to survey the city.\nEconomy.\nAlthough the steel industry has historically dominated Moselle's economy, Metz's efforts at economic diversification have created a base in the sectors of commerce, tourism, information technology and the automotive industry. The city is the economic heart of the Lorraine region and around 73,000 people work daily within the urban agglomeration. The transport facilities found in the conurbation, including the international high-speed railway, motorway, inland connections and the local bus rapid transit system, have made the city a transport hub in the heart of the European Union. Metz is home to the biggest harbour handling cereals in France with over 4,000,000 tons/year.\nMetz is home to the Moselle Chamber of Commerce. International companies such as PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn, ArcelorMittal, SFR and TDF have established plants and centres in the Metz conurbation. Metz is also the regional headquarters of the Caisse d'Epargne and Banque Populaire banking groups.\nMetz is an important commercial centre of northern France with France's biggest retailer federation, consisting of around 2,000 retailers. Important retail companies are found in the city, such as the Galeries Lafayette, the Printemps department store and the Fnac entertainment retail chain. The historic city centre displays one of the largest commercial pedestrian areas in France and a mall, the Saint-Jacques centre. In addition there are several multiplex movie theatres and malls found in the urban agglomeration.\nIn recent years, Metz municipality have promoted an ambitious policy of tourism development, including urban revitalization and refurbishment of buildings and public squares. This policy has been spurred by the creation of the Centre Pompidou-Metz in 2010. Since its inauguration, the institution has become the most popular cultural venue in France outside Paris, with 550,000 visitors per year. Meanwhile, Saint-Stephen Cathedral is the most visited building in the city, accommodating 652,000 visitors per year.\nCulture.\nMuseums and exhibition halls.\n \nIn addition, Metz features other museums and exhibition venues, such as:\nEntertainment and performing arts.\nMetz has several venues for the performing arts. The Opera House of Metz, the oldest working opera house in France, features plays, dance and lyric poetry. The Arsenal Concert Hall, dedicated to art music, is widely renowned for its excellent acoustics. The Trinitarians Club is a multimedia arts complex housed in the vaulted cellar and chapel of an ancient convent, the city's prime venue for jazz music. The Music Box (), familiarly known as BAM, is the concert venue dedicated to rock and electronic music. The Braun Hall and the Kolt\u00e8s Theater feature plays, and the city has two movie theaters specializing in Auteur cinema. The Saint-Jacques Square, surrounded by busy bars and pubs whose open-air tables fill the centre of the square.\nSince 2014, the former bus garage has been converted to accommodate over thirty artists in residence, in a space where they can create and rehearse artworks and even build set decorations. The artistic complex, called Metz Network of All Cultures () and familiarly known as TCRM-Blida, encompasses a large hall of while theater and dance companies benefit from a studio of with backstages. \nMetz in the arts.\nMetz was an important cultural centre during the Carolingian Renaissance. For instance, Gregorian chant was created in Metz during the 8th century as a fusion of Gallican and ancient Roman repertory. Then called Messin Chant, it remains the oldest form of music still in use in Western Europe. The bishops of Metz, notably Saint-Chrodegang promoted its use for the Roman liturgy in Gallic lands under the favorable influence of the Carolingian monarchs. Messin chant made two major contributions to the body of chant: it fitted the chant into the ancient Greek octoechos system, and invented an innovative musical notation, using neumes to show the shape of a remembered melody. Metz was also an important centre of illumination of Carolingian manuscripts, producing such monuments of Carolingian book illumination as the Drogo Sacramentary.\nThe Metz School () was an art movement in Metz and the region between 1834 and 1870, centred on Charles-Laurent Mar\u00e9chal. The term was originally proposed in 1845 by the poet Charles Baudelaire, who appreciated the works of the artists. They were influenced by Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix and inspired by the medieval heritage of Metz and its romantic surroundings. The Franco-Prussian War and the annexation of the territory by the Germans resulted in the dismantling of the movement. The main figures of the Metz School were Charles-Laurent Mar\u00e9chal, Auguste Migette, Auguste Hussenot, Louis-Th\u00e9odore Devilly, Christophe Fratin and Charles P\u00eatre. Their works include paintings, engravings, drawings, stained-glass windows and sculptures.\nA festival named \"passages\" takes place in May. Numerous shows are presented to it.\nGraoully dragon as symbol of the city.\nThe Graoully is depicted as a fearsome dragon, vanquished by the sacred powers of Saint Clement of Metz, the first Bishop of the city. The Graoully quickly became a symbol of Metz and can be seen in numerous insignia of the city, from the 10th century on. Writers from Metz tend to present the legend as an allegory of Christianity's victory over paganism, represented by the harmful dragon.\nCuisine.\nLocal specialties include quiche, pot\u00e9e, Lorraine p\u00e2t\u00e9 and also suckling pig. Various dishes such as jam, tart, charcuterie and fruit brandy are made from the Mirabelle and Damsons. Metz is the home of some pastries, such as Metz cheese pie and Metz Balls (), a ganache-stuffed biscuit coated with marzipan, caramel and dark chocolate. Local beverages include Moselle wine and Amos beer. The Covered Market of Metz is one of the oldest and most grandiose in France and is home to traditional local food producers and retailers. It was originally built as the bishop's palace but the French Revolution broke out before the Bishop of Metz could move in and the citizens decided to turn it into a food market. The adjacent Chamber's Square () is surrounded by numerous restaurants serving local food.\nCelebrations and events.\nMany events are celebrated in Metz throughout the year. The city of Metz dedicates two weeks to the Mirabelle plum during the popular Mirabelle Festival held in August. During the festival, in addition to open markets selling fresh plums, mirabelle tarts and mirabelle liquor, there are live music, fireworks, parties, art exhibits, a parade with floral floats, a competition, the crowning of the Mirabelle Queen and a gala of celebration.\nA literature festival is held in June. The Montgolfiades hot air balloon festival is organized in September. The second most popular Christmas Market in France is held in November and December. Finally, a Saint Nicholas parade honors the patron saint of the Lorraine region in December.\nSport.\nMetz is home to the Football Club of Metz (FC Metz), a football association club in Ligue 1, the highest division of French football (as of 2019\u20132020 season). FC Metz has won three times the Ligue 2 (1935, 2007 and 2014), twice the Coupe de France (in 1984 and 1988) and the French League Cup (in 1986 and 1996), and was French championship runner-up in 1998. FC Metz has also gained recognition in France and Europe for its successful youth academy, winning the Gambardella Cup 3 times in 1981, 2001 and 2010. The Saint-Symphorien stadium has been the home of FC Metz since the creation of the club.\nMetz Handball is a Handball club. Metz Handball has won the French Women's First League championship 23 times, the Women's France Cup nine times, and the French Women's League Cup eight times. The Metz Arena has been the home of Metz Handball since 2002.\nSince 2003, Metz has been home to the Moselle Open, an ATP World Tour 250 tournament played on indoor hard courts, which usually takes place in September.\nEducation.\nHigh schools.\nMetz has numerous high schools, including the Fabert High School and the Lyc\u00e9e of Communication. Some of these institutions offer higher education courses such as classes pr\u00e9paratoires (undergraduate school) or BTS (technician certificate).\nUniversity of Lorraine.\nMetz is also home to the University of Lorraine (often abbreviated as UL). The university is divided into two university centers, one in Metz (material sciences, technology and management) and one in Nancy (biological sciences, health care, administration, management and law). The University of Lorraine, which ranks in 2016 among the top 15 of French universities and among the top 300 of universities in the world according to the 2016 Academic Ranking of World Universities, has a student body of over 55,000 and offers 101 accredited research centers organized in 9 research areas and 8 doctoral colleges.\nGraduate schools.\nAt the end of the 1990s, the city expanded and the Metz Science Park was created in the southern area. Along with this expansion, several graduate schools took the opportunity to establish campuses in the park. At first, facilities were grouped around the lake Symphony, like Sup\u00e9lec in 1985 and Georgia Tech Lorraine in 1990. In 1996, the engineering school Arts et M\u00e9tiers ParisTech (ENSAM) built a research and learning center next to the golf course. This opened the way to the development of a new area, where the Franco-German university (ISFATES) and the ENIM moved in 2010. These graduate schools often cooperate with the University of Lorraine. For instance, the university and ENSAM share research teams, laboratories, equipments and doctoral programs. The \u00c9cole sup\u00e9rieure d'ing\u00e9nieurs des travaux de la construction de Metz is also located in the city.\nTransport.\nLocal transport.\nPublic transport includes a bus rapid transit system, called Mettis. Mettis vehicles are high-capacity hybrid bi-articulated buses built by Van Hool, and stop at designated elevated tubes, complete with disability access. Mettis has its own planned and integrated transportation system, which includes two dedicated lines that spread out into the Metz conurbation. Mettis lanes A and B serve the city's major facilities (e.g., city centre, university campus and hospitals), and a transport hub is located next to the railway station.\nRailways.\nMetz Railway Station is connected to the French high speed train (TGV) network, which provides a direct rail service to Paris and Luxembourg. The time from Paris (Gare de l'Est) to Metz is 82 minutes. Additionally, Metz is served by the Lorraine TGV railway station, located at Louvigny, to the south of Metz, for high speed trains going to Nantes, Rennes, Lille and Bordeaux (without stopping in Paris). Also, Metz is one of the main stations of the regional express trains system, M\u00e9trolor.\nMotorways.\nMetz is located at the intersection of two major road axes: the Eastern Motorway, itself a part of the European route E50 connecting Paris to Prague, and the A31 Motorway, which goes north to Luxembourg and south to the Mediterranean Sea towards Nancy, Dijon and Lyon.\nAirports.\nThe Luxembourg International Airport is the nearest international airport, connected to Metz by M\u00e9trolor train. The Lorraine TGV Station is 75 minutes by train from France international Charles de Gaulle Airport. Finally, Metz\u2013Nancy\u2013Lorraine Airport is located in Goin, southeast of Metz.\nWaterways.\nMetz is located at the confluence of the Moselle and the Seille rivers, both navigable waterways. The marina connects Metz to the cities of the Moselle valley (i.e. Trier, Schengen and Koblenz) via the Moselle river.\nInternational relations.\nMetz is a member of the QuattroPole union of cities, along with Luxembourg, Saarbr\u00fccken and Trier (neighbouring countries: Luxembourg, France, and Germany). Metz has a central place in the Greater Region and of the economic SaarLorLux Euroregion. Metz is also twin town with:\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "57907", "revid": "49352941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57907", "title": "Metz, France", "text": ""}
{"id": "57909", "revid": "4497767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57909", "title": "Battle of Evesham", "text": "1265 battle of the Second Barons' War in England\nThe Battle of Evesham (4 August 1265) was one of the two main battles of 13th century England's Second Barons' War. It marked the defeat of Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester, and the rebellious barons by the future King Edward I, who led the forces of his father, King Henry III. It took place on 4 August 1265, near the town of Evesham, Worcestershire.\nWith the Battle of Lewes, de Montfort had won control of royal government, but after the defection of several close allies and the escape from captivity of Prince Edward, he found himself on the defensive. Forced to engage the royalists at Evesham, he faced an army twice the size of his own. The battle soon turned into a massacre; de Montfort himself was killed and his body mutilated. It was described by the contemporary historian Robert of Gloucester as the \"murder of Evesham, for battle it was none\". Though the battle effectively restored royal authority, scattered resistance remained until the Dictum of Kenilworth was signed in 1267.\nBackground.\nSimon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester, had gained a dominant position in the government of the Kingdom of England after his victory at the Battle of Lewes a year earlier. He also held the King, Prince Edward, and the King's brother Richard of Cornwall in his custody. However, his sphere of influence began to shrink rapidly, owing to loss of key allies. In February, Robert de Ferrers, Earl of Derby was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower. An even more important collaborator, Gilbert de Clare, the Earl of Gloucester, deserted to the side of the King in May of the same year. With Gloucester's assistance, Prince Edward escaped from de Montfort's captivity.\nWith the Lords of the Welsh Marches now in rebellion, de Montfort solicited the aid of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, the Prince of Wales. Llywelyn agreed to help, in return for full recognition of his title and the promise that he could keep all military gains. Whatever benefits this alliance might have brought de Montfort, the large concessions cost him popularity at home. Meanwhile, Edward laid siege to the town of Gloucester, which fell on 29 June. De Montfort's goal now became to unite with the forces of his son Simon the Younger, and engage with the royal army, but the younger Simon moved much too slowly westwards from London. Eventually Simon the Younger reached the baronial stronghold of Kenilworth, but Edward managed to inflict great losses on his forces, many of whom were quartered outside the castle walls. From there the prince moved south, where on 4 August, using many banners captured at Kenilworth to deceive de Montfort into thinking his reinforcements were arriving, he managed to trap the older de Montfort in a loop of the Avon, blocking off the only bridge and thereby forcing de Montfort to fight without his son's reinforcements. When de Montfort realised this, he allegedly commented: \"How skilfully they are advancing. Our bodies are theirs, our souls are God's.\"\nBattle.\nHeeding a lesson learned at the Battle of Lewes, the royalists took position on the high ground. Along a ridge called Green Hill, just north of Evesham, Edward set up his forces on the left, with Gloucester commanding the right. At about eight in the morning, de Montfort left the town of Evesham as a great thunderstorm began to rage. At Lewes, the baronial forces had gained confidence to win the day by a sense of divine destiny, reinforced by white crosses on their uniforms. This time the royal army had taken their lead, and wore a red cross as their distinguishing mark. According to the chronicler William Rishanger, when de Montfort saw the advance of the royal troops, he exclaimed that \"They have not learned that for themselves, but were taught it by me.\"\nThe respective forces of the baronial and royal armies have been estimated to be 5,000 and 10,000 strong. De Montfort, facing such unfavourable numbers, decided to concentrate his forces on the centre of the enemy's front, hoping to drive a wedge through the line. Though the tactics were initially successful, the baronial forces soon lost the initiative, especially as the Welsh infantry provided by Llywelyn ap Gruffudd had proved unreliable, and deserted at an early point. The flanks of the royal army closed in on de Montfort's, surrounding them. With de Montfort confronted by a force twice the size of his own, on unfavourable ground, the battle rapidly turned into a massacre.\nWith their defeat at Lewes still fresh in memory, the royalists fought with a strong sense of bitterness and resentment. As a result, and despite attempts to surrender, most of the baronial rebels were killed on the battlefield rather than taken prisoner and ransomed, as was the common custom and practice. In what has been referred to as \"an episode of noble bloodletting unprecedented since the Conquest\", de Montfort's son Henry was killed first, then Simon himself lost his horse and died fighting. His body was mutilated; his head, hands, feet and testicles cut off. King Henry himself, who had been in the custody of de Montfort and dressed up in his colours, was barely rescued from the m\u00eal\u00e9e by Roger de Leybourne, a converted rebel.\nAftermath.\nThe royalists were eager to settle scores after de Montfort's defeat. At the Parliament at Winchester in September the same year, all those who had taken part in the rebellion were disinherited. Yet even though the uprising of the younger Simon de Montfort in Lincolnshire was over by Christmas, scattered resistance remained. The main problem was the garrison encamped at the virtually impregnable Kenilworth Castle, and a siege started in the summer of 1266 seemed futile. By the end of October, the royalists drew up the so-called Dictum of Kenilworth, whereby rebels were allowed to buy back their land at prices dependent on their level of involvement in the rebellion. The defenders of the castle turned down the offer at first, but by the end of the year conditions had become intolerable, and in 1267 the Dictum was agreed upon.\nIn regard to wide-scale confrontations, the Battle of Evesham and its aftermath proved decisive: it ended baronial opposition in the reign of Henry III. The kingdom now entered into a period of unity and progress that lasted into the early 1290s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57910", "revid": "19569748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57910", "title": "Tripoli under Italian rule", "text": ""}
{"id": "57911", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57911", "title": "Tarabulus", "text": ""}
{"id": "57912", "revid": "50169307", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57912", "title": "Brest, France", "text": "Subprefecture and commune in Brittany, France\n \nBrest (; ) is a port city in the Finist\u00e8re department, Brittany. Located in a sheltered bay not far from the western tip of a peninsula and the western extremity of metropolitan France, Brest is an important harbour and the second largest French military port after Toulon. The city is located on the western edge of continental France. With 139,456 inhabitants (2020), Brest forms Western Brittany's largest metropolitan area (with a population of 370,000 in total), ranking third behind only Nantes and Rennes in the whole of historic Brittany, and the 25th most populous city in France (2019); moreover, Brest provides services to the one million inhabitants of Western Brittany. Although Brest is by far the largest city in Finist\u00e8re, the \"pr\u00e9fecture\" (administrative seat) of the department is in the much smaller town of Quimper.\nDuring the Middle Ages, the history of Brest was the history of its castle. Then Richelieu made it a military harbour in 1631. Brest grew around its arsenal until the second part of the 20th century. Heavily damaged by the Allies' bombing raids during World War II, the city centre was completely rebuilt after the war. At the end of the 20th century and the beginning of the 21st century, the deindustrialization of the city was followed by the development of the service sector. Nowadays, Brest is an important university town with 23,000 students. Besides a multidisciplinary university, the University of Western Brittany, Brest and its surrounding area possess several prestigious French elite schools such as \"\u00c9cole Navale\" (the French Naval Academy), \"T\u00e9l\u00e9com Bretagne\" and the Superior National School of Advanced Techniques of Brittany (ENSTA Bretagne, formerly ENSIETA). Brest is also an important research centre, mainly focused on the sea, with among others the largest Ifremer (French Research Institute for Exploitation of the Sea) centre, \"le Cedre\" (Centre of Documentation, Research and Experimentation on Accidental Water Pollution) and the French Polar Institute.\nBrest's history has since the 17th century been linked to the sea: the \"Acad\u00e9mie de Marine\" (Naval Academy) was founded in 1752 in this city. The aircraft carrier was built there. Every four years, Brest hosts the international festival of the sea, boats and sailors: it is a meeting of old riggings from around the world (\"Les Tonnerres de Brest\").\nHistory.\nThe name of the town is first recorded as \"Bresta\"; it may derive from *\"brigs\", a Celtic word for \"hill\".\nNothing definite is known of Brest before about 1240, when Harvey V, Lord of L\u00e9on ceded it to John I, Duke of Brittany. In 1342 John IV, Duke of Brittany surrendered Brest to the English, in whose possession it was to remain until 1397. This was strategically important to the English as it helped protect their communication with Gascony.102 The importance of Brest in medieval times was great enough to give rise to the saying, \"He is not the Duke of Brittany who is not the Lord of Brest.\" With the marriage of Francis I of France to Claude, the daughter of Anne of Brittany, the definitive overlordship of Brest \u2013 together with the rest of the duchy \u2013 passed to the French crown in 1491.\nStarting in 1534 Brest and the rest of Brittany become fully part of France as the Province of Brittany. The advantages of Brest's situation as a seaport town were first recognized by Cardinal Richelieu, who in 1631 constructed a harbour with wooden wharves. This soon became a base for the French Navy. Jean-Baptiste Colbert, finance minister under Louis XIV, rebuilt the wharves in masonry and otherwise improved the harbour. Fortifications by Vauban (1633\u20131707) followed in 1680\u20131688. These fortifications, and with them the naval importance of the town, were to continue to develop throughout the 18th century.\nIn 1694, an Anglo-Dutch squadron under Lord Berkeley was soundly defeated in its attack on Brest.\nDuring the repression of January and February 1894, the gendarmes conducted raids targeting the anarchists living there, without much success. They notably surrounded the house of R\u00e9gis Meunier with their bayonnets fixed.\nIn 1917, during the First World War, Brest was used as the disembarking port for many of the troops coming from the United States. Thousands of such men came through the port on their way to the front lines. The United States Navy established a naval air station on 13 February 1918 to operate seaplanes. This port also became a hot spot where the U.S. Navy and the French Navy engaged in underwater combat with German submarines. The base closed shortly after the Armistice of 11 November 1918.\nIn the Second World War, the Germans maintained a large U-boat submarine base at Brest. Despite being within range of RAF bombers, it was also a base for some of the German surface fleet, giving repair facilities and direct access to the Atlantic Ocean. For much of 1941, , and were under repair in the dockyards. The repair yard facilities for both submarines and surface vessels were staffed by both German and French workers, with the latter forming the major part of the workforce; huge reliance was made on this French component.\nIn 1944, after the Allied invasion of Normandy, the city was almost totally destroyed during the Battle for Brest, with only a tiny number of buildings left standing. After the war, the West German government paid several billion Deutschmarks in reparations to the homeless and destitute civilians of Brest in compensation for the destruction of their city. Large parts of today's rebuilt city consist of utilitarian granite and concrete buildings. The French naval base now houses the Brest Naval Training Centre.\nDuring the postwar Nuremberg Trials, a memorandum of German admiral and chief of staff Kurt Fricke from 1940 was given in evidence which suggested that the town should serve as a German enclave after the war.\nIn 1972, the French Navy opened its nuclear weapon-submarine (deterrence) base at \u00cele Longue in the \"Rade de Brest\" (Brest roadstead). This continues to be an important base for the French nuclear-armed ballistic missile submarines.\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms of Brest is divided in two: to the left, there's the three fleurs-de-lis of the former kingdom of France, and to the right it has the ermines of the Duchy of Brittany. These arms were used for the first time in a register of deliberations of the city council dated the 15 July 1683. Additionally, it looks visually identical to the coat of arms of Bourg-la-Reine.\nSights.\n\"Pont de Recouvrance\" (Recouvrance Bridge, is a massive drawbridge 64 m/210\u00a0ft high), the military arsenal and the \"rue de Siam\" (Siam Street) are other sights. The castle and the Tanguy tower are the oldest monuments of Brest.\nThe \"Mus\u00e9e de la Tour Tanguy\", in the Tanguy tower, houses a collection of dioramas that depict the city of Brest on the eve of World War II. The \"Mus\u00e9e national de la Marine de Brest\", housed in the ancient castle, contains exhibits which outline Brest's maritime tradition, as well as an aquarium, the Oc\u00e9anopolis marine centre. The city also has a notable botanical garden specializing in endangered species, the \"Conservatoire botanique national de Brest\", as well as the \"Jardin botanique de l'H\u00f4pital d'Instruction des Arm\u00e9es Clermont-Tonnerre\".\nThe city of Brest does not have much remaining historical architecture, apart from a few select monuments such as the castle and the Tanguy tower. This is due to heavy bombing by the Allies during World War II, in an attempt to destroy the submarine base the Germans had built in the harbour. In the 1950s, the town was hastily rebuilt using a large amount of concrete. In Recouvrance, the west bank of the town, there remains an authentic street of the 17th century, Saint-Malo Street.\nA few kilometres out of town, there are landscapes, from sandy beaches to grottos to tall granite cliffs. Sunbathing, windsurfing, yachting and fishing are enjoyed in the area. Brest was an important warship-producing port during the Napoleonic wars. The naval port, which is in great part excavated in the rock, extends along both banks of the Penfeld river.\nGeography.\nBrest is located amidst a dramatic landscape near the entrance of the natural \"rade de Brest\" (Brest roadstead), at the west end of Brittany.\nIt is situated to the north of a magnificent landlocked bay, and occupies the slopes of two hills divided by the river Penfeld. The part of the town on the left bank is regarded as Brest proper, while the part on the right is known as Recouvrance. There are also extensive suburbs to the east of the town. The hillsides are in some places so steep that the ascent from the lower to the upper town has to be effected by flights of steps and the second or third storey of one house is often on a level with the ground storey of the next.\nClimate.\nBrest experiences an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"). As a result of maritime moderation, Brest has cool summers by French standards, July afternoons are cooler than the norm in Western Europe. Rainfall is common year-round, but snowfall is a rarer occurrence since temperatures usually remain several degrees above freezing during winter nights.\nAn extreme temperature of was recorded on 18 July 2022.\nPopulation.\nIn 1945 Brest absorbed three neighbouring communes. The population data for 1936 and earlier in the table and graph below refer to the pre-1945 borders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nThe railway station of Brest, Gare de Brest, is linked to Rennes and Paris and provides services to other stations in Brittany as well. TGV trains to Paris take approximately three hours and forty minutes to reach the capital.\nA new 28-stop, tram line connecting Porte de Plouzan\u00e9 in the west with Porte de Gouesnou and Porte de Guipavas northeast of the city centre opened in June 2012.\nBrest international airport, Brest Bretagne Airport, is mainly linked to Paris, London, Nice, Lyon, Dublin. The primary operator is Air France (via its subsidiary HOP!). Brest international airport is the main airport of the region of Brittany in terms of passenger traffic with 45% of this traffic of the region, representing 919,404 passengers in 2010. A new terminal has been in service since 12 December 2007 and can accommodate up to 1.8\u00a0million passengers annually.\nThe harbour of Brest is mainly dedicated to bulk, hydrocarbon and freight containers. The harbour's facilities can accommodate the largest modern ships. A cruise ship port is also located in Brest, near the city centre.\nEconomy.\nDue to its location, Brest is regarded as the first French port that can be accessed from the Americas. Shipping is big business, although Nantes and Saint-Nazaire offer much larger docks and attract more of the larger vessels. Brest has the ninth French commercial harbour including ship repairs and maintenance. The protected location of Brest means that its harbour is ideal to receive any type of ship, from the smallest dinghy to the biggest aircraft carrier ( has visited a few times). Naval construction is also an important activity: for example, the was built by Direction des Constructions Navales (DCN) in Brest.\nDespite its image of an industrialised city whose activity depends mainly on military order, the service sector represents 75% of the economic activity. The importance of the service sector is still increasing while industrialised activity is decaying, explaining the unchanged rate of working-class in Brest. Brest also hosts headquarters for many subsidiaries like the banking group Ark\u00e9a. Research and conception is taking an increasing importance. Brest claims to be the largest European centre for sciences and techniques linked to the sea: 60% of the French research in the maritime field is based in Brest.\nBrest has a vast program, combining a restructuring of the city, up to 2025.\nAdministration.\nThe H\u00f4tel de Ville (City Hall) was officially opened in 1961.\nBreton language.\nBreton is not commonly spoken in the city of Brest, which was the only French-speaking city in western Brittany before the 1789 French Revolution, despite the surrounding countryside being fully Breton-speaking at that time. Like other French minority languages, Breton does not have any official language status in France.\nThe municipality launched a linguistic plan to revive Breton as a language through \"Ya d'ar brezhoneg\" on 16 June 2006. In 2008, 1.94% of primary-school children attended French-Breton bilingual Diwan schools. Besides bilingual schools, the Breton language is also taught in some schools and universities.\nThe association \"Sked\" federates all Breton cultural activities.\nCulture.\nThe city is host to several events to celebrate its long maritime history. The largest of these is held every four years, when the town organises a tall ship meeting. The last such tall ship event was \"Les Tonnerres de Brest 2016\". Due to the COVID-19 pandemic the next event is planned for 2022.\nBrest also hosts an annual short film festival called \"Brest European Short Film Festival\". The city was the setting for the 1982 art film \"Querelle\", directed by Rainer Werner Fassbinder, itself based on the 1947 novel \"Querelle de Brest\" by Jean Genet.\nCuisine.\nBrittany's most famous local delicacy, the Breton cr\u00eape, is the main culinary feature apart from seafood. There are many cr\u00eape restaurants (called \"cr\u00eaperies\"). Breton apple cider is often featured.\nTraditional biscuits include \"Traou Mad\", which is a full-fat butter biscuit similar to Scottish shortbread.\nSport.\nBrest has held the Grands D\u00e9parts of the Tour de France on three occasions, in 1952, 1974 and 2008. The 2021 Tour de France started from Brest on 26 June 2021. Stage 6 of the 2018 Tour de France departed from Brest. Since 1901, Brest has served as the midpoint for the bicycle endurance event, Paris\u2013Brest\u2013Paris.\nBrest is home to Stade Brestois 29 (commonly known as \"Brest\"), a football team in Ligue 1, the top tier of the French football league system. Brest made their debut in European competitions in the 2024/2025 UCL season, after achieving a third-place finish in Ligue 1 a year earlier.\nBrest is also home to Brest Albatros Hockey, an ice hockey team in Ligue Magnus, and won the league title in the 1996 and 1997.\nIn 2002 the Brest throwball team Brest LC reached the 1st division of French throwball but were subsequently relegated due to financial difficulty. The club has recently adopted an Irish influenced infrastructure.\nResearch and education.\nPrimarily the research centre of western Brittany, Brest and its surrounding area is the home of several research and elite educational establishments:\nNotable people.\nBrest was the birthplace of:\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nBrest is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendly relationship.\nBrest has an official friendly relationship (\"protocole d'amiti\u00e9\") with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57915", "revid": "3632083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57915", "title": "Verkhoyansk", "text": "Town in Sakha Republic, Russia\nVerkhoyansk (Russian: , ; ) is a town in Verkhoyansky District of the Sakha Republic, Russia, located on the Yana River in the Arctic Circle, from Batagay, the administrative center of the district, and north of Yakutsk, the capital of the Sakha republic. As of the 2010 Census, its population was\u00a01,311. Verkhoyansk holds the record for the hottest temperature ever recorded north of the Arctic Circle, with , and it also holds the record for the coldest temperature ever recorded in Asia, . The cold record is shared with Oymyakon.\nHistory.\nCossacks founded an ostrog in 1638, southwest of the modern town. The ostrog's name \"Verkhoyansky\", roughly translating from Russian as \"[thing/ostrog] on the Upper Yana\" (grammatically, it's only a masculine adjective), derived from its geographical location on the upper reaches of the Yana River. In 1775, it was moved to the left bank of the Yana River to facilitate tax collection. It was granted town status in 1817. Between the 1860s and 1917, the town was a place of political exile, with some of the more prominent exiles including the Polish writer Wac\u0142aw Sieroszewski, as well as Bolshevik revolutionaries Ivan Babushkin and Viktor Nogin.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nAs an inhabited locality, Verkhoyansk is classified as a town under district level jurisdiction. Within the framework of administrative divisions, it is incorporated within Verkhoyansky District as the Town of Verkhoyansk. As a municipal division, the Town of Verkhoyansk is incorporated within Verkhoyansky Municipal District as Verkhoyansk Urban Settlement.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nThere is a river port, an airport, a fur-collecting depot, and the center of a reindeer-raising area.\nGeography.\nVerkhoyansk gives its name to the Verkhoyansk Range, one of the main mountainous zones of the Eastern Siberian System. The town is located close to the northwestern edge of the Yana-Oymyakon Highlands, a cold and sparsely populated area.\nReligion.\nOrthodox Christianity is the most widely professed faith in Verkhoyansk, with a significant non-religious population. Shamanism and Aiyy Faith also have a presence in the town.\nClimate.\nWith an extreme subarctic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfd\", Trewartha climate classification \"Ecle\"), Verkhoyansk has extremely cold winter temperatures and some of the greatest temperature differences on Earth between summer and winter. Average monthly temperatures range from in January to in July. Mean monthly temperatures are below freezing from October through April and exceed from June through August, with the intervening months of May and September constituting very short transitional seasons. Located within the Arctic Circle, Verkhoyansk has an extreme subarctic climate rather than a tundra climate, dominated much of the year by high pressure. This has the effect of cutting off the region from warming influences in winter and together with a lack of cloud cover leads to extensive heat losses during the cooler months.\nVerkhoyansk is one of the places considered the northern Pole of Cold, the other being Oymyakon, located 629\u00a0km (391 miles) away. The lowest recorded temperature was , recorded on January 15, 1885, and both February 5 and 7, 1892. On 6 February 1933 however, the temperature at Oymyakon reached , just barely above Verkhoyansk's record. Only Greenland and Antarctica have recorded lower temperatures than Oymyakon or Verkhoyansk: the lowest directly recorded temperature at ground level is , recorded at the Vostok Station in Antarctica on 21 July 1983, and a temperature of was recorded via satellite observations at the East Antarctic Plateau in Antarctica on 10 August 2010. The World Meteorological Organization has recently recognized a temperature of measured in Greenland on 22 December 1991 as the lowest in the Northern Hemisphere. The record was measured at an automatic weather station and was uncovered after nearly 30 years.\nIn this area, temperature inversions consistently form in winter due to the extremely cold and dense air of the Siberian High pooling in deep hollows, so that temperatures increase rather than decrease with higher altitude. In Verkhoyansk it sometimes happens that the average minimum temperatures for January, February, and December are below .\nIn its short summer, daytime temperatures over are not uncommon. The average annual temperature for Verkhoyansk is . On 20 June 2020 Verkhoyansk recorded a temperature of , yielding a temperature range of based on reliable records, making it the largest temperature range in the world. It was also the highest temperature above the Arctic Circle ever recorded. Only a handful of towns in Siberia and Canada have temperature ranges of or more, and Verkhoyansk is the only place on earth with a temperature range of or higher. Verkhoyansk has never recorded a temperature above freezing between November\u00a010 and March\u00a014.\nVerkhoyansk has an extreme latitude temperature anomaly when compared with R\u00f8st off the coastline of Norway. Both settlements are on 67\u00b0N and almost on the same latitudal decimal. In spite of this, R\u00f8st is on average more than milder during winter. In summer and particularly during July, on the other hand, Verkhoyansk is significantly warmer than its Norwegian counterpart.\nVerkhoyansk has a dry climate with little rainfall or snowfall; the average annual precipitation is . Although no month can be described as truly wet, there are strong seasonal differences in precipitation, with the summer being much wetter than the winter; because the driest month (April) is in the \"summer\" and has less than one-third the precipitation of the wettest \"winter\" month (October), Verkhoyansk's climate technically qualifies as K\u00f6ppen \"Dsd\", a classification found only in parts of eastern Siberia. The dryness experienced in winter is largely due to the dominance of high pressure at this time of year.\nFinally, Verkhoyansk has very low seasonal lag, with December being colder than February, and June warmer than August. This is similar to Patagonia in the Southern Hemisphere, where June is the coldest month in many areas.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57916", "revid": "50917981", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57916", "title": "Antigone", "text": "Daughter of Oedipus in Greek mythology\nIn Greek mythology, Antigone ( ; ) was a Theban princess and a character in several ancient Greek tragedies. She was the daughter of Oedipus, king of Thebes; her mother/grandmother was either Jocasta or, in another variation of the myth, Euryganeia. She was the sister of Polynices, Eteocles, and Ismene.\nAntigone appears in three 5th century BC tragic plays written by Sophocles, known collectively as the three Theban plays, with her being the protagonist of the eponymous tragedy \"Antigone\". She makes a brief appearance at the end of Aeschylus' \"Seven against Thebes\", and her story was also the subject of Euripides' now lost play of the same name.\nIn Sophocles.\nThe story of Antigone was addressed by the fifth-century BC Greek playwright Sophocles in his Theban plays:\n\"Oedipus Rex\".\nAntigone and her sister Ismene are seen at the end of \"Oedipus Rex\" as Oedipus laments the \"shame\" and \"sorrow\" he is leaving his daughters to. He then begs Creon to watch over them, but in his grief reaches to take them with him as he is led away. Creon prevents him from taking the girls out of the city with him. Neither of them is named in the play.\n\"Oedipus at Colonus\".\nAntigone serves as her father's guide in \"Oedipus at Colonus\", as she leads him into the city where the play takes place. Antigone resembles her father in her stubbornness and doomed existence. She stays with her father for most of the play, until she is taken away by Creon in an attempt to blackmail Oedipus into returning to Thebes. However, Theseus defends Oedipus and rescues both Antigone and her sister who was also taken prisoner.\nAt the end of the play, both Antigone and her sister mourn the death of their father. Theseus offers them the comfort of knowing that Oedipus has received a proper burial, but by his wishes, they cannot go to the site. Antigone then decides to return to Thebes.\n\"Antigone\".\nIn her eponymous play, Antigone attempts to secure a respectable burial for her brother Polynices. Oedipus's sons, Eteocles and Polynices, had shared rule jointly until they quarreled, and Eteocles expelled his brother. In Sophocles' account, the two brothers agreed to alternate rule each year, but Eteocles decided not to share power with his brother after his tenure expired. Polynices left the kingdom, gathered an army and attacked the city of Thebes in the war of the Seven against Thebes. Both brothers were killed in the battle.\nKing Creon, who has ascended to the throne of Thebes after the death of the brothers, decrees that Polynices is not to be buried or even mourned, on pain of death by stoning. Antigone, Polynices' sister, defies the king's order and is caught.\nAntigone is brought before Creon, and admits that she knew of Creon's law forbidding mourning for Polynices but chose to break it, claiming the superiority of divine over human law, and she defies Creon's cruelty with courage, passion, and determination. Creon orders Antigone buried alive in a tomb. Although Creon has a change of heart, due to a visit from soothsayer Tiresias, and tries to release Antigone, he finds she has hanged herself. Creon's son Haemon, who was engaged to Antigone, kills himself with a knife, and his mother Queen Eurydice also kills herself in despair over her son's death. She had been forced to weave throughout the entire story, and her death alludes to The Fates. By her death Antigone ends up destroying the household of her adversary, Creon.\nOther representations.\nIn the oldest version of the story, the burial of Polynices takes place during Oedipus' reign in Thebes, before Oedipus marries his mother, Jocasta. However, in other versions such as Sophocles' tragedies \"Oedipus at Colonus\" and \"Antigone\", it occurs in the years after the banishment and death of Oedipus and Antigone's struggles against Creon.\n\"Seven Against Thebes\".\nAntigone appears briefly in Aeschylus' \"Seven Against Thebes.\"\nEuripides's Lost Play.\nThe dramatist Euripides also wrote a play called \"Antigone\", which is lost, but some of the text was preserved by later writers and in passages in his \"Phoenissae\". In Euripides, the calamity is averted by the intercession of Dionysus and is followed by the marriage of Antigone and H\u00e6mon. Antigone also plays a role in the Phoenissae.\nAppearances Elsewhere.\nDifferent elements of the legend appear in other places. The 4th century tragedian Astydamas wrote a play about Antigone that is now lost. A description of an ancient painting by Philostratus (\"Imagines\" ii. 29) refers to Antigone placing the body of Polynices on the funeral pyre, and this is also depicted on a sarcophagus in the Villa Doria Pamphili in Rome. And in Hyginus's version of the legend, apparently founded on a tragedy by a follower of Euripides, Antigone, on being handed over by Creon to her lover H\u00e6mon to be slain, is secretly carried off by him and concealed in a shepherd's hut, where she bears him a son, Maeon. When the boy grows up, he attends some funeral games at Thebes, and is recognized by the mark of a dragon on his body. This leads to the discovery that Antigone is still alive. The demi-god Heracles then intercedes and unsuccessfully pleads with Creon to forgive H\u00e6mon. H\u00e6mon then kills Antigone and himself. The intercession by Heracles is also represented on a painted vase (circa 380\u2013300 BC).\nCultural references.\nIn modern times, Antigone is invoked as a symbol of heroism. The character of 'Ani' in \"True Detective\" season 2 is named after Antigone.\nAdaptations.\nThe story of Antigone has been a popular subject for books, plays, and other works, including:\nAnalysis.\nIn the works of Hegel, in particular in his discussion of Sittlichkeit in his \"Phenomenology of Spirit\" and his \"Elements of the Philosophy of Right\", Antigone is figured as exposing a tragic rift between the so-called feminine \"Divine Law,\" which Antigone represents, and the \"Human Law,\" represented by Creon. \nThe Catholic philosopher Jacques Maritain considers Antigone as the \"heroine of the natural law:\"\nshe was aware of the fact that, in transgressing the human law and being crushed by it, she was obeying a higher commandment\u2014that she was obeying laws that were unwritten, and that had their origin neither today nor yesterday, but which live always and forever, and no one knows where they have come from.\nThe psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan writes about the ethical dimension of Antigone in his Seminar VII, \"The Ethics of Psychoanalysis.\" Others who have written on Antigone include theorist Judith Butler, in their book \"Antigone's Claim\", as well as philosopher Slavoj \u017di\u017eek, in various works, including \"Interrogating the Real\" (Bloomsbury: London, 2005) and \"The Metastases of Enjoyment\" (Verso: London, 1994).\nContemporary productions.\nA new translation of \"Antigone\" into English by the Canadian poet Anne Carson has been used in a production of the play (March 2015) at the Barbican directed by Ivo van Hove and featuring Juliette Binoche as Antigone. This production was broadcast as a TV movie on April 26, 2015. The play was transferred to the BAM Harvey Theatre at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, running from September 24 to October 4, 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57917", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57917", "title": "Synoptic Gospel", "text": ""}
{"id": "57918", "revid": "35443100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57918", "title": "Verkhoyansk Range", "text": "Mountain range in eastern Siberia, Russia\nThe Verkhoyansk Range (, \"Verhoyanskiy Khrebet\"; ) is a mountain range in the Sakha Republic, Russia, near the settlement of Verkhoyansk, known for its frigid climate. It is part of the East Siberian Mountains.\nThe range lies just west of the boundary of the Eurasian and the North American tectonic plates. The mountains were formed by folding, and represent an anticline.\nThe Verkhoyansk Range was covered by glaciers during the Last Glacial Period, and the mountains in the northern section, such as the Orulgan Range, display a typical Alpine relief.\nThere are coal, silver, lead, tin, and zinc deposits in the mountains.\nGeography.\nRising from the shores of the Buor-Khaya Gulf in the north, it runs southwards spanning roughly across Yakutia, east of the Central Yakutian Lowland, and west of the Chersky Range, reaching the Lena Plateau to the south and the Yudoma-Maya Highlands to the southeast. It forms a vast arc between the Lena and Aldan rivers to the west and the Yana River to the east. \nThe Verkhoyansk Range has a higher southeastern prolongation than the Suntar-Khayata Range, which is occasionally considered as a separate range system. Thus the highest point of the range in a restricted geographical sense is an unnamed peak in the Orulgan Range. The Ulakhan-Bom, highest point , Sette-Daban, highest point , and Skalisty Range (Rocky Range), highest point , are located at the southern end and were also considered separate ranges in classical geographic works. The two ranges were surveyed in 1934 by geologist Yuri Bilibin (1901\u20131952) together with mining engineer Evgeny Bobin (1897\u20131941) in the course of an expedition sent by the government of the Soviet Union. After conducting the first topographic survey of the area, Bilibin established that the Skalisty and Sette-Daban mountain chains belong to the Verkhoyansk Mountain System. Bilibin and Bobin also explored for the first time the Yudoma-Maya Highlands, located to the southeast of the Ulakhan-Bom/Sette-Daban/Skalisty ranges.\nSubranges.\nBesides the Orulgan, the system of the range comprises a number of subranges, as well as a plateau, including the following:\nHydrography.\nThe Verkhoyansk mountain system separates the basins of the Lena River to the west and southwest and the Omoloy and Yana to the east and northeast. It is deeply cut by riverine intermontane basins. Many right tributaries of the Lena flow westwards, having their sources in the range, including the Kyundyudey, Undyulyung, Begidyan, Sobolokh-Mayan, Menkere, Dzhardzhan, Uel-Siktyakh, Kuranakh-Siktyakh, Byosyuke, Tikyan, Dyanyshka, Lyapiske, Belyanka, Munni, Kele, Tukulan, Tumara, Nuora, and Baray, among others. To the northeast flow left tributaries of the Omoloy such as the Kuranakh-Yuryakh, Arga-Yuryakh, Bukhuruk, and Sietinde. The Tompo cuts across the range in its southern part, flowing from its source in the Suntar Khayata. The valley of the Aldan is located to the south, where the river makes a wide bend.\nFrom the eastern slopes flow the rivers Dulgalakh and Sartang, which form the river Yana further north, as well as its tributaries Bytantay, Nelgese, Derbeke, and Baky, among others. \nRivers in the mountainous areas are usually frozen between September and May.\nClimate and flora.\nThe world's lowest temperatures for inhabited places have been recorded in this region at Verkhoyansk () and Oymyakon (), and there is quite deep snow cover for most of the year.\nThe mountain range is home to an alpine tundra, supporting various species of mosses and lichens. Some sparsely-wooded forests of mainly larch and dwarf Siberian pine are found on smooth slopes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57919", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57919", "title": "Q Gospel", "text": ""}
{"id": "57920", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57920", "title": "Verkhoyansk, Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "57921", "revid": "49189014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57921", "title": "Desmond Llewelyn", "text": "Welsh actor (1914\u20131999)\nDesmond Wilkinson Llewelyn (; 12 September 1914 \u2013 19 December 1999) was a Welsh actor. He was best known for his role as Q in 17 of the \"James Bond\" films between 1963 and 1999.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nLlewelyn was born on 12 September 1914 at Blaen-y-Pant House in Bettws in Newport, the son of Mia (n\u00e9e Wilkinson) and Ivor Llewelyn. Desmond's father was a coal mining engineer, who notably purchased the first Bentley production automobile, a Bentley 3-litre from W. O. Bentley in 1921. His paternal grandfather, Llewelyn Llewelyn of Kings Hill, was the High Sheriff of Monmouthshire as well as General Manager of the Powell-Dyffryn Steam Coal Company.\nWhile Llewelyn originally wanted to be a minister, he became involved in theatrical productions during his education at Radley College. Initially working as a stagehand, he was encouraged to take on more acting roles by his fellow pupil Dennis Price. During his education, Llewelyn gained renown as a skilled sportsman, particularly as a rugby player and he remained a fan of the game throughout his life. The young Llewelyn would play rugby for Newport RFC and can be seen wearing the club tie in \"The Living Daylights\" as well as that of Malpas Cricket Club in \"Octopussy\".\nDespite the objections of his father, Llewelyn decided to pursue an acting career, and was accepted into the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in 1934. In 1937 Llewelyn found work with a number of small stage roles, working with Matthew Forsyth and the Forsyth Players, and it was through this company that Llewelyn met Pamela Mary Pantlin whom he married in 1938. The following year, Llewelyn appeared in his first feature film, the British comedy \"Ask a Policeman\".\nSecond World War.\nLlewelyn's nascent acting career was paused by the outbreak of war in 1939, when he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Royal Welsh Fusiliers. In 1940 his unit was engaged in fighting an entire Panzer division for several days near the French city of Lille, but they were overrun in attempting to retreat to Dunkirk, and Llewelyn was captured. He spent the remainder of the war in prisoner of war camps, first at Laufen, before he was transferred to Colditz Castle (Oflag IV-C) following his attempted escape from Laufen by tunnelling out. Llewelyn remained imprisoned at Colditz until it was liberated by Allied forces in 1945.\nActing career.\nAfter the war, Llewelyn continued his career as an actor, returning to television work in Sir Robert Atkins' 1946 film of \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\". He also acted on stage with Laurence Olivier and Vivien Leigh, before appearing in Olivier's 1948 film \"Hamlet\". Llewelyn continued to gain work in television, notably portraying Mr Hyde in \"The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\", as well as roles in TV series \"My Wife Jacqueline\", \"The Adventures of Robin Hood\" and \"The Invisible Man\".\nIn 1950, Llewelyn drew on both his war experience and Welsh background to play a supporting role as \"'77 Jones\" a Welsh tank commander in the film \"They Were Not Divided\" directed by Terence Young. Throughout the 1950s Llewelyn appeared in a number of small roles in films such as \"The Lavender Hill Mob\", \"Valley of Song\", \"A Night to Remember\", \"Knights of the Round Table\", \"Sword of Sherwood Forest\", and he appeared in the 1961 Hammer Horror film \"The Curse of the Werewolf\".\n\"James Bond\" series.\nIn 1963, Terence Young asked Llewelyn to read for the part of Quartermaster Major Boothroyd in \"From Russia with Love\", the second release in the official Bond film series. Both Young and Ian Fleming wanted 'Q' to be portrayed as a Welshman with a strong Welsh accent, and Young had Llewelyn use a broad South Wales accent in \"They Were Not Divided\". Llewelyn fought against the idea suggesting that such a character would never have been allowed to rise to the rank of Major in the British service. Llewelyn persuaded them that the character should have an upper-class English accent, with Llewelyn later stating that he played him as a \"toffee nosed Englishman ever since\".\nLlewelyn would go on to become a staple of the film series for over thirty years, appearing in all but one EON-produced Bond film during his lifetime (the exception being 1973's \"Live and Let Die\", in which 'Q' does not appear). In total, Llewelyn played 'Q' in seventeen films, appearing in more Bond films than any other actor and playing opposite each of the first five Bond actors: Sir Sean Connery, George Lazenby, Sir Roger Moore, Timothy Dalton, and Pierce Brosnan.\nIn 1967, Llewelyn portrayed 'Q' alongside Lois Maxwell's Miss Moneypenny in an EON-produced television documentary entitled \"Welcome to Japan, Mr. Bond\". This promotional film was included in the 2006 Special Edition DVD release of \"You Only Live Twice\".\nHis last appearance as 'Q' before his death was in \"The World Is Not Enough\" in 1999. During his briefing of 007 in the film, Q introduces John Cleese's character, R, as his heir presumptive, and the film alludes to Q's retirement, to which Bond, after seeing Q, expresses his hope that it will not be any time soon. Q's response is to admonish Bond to \"always have an escape plan\", after which he lowers himself through the floor of his lab. Llewelyn had stated not long before his death that he had no plans to retire and that he would continue playing Q \"as long as the producers want me and the Almighty doesn't.\"\nThe part of 'Q' would make Llewelyn immensely popular among Bond fans and one of British cinema's most recognisable character actors. As such, Llewelyn would front a number of Bond related commercials, including two promotions for the video games \"GoldenEye 007\" and \"Tomorrow Never Dies\".\nOther roles.\nLlewellyn continued to act in other roles throughout his tenure as 'Q', notably appearing the 1963 film \"Cleopatra\" (as a Roman senator), and the 1981 PBS production of \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\", and he had a small role in the musical \"Chitty Chitty Bang Bang\" (1968), which was itself based on a children's book by Bond author Ian Fleming. Llewelyn would also appear as Geoffrey Maddocks ('The Colonel') in the British television series \"Follyfoot\" from 1971 to 1973, and the BBC Wales production \"The Life and Times of David Lloyd George\" with Philip Madoc.\nThe Bond film \"Live and Let Die\" was filmed during the third series of \"Follyfoot\", and Llewelyn was written out of the series for three episodes so he could appear in the film. However, the Bond producers ultimately decided to leave the character out of the film anyway, much to Llewelyn's annoyance.\nHe was the subject of \"This Is Your Life\" in 1995 when he was surprised by Michael Aspel at London's Hyde Park Hotel, during a press launch for the new Bond film, \"GoldenEye\".\nPersonal life.\nLlewelyn married Pamela Mary Pantlin in Kensington in May 1938. The couple had two sons, Charles Ivor (b. 1949) and Justin Cather (1953\u20132012). Despite playing an inventor in the Bond films, Llewelyn always maintained that he was totally lost in the world of technology, a trait that also plagued his successors, John Cleese and Ben Whishaw. A biography entitled \"\" was written by Sandy Hernu, and it was subsequently released on 1 November 1999.\nDeath.\nOn 19 December 1999, Llewelyn was driving alone from a book signing event when his Renault M\u00e9gane collided head-on with a Fiat Bravo on the A27 near the village of Berwick, East Sussex. Llewelyn sustained massive internal injuries and was airlifted by helicopter to Eastbourne District General Hospital, where he died soon afterward at the age of 85. The driver of the Fiat, a 35-year-old man, was seriously injured but survived; a woman in her thirties was also in the Fiat and suffered minor injuries. An inquest recorded a verdict of accidental death. \nLlewelyn's death occurred three weeks after the premiere of \"The World Is Not Enough\". Roger Moore, who starred with Llewelyn in six of his seven \"Bond\" films, spoke at his funeral on 6 January 2000 at St Mary the Virgin Church in Battle, Sussex. The service was followed by a private cremation at Hastings Crematorium, with the ashes given to Llewelyn's family.\nHis widow, Pamela Mary Llewelyn, died in East Sussex in 2001, also aged 85. His son, Justin Llewelyn, died in 2012, aged 59.\nSelected filmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther appearances.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57922", "revid": "15952059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57922", "title": "Desmond Llewellyn", "text": ""}
{"id": "57925", "revid": "27923878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57925", "title": "Pituitary gland", "text": "Endocrine gland of the brain\nThe pituitary gland or hypophysis is an endocrine gland in vertebrates. In humans, the pituitary gland is located at the base of the brain, protruding off the bottom of the hypothalamus. The pituitary gland and the hypothalamus control much of the body's endocrine system. It is seated in part of the sella turcica, a depression in the sphenoid bone, known as the hypophyseal fossa. The human pituitary gland is oval shaped, about 1 cm in diameter, in weight on average, and about the size of a kidney bean.\nThere are two main lobes of the pituitary, an anterior lobe, and a posterior lobe joined and separated by a small intermediate lobe. The anterior lobe (adenohypophysis) is the glandular part that produces and secretes several hormones. The posterior lobe (neurohypophysis) secretes neurohypophysial hormones produced in the hypothalamus. Both lobes have different origins and they are both controlled by the hypothalamus. \nHormones secreted from the pituitary gland help to control growth, blood pressure, energy management, all functions of the sex organs, thyroid gland, metabolism, as well as some aspects of pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding, water/salt concentration at the kidneys, temperature regulation, and pain relief.\nStructure.\nIn humans, the pituitary gland rests upon the hypophyseal fossa of the sphenoid bone, in the center of the middle cranial fossa. It sits in a protective bony enclosure called the sella turcica, covered by a fold of dura mater known as the diaphragma sellae. \nThe pituitary gland is composed of the anterior pituitary, the posterior pituitary, and an intermediate lobe that joins them. The intermediate lobe is avascular and almost absent in humans, but in many other animals, it is distinct. The intermediate lobe in rats and mice have been extensively studied for the development of the pituitary and its functions. In all animals, the fleshy, glandular anterior pituitary is distinct from the neural composition of the posterior pituitary, which is an extension of the hypothalamus.\nThe height of the pituitary gland ranges from 5.3 to 7.0 mm. The volume of the pituitary gland ranges from 200 to 440\u00a0mm3. Its most common shape, found in 46% of people is flat, it is convex in 31.2% and concave in 22.8%.\nAnterior.\nThe anterior pituitary lobe (adenohypophysis) arises from an evagination of the oral ectoderm (Rathke's pouch). This contrasts with the posterior pituitary, which originates from neuroectoderm.\nEndocrine cells of the anterior pituitary are controlled by regulatory hormones released by parvocellular neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamic capillaries leading to infundibular blood vessels, which in turn lead to a second capillary bed in the anterior pituitary. This vascular relationship constitutes the hypophyseal portal system. Diffusing out of the second capillary bed, the hypothalamic releasing hormones then bind to anterior pituitary endocrine cells, upregulating or downregulating their release of hormones.\nThe anterior lobe of the pituitary can be divided into the pars tuberalis (pars infundibularis) and pars distalis (pars glandularis) that constitutes ~80% of the gland. The pars intermedia (the intermediate lobe) lies between the pars distalis and the pars tuberalis, and is rudimentary in the human, although in other species it is more developed. It develops from a depression in the dorsal wall of the pharynx (stomal part) known as Rathke's pouch.\nThe anterior pituitary contains several different types of cells that synthesize and secrete hormones. Usually there is one type of cell for each major hormone formed in the anterior pituitary. At least five different cell types can be differentiated using various stains.\nPosterior.\nThe posterior pituitary consists of the posterior lobe and the pituitary stalk (infundibulum) that connects it to the hypothalamus. It develops as an extension of the hypothalamus, from the floor of the third ventricle. The posterior pituitary hormones are synthesized by cell bodies in the hypothalamus. The magnocellular neurosecretory cells, of the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei located in the hypothalamus, project axons down the infundibulum to terminals in the posterior pituitary. This simple arrangement differs sharply from that of the adjacent anterior pituitary, which does not develop from the hypothalamus.\nThe release of pituitary hormones by both the anterior and posterior lobes is under the control of the hypothalamus, albeit in different ways.\nFunction.\nThe anterior pituitary regulates several physiological processes by secreting hormones. This includes stress (by secreting ACTH), growth (by secreting GH), reproduction (by secreting FSH and LH), metabolism rate (by secreting TSH) and lactation (by secreting prolactin). The intermediate lobe synthesizes and secretes melanocyte-stimulating hormone. The posterior pituitary (or neurohypophysis) is a lobe of the gland that is functionally connected to the hypothalamus by the median eminence via a small tube called the pituitary stalk (also called the infundibular stalk or the infundibulum). It regulates hydroelectrolytic stability (by secreting ADH), uterine contraction during labor and human attachment (by secreting oxytocin).\nAnterior.\nThe anterior pituitary synthesizes and secretes hormones. All releasing hormones (-RH) referred to can also be referred to as releasing factors (-RF).\nSomatotropes:\nCorticotropes:\nThyrotropes:\nGonadotropes:\nLactotropes:\nThese hormones are released from the anterior pituitary under the influence of the hypothalamus. Hypothalamic hormones are secreted to the anterior lobe by way of a special capillary system, called the hypothalamic-hypophysial portal system.\nThere is also a non-endocrine cell population called folliculostellate cells.\nPosterior.\nThe posterior pituitary stores and secretes (but does not synthesize) the following important endocrine hormones:\nMagnocellular neurons:\nHormones.\nHormones secreted from the pituitary gland help control the following body processes:\nDevelopment.\nThe development of the pituitary gland is a complex process that occurs early in the organogenesis stage of embryonic development. It begins as a thickening of cells \nin the embryonic ectoderm that form a neurogenic cranial placode, the hypophyseal placode or adenohypophyseal placode, that in the fourth week of gestational age, gives rise to Rathke's pouch. Rathke's pouch is the ectodermal outpocketing from the roof of the developing mouth, and gives rise to the anterior pituitary.\nA downward extension from the neuroectoderm as the infundibulum, forms the posterior pituitary.\nDifferentiation and migration takes place in weeks 5 and 6. Rathke's pouch grows towards the developing brain. The upper part of the pouch eventually constricts and detaches from the oral cavity, and cells in Rathke's pouch differentiate to form three parts of the adenohypophysis: the pars distalis, pars intermedia, and pars tuberalis.\nIn weeks 4 to 8 the posterior pituitary is formed. The infundibulum from the diencephalon elongates downward, forming a stalk that connects with Rathke\u2019s pouch. This stalk will develop into the posterior pituitary where specialized cells from the hypothalamus, known as pituicytes, migrate to help store and release hormones such as oxytocin and vasopressin.\nFrom week 12 to week 16, the anterior pituitary starts to produce hormones, notably growth hormone and around the 12th to 16th week of gestation, the anterior pituitary begins producing hormones like growth hormone (GH), and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), essential for fetal development.\nBy the end of the first trimester the pituitary gland is completely formed remaining connected to the hypothalamus by the pituitary stalk (infundibulum), allowing the integration of signals from the brain and regulation of various endocrine functions.\nThis dual-origin structure and function are what make the pituitary gland a unique and critical component of the endocrine system, acting as a bridge between the nervous and endocrine systems. \nPituitary stem cells can differentiate into different types of hormone-producing cells, with a great number specialising as gonadotropes.\nClinical significance.\nSome of the diseases involving the pituitary gland are:\nAll of the functions of the pituitary gland can be adversely affected by an over- or under-production of associated hormones.\nThe pituitary gland is important for mediating the stress response, via the hypothalamic\u2013pituitary\u2013adrenal axis (HPA axis). Critically, pituitary gland growth during adolescence can be altered by early life stress such as childhood maltreatment or maternal dysphoric (depressive) behavior.\nIt has been demonstrated that, after controlling for age, sex, and BMI, larger quantities of DHEA and DHEA-S tended to be linked to larger pituitary volume. Additionally, a correlation between pituitary gland volume and social anxiety subscale scores was identified which provided a basis for exploring mediation. Again controlling for age, sex, and BMI, DHEA and DHEA-S have been found to be predictive of larger pituitary gland volume, which was also associated with increased ratings of social anxiety. This research provides evidence that pituitary gland volume mediates the link between higher DHEA(S) levels (associated with relatively early adrenarche) and traits associated with social anxiety. Children who experience early adrenarcheal development tend to have larger pituitary gland volume compared to children with later adrenarcheal development.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nPituitary gland.\nThe Greek physician Galen referred to the pituitary gland by only using the (Ancient Greek) name , \"gland\". He described the pituitary gland as part of a series of secretory organs for the excretion of nasal mucus. Anatomist Andreas Vesalius translated with \"glans, in quam pituita destillat\", \"gland in which slime (\"pituita\") drips\". Besides this 'descriptive' name, Vesalius used \"glandula pituitaria\", from which the English name \"pituitary gland\" is ultimately derived.\nThe expression \"glandula pituitaria\" is still used as official synonym beside \"hypophysis\" in the official Latin nomenclature \"Terminologia Anatomica\". In the seventeenth century the supposed function of the pituitary gland to produce nasal mucus was debunked. The expression \"glandula pituitaria\" and its English equivalent \"pituitary gland\" can only be justified from a historical point of view. The inclusion of this synonym is merely justified by noting that the main term \"hypophysis\" is a much less popular term.\nHypophysis.\nNote: \"hypophysial\" (or \"hypophyseal\") means \"related to the hypophysis (pituitary gland)\".\nThe German anatomist Samuel Thomas von S\u00f6mmerring coined the name \"hypophysis\". This name consists of \u1f51\u03c0\u03cc ('under') and \u03c6\u03cd\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd ('to grow'). In later Greek \u1f51\u03c0\u03cc\u03c6\u03c5\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 is used differently by Greek physicians as \"outgrowth\". S\u00f6mmering also used the equivalent expression \"appendix cerebri\", with \"appendix\" as \"appendage\". In various languages, in German and in Dutch, the terms are derived from \"appendix cerebri\".\nOther animals.\nThe pituitary gland is found in all vertebrates, but its structure varies among different groups.\nThe division of the pituitary described above is typical of mammals, and is also true, to varying degrees, of all tetrapods. However, only in mammals does the posterior pituitary have a compact shape. In lungfish, it is a relatively flat sheet of tissue lying above the anterior pituitary, but in amphibians, reptiles, and birds, it becomes increasingly well developed. The intermediate lobe is, in general, not well developed in any species and is entirely absent in birds.\nThe structure of the pituitary in fish, apart from the lungfish, is generally different from that in other animals. In general, the intermediate lobe tends to be well developed, and may equal the remainder of the anterior pituitary in size. The posterior lobe typically forms a sheet of tissue at the base of the pituitary stalk, and in most cases sends irregular finger-like projection into the tissue of the anterior pituitary, which lies directly beneath it. The anterior pituitary is typically divided into two regions, a more anterior \"rostral\" portion and a posterior \"proximal\" portion, but the boundary between the two is often not clearly marked. In elasmobranchs, there is an additional, \"ventral lobe\" beneath the anterior pituitary proper.\nThe arrangement in lampreys, which are among the most primitive of all fish, may indicate how the pituitary originally evolved in ancestral vertebrates. Here, the posterior pituitary is a simple flat sheet of tissue at the base of the brain, and there is no pituitary stalk. Rathke's pouch remains open to the outside, close to the nasal openings. Closely associated with the pouch are three distinct clusters of glandular tissue, corresponding to the intermediate lobe, and the rostral and proximal portions of the anterior pituitary. These various parts are separated by meningial membranes, suggesting that the pituitary of other vertebrates may have formed from the fusion of a pair of separate, but associated, glands.\nMost armadillos also possess a neural secretory gland very similar in form to the posterior pituitary, but located in the tail and associated with the spinal cord. This may have a function in osmoregulation.\nThere is a structure analogous to the pituitary in the octopus brain.\nIntermediate lobe.\nAlthough rudimentary in humans (and often considered part of the anterior pituitary), the intermediate lobe located between the anterior and posterior pituitary is important to many animals. For instance, in fish, it is believed to control physiological color change. In adult humans, it is just a thin layer of cells between the anterior and posterior pituitary. The intermediate lobe produces melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), although this function is often (imprecisely) attributed to the anterior pituitary.\nThe intermediate lobe is, in general, not well developed in tetrapods, and is entirely absent in birds.\n* Melanotroph\n* Acidophil cell\n* Basophil cell\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57927", "revid": "1316713483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57927", "title": "Sea of Okhotsk", "text": "Marginal sea of the Pacific Ocean\nThe Sea of Okhotsk is a marginal sea of the northwestern Pacific Ocean. It is located between Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula on the east, the Kuril Islands on the southeast, Japan's island of Hokkaido on the south, the island of Sakhalin along the west, and a stretch of eastern Siberian coast along the west and north. Its northeast corner is the Shelikhov Gulf. The sea is named for the port of Okhotsk, itself named for the Okhota River.\nGeography.\nThe Sea of Okhotsk covers an area of , with a mean depth of and a maximum depth of . It is connected to the Sea of Japan on either side of Sakhalin: on the west through the Sakhalin Gulf and the Gulf of Tartary; on the south through the La P\u00e9rouse Strait.\nIn winter, navigation on the Sea of Okhotsk is impeded by ice floes. Ice floes form due to the large amount of freshwater from the Amur River, lowering the salinity of upper levels, often raising the freezing point of the sea surface. The distribution and thickness of ice floes depend on many factors: the location, the time of year, water currents, and the sea temperatures.\nCold air from Siberia forms sea ice in the northwestern Sea of Okhotsk. As the ice forms, it expels salt into the deeper layers. This heavy water flows east toward the Pacific, carrying oxygen and nutrients, supporting abundant sea life. The Sea of Okhotsk has warmed in some places by as much as 3\u00b0C (5.4\u00b0F) since preindustrial times, three times faster than the global mean. Warming inhibits the formation of sea ice and also drives fish populations north. The salmon catch on the northern Japanese coast has fallen 70% in the last 15 years, while the Russian chum salmon catch has quadrupled.\nWith the exception of Hokkaido, one of the Japanese home islands, the sea is surrounded on all sides by territory administered by the Russian Federation. South Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands were administered by Japan until 1945. Japan claims the southern Kuril Islands and refers to them as Northern Territories.\nExtent.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Sea of Okhotsk as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;::\"On the Southwest.\" The Northeastern and Northern limits on the Japan Sea [In La Perouse Strait (S\u00f4ya Kaiky\u00f4). A line joining S\u00f4ni Misaki and Nishi Notoro Misaki (45\u00b055'N). From Cape Tuik (51\u00b045'N) to Cape Sushcheva].\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;::\"On the Southeast.\" A line running from Nosyappu Saki (Cape Noshap, 43\u00b023'N) in the Island of Hokusy\u00fb (Yezo) through the Kuril or Tisima Islands to Cape Lopatka (South point of Kamchatka) in such a way that all the narrow waters between Hokusy\u00fb and Kamchatka are included in the Sea of Okhotsk.\nIslands.\nSome of the Sea of Okhotsk's islands are quite large, including Japan's second-largest island, Hokkaido, as well as Russia's largest island, Sakhalin. Practically all of the sea's islands are either in coastal waters (such as the Shantar Islands) or belong to the various islands making up the Kuril Islands chain. These fall either under undisputed Japanese or Russian ownership or disputed ownership between Japan and Russia. Iony Island is the only island located in open waters and belongs to the Khabarovsk Krai of the Russian Federation. \nThe majority of the sea's islands are uninhabited, making them ideal breeding grounds for seals, sea lions, seabirds, and other sea island fauna. Large colonies of crested auklets use the Sea of Okhotsk as a nesting site.\nHistory.\nPre-modern.\nThe Okhotsk culture and the later Ainu people, a coastal fishing and hunter-gatherer people, were located around the lands surrounding the Sea of Okhotsk, as well as in northern Japan.\nEuropean exploration and settlement.\nRussian explorers Vassili Poyarkov (1639) and Ivan Moskvitin (1645) were the first Europeans to visit the Sea of Okhotsk, and probably the island of Sakhalin in the 1640s. The Dutch captain Maarten Gerritsz Vries in the \"Breskens\" entered the Sea of Okhotsk from the south-east in 1643, and charted parts of the Sakhalin coast and Kuril Islands, but failed to realize that either Sakhalin or Hokkaido are islands. During this period, the sea was sometimes known as the Sea of Kamchatka.\nThe first and foremost Russian settlement on the shore was the port of Okhotsk, which relinquished commercial supremacy to Ayan in the 1840s. The Russian-American Company all but monopolized the commercial navigation of the sea in the first half of the 19th century.\nThe Second Kamchatka Expedition under Vitus Bering systematically mapped the entire coast of the sea, starting in 1733. Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse and William Robert Broughton were the first non-Russian European navigators known to have passed through these waters other than Vries. Ivan Krusenstern explored the eastern coast of Sakhalin in 1805. Mamiya Rinz\u014d and Gennady Nevelskoy determined that Sakhalin was indeed an island separated from the mainland by a narrow strait. The first detailed summary of the hydrology of the Sea of Okhotsk was prepared and published by Stepan Makarov in 1894.\nFishing.\nThe Sea of Okhotsk is rich in biological resources, with various kinds of fish, shellfish and crabs.\nThe harsh conditions of crab fishing in the Sea of Okhotsk are the subject of the most famous novel of the Japanese writer Takiji Kobayashi, \"The Crab Cannery Ship\" (1929).\nThe Peanut Hole.\nThe Peanut Hole (named for its shape) is an area of open ocean at the center of the Sea of Okhotsk, about wide and long, surrounded by Russia's exclusive economic zone (EEZ). Since the Peanut Hole is not in the Russian EEZ, any country could fish there, and some began doing so in large numbers in 1991, catching perhaps as much as one million metric tons of pollock in 1992. This was seen by the Russian Federation as presenting a danger to Russian fish stocks, since the fish move in and out of the Peanut Hole from the Russian EEZ.\nThe Russian Federation petitioned the United Nations to declare the Peanut Hole to be part of Russia's continental shelf. In November 2013, a United Nations subcommittee accepted the Russian argument, and in March 2014 the full United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf ruled in favor of the Russian Federation.\nWhaling.\nBowhead whales were first caught in 1847, and dominated the catch between 1852 and the late 1860s. Between 1850 and 1853 the majority of the fleet went to the Bering Strait region to hunt bowheads, but intense competition, poor ice conditions, and declining catches forced the fleet back to the Sea of Okhotsk. From 1854 to 1856, an average of over 160 vessels cruised in the sea each year. As catches declined between 1858 and 1860 the fleet shifted back to the Bering Strait region.\nThe Russian military marine mammal program reportedly sources some of its animals from the Sea of Okhotsk.\nModern.\nSouth Sakhalin was administered by Japan as Karafuto Prefecture from 1907 to 1949. The Kuril Islands were Japanese from 1855 and 1875 till the end of World War II in 1945. Afterward, the Soviet Union occupied the territory.\nDuring the Cold War, the Sea of Okhotsk was the scene of several successful U.S. Navy operations (including Operation Ivy Bells) to tap Soviet Navy undersea communications cables. These operations were documented in the 1998 book \"\". The sea (and surrounding area) were also the scene of the Soviet attack on Korean Air Lines Flight 007 in 1983. The Soviet Pacific Fleet used the sea as a ballistic missile submarine bastion, a strategy that Russia continues.\nDespite its proximity to Japan, the Sea of Okhotsk has no native etymology in the Japanese language; its name, ' ('), is a transcription of the Russian name. This is also reflected in the name of Hokkaido's Okhotsk Subprefecture, which faces the Sea of Okhotsk and is also known as the .\nOil and gas exploration.\nTwenty-nine zones of possible oil and gas accumulation have been identified on the Sea of Okhotsk shelf, which runs along the coast. Total reserves are estimated at 3.5 billion tons of equivalent fuel, including 1.2 billion tons of oil and 1.5 billion cubic meters of gas.\nOn 18 December 2011, the Russian oil drilling rig \"Kolskaya\" capsized and sank in a storm in the Sea of Okhotsk, some from Sakhalin island, where it was being towed from Kamchatka. Reportedly, its pumps failed, causing it to take on water and sink. The platform carried 67 people, of which 14 were rescued by the \"Magadan\" and the tugboat \"Natftogaz-55\". The platform was subcontracted to a company working for the Russian energy giant Gazprom.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57928", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57928", "title": "Fritz Walter", "text": "German footballer (1920\u20132002)\nFriedrich \"Fritz\" Walter (; 31 October 1920 \u2013 17 June 2002) was a German footballer who spent his entire senior career at 1. FC Kaiserslautern. He usually played as an attacking midfielder or inside forward. In his time with the Germany and West Germany national teams, he appeared in 61 games and scored 33 goals, and was the captain of the team that won the 1954 FIFA World Cup. After his career, he was named honorary captain of the Germany national team.\nLife and career.\nEarly club career.\nBorn on 31 October 1920, Walter was exposed to football early with his parents, Ludwig (1894\u20131976) and Dorothea Walter (n\u00e9e Kieburg; 1896\u20131978), working at the 1. FC Kaiserslautern club restaurant. By 1928 he had joined the Kaiserslautern youth academy, and he made his first team debut at 17, continuing an association with the club that would be his only professional club.\nInternational pro teams had repeatedly offered him hefty sums, but with support from his wife always declined in order to stay at home, to play for his home town, the national team and \"Chef\" (German for \"Boss\") Herberger.\nInternational debut.\nWalter debuted with the Germany national team in 1940 under Sepp Herberger, and scored a hat-trick against Romania.\nWar.\nWalter was drafted into the armed forces in 1942. However, the end of the war found 24-year-old Walter in a Prisoner of War camp in Maramures in which he played with Hungarian and Slovakian guards. When the Soviets arrived they generally took all German prisoners back to Gulags in the Soviet Union. One of the Hungarian prison guards had seen Walter playing for Germany, and told them that Fritz was not German but from the Saar Protectorate. Walter would later call the match in question as the most important of his life as it spared him and his brother from a gulag sentence.\nReturn to Germany.\nUpon his return in 1945, Walter, who by now suffered from malaria, again played for Kaiserslautern, leading them to German championships in 1951 and 1953. Walter coached VfR Kaiserslautern during the 1948\u201349 season and helped them win the 1948\u201349 Westpf\u00e4lzischen Amateurliga. Sepp Herberger recalled Walter to the national team in 1951, and he was named captain.\nHe was captain of the West German team that won their first World Cup in 1954, beating Hungary. He and his brother, Ottmar Walter, became the first brothers to play in a World Cup winning team.\nIn 1956, after the crackdown by the Soviets of the Hungarian Uprising, the Hungarian football team were caught away from home, and for two years, Fritz managed their games and provided the financial backing and in small measure, paid them back for having saved him from deportation to the Soviet Union. Walter received his last cap during the semi-final against Sweden in the 1958 World Cup, suffering an injury which ended his international career, and he retired from football in 1959.\nLater life and legacy.\nThe home stadium of 1. FC Kaiserslautern was renamed the Fritz-Walter-Stadion in 1985.\nFritz Walter was named an honorary captain of the German football squad in 1958. The other five are Uwe Seeler, Franz Beckenbauer, Lothar Matth\u00e4us, Bettina Wiegmann and J\u00fcrgen Klinsmann.\nWalter died in Enkenbach-Alsenborn on 17 June 2002, aged 81. It was his dream to see the World Cup 2006 in \"his\" town Kaiserslautern as the town had not been selected in the smaller tournament of 1974, but it was denied with his death. But on the fourth anniversary of his death on 17 June 2006, the United States played Italy in Kaiserslautern and a minute of silence was observed in his memory. Today people may visit the \"Fritz Walter Haus\" in the town of Enkenbach-Alsenborn approx. 20\u00a0km east of Kaiserslautern (first exit from Kaiserslautern on Bundesautobahn 6 direction Mannheim).\nIn November 2003, to celebrate UEFA's 50th anniversary, the German Football Association (DFB) selected him as its Golden Player of the past 50 years (from 1954 to 2003).\nDuring the eighties and nineties, there was another successful Bundesliga striker called \"Fritz Walter\", who mainly played for VfB Stuttgart. Although he had no relationship to the great Kaiserslautern captain, sports fans jokingly called him \"Fritz Walter junior\".\nIn 2005, the \"Fritz Walter Medal\", a series of annual awards which were established in his honour, and which are given by the German Football Association to youth footballers in Germany, was first awarded.\nPersonal life.\nWalter's wife of five decades was Italia Walter (n\u00e9e Bortoluzzi; 1922\u20132000), a woman from Belluno, Italy.\nIt was popular knowledge in Germany that Walter appeared to play better the worse the weather was, and so now the term \"Fritz Walter's weather\" is used to describe rainy weather conditions, often rendered with odd local dialect grammar \"of Fritz, his weather\". This is because he, as many other soldiers, had contracted malaria during the war, thus rendering him unable to stand the heat of the sun. The 1954 World Cup final was played in \"Fritz Walter's weather\" conditions.\nOn 6 October 1956, Walter scored a spectacular goal in Leipzig in front of 100,000 East Germans during a friendly against Wismut Aue, when he hit the ball back-heel while diving forward.\nSource:\n\"Scores and results list Germany's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Walter goal.\"\nHonours.\nClub.\n1. FC Kaiserslautern\nGerman football championship: 1950\u201351, 1952\u201353\nInternational.\nWest Germany\nFIFA World Cup: 1954\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57929", "revid": "1631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57929", "title": "Okhotskoe Sea", "text": ""}
{"id": "57930", "revid": "48852386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57930", "title": "Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky", "text": "City in Kamchatka Krai, Russia\nPetropavlovsk-Kamchatsky (, ) is a port city and the administrative center of Kamchatka Krai, Russia. It is located in the Far East of the country and lies along the coast of Avacha Bay by the Pacific Ocean, nearby Khalaktyrskoye Lake. As of the 2021 census, it had a population of 164,900.\nThe city is widely known simply as \"Petropavlovsk\" (literally \"city of Peter and Paul\"). The adjective \"Kamchatsky\" (\"Kamchatkan\") was added to the official name in 1924.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOrigins.\nCossack units visited the area from 1697. The explorer and navigator Captain Vitus Bering (a Danish-born Russian) is considered to have founded the city in 1740, although navigator Ivan Fomich Yelagin had laid the foundation a few months earlier. Bering reached Avacha Bay in late 1740 and in his capacity as the superior officer, named the new settlement \"Petropavlovsk\" (Peter and Paul) after his two ships, the \"Saint Peter\" and the \"Saint Paul\", which had been built in Okhotsk for his second expedition (1733\u201342). The town's location on the eastern coast of the Kamchatka Peninsula, on the sheltered Avacha Bay and at the mouth of the Avacha River, saw it develop to become the most important settlement in Kamchatka. It gained town status on April 9, 1812.\nCrimean War.\nDuring the 1853\u201355 Crimean War, Anglo-French forces initiated the Siege of Petropavlovsk (August\u2013September 1854), but it never fell. The city had been fortified under the overall command of Nikolay Muravyov (Governor-General of the Eastern Siberia Governorate-General from 1847 to 1861) in the preceding years, but possessed only a small garrison of a few hundred soldiers and sixty-seven cannon. After much exchange of fire, six hundred Anglo-French troops landed south of the city; two hundred and thirty Russian troops forced them to retreat after heavy fighting (September 1, 1854). Four days later, a larger force of nine hundred Anglo-French troops landed east of the town, but again the Russians repelled the allies (September 5, 1854). The allied ships then retreated from Russian Pacific waters (September 7, 1854). The total Russian losses were reported at around a hundred men; the Anglo-French were said to have lost 209 men, over twice that number.\nPost-World War II.\nAt the time of the surrender of Japan in World War II (August/September 1945), United States Naval Construction Battalion 114 was in the Aleutians. In September 1945 the battalion received orders to send a detachment to the USSR to build a Naval Advance Base (a Fleet Weather Central) \u2013 located ten miles outside Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky and code-named TAMA. The original agreement gave the Seabees three weeks to complete the camp. Upon arrival the Soviets told the Seabees they had ten days, and were amazed that the Seabees achieved the task. It was one of two to which Stalin agreed. The other was near Khabarovsk, in buildings provided by the Russians. For mail Petropavlovsk was assigned Navy number 1169, FPO San Francisco. The American use of these two bases proved short-lived.\nPetropavlovsk was a great source of fish, particularly salmon, and crab meat for the Soviet Union in the 20th century. Following the end of the Soviet era in December 1991, fishing rights have also been granted to foreign interests. Poaching of salmon for their caviar at Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy remains a problem amid lax law-enforcement and widespread corruption.\n2020 earthquake.\nAn 7.5 earthquake occurred on March 25, 2020. The earthquake was the largest to occur in Russia since the 2013 Okhotsk Sea earthquake. In Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, 285 miles (460km) away from the epicenter, the intensity was felt as a Modified Mercalli intensity scale V (moderate); objects fell in buildings and people ran out into the street for safety.\n2025 earthquake.\nOn July 30, 2025, an 8.8 earthquake occurred 119 km (73 miles) southeast of the city, the 6th strongest since 1900, causing moderate to severe damage along the coastline.\nGeography.\nThe city is situated at sea level and surrounded by volcanoes. The surrounding terrain is mountainous enough that the horizon cannot be seen clearly from any point in town. The city also hosts a key strategical port situated on Avacha Bay. Across Avacha Bay from the city in Vilyuchinsk is Russia's largest submarine base, the Rybachiy Nuclear Submarine Base, established during the Soviet period and still used by the Russian Navy. The city is located from Moscow and about from Vladivostok.\nClimate.\nThe climate at Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy reasonably qualifies as a subarctic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfc\"), falling just short of a humid continental climate (\"Dfb\"). However, this area's climate has strong oceanic influences due its proximity to the Pacific Ocean. Average annual precipitation is , or about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442 times as much as most of Siberia averages, mostly falling as frozen precipitation, primarily snow, from November to April. Average monthly precipitation is highest in autumn, with October the wettest month on average, closely followed by November. May through July are markedly the driest months on average; June is the single driest month. Winter temperatures are much milder than in Siberia. Here, average January daytime high temperatures are around , while average daytime high temperature in August, the warmest month, is . Thus, resulting from oceanic cooling, summer daytime high temperatures in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy are markedly cooler than in interior Siberia. In warmer-summer years, monthly high averages in July\u2013August can reach and higher. Days of above can be expected an average of 19.6 days per summer.\nDespite the generally high precipitation, the weather is less cloudy than in the adjacent Kuril Islands that are one of the least sunny places in the world, since the city is located behind a peninsula to the north that blocks some of the fog from the cold Oyashio Current offshore of the Kamchatka Peninsula. Oceanic water in Avacha Bay and adjacent bays is also warmer than coastal waters of Kuril Islands and Okhotsk sea coast (except Southern Kuriles and Southern Sakhalin).\nIn the spring (February to April), seawater may freeze.\nHighest Temperature: on July 2, 2012\nLowest Temperature: on February 14, 1917\nHighest Daily Precipitation: on November 10, 2002\nWettest Year: in 1971\nDriest Year: in 1947\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nPetropavlovsk-Kamchatsky is the administrative center of Kamchatka Krai. Within the framework of administrative divisions, it is incorporated as Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky City Under Krai Jurisdiction \u2013an administrative unit with status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky City Under Krai Jurisdiction is incorporated as Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky Urban Okrug.\nEconomy.\nThe Rybachiy submarine base houses Russia\u2019s Pacific submarine fleet. It was built in Soviet times but received new piers in 2022. During the 2025 Kamchatka Peninsula earthquake tsunami waves damaged at least one of the piers.\nCulture.\nSports.\nThe main association football stadium in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy is the 5,000-capacity Spartak Stadium. The former club FC Volcano played at the stadium.\nMuseums.\nThere are multiple museums in the city.\nTourism.\nThe city is the main gateway to the rest of Kamchatka.\nTransport.\nThe city is served by Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky (Elizovo) Airport, which is linked to the town and its port via the A-401 road. During the warmer months cruise ships regularly stop there for the day.\nThere is a bus service in the city.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEthnic Russians make up the majority of the population; the city on its own has more inhabitants than the entire neighboring Chukotka Autonomous Okrug or Magadan Oblast.\nThe population numbered 179,780 in 2010; 179,800 in 2011; 179,784 in 2012; 181,618 in 2013, and 164,900 in 2021.\nEthnic composition (2021):\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nPetropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57931", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57931", "title": "Vitus Bering", "text": "Danish-born Russian explorer (1681\u20131741)\n Vitus Jonassen Bering ( , , ; baptised 5 August 1681\u00a0\u2013 19 December 1741), also known as Ivan Ivanovich Bering (), was a Danish-born Russian cartographer, explorer, and officer in the Russian Navy. He is known as a leader of two Russian expeditions, the First Kamchatka Expedition and the Great Northern Expedition, exploring the northeastern coast of the Asian continent and from there the western coast of the North American continent. The Bering Strait, the Bering Sea, Bering Island, the Bering Glacier, and Vitus Lake were all named in his honor.\nTaking to the seas as a ship's boy at age 15, Bering traveled extensively over the next eight years, as well as taking naval training in Amsterdam. In 1704, he enrolled with the rapidly expanding navy of Tsar Peter I. After serving with the navy in significant but non-combat roles during the Great Northern War, Bering resigned in 1724 to avoid the continuing embarrassment of his low rank to his wife, and upon retirement was promoted to first captain. Bering was permitted to keep the rank when he rejoined the Russian Navy later that year.\nThe tsar selected Bering to captain the First Kamchatka Expedition, an expedition set to sail north from Russian outposts on the Kamchatka Peninsula, with the charge to map the new areas visited and establish whether Asia and America shared a land border. Bering departed from Saint Petersburg in February 1725 as the head of a 34-man expedition, aided by the expertise of Lieutenants Martin Spanberg and Aleksei Chirikov. The party took on men as it headed toward Okhotsk, encountering many difficulties before arriving at the settlement. From there, the men sailed to the Kamchatka Peninsula, preparing new ships there and sailing north\u2014repeating a little-documented journey of Semyon Dezhnyov 80 years earlier. In August 1728, Bering concluded that there was clear sea between Asia and America, which he did not sight during the trip. For this expedition, he was rewarded with money, prestige, and a promotion to the noble rank of captain-commodore. He immediately started preparations for a second trip.\nHaving returned to Okhotsk with a much larger, better prepared, and much more ambitious expedition, Bering set off for an expedition to North America in 1741. The expedition spotted Mount Saint Elias, and sailed past Kodiak Island. A storm separated the ships, but Bering sighted the southern coast of Alaska, and a landing was made at Kayak Island or in the vicinity. Adverse conditions forced a return, but he documented some of the Aleutian Islands on his way back. One of the sailors died and was buried on one of these islands, and Bering named the island group Shumagin Islands after him. Bering himself became too ill to command his ship, which was at last driven to seek refuge on an uninhabited island in the Commander Islands group in the southwest Bering Sea. On 19 December 1741, Bering died on the island, which was given the name Bering Island after him, near the Kamchatka Peninsula, reportedly from scurvy, along with 28 men of his company.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nVitus Bering was born in the port town of Horsens in Denmark to Anne Pedderdatter and her husband Jonas Svendsen (a \"customs inspector and churchwarden\") and was baptized in the Lutheran church there on 5 August 1681. He was named after a maternal great-uncle, Vitus Pedersen Bering, who had been a chronicler in the royal court, and was not long deceased at the time of Vitus Jonassen Bering's birth. The family enjoyed reasonable financial security, with two of Vitus's elder half-brothers both attending the University of Copenhagen. Vitus instead signed on as a ship's boy at age 15. Between 1696 and 1704, he traveled the seas, reaching India and the Dutch East Indies while also finding time to complete naval officer training in Amsterdam. He later claimed (not without some supporting evidence) to have served on Danish whalers in the North Atlantic, visiting European colonies in the Caribbean and on North America's eastern seaboard. But it was in Amsterdam that, in 1704, under Norwegian-born Russian admiral Cornelius Cruys's guidance, Bering gained an officer's commission into the Russian Navy, with the rank of sub-lieutenant. He was repeatedly promoted in Peter the Great's rapidly evolving navy, reaching the rank of second captain by 1720. In that time, it appears he was not involved in any sea battles, but commanded several vessels on potentially dangerous missions, including the transport of a ship from the Azov Sea on Russia's southern coast to the Baltic on its northern coast. His work in the latter stages of the Great Northern War (ending in 1721), for example, was dominated by lightering duties.\nOn 8 October 1713, Bering married Anna Christina P\u00fclse; the ceremony took place in the Lutheran church at Vyborg. Over the next 18 years, they had nine children, four of whom survived childhood. During his time with the Russian Navy\u2014particularly as part of the Great Northern War\u2014he was unable to spend much time with Anna, who was approximately 11 years Bering's junior and the daughter of a Swedish merchant. At the war's conclusion in 1721, Bering was not promoted like many of his contemporaries. The omission proved particularly embarrassing when, in 1724, Anna's younger sister Eufemia upstaged her by marrying Thomas Saunders, already a rear-admiral despite a much shorter period of service. To save face, Bering retired from the navy, securing two months' pay and a notional promotion to first captain. Shortly after, the family\u2014Bering, his wife, and two young sons\u2014moved out of St. Petersburg to live with Anna's family in Vyborg. After five months of joblessness, Bering, keenly aware of his dependents, reapplied to the Admiralty. He was accepted for a renewed period of active service the same day. By 2 October 1724, Bering (retaining the rank of first captain he had secured earlier in the year) was back on the sea, commanding the 90-gun \"Lesnoe\" (). But the tsar soon had a new command for him.\nFirst Kamchatka Expedition.\nSt. Petersburg to Okhotsk.\nOn 29 December 1724 , Peter I of Russia ordered Bering to command a voyage east, probably to map the lands (and possibly seas) between Russia's eastern boundary and the North America continent. Preparations for the trip had begun some years before, but with his health rapidly deteriorating, the Tsar had ordered that the process be hurried, and it was with this backdrop that Bering (with his knowledge of both the Indian Ocean and the eastern seaboard of North America, good personal skills and experience in transporting goods) was selected ahead of the experienced cartographer K. P. von Verd. His lieutenants for the journey, which became known as the First Kamchatka Expedition, were the hardened Danish-born Russian Martin Spanberg and the well-educated but relatively inexperienced Russian Aleksei Chirikov, a respected naval instructor. They would receive annual salaries of some 180 roubles during the trip; Bering would be paid 480. The final papers from Peter before his death on 28 January made it clear to Bering that he should proceed to the Kamchatka Peninsula, build one or two ships there, and, keeping the land on his left, sail northwards until the land turned westwards, making it clear that there existed sea between Asia and North America. Instructions were left on how to proceed if North America was sighted during the voyage, which was scheduled to last three years. The natural route to Kamchatka was along tributaries of the Lena; but after the Treaty of Nerchinsk (1689) this looked politically infeasible. Instead, Bering's party, it was decided, would travel over land and river from St. Petersburg to Okhotsk, a small port town on Russia's eastern coast, and then by sea from Okhotsk to the Kamchatka Peninsula, where they could start their voyage of exploration. On 24 January, Chirikov departed with 26 of the 34-strong expedition along the well-travelled roads to Vologda, to the east. Having waited for the necessary paperwork to be completed, Bering and the remaining members of the expedition followed on 6 February. Bering was supplied with what few maps Peter had managed to commission in the preceding years.\nBoth parties used horse-drawn sledges and made good time over the first legs of the journey. On 14 February they were reunited in Vologda, and, now travelling together, headed eastwards across the Ural Mountains, arriving in the small city of Tobolsk (one of the main stopping points of the journey) on 16 March. They had already travelled over 1750 miles. At Tobolsk, Bering took on more men to help the party through the more difficult journey ahead. He asked for 24 more from the garrison, before upping the request to 54 after hearing that the ship the party required at Okhotsk\u2014the \"Vostok\" ()\u2014would need significant manpower to repair. In the end, the governor could spare only 39, but it still represented a significant expansion in numbers for the party. In addition, Bering wanted 60 carpenters and 7 blacksmiths; the governor responded that half of these would have to be taken on later, at Yeniseysk. After some delays preparing equipment and funds, on 14 May the now much enlarged party left Tobolsk, heading along the Irtysh. The journey ahead to the next major stopping point Yakutsk, was well-worn, but rarely by groups as large as Bering's, who had the additional difficulty of needing to take on more men as the journey progressed. As a result, the party ran behind schedule, reaching Surgut on 30 May and Makovsk in late June before entering Yeniseysk, where the additional men could be taken on; Bering would later claim that \"few were suitable\". In any case, the party left Yeniseysk on 12 August, desperately needing to make up lost time. On 26 September they arrived at Ilimsk, just three days before the river froze over. After the party had completed an eighty-mile trek to Ust-Kut, a town on the Lena where they could spend the winter, Bering travelled on to the town of Irkutsk both to get a sense of the conditions and to seek advice on how best to get their large party across the mountains separating Yakutsk (their next stop) to Okhotsk on the coast.\nAfter leaving Ust-Kut when the river ice melted in the spring of 1726, the party rapidly travelled down the River Lena, reaching Yakutsk in the first half of June. Despite the need for hurry and men being sent in advance, the governor was slow to grant them the resources they needed, prompting threats from Bering. On 7 July, Spanberg left with a detachment of 209 men and much of the cargo; on 27 July apprentice shipbuilder Fyodor Kozlov led a small party to reach Okhotsk ahead of Spanberg, both to prepare food supplies and to start work repairing the \"Vostok\" and building a new ship, the \"Fortuna\" (), needed to carry the party across the bay from Okhotsk to the Kamchatka Peninsula. Bering himself left on 16 August, whilst it was decided that Chirikov would follow the next spring with fresh supplies of flour. The journeys were as difficult as Bering had worried they would be. Both men and horses died, whilst other men (46 from Bering's party alone) deserted with their horses and portions of the supplies as they struggled to build roads across difficult marshland and river terrain. If Bering's party (which reached Okhotsk in October) fared badly, however, Spanberg's fared far worse. His heavily loaded boats could be tugged at no more than one mile a day\u00a0\u2013 and they had some 685 miles to cover. When the rivers froze, the cargo was transferred to sleds and the expedition continued, enduring blizzards and waist-high snow. Even provisions left by Bering at Yudoma Cross could not fend off starvation. On 6 January 1727, Spanberg and two other men, who had together formed an advance party carrying the most vital items for the expedition, reached Okhotsk; ten days later sixty others joined them, although many were ill. Parties sent by Bering back along the trail from Okhotsk rescued seven men and much of the cargo that had been left behind. Okhotsk's inhabitants described the winter as the worst they could recall; Bering seized flour from the local villagers to ensure that his party too could take advantage of their stocks and consequently the whole village soon faced the threat of starvation. The explorer later reported how it was only the arrival of an advance party of Chirikov's division in June with 27\u00a0tons of flour that ensured his party (by then diminished in numbers) could be fed.\nOkhotsk to Kamchatka and beyond.\nThe \"Vostok\" was readied and the \"Fortuna\" built at a rapid pace, with the first party (48 men commanded by Spanberg and comprising those required to start work on the ships that would have to be built in Kamchatka itself as soon as possible) leaving in June 1727. Chirikov himself arrived in Okhotsk soon after, bringing further supplies of food. He had had a relatively easy trip, losing none of his men and only 17 of the 140 horses he had set out with. On 22 August, the remainder of the party sailed for Kamchatka. Had the route been charted, they should have sailed around the peninsula and made port on its eastern coast; instead, they landed on the west and made a gruelling trip from the settlement of Bolsheretsk in the southwest, north to the Upper Kamchatka Post and then east along the Kamchatka River to the Lower Kamchatka Post. This Spanberg's party did before the river froze; next, a party led by Bering completed this final stint of approximately 580 miles over land without the benefit of the river; and finally, in the spring of 1728, the last party to leave Bolsheretsk, headed by Chirikov, reached the Lower Kamchatka Post. The outpost was six thousand miles from St. Petersburg and the journey itself (the first time \"so many [had] gone so far\") had taken some three years. The lack of immediate food available to Spanberg's advance party slowed their progress, which hastened dramatically after Bering's and Chirikov's group arrived with provisions. As a consequence, the ship they constructed\u2014the \"St. Gabriel\" ()\u2014was ready to be launched as soon as 9 June 1728 from its construction point upriver at Ushka. It was then fully rigged and provisioned by 9 July, and on 13 July set sail downstream, anchoring offshore that evening. On 14 July, Bering's party began their first exploration, hugging the coast in not a northerly direction (as they had expected) but a north-easterly one. The ship's log records a variety of landmarks spotted (including St. Lawrence Island) many of which the expedition took the opportunity to name. Translation problems hindered the exploration attempt, however, as Bering was unable to discuss the local geography with locals he encountered. Sailing further north, Bering entered for the first time the strait that would later bear his name.\nReaching a cape (which Chirikov named Cape Chukotsky), the land turned westwards, and Bering asked his two lieutenants on 13 August 1728 whether or not they could reasonably claim it was turning westwards for good: that is to say, whether they had proven that Asia and America were separate land masses. The rapidly advancing ice prompted Bering to make the controversial decision not to deviate from his remit: the ship would sail for a few more days, but then turn back. The expedition was neither at the most easterly point of Asia (as Bering had supposed) nor had it succeeded in discovering the Alaskan coast of America, which on a clear day would have been visible to the east. As promised, on 16 August, Bering turned the \"St. Gabriel\" around, heading back towards Kamchatka. Not before a storm forced hasty repairs, the ship was back at the mouth of the Kamchatka River, fifty days after it had left. The mission was at its conclusion, but the party still needed to make it back to St. Petersburg to document the voyage (thus avoiding the fate of Semyon Dezhnyov who, unbeknownst to Bering, had made a similar expedition eighty years previously). In the spring of 1729, the \"Fortuna\", which had sailed round the Kamchatka Peninsula to bring supplies to the Lower Kamchatka Post, now returned to Bolsheretsk; and shortly after, so did the \"St. Gabriel\". The delay was caused by a four-day journey Bering had embarked upon directly eastwards in search of North America, to no avail. By July 1729 the two vessels were back at Okhotsk, where they were moored alongside the \"Vostok\"; the party, no longer needing to carry shipbuilding materials made good time on the return journey from Okhotsk, and by 28 February 1730 Bering was back in the Russian capital. In December 1731 he would be awarded 1000 roubles and promoted to captain-commodore, his first noble rank (Spanberg and Chirikov were similarly promoted to captain). It had been a long and expensive expedition, costing 15 men and souring relations between Russia and her native peoples: but it had provided useful new (though not perfect) insights into the geography of Eastern Siberia, and presented useful evidence that Asia and North America were separated by sea. Bering had not, however, proved the separation beyond doubt.\nSecond Kamchatka expedition and death.\nPreparations.\nBering soon proposed a second Kamchatka expedition, much more ambitious than the first and with an explicit aim of sailing east in search of North America. The political situation in the Russian Empire was difficult, however, and this meant delays. In the interim, the Berings enjoyed their new-found status and wealth: there was a new house and a new social circle for the newly ennobled Berings. Bering also made a bequest to the poor of Horsens, had two children with Anna and even attempted to establish his familial coat of arms. The proposal, when it was accepted, would a significant affair, which involved 600 people from the outset and several hundred added along the way. Though Bering seems to have been primarily interested in landing in North America, he recognised the importance of secondary objectives: the list of which expanded rapidly under the guidance of planners Nikolai Fedorovich Golovin (head of the Admiralty); Ivan Kirilov, a highly ranked politician with an interest in geography, and Andrey Osterman, a close adviser of the new Empress, Anna Ivanovna. As Bering waited for Anna to solidify her grip on the throne, he and Kirilov worked to find a new, more dependable administrator to run Okhotsk and to begin work on improving the roads between Yakutsk and the coastal settlement. Their choice for the post of administrator, made remotely, was Grigory Skornyakov-Pisarev; possibly the least bad candidate, he would nevertheless turn out to be a poor choice. In any case, Skornyakov-Pisarev was ordered in 1731 to proceed to Okhotsk, with directions to expand it into a proper port. He did not leave for Okhotsk for another four years, by which time Bering's own expedition (in time for which Okhotsk was supposed to have been prepared) was not far off.\nIn 1732, however, Bering was still at the planning stage in Moscow, having taken a short leave of absence for St. Petersburg. The better positioned Kirilov oversaw developments, eyeing up not only the chance of discovering North America, but of mapping the whole Arctic coast, finding a good route south to Japan, landing on the Shantar Islands and even making contact with Spanish America. On 12 June the Senate approved resources to fund an academic contingent for the expedition, and three academics\u00a0\u2013 Johann Georg Gmelin (a natural historian), Louis de l'Isle de la Croy\u00e8re (an astronomer), and Gerhard Friedrich M\u00fcller (an anthropologist)\u00a0\u2013 were selected by the Academy of Sciences. Proposals were made to transports goods or men to Kamchatka by sea via Cape Horn, but these were not approved. Other than a broad oversight role, Bering's personal instructions from the Admiralty were surprisingly simple. Given on 16 October 1732, they amounted only to recreating his first expedition, but with the added task of heading east and finding North America (a feat which had in fact just been completed by Mikhail Gvozdev, though this was not known at the time). The suggestion was made that Bering share more of his command with the Chirikov, suggesting that the 51-year-old Bering was slowly being edged out. Elsewhere, instructions were sent ahead to Yakutsk, Irkutsk and Okhotsk to aid Bering's second expedition\u00a0\u2013 and thus, the naivety of the first expedition in assuming compliance was repeated. Further follies included plans to send ships north along the rivers Ob and Lena towards the Arctic.\nSt. Petersburg to Kamchatka.\nSpanberg left St. Petersburg in February 1733 with the first (small) detachment of the second expedition, bound for Okhotsk. Chirikov followed on 18 April with the main contingent (initially 500 people and eventually swelling to approximately 3000 after labourers were added). Following them, on 29 April Bering followed with Anna and their two youngest children\u00a0\u2013 their two eldest, both sons, were left with friends in Reval. The academic contingent, including the three professors, left in August. Soon catching the main party, Bering and Chirikov led the group eastwards, descending on Tobolsk for the winter. The arrival of such a large party with such great demands\u00a0\u2013 and so soon after Spanberg had made similar demands\u00a0\u2013 put a strain on the town. Bering and a small advance party left Tobolsk in later February, stopping at Irkutsk to pick up gifts for the native tribes they would later encounter; it arrived at Yakutsk in August 1734. The main grouping, now under Chirikov's command left Tobolsk in May 1734, but had a more difficult trek and one which required harsh discipline be imposed to prevent desertions. Nonetheless, it arrived in Yakutsk in June 1735. Whilst Spanberg headed east to Okhotsk, Bering waited in Yakutsk where he partied for a long time, preparing two ships on the Lena (one would be captained by Vasili Pronchishchev and the other first by Peter Lassenius and later by Dmitry Laptev). Both were to sail northwards, and over the coming years to chart the Arctic coastline and to test whether it was navigable. Nevertheless, Bering soon found he was quickly bogged down in Yakutsk; two parties sent east to find a better route to the Okhotsk Sea were both failures (the second coming far closer than it realised), and yet this was information the expedition desperately needed. Bering decided to prepare a similar land route to the one he had used on the first expedition instead, constructing huts along the route in advance. It was work, however, that was still unfinished even by the summer of 1737, such were the delays.\nAt Okhotsk things were little better; it was \"ill-suited to be a permanent port\", and Skornyakov-Pisarev was slow to construct the buildings needed. Spanberg was, however, able to ready the ships the expedition needed. By the end of 1737 the \"St. Gabriel\" had been refitted; additionally, two new ships\u2014the \"Archangel Michael\" (, \"Arkhangel Mikhail\") and the \"Nadezhda\" ()\u2014had been constructed and were rapidly readied for a voyage to Japan, a country with which Russia had never had contact. The same year, Bering took up residence in Okhotsk. It was the fifth year of the expedition, and the original costings now looked naive compared to the true costs of the trip. The additional costs (300,000 roubles compared to the 12,000 budgeted) brought poverty to the whole region. On 29 June 1738, Spanberg set off for the Kuril Islands with the three ships he had prepared. After he had left there were further delays, probably due to a lack of natural resources. Over the next three years, Bering himself was criticised on an increasingly regular basis (his salary had already been halved in 1737 when the originally planned four years ran out); the delays also caused friction between Bering, Chirikov (who felt unduly constrained) and Spanberg (who felt Bering was too weak in his dealings with the local peoples). The two key figures who had been so useful to Bering in St. Petersburg back in the early 1730s (Saunders and Kirilov) were now dead, and there were occasional moves to either terminate the expedition or to replace Bering. Meanwhile, a fourth ship, the \"Bolsheretsk\" () was constructed and Spanberg (having identified some 30 Kuril Islands on his first trip) led the four ships on a second voyage, which saw the first Russians land in Japan. In August 1740, with the main, America-bound expedition almost ready, Anna Bering returned to St. Petersburg with her and Vitus' younger children. Bering would never see his wife again. Those without places on a ship also began the long journey home. As they left, a messenger arrived; the admiralty was demanding a progress update. Bering delayed, promising a partial report from Spanberg and a fuller report later.\nSea voyage, death and achievements.\nWith time now of the essence, the \"Okhotsk\" () left for Bolsheretsk, arriving there in mid-September. Another new ship, the \"St. Peter\" (, \"Sviatoi Piotr\", \"Pyotr\", or \"P\u00ebtr\"), captained by Bering, also left. It was accompanied by its sister creation the \"St. Paul\" (, \"Sviatoi Pavel\") and the \"Nadezhda\". Delayed by the \"Nadezhda\"'s hitting a sand bank and then being beaten by a storm, such that it was forced to stay at Bolsheretsk, the two other ships arrived in their destination of Avacha Bay in south-eastern Kamchatka on 6 October. The foundation of Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, including warehouses, living quarters and a beacon had been built there on Bering's orders few months before, and now the explorer named the settlement after his vessels. Over the winter, Bering recruited for the trip ahead naturalist Georg Steller and completed the report he had promised to send. At the same time, however, the murder of several Russians under Bering's command by native tribesmen prompted him to send armed men to the north, with orders not to use force if it could be avoided. Apparently it could not, because the detachment killed several native Koryaks in the settlement of Utkolotsk and enslaved the remainder, bringing them back south. Steller was horrified to see the Koryaks tortured in search of the murderers. His ethical complaints, like Chirikov's more practical ones before him, were suppressed. From Petropavlovsk, Bering led his expedition towards North America in the spring of 1741.\nThe expedition spotted the volcano Mount Saint Elias on 16 July 1741, where it briefly landed. His objective complete, ill and exhausted, Bering turned ship and headed back towards port. The return journey then included the discovery of Kodiak Island. A storm separated the ships, but Bering sighted the southern coast of Alaska, and a landing was made at Kayak Island or in the vicinity. Under the command of Aleksei Chirikov, the second ship discovered the shores of northwest America (Aleksander Archipelago of present-day Alaska). Steller ensured the voyage recorded the wildlife it encountered, discovering and describing several species of plant and animal native to the North Pacific and North America during the expedition (including the Steller sea cow and Steller's jay). Bering himself was forced by adverse conditions to return, and he discovered some of the Aleutian Islands on his way back. One of the sailors died and was buried on one of these islands, and the group was named after him (as the Shumagin Islands). Suffering from scurvy like many of his crew, Bering steadily became too ill to command the ship, passing control to Sven Waxell. Storms, however, meant that the crew of the \"St. Peter\" was soon driven to refuge on an uninhabited island in the Commander Islands group (\"Komandorskiye Ostrova\") in the south-west Bering Sea. On 19 December 1741 Vitus Bering died on the uninhabited island near the Kamchatka Peninsula, which was later given the name Bering Island in his honour. Like 28 men of his company, Bering's death was commonly assumed to have been the result of scurvy (although this has since been contested); certainly, it had afflicted him in the final months. The situation was still dire for Bering's expedition (now headed by Waxell), many of them, including Waxell, were still ill and the \"St. Peter\" was in poor condition. By April 1742 the party had ascertained that they were on an island. They decided to construct a new vessel from the remnants of the ship in order to return home. By August it was ready, successfully reaching Avacha Bay later in the month. There, the party discovered that Chirikov had led a rescue mission during 1741 that came within miles of the stranded group. Out of 77 men aboard the \"St. Peter\", only 46 survived the hardships of the expedition, which claimed its last victim just one day before coming into home port. Its builder, Starodubtsev, returned home with government awards and later built several other seaworthy ships.\nAssessing the scale of Bering's achievements is difficult, given that he was neither the first Russian to sight North America (that having been achieved by Mikhail Gvozdev during the 1730s), nor the first Russian to pass through the strait which now bears his name (an honour which goes to the relatively unknown 17th-century expedition of Semyon Dezhnev). Reports from his second voyage were jealously guarded by the Russian administration, preventing Bering's story from being retold in full for at least a century after his death. Nonetheless, Bering's achievements, both as an individual explorer and as a leader of the second expedition, are regarded as substantial. Consequently, Bering's name has since been used for the Bering Strait (named by Captain James Cook despite knowledge of Dezhnev's earlier expedition), the Bering Sea, Bering Island, Bering Glacier and the Bering Land Bridge.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57932", "revid": "859373", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57932", "title": "Battle of Culloden", "text": "April 1746 decisive battle of the Jacobite Rising of 1745\nThe Battle of Culloden took place on 16 April 1746, near Inverness, in the Scottish Highlands. A Jacobite army under Charles Edward Stuart was decisively defeated by a British government force commanded by the Duke of Cumberland, thereby ending the Jacobite rising of 1745.\nCharles landed in Scotland in July 1745, seeking to restore his father James Francis Edward Stuart to the British throne. He quickly won control of large parts of Scotland, and an invasion of England reached as far south as Derby before being forced to turn back. However by April 1746 the Jacobites were short of supplies, facing a superior and better-equipped opponent. \nCharles and his senior officers decided their only option was to stand and fight. When the two armies met at Culloden, the battle was brief, lasting less than an hour, with the Jacobites suffering an overwhelming and bloody defeat. This effectively ended both the 1745 rising and Jacobitism as a significant element in British politics.\nBackground.\nThe Jacobite rising of 1745 began on 23 July when Charles Edward Stuart landed in the Western Isles and launched an attempt to reclaim the British throne for the exiled House of Stuart. After their victory at Prestonpans in September, the Jacobites controlled much of Scotland, and Charles persuaded his colleagues to invade England. The Jacobite army reached Derby before successfully retreating across the border. \nDespite its lack of tangible results, the invasion boosted recruitment, bringing Jacobite strength to more than 8,000. These troops, along with French-supplied artillery, were used to besiege Stirling Castle, the strategic key to the Scottish Highlands. On 17 January the Jacobites repulsed a government relief force under Henry Hawley at the Battle of Falkirk Muir, although the siege itself made little progress.\nSoon after, Cumberland arrived in Edinburgh to take over command from Hawley. On 1 February, the Jacobite army abandoned the siege and withdrew to Inverness. Cumberland's army entered Aberdeen on 27 February and both sides halted operations until the weather improved. Although several French shipments were received during the winter, the Royal Navy blockade left the Jacobites short of money and food. When Cumberland marched out of Aberdeen on 8 April to resume the campaign, Charles and his senior advisers agreed their best option was to gamble on a set-piece battle.\nPrelude.\nOn 12 April, the government army forded the River Spey, which was guarded by 2,000 Jacobites under Lord John Drummond. He decided the position could not be held and withdrew towards Nairn, an action for which he was later criticised. The Jacobites evacuated the town on 14 April, and Cumberland's troops camped just to the west. Although significant elements were absent elsewhere, the main Jacobite army of about 5,400 left Inverness on 15 April,p and assembled on the Culloden estate, to the east.\nPrince Charles and his senior officers debated whether to give battle or abandon Inverness, but with most of their dwindling supplies stored in the town they feared retreat meant the army might disintegrate. Sir John O'Sullivan, the adjutant-general, identified a suitable site for a defensive action at Drummossie Moor, a stretch of open moorland between the walled enclosures of Culloden Park to the north and those of Culwhiniac to the south.\nHowever, Lord George Murray felt the relatively flat and open ground selected by O'Sullivan favoured the government troops. He suggested an alternative, steeply sloping site near Daviot Castle, which was inspected by Brigadier Stapleton of the Irish Brigade and Colonel Ker on the morning of 15 April. They rejected Murray's suggestion, arguing the ground was \"mossy and soft\" and would fail to protect the road into Inverness. The Jacobites ultimately formed their line west of the site originally chosen by O'Sullivan.\nNight attack at Nairn.\nOn 15 April the government army celebrated Cumberland's 25th birthday by issuing of brandy to each regiment. Hoping they would be less vigilant as a result, the Jacobite leaders decided to conduct a night attack on the government encampment. Murray's instructions were for his troops to use only swords, dirks and bayonets, to overturn tents and subsequently to locate \"a swelling or bulge in the fallen tent, there to strike and push vigorously\".\nThe plan drawn up by Murray called for simultaneous attacks on Cumberland's front and rear by his troops and a second force under the Duke of Perth, supported by Lord John Drummond and Prince Charles. The Jacobite force did not begin its march until well after dark, partly to avoid being spotted by ships of the Royal Navy then in the Moray Firth. Murray led it across country to avoid government outposts, but one participant, James Johnson, later wrote \"this march...on a dark night [was] accompanied with confusion and disorder\".\nAs a result, it was one hour before dawn when Murray's leading elements reached Culraick, still from the intended crossing point over the River Nairn. After a heated debate, Murray concluded the attack should be aborted, but this message was not communicated to the 1,200 men under Perth. While Murray led his detachment back to camp along the Inverness road, Perth continued, unaware of the change in plan. One account claims his troops made contact with government sentries before realising their colleagues had turned around. Although some historians suggest the night attack might have remained viable if he had continued, most argue their numbers were too small to have any effect.\nNot long after the exhausted Jacobite forces had made it back to Culloden, an officer of Lochiel's regiment, who had been left behind after falling asleep in a wood, arrived with a report of advancing government troops. By then, many Jacobite soldiers had dispersed in search of food or returned to Inverness, and others were asleep in ditches and outbuildings. Several hundred of their army may have missed the battle.\nBattle.\nAfter the abortive night attack, the Jacobites formed up in substantially the same battle order as the previous day, the Highland regiments forming the first line. They faced north-east over common grazing land, with the River Nairn about 1\u00a0km to their right. Their left wing, anchored on the Culloden Park walls, was nominally led by James Drummond, titular Duke of Perth, while his brother John commanded the centre. The right wing, flanked by the Culwhiniac enclosure walls, was led by Murray. Behind them, the conventionally trained Lowland regiments were drawn up in accordance with French practice. During the morning, heavy snow and rain saturated the already wet ground, although the weather cleared just before the battle started.\nCumberland's army left their encampment by 5 am, leaving the main Inverness road and marching across country. By 10 am the Jacobites finally saw them approaching at a distance of around 4 km. At 3 km from the Jacobite position, Cumberland gave the order to form line, and the army marched forward in full battle order. John Daniel, an Englishman serving with Charles's army, recorded that on seeing the government troops, the Jacobites began calling out insults, but without response. Once within 500 metres, Cumberland moved his artillery up through the ranks.\nAs his troops formed up, it became clear that Cumberland's right flank was exposed, and so he moved additional units up to reinforce it. Meanwhile, Sullivan ordered two battalions of Lord Lewis Gordon's regiment to cover the walls at Culwhiniac against a possible flank attack, while Murray shifted the right wing slightly forward. Since these alterations had the unintended result of skewing the Jacobite line and opening gaps, Sullivan transferred the Edinburgh Regiment, along with those of Perth and Glenbucket, from the second line into the first. This meant the Jacobite front rank now substantially outnumbered that of Cumberland, but depleted their reserve and increased their reliance on a successful initial attack.\nArtillery exchange.\nAt approximately 1\u00a0pm, Finlayson's Jacobite batteries opened fire; possibly in response to Cumberland sending forward Lord Bury to within 100 m of the Jacobite lines to \"ascertain the strength of their battery\". The government artillery responded shortly afterwards. Some later Jacobite memoirs suggest that their troops were then subjected to artillery bombardment for 30 minutes or more while Charles delayed an advance, but government accounts suggest a much shorter exchange before the Jacobites attacked. Campbell of Airds, in the rear, timed it at 9 minutes, but Cumberland's aide-de-camp Yorke suggested only 2 or 3 minutes.\nThe duration implies that the government artillery is unlikely to have fired more than thirty rounds at extreme range: statistical analysis concludes that would have caused only 20\u201330 Jacobite casualties at that stage, rather than the hundreds suggested by some accounts.\nJacobite advance.\nShortly after 1 pm, Charles issued an order to advance, which Colonel Harry Kerr of Graden first took to Perth's regiment, on the extreme left. He then rode down the Jacobite line, giving orders to each regiment in turn. Sir John MacDonald and Brigadier Stapleton were also sent forward to repeat the order. As the Jacobites left their lines, the government gunners switched to canister shot, which was augmented by fire from the Coehorn mortars situated behind the government front line. As there was no need for careful aiming when canister was used, the rate of fire increased dramatically, and the Jacobites found themselves advancing into heavy fire.\nOn the Jacobite right, the Atholl Brigade, Lochiel's and the Appin Regiment left their start positions and charged towards Barrell's and Munro's regiments. Within a few hundred yards, however, the centre regiments, Lady Mackintosh's and Lovat's, had begun to swerve rightwards to try to avoid canister fire or to follow the firmer ground along the road running diagonally across Drummossie Moor. The five regiments became entangled as a single mass, converging on the government left. The confusion was worsened when the three largest regiments lost their commanding officers, all at the front of the advance: MacGillivray and MacBean of Lady Mackintosh's both went down; Inverallochie of Lovat's fell, and Lochiel had his ankles broken by canister within a few yards of the government lines. In 2024, in a 60 m\u00b2 area near what is believed to have been the government front line, archaeologists recovered large numbers of musket balls and grapeshot, indicating extremely intense close-range combat.\nThe Jacobite left, by contrast, advanced much more slowly, hampered by boggy ground and by having several hundred yards further to cover. According to the account of Andrew Henderson, Lord John Drummond walked across the front of the Jacobite lines to try and tempt the government infantry into firing early, but they maintained their discipline. The three MacDonald regiments (Keppoch's, Clanranald's and Glengarry's) stalled before resorting to ineffectual long-range musket fire. They also lost senior officers, as Clanranald was wounded and Keppoch killed. The smaller units on their right (Maclachlan's Regiment and Chisholm's and Monaltrie's battalions) advanced into an area swept by artillery fire and suffered heavy losses before falling back.\nEngagement of government left wing.\nAs it charged, the Jacobite right was hit hard by a volley at nearly point-blank range, but many of its men still reached the government lines. The brunt of the Jacobite impact, led by Lochiel's regiment, was taken by only two government regiments: Barrell's 4th Foot and Dejean's 37th Foot. Barrell's lost 17 killed and suffered 108 wounded, out of a total of 373 officers and men. Dejean's lost 14 killed and had 68 wounded, with the unit's left wing taking a disproportionately higher number of casualties. Barrell's regiment temporarily lost one of its two colours. \nJohn Huske, commanding the government second line, quickly organised a counterattack by Lord Sempill's Fourth Brigade, comprising 1,078 men from the 25th, 59th, and 8th Regiment of Foot. He also instructed the 20th Foot to take up position between the 25th and 37th, leaving the Jacobite right surrounded on three sides by five battalions.\nWith the Jacobite left under Perth failing to advance further, Cumberland ordered two troops of Cobham's 10th Dragoons to ride them down. The boggy ground, however, impeded the cavalry, and they turned to engage the Irish Picquets whom Sullivan and Lord John Drummond had brought up in an attempt to stabilise the deteriorating Jacobite left flank. Cumberland later wrote: \"They came running on in their wild manner, and upon the right where I had placed myself, imagining the greatest push would be there, they came down there several times within a hundred yards of our men, firing their pistols and brandishing their swords, but the Royal Scots and Pulteneys hardly took their fire-locks from their shoulders, so that after those faint attempts they made off; and the little squadrons on our right were sent to pursue them\".\nJacobite collapse and rout.\nWith the collapse of the left wing, Murray brought up the \"Royal \u00c9cossais\" and Kilmarnock's Footguards, who were still unengaged, but when they had been brought into position, the Jacobite first line had been routed. The \"Royal \u00c9cossais\" exchanged musket fire with Campbell's 21st and commenced an orderly retreat, moving along the Culwhiniac enclosure to shield themselves from artillery fire. Immediately, the half battalion of Highland militia, commanded by Captain Colin Campbell of Ballimore, which had stood inside the enclosure, ambushed them. In the encounter, Campbell of Ballimore was killed along with five of his men. The result was that the \"Royal \u00c9cossais\" and Kilmarnock's Footguards were forced out into the open moor and were engaged by three squadrons of Kerr's 11th Dragoons. \nThe Irish Picquets under Stapleton bravely covered the Highlanders' retreat from the battlefield, preventing the fleeing Jacobites from suffering heavy casualties. That action cost half of the 100 casualties that they suffered in the battle. The \"Royal \u00c9cossais\" appear to have retired from the field in two wings; one part surrendered after suffering 50 killed or wounded, but their colours were not taken and a large number retired from the field with the Jacobite Lowland regiments. A few Highland regiments also withdrew in good order, unhindered by the government cavalry.\nThe stand by the French regulars gave Charles and other senior officers time to escape. Charles seems to have been rallying Perth's and Glenbucket's regiments when Sullivan rode up to Captain Shea, commander of his bodyguard, and ordered him to take the Prince away. Charles reportedly called for a final charge into the government lines, but Shea led him from the field.\nFrom that point onward, the fleeing Jacobite forces were split into several groups: the Lowland regiments retired southwards, making their way to Ruthven Barracks, and the remains of the Jacobite right wing also retired southwards. The MacDonald and the other Highland left-wing regiments, however, were cut off by the government cavalry and were forced to retreat down the road to Inverness. The result was that they were a clear target for government dragoons. Major-General Humphrey Bland led the pursuit of the fleeing Highlanders, giving \"Quarter to None but about Fifty French Officers and Soldiers\".\nConclusion: casualties and prisoners.\nJacobite casualties are estimated at between 1,500 and 2,000 killed or wounded, with many of them occurring in the pursuit after the battle. Cumberland's official list of prisoners taken includes 154 Jacobites and 222 \"French\" prisoners (men from the \"foreign units\" in the French service). Added to the official list of those apprehended were 172 of the Earl of Cromartie's men, captured after a brief engagement the day before near Littleferry.\nIn striking contrast to the Jacobite losses, the government losses were reported as 50 dead and 259 wounded. Of the 438 men of Barrell's 4th Foot, 17 were killed and 104 were wounded. However, a large proportion of those recorded as wounded are likely to have died of their wounds. Only 29 men out of the 104 wounded from Barrell's 4th Foot later survived to claim pensions, and all six of the artillerymen recorded as wounded later died.\nSeveral senior Jacobite commanding officers were casualties, including Keppoch; Viscount Strathallan; Commissary-General Lachlan Maclachlan; and Walter Stapleton, who died of wounds shortly after the battle. Others, including Kilmarnock, were captured. The only high-ranking government officer casualty was Lord Robert Kerr, the son of William Kerr, 3rd Marquess of Lothian. Sir Robert Rich, 5th Baronet, who was a lieutenant-colonel and the senior officer commanding Barrell's 4th Foot, was badly wounded, losing his left hand and receiving several wounds to his head. A number of captains and lieutenants had also been wounded.\nAftermath.\nCollapse of Jacobite campaign.\nAs the first of the fleeing Highlanders approached Inverness, they were met by the 2nd battalion of Lovat's regiment, led by the Master of Lovat. It has been suggested that Lovat shrewdly switched sides and turned upon the retreating Jacobites, an act that would explain his remarkable rise in fortune in the years that followed.\nFollowing the battle, the Jacobites' Lowland regiments headed south towards Corrybrough and made their way to Ruthven Barracks, and their Highland units made their way north towards Inverness and on through to Fort Augustus. There, they were joined by Barisdale's battalion of Glengarry's regiment and a small battalion of MacGregors. At least two of those present at Ruthven, James Johnstone and John Daniel, recorded that the Highland troops remained in good spirits despite the defeat and were eager to resume the campaign. At that point, continuing Jacobite resistance remained potentially viable in terms of manpower. At least a third of the army had either missed or slept through Culloden, which along with survivors from the battle gave a potential force of 5,000 to 6,000 men. However the roughly 1,500 men who assembled at Ruthven Barracks received orders from Charles to the effect that the army should disperse until he returned with French support.\nSimilar orders must have been received by the Highland units at Fort Augustus, and by 18 April, the majority of the Jacobite army had been disbanded. Officers and men of the units in French service made for Inverness, where they surrendered as prisoners of war on 19 April. Most of the rest of the army broke up, with men heading for home or attempting to escape abroad, although the Appin Regiment, amongst others, was still in arms as late as July.\nMany senior Jacobites made their way to , where Charles Edward Stuart had first landed at the outset of the campaign in 1745. There, on 30 April, they were met by two French frigates: the \"Mars\" and \"Bellone\". Two days later, the French ships were spotted and attacked by three smaller Royal Navy sloops: the \"Greyhound\", \"Baltimore\", and \"Terror\". The result was the last real engagement of the campaign. During the six hours in which the battle continued, the Jacobites recovered cargo that had been landed by the French ships, including \u00a335,000 of gold.\nWith visible proof that the French had not deserted them, a group of Jacobite leaders attempted to prolong the campaign. On 8 May, nearby at Murlaggan, Lochiel, Lochgarry, Clanranald and Barisdale all agreed to rendezvous at Invermallie on 18 May, as did Lord Lovat and his son. The plan was that they would be joined by what remained of Keppoch's men and Macpherson of Cluny's regiment, which had not taken part in the battle at Culloden. However, things did not go as planned. After about a month of relative inactivity, Cumberland moved his army into the Highlands, and on 17 May, three battalions of regulars and eight Highland companies reoccupied Fort Augustus. The same day, the Macphersons surrendered. On the day of the planned rendezvous, Clanranald never appeared, and Lochgarry and Barisdale showed up with only about 300 combined, most of whom immediately dispersed in search of food. Lochiel, who commanded possibly the strongest Jacobite regiment at Culloden, mustered 300 men. The group dispersed, and the following week, the government launched punitive expeditions into the Highlands that continued throughout the summer.\nAfter his flight from the battle, Charles Edward Stuart made his way towards the Hebrides, accompanied by a small group of supporters. By 20 April, Charles had reached Arisaig on the west coast of Scotland. After spending a few days with his close associates, he sailed for the island of Benbecula in the Outer Hebrides. From there, he travelled to Scalpay, off the east coast of Harris, and from there made his way to Stornoway. For five months, Charles crisscrossed the Hebrides, constantly pursued by government supporters and under threat from local lairds, who were tempted to betray him for the \u00a330,000 upon his head. During that time, he met Flora Macdonald, who famously aided him in a narrow escape to Skye. Finally, on 19 September, Charles reached Borrodale on in Arisaig, where his party boarded two small French ships, which ferried them to France. He never returned to Scotland.\nRepercussions.\nThe morning after the battle, Cumberland issued a declaration to his troops claiming the rebels had been instructed to give \"no quarter\". This alluded to the belief such orders had been found on the bodies of fallen Jacobites, versions of which were published in the \"Newcastle Journal\" and the \"Gentleman's Journal\". Only one copy still exists, which appears to be forged since it was not signed by Murray, and appears on the bottom half of a copy of a declaration published in 1745. Over the next two days, the moor was searched, and wounded rebels were put to death. In total, over 20,000 head of livestock, sheep, and goats were driven off and sold at Fort Augustus, where the soldiers split the profits.\nWhile in Inverness, Cumberland emptied the jails that were full of people imprisoned by Jacobite supporters by replacing them with Jacobites themselves. Prisoners were taken south to England to stand trial for high treason. Many were held on hulks on the Thames or in Tilbury Fort, and executions took place in Carlisle, York and Kennington Common. In total, 120 common men were executed, one third of them being deserters from the British Army. The common prisoners drew lots amongst themselves, and only one out of twenty actually came to trial. Although most of those who stood trial were sentenced to death, almost all of them had their sentences commuted to penal transportation to the British colonies for life by the Traitors Transported Act 1746 (20 Geo. 2. c. 46). In all, 936 men were thus transported, and 222 more were banished. Even so, 905 prisoners were actually released under the Act of Indemnity that was passed in June 1747. Another 382 obtained their freedom by being exchanged for prisoners of war being held by France. Of the total 3,471 prisoners recorded, nothing is known of the fate of 648. The high-ranking \"rebel lords\" were executed on Tower Hill in London.\nFollowing the military success won by their forces, the British government enacted laws to further integrate Scotland, specifically the Scottish Highlands, with the rest of Britain. Members of the Episcopal clergy were required to give oaths of allegiance to the reigning Hanoverian dynasty. The Heritable Jurisdictions (Scotland) Act 1746 ended the hereditary right of landowners to govern justice upon their estates through barony courts. Prior to the Act, feudal lords (which included clan chiefs) had considerable judicial and military power over their followers such as the oft-quoted power of \"pit and gallows\". Lords who were loyal to the government were greatly compensated for the loss of these traditional powers. For example, the Duke of Argyll was given \u00a321,000. The lords and clan chiefs who had supported the Jacobite rebellion were stripped of their estates, which were then sold and the profits were used to further trade and agriculture in Scotland. The forfeited estates were managed by factors. Anti-clothing measures were taken against the Highland dress by an Act of Parliament in 1746. The result was that the wearing of tartan was banned except as a uniform for officers and soldiers in the British Army and later landed men and their sons.\nCommemoration.\nThere appears to have been little interest in commemorating the battle before the 1840s. \"The Inverness Courier\"'s account of the events surrounding the centenary in the spring of 1846 suggests that they had a recreational dimension, but as the century progressed, commemoration became more solemn and elegiac. Thoughts turned to erecting a physical memorial, and in 1849, a foundation stone for a Culloden monument was laid on the battlefield. By 1852, the project had been abandoned due to a lack of funds. A memorial stone carved by Edward Power in 1858 was eventually incorporated into the cairn erected on the battlefield in 1881. An annual commemoration ceremony under the auspices of the Gaelic Society of Inverness began in 1925, and a major event, attended by up to 500 people, marked the 200th anniversary of the battle in 1946.\nCulloden battlefield today.\nIt was the last pitched battle fought on British soil. Today, a visitor centre is located near the site of the battle. It was first opened in December 2007, with the intention of preserving the battlefield in a condition similar to how it was on 16 April 1746. One difference is that it is currently covered in shrubs and heather. During the 18th century, however, the area was used as common grazing ground, mainly for tenants of the Culloden estate. Those visiting can walk the site by way of footpaths on the ground and can also enjoy a view from above on a raised platform. Possibly the most recognisable feature of the battlefield today is the -tall memorial cairn, erected by Duncan Forbes in 1881. In the same year, Forbes also erected headstones to mark the mass graves of the clans. The thatched roofed farmhouse of Leanach that stands today dates from about 1760; however, it stands on the same location as the turf-walled cottage that probably served as a field hospital for government troops following the battle. A stone, known as \"The English Stone\", is situated west of the Old Leanach cottage and is said to mark the burial place of the government dead. West of this site lies another stone, erected by Forbes to mark the place that the body of Alexander McGillivray of Dunmaglass was found after the battle. A stone lies on the eastern side of the battlefield and is supposed to mark the spot from which Cumberland directed the battle. The battlefield has been inventoried and protected by Historic Scotland under the Historic Environment (Amendment) Act 2011.\nSince 2001, the site of the battle has undergone topographic, geophysical and metal detector surveys in addition to archaeological excavations. Interesting finds have been made in the areas on which the fiercest fighting occurred on the government left wing, particularly where Barrell's and Dejean's regiments stood. For example, pistol balls and pieces of shattered muskets have been uncovered here, indicating close-quarters fighting, as pistols were used only at close range, and the musket pieces appear to have been smashed by pistol/musket balls or heavy broadswords. Finds of musket balls appear to mirror the lines of men who stood and fought. Some balls appear to have been dropped without being fired, some missed their targets, and others are distorted from hitting human bodies. In some cases, it may be possible to identify whether the Jacobites or government soldiers fired certain rounds because the Jacobite forces are known to have used a large number of French muskets, which fired a slightly smaller calibre shot than that of the British Army's \"Brown Bess\". Analysis of the finds confirms that the Jacobites used muskets in greater numbers than previously thought. Not far from where the hand-to-hand fighting took place, fragments of mortar shells have been found. Though Forbes's headstones mark the graves of the Jacobites, the location of the graves of about 60 government soldiers is unknown. However, the recent discovery of a 1752 silver \"Thaler\", from the Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, may lead archaeologists to these graves. A geophysical survey, directly beneath the spot at which the coin was found, seems to indicate the existence of a large rectangular burial pit. It is thought possible that the coin was dropped by a soldier who once served on the Continent while he visited the graves of his fallen comrades. The National Trust of Scotland is currently trying to restore Culloden Moor, as closely as possible, to the state it was in during the Battle of Culloden Moor. It is also trying to expand the land under its care to ensure the full battlefield is protected under the NTS. Another goal is to restore Leannach Cottage and allow visitors to tour its interior once again.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57933", "revid": "1386827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57933", "title": "Bonnie Prince Charlie (disambiguation)", "text": "Bonnie Prince Charlie, or Charles Edward Stuart (1720\u20131788), was the Jacobite claimant to the throne of Great Britain.\nBonnie Prince Charlie may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "57934", "revid": "44812869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57934", "title": "Okhotsk", "text": "Okhotsk (Russian: , ) is an urban locality (a work settlement) and the administrative center of Okhotsky District of Khabarovsk Krai, Russia, located at the mouth of the Okhota River on the Sea of Okhotsk. Population: \u2009(2010 census); \u2009(2002 census); \u2009(1989 Soviet census)\nEtymology.\nIt was named after the Okhota River, whose name is a corrupted Evenk word \"okat\", \"river\".\nHistory.\nOkhotsk was the main Russian base on the Pacific coast from about 1650 to 1860, but lost its importance after the Amur Annexation in 1860. It is located at the east end of the Siberian River Routes on the Sea of Okhotsk where the Okhota and Kukhtuy rivers join to form a poor-but-usable harbor. \nIn 1639, the Russians first reached the Pacific southwest of Okhotsk at the mouth of the Ulya River. In 1647, Semyon Shelkovnikov built winter quarters at Okhotsk. In 1649, a fort was built (Kosoy Ostrozhok). In 1653, Okhotsk was burned by the local Lamuts. Although the Russian pioneers were skilled builders of river boats, they lacked the knowledge and equipment to build seagoing vessels, which meant that Okhotsk remained a coastal settlement and not a port. In 1682, Okhotsk had eight dwellings and five other buildings. When the Russians entered the Kamchatka Peninsula, they had to travel overland from the north.\nIn 1714, Peter the Great sent a party of shipbuilders to Okhotsk to provide faster access to the furs of Kamchatka. In 1715, they built the vessel \"Vostok\", and in 1716\u201317, Kozma Sokolov sailed it to Kamchatka. For the next 145 years, Okhotsk was the main Russian seaport on the Pacific, supplying Kamchatka and other coastal settlements. In 1731, the Siberian Military Flotilla was established here. In 1736, Okhotsk was moved downstream to a spit of land at the mouth of the Okhota River, converting the \"ostrog\" into a proper port. Vitus Bering's two Pacific expeditions (1725\u20131729 and 1733\u20131742) brought in large numbers of people, including the first scholars and expert sailors, and led to a great deal of building. In 1742, there were fifty-seven already-established buildings, forty-five newer buildings in Bering's \"expedition settlement,\" and eight ships in the harbor. Anton de Vieira was the town's governor at that time; he was of Portuguese origin, son of a Jewish father and Christian mother. From 1737 to 1837, there was a salt works several kilometers west on the coast that produced 14\u201336 tons of salt annually; in 1827, it was worked by a hundred and fifty exiles and about a hundred guards and overseers.\nBering's men found valuable sea otters east of Kamchatka, and fur hunters began island-hopping along the Aleutian Islands. Furs were brought back to Okhotsk and carried inland, mostly to be sold to the Chinese at Kyakhta. The Russian-American Company was founded in 1799 with its base at Okhotsk, which brought in more money to the town. In 1822 the Scottish traveler Captain John Cochrane ranked Okhotsk just after Barnaul as the neatest, cleanest, and most pleasant town he had seen in Siberia.\nFrom at least 1715, it was clear that Okhotsk was a poor site for a city. In addition to the difficult track inland, the harbor was poor, and the short growing season and lack of plowland meant that food had to be imported. Around 1750, there were only thirty-seven peasant families and a number of Yakut cattlemen living there. There was so little pasture in the area that pack horses sometimes had to be returned to Yakutsk unloaded. The harbor was ice-free from May to November, but the sailing season ran only from June through September. The town was built on a low, narrow spit blocking the mouths of the two rivers. The harbor inside the spit was large but shallow; three quarters of it was a mud flat during low water. Large ships could cross the bar only on a high tide. Ice-choked water during the spring breakup frequently flooded the town (twenty times from 1723 to 1813), as did high surf on a number of occasions. In 1810, the Okhota River, its mouth jammed by ice, cut a new channel through the spit and isolated the townsite; the town was moved to the spit east of the harbor mouth five years later. Goods now had to be unloaded and barged across the harbor; because the harbor was shallow, Yakuts had to wade with loads from shore to barge. Fresh water had to be fetched from away. Goods could not be brought down along the Kukhtuy River because of swamps. \nIn 1840, Vasily Zavoyko became head of the Russian-American Company post at Okhotsk and decided to move the post south to Ayan, a move that was completed in 1845. The Yakutsk-Ayan Track was built and then rebuilt in 1852 at a cost of 20,000 rubles, bypassing Okhotsk. In 1849, Siberian governor Nikolay Muravyov-Amursky followed the Russian-American Company's example and decided to move the Siberian Flotilla to Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky and other government facilities to Ayan. The Amur Annexation in 1860 continued the shift of Russian focus to the south. From 1870, Okhotsk was supplied from Nikolayevsk-on-Amur. Further loss of importance came in 1867 when Russian America (Alaska) was sold to the United States. The total population decline of Okhotsk went from 1,660 in 1839 to one hundred in 1865.\nBetween 1849 and 1866, American whaleships cruised for bowhead whales in the waters off Okhotsk. Some caught whales within sight of the settlement while others visited the town itself. They also fished for salmon in the Okhota River.\nOkhotsk was of some military importance during the Russian Civil War, when the White army generals Vasily Rakitin and Anatoly Pepelyayev used it as their place of arms in the Far East.\nOkhotsk was also a launch site of sounding rockets between 1981 and 2005. The rockets reached altitudes of up to 1,000\u00a0km https://.\nThe importance and population of Okhotsk sharply declined following the demise of the Soviet Union.\nTransportation.\nOkhotsk is served by the Okhotsk Airport.\nClimate.\nOkhotsk has a subarctic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dwc\") with very cold, dry winters and mild, wet summers.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57935", "revid": "15952072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57935", "title": "Battle of Culloden Moor", "text": ""}
{"id": "57936", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57936", "title": "Chernobyl, Ukraine", "text": ""}
{"id": "57937", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57937", "title": "Okhotsk, Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "57938", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57938", "title": "Petropavlovsk", "text": "Petropavlovsk () may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "57939", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57939", "title": "Petropavlovsk, Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "57940", "revid": "15952077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57940", "title": "Falkland Islands War", "text": ""}
{"id": "57941", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57941", "title": "Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser", "text": "Characters by Fritz Leiber\nFafhrd and the Gray Mouser are two sword-and-sorcery heroes appearing in stories written by American author Fritz Leiber. They are the protagonists of what are probably Leiber's best-known stories. One of his motives in writing them was to have a couple of fantasy heroes closer to true human nature than the likes of Howard's Conan the Barbarian or Burroughs's Tarzan. \nFafhrd is a very tall (nearly ) and strong northern barbarian, skilled at both swordsmanship and singing. The Mouser is a small (not much more than ) mercurial thief, gifted and deadly at swordsmanship (often using a sword in one hand and a long dagger or in the other), as well as a former wizard's apprentice who retains some skill at magic. Fafhrd talks like a romantic, but his strength and practicality usually wins through, while the cynical-sounding Mouser is prone to showing strains of sentiment at unexpected times. Both are rogues, living in a decadent world where only the ruthless and cynical survive. They spend a lot of time drinking, feasting, wenching, brawling, stealing, and gambling, and are seldom fussy about who hires their swords. Still, they are humane and\u2014most of all\u2014relish true adventure.\nThe characters were loosely modeled upon Leiber himself and his friend Harry Otto Fischer. Fischer initially created them in a letter to Leiber in September 1934, naming at the same time their home city of Lankhmar. In 1936, Leiber finished the first Fafhrd and Gray Mouser novella, \"Adept's Gambit\", and began work on a second, \"The Tale of the Grain Ships\". At the same time, Fischer was writing the beginning of \"The Lords of Quarmall\". \"Adept's Gambit\" would not see publication until 1947, while \"The Lords of Quarmall\" would be finished by Leiber and published in 1964. His second story, \"The Tale of the Grain Ships\", would become the prototype for \"Scylla's Daughter\" (1961) and, later, the novel \"The Swords of Lankhmar\" (1968).\nThe stories of Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser respectively were only loosely connected until the 1960s, when Leiber organized them chronologically and added additional material in preparation for paperback publication. Starting as young men, the two separately meet their female lovers, meet each other, and lose both their lovers in the same night, which explains both their friendship and the arrested adolescence of their lifestyles. However, in later stories, the two mature, learn leadership, and eventually settle down with new female partners on the Iceland-like Rime Isle. The novels have many picaresque elements, and are sometimes described as picaresque on the whole.\nSetting.\nThe majority of the stories are set in the fictional world of Nehwon (\"nehw on\", or \"Nowhen\" backwards: contrasted to Samuel Butler's 1872 \"Erewhon\"). Many of them take place in and around its greatest city, Lankhmar. It is described as \"a world like and unlike our own\". Theorists in Nehwon believe that their world may be shaped like a bubble, floating in the waters of eternity.\nSundered from us by gulfs of time and stranger dimensions dreams the ancient world of Nehwon with its towers and skulls and jewels, its swords and sorceries. Nehwon's known realms crowd about the Inner Sea: northward the green-forested fierce Land of the Eight Cities, eastward the steppe-dwelling Mingol horsemen and the desert where caravans creep from the rich Eastern Lands and the River Tilth. But southward, linked to the desert only by the Sinking Land and further warded by the Great Dike and the Mountains of Hunger, are the rich grain fields and walled cities of Lankhmar, eldest and chiefest of Nehwon's lands. Dominating the Land of Lankhmar and crouching at the silty mouth of the River Hlal in a secure corner between the grain fields, the Great Salt Marsh, and the Inner Sea is the massive-walled and mazy-alleyed metropolis of Lankhmar, thick with thieves and shaven priests, lean-framed magicians and fat-bellied merchants\u2014Lankhmar the Imperishable, the City of the Black Toga.\n\u2014From \"Induction\" by Fritz Leiber\nIn \"The Swords of Lankhmar\", it is revealed that Nehwon is just one of many worlds in a multiverse when Fafhrd and the Mouser join forces with a German explorer named Karl Treuherz who is looking for his spacecraft, which he uses to cross the boundaries between parallel dimensions in his hunt for new animals to feature at a zoo.\nTechnology in Nehwon varies between the Iron Age and medieval. Leiber wrote of Lankhmarts: \"They may be likened to the Romans or be thought of as, if I may use such a term, southern medievals.\" On the topic of his Eastern Lands, he wrote: \"think of Saracens, Arabs, Parthians, Assyrians even. They ride the camel and elephant, and use the bow extensively.\"\nThe series includes many bizarre and outlandish characters. The two who most influence\u2014and, some would say, cause the most trouble\u2014for Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser are their sorcerous advisers, Ningauble of the Seven Eyes and Sheelba of the Eyeless Face (see Ningauble and Sheelba, below). These two lead the heroes into some of their most interesting and dangerous adventures.\nPublication history.\nThe first story, \"Two Sought Adventure\", appeared in \"Unknown\" in August 1939; the last in \"The Knight and Knave of Swords\" in 1988. Although Leiber credited his friend Harry Otto Fischer with the original concepts for his characters, it was Leiber who wrote nearly all the stories. Ten thousand words of \"The Lords of Quarmall\" were penned by Fischer early in the development of the series; the story was completed by Leiber in 1964. Fischer also wrote \"The Childhood and Youth of the Gray Mouser\", published in 1978. The stories' style and tone vary considerably, but nearly all contain an often dark sense of humor, which ranges from the subtle and character-based to the Pythonesque.\nThe stories have been collected in the \"Swords\" series:\nIn 2009, Benjamin Szumskyj's \"Strange Wonders\" included the first few chapters of \"The Tale of the Grain Ships\", written in the 1930s. This unfinished fragment depicts the Gray Mouser in Rome during the reign of the Emperor Claudius.\nOmnibus editions.\nSeveral omnibus editions have also been published:\nComics adaptations.\nIn 1972, Fafhrd and the Mouser began their comics career, appearing in \"Wonder Woman\" #202 alongside the title character and Catwoman in a story scripted by award-winning SF writer Samuel R. Delany. In 1973, DC Comics began an ongoing series, \"Sword of Sorcery\", featuring the duo. The title was written by Denny O'Neil and featured art by Howard Chaykin, Walt Simonson and Jim Starlin; the well-received title ran only five issues. Stories included adaptations of \"The Price of Pain-Ease\", \"Thieves' House\", \"The Cloud of Hate\", and \"The Sunken Land\", as well as original stories. This series was collected by Dark Horse Comics in a trade paperback collection published in June 2008.\nIn 1991, Epic Comics published a four-issue comic book adaptation of seven of the stories: \"Ill Met in Lankhmar\" (issue 1), \"The Circle Curse\" and \"The Howling Tower\" (issue 2), \"The Price of Pain Ease\" and \"Bazaar of the Bizarre\" (issue 3), and \"Lean Times in Lankhmar\" and \"When the Sea King's Away\" (issue 4). The comics were scripted by Howard Chaykin, who had drawn several issues of the earlier DC title, and pencilled by Mike Mignola, whose \"Hellboy\" comic book often has a similar feel to Leiber's work. Mignola also did the jacket covers and interior art for the White Wolf collection. This series was collected by Dark Horse Comics in a trade paperback collection published in March 2007.\nMarvel Comics created their own version of Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser, when they introduced Fafnir of Vanaheim and his companion Blackrat to the \"Conan\" comic series. The pairs of characters were very much alike and Roy Thomas, who wrote the original \"Conan\" comics, made no secret that it was his intention to create characters that were a tribute to Fritz Leiber's creations.\nGames.\nIn 1937, Leiber and his college friend Harry Otto Fischer created a complex wargame set within the world of Nehwon, which Fischer had helped to create. Later, they created a simplified board game entitled simply \"Lankhmar\" which was released by TSR in 1976. This is a rare case of a game adaptation written by the creators of the stories that the game is based on.\nNehwon, and some of its more interesting inhabitants, are described in the early \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" supplement \"Deities and Demigods\", and the stories themselves were a significant influence on the role-playing game.\nIn 1986, Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser were featured in a 1-on-1 Adventure Gamebook set, \"Dragonsword of Lankhmar\". One player controlled Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser, who were trying to find a magical sword beneath an altar (just which one, they were not sure) in Lankhmar. The other player controlled assassins from the local thieves' guild, who were trying to kill the famous rogues for operating in the city without permission from the guild.\nNingauble and Sheelba.\nNingauble of the Seven Eyes and Sheelba of the Eyeless Face are two wizards who serve as patrons for Fafhrd and the Mouser. Patron warlock of Fafhrd, Ningauble is so named due to his seven (usually only six visible) glowing eyes, seen roving within, and sometimes projecting from, the hood of his cloak. Along with the Gray Mouser's patron warlock, Sheelba, Ningauble often sends his servant on ludicrous missions such as recovering the Mask of Death or stealing the very stars from the highest mountain. Ningauble's mysterious cavern has obscure space-time portals, which prevent Fafhrd and the Mouser from being sent into other worlds. Ningauble is referred to as the \"gossiper of the gods\", because of his fondness for stories of an unusual nature (whether or not they are true seems irrelevant) or his sometimes bizarre spies and informants. Ningauble is a mysterious being with a manipulative character, as described in this passage from \"Adept's Gambit\":\nSome said that Ningauble had been created by the Elder Gods for men to guess about and to sharpen their imaginations for even tougher riddles. None knew whether he had the gift of foresight, or whether he merely set the stage for future events with such a bewildering cunning that only an efreet or an adept could evade acting the part given him.\nThe relationship between Fafhrd and Ningauble of the Seven Eyes is captured well in this exchange from \"The Swords of Lankhmar:\"\nNingauble shrugged his cloaked, bulbous shoulders. \"I thought you were a brave man, addicted to deeds of derring-do.\"\nFafhrd cursed sardonically, then demanded, \"But even if I should go clang those rusty bells, how can Lankhmar hold out until then with her walls breached and the odds fifty to one against her?\"\n\"I'd like to know that myself,\" Ningauble assured him.\n\"And how do I get to the temple when the streets are crammed with warfare?\"\nNingauble shrugged once again. \"You're a hero. You should know.\"\nThe Mouser's patron, Sheelba of the Eyeless Face, is named for the featureless darkness within his/her hood. In contrast to Ningauble's love of often pointless storytelling, Sheelba is taciturn, choosing his/her words as if they were valuables to be disbursed parsimoniously. That the stoic Fafhrd is paired with the voluble Ningauble, while the story-loving Mouser with the laconic Sheelba is doubly ironic. Sheelba's sigil is an empty oval (presumably signifying an empty hooded face).\nSheelba's gender is ambiguous: Harry Fischer, who first conceived of the character, claimed Sheelba was female, while to Fischer's surprise Leiber referred to Sheelba as male beginning in \"The Swords of Lankhmar\". In fact, Leiber refers to Sheelba as \"he\" throughout the six books of the series, switching to \"she\" for the first time only in the last book, \"The Knight and Knave of Swords\", without explanation. Leiber's friend, Frederick MacKnight, who introduced Leiber to Fischer and was involved in the earliest days of the characters, called Sheelba \"she-he (or it)\". Fischer may have created Sheelba as a tribute to his wife Martha.\nWhile Ningauble dwells in caverns, Sheelba's house is a small hut which strides about the swamps not far from Lankhmar on five chicken leg-like posts, which bend and scuttle like the legs of a great crab or spider. Sheelba's hut is similar in description to the Russian legend of Baba Yaga, which is referenced in other Leiber works such as \"The Wanderer\", where Baba Yaga is the name of a lunar lander.\nWeapons of Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser.\nFafhrd commonly uses a sword which he names Graywand, a two-hand sword that he's able to use one-handed too (in later stories by necessity). He also carries a poignard named Heartseeker and a short hand-axe which has never been named. For combat at a distance, he often carries a bow and arrow which he wields effectively even while on horseback or at sea, and which he's able to use despite his final handicap (he loses a hand). The Mouser, who in one story is called \"the best swordsman in the World\", also fights with a pair of weapons: a \"slim, curving\" sword or sabre called Scalpel, and a dagger called the Cat's Claw, the latter usually hidden in the small of the Mouser's back, and the original of which had a very subtle curve. (It was a straight-bladed weapon by the events of \"Lean Times in Lankhmar\".) As the pair are often divested of their property, these are names they apply to any of their appropriate weapons and not necessarily names of specific ones. They are absolutely not magic weapons: both the wielders are just very able in their use. The Mouser is also an expert with the sling. The Mouser, having been an apprentice magician, can do some very small enchantments, especially while dueling.\nIn popular culture.\nJoanna Russ was familiar with and appreciative of the Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser series, and in addition to critical reviews of Leiber, also referenced Fafhrd in her \"The Adventures of Alyx\" (1976) sequence as one of Alyx's former lovers in \"The Adventuress\" (1967; aka \"Bluestocking\"). Leiber then included Alyx in two Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser stories, \"The Two Best Thieves in Lankhmar\" (1968) and \"Under the Thumbs of the Gods\" (1975).\nIn Terry Pratchett's \"The Colour of Magic\" (1983), Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser are parodied as Bravd and the Weasel. Although Ankh-Morpork bears more than a passing resemblance to Lankhmar, Pratchett, known for the use of pastiche in his early works, has been quoted as not intending a direct takeoff.\nThe characters of Barak and Silk from David Eddings' fantasy series \"The Belgariad\" are very similar in both form and personality to Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser respectively.\nAmerican author Michael Chabon's \"Gentlemen of the Road\" (2007) is a \"swashbuckling adventure\" novel set in the kaganate of Khazaria (now southwest Russia) around AD 950. It features two similarly physically built adventurers who have a working relationship similar to Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser's \u2013 Amram, a hulking Abyssinian proficient with an axe, and the slightly-built swordsman Zelikman, who is Frankish. This pair \u2013 both of Jewish origin \u2013 become embroiled in a rebellion and a plot to restore a displaced Khazar prince to the throne.\nTwo characters created by Michael J. Sullivan, Hadrian and Royce, also share a similar relationship to Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser and have similar characteristics and personalities. Sullivan wrote a trilogy of books, Riyria Revelations, originally published as six novellas or books in 2011 and 2012.\nA thief character created by Christopher Buehlman in his novel, \"The Blacktongue Thief\", undergoes a similar training to that described in the short story \"Ill Met in Lankhmar\".\nPlaying off the visit of Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser to Earth in \"Adept's Gambit\" (set in second century B.C. Tyre), Steven Saylor's short story \"Ill Seen in Tyre\" takes his Roma Sub Rosa series hero Gordianus to the city of Tyre a hundred years later, where the two visitors from Nehwon are remembered as local legends.\nThe Gray Mouser's dirk \"Cat Claw\" has appeared as a weapon in several role-playing video games, including early installments of the \"Final Fantasy\" series.\nIn \"Baldur's Gate\", the name \"Fafhrd\" appears as a password needed to gain entrance into the Thieves' Guild.\nIn Bethesda's \"\", when visiting the Ratway in the city of Riften, the first enemies the player meets are a sneaky-looking fellow and a barbarian type called Drahff and Hewnon Black-Skeever. Drahff is an anagram of Fafhrd, \"Black-Skeever\" is a play on \"Gray-Mouser\", and Hewnon is an anagram of Nehwon, the world in which Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser live. \nIn Dodge Roll's \"Enter the Gungeon\", the player can encounter a pair of characters named Frifle and the Grey Mauser, styled to look like the eponymous heroes.\nIn Jack L. Chalker's \"And the Devil Will Drag You Under\", two characters resembling Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser appear briefly in a tavern with one repeating out loud slightly similar names to Ningauble and Sheelba.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57942", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57942", "title": "Bratsk", "text": "City in Irkutsk Oblast, Russia\nBratsk (, ; ) is a city in Irkutsk Oblast, Russia, located on the Angara River near the vast Bratsk Reservoir. It had population of \u2009(2021 census).\nEtymology.\nThe name of the city, which is from the same root as the Russian word for 'brother' ( / \"brat\"), derives from the Russian phrase for 'brotherly people' ( / \"bratskije ljudi\").\nHistory.\nThe first Europeans in the area arrived in 1623, intending to collect taxes from the local Buryat population. Permanent settlement began with the construction of an \"ostrog\" ('fortress') in 1631 at the junction of the Oka and Angara rivers. Several wooden towers from the 17th-century fort are now exhibited in Kolomenskoye Estate of Moscow.\nDuring World War II, there was an increase in industrial activity in Siberia, as Soviet industry was moved to the lands east of the Ural Mountains. After the end of the war, development slowed as resources were required in the rebuilding of European Russia.\nIn 1947, the Gulag Angara prison labor camp was constructed near Bratsk, with capacity for up to 44,000 prisoners for projects such as the construction of the railway from Tayshet to Ust-Kut via Bratsk (now the western section of the Baikal-Amur Mainline).\nThe city's rapid development commenced with the announcement in 1952 that a dam and hydroelectric plant would be built at Bratsk on the Angara River. Town status was granted to Bratsk in 1955. The city of Bratsk was formed from separate villages, industrial and residential areas according to a 1958\u201361 masterplan. These areas were in certain cases far away from each other, leading to the large territorial area of the Bratsk municipal region, and explaining why there are unsettled areas of taiga between city districts.\nThe 4,500-megawatt Bratsk Hydroelectric Power Station was built between 1954 and 1966, bringing numerous workers to the town. Other industries in the city include an aluminum smelter and a pulp mill.\nBratsk originally comprised the following regions, with the idea being that they would each grow, and merge, to form the city of Bratsk.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nWithin the framework of administrative divisions, Bratsk serves as the administrative center of Bratsky District, even though it is not technically a part of it. As an administrative division, it is incorporated separately as the City of Bratsk\u2014an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the City of Bratsk is incorporated as Bratsk Urban Okrug.\nTerritorial divisions.\nFor administrative purposes, the city is divided into three districts (populations are as of the 2010 Census):\nResidential districts of the city, some of which are separated by open country, include: Bikey, Chekanovsky, Energetik, Gidrostroitel, Osinovka, Padun, Porozhsky, Sosnovy, Stenikha, Sukhoy, Tsentralny, and Yuzhny Padun.\nPolitics.\nThe current mayor of Bratsk is Sergei Vasilievich Serebrennikov. In November 2013 the city council amended the charter to institute direct mayoral elections, which had been abolished in 2011. Elected again in 2014, Serebrennikov then began his second term after previously having served as mayor between 2005 and 2009.\nCulture.\nMuseums.\nBratsk has multiple museums.\nIn popular culture.\nThe film 'Svist' was filmed in Bratsk.\nClimate.\nBratsk has a subarctic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfc\"). Winters are very cold and long with average temperatures from to in January, while summers are mild to warm with average temperatures from to in July. Precipitation is moderate and is significantly higher in summer than at other times of the year.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nBratsk is served by the Baikal-Amur Mainline railway and by the Bratsk Airport. There is a hydrofoil up the Angara to Irkutsk. Public transport includes buses and trolleybuses (only in the central district)\nThe city's economy is largely reliant on heavy industry, including one of Russia's largest aluminum plants, lumber mills, chemical works, and a coal-fired power station.\nHigher educational facilities include the Bratsk State University and a branch of the Irkutsk State University.\nIn recent times, Bratsk has attracted attention due to association with the cryptocurrency industry. \nRusal operates a smelter in Bratsk.\nIndustry.\nBratsk Reservoir has traditionally been a major employer for the city of Bratsk. Thousands were involved in its construction, and to this day the reservoir, and dam, support many jobs in the city, both directly connected to the dam itself, and secondary industries - i.e. fishing. Bratsk Reservoir is a popular tourist attraction, and due to this, Bratsk has a small, but notable, tourism industry.\nModern Bratsk is classed as a 'high-density industrial region', producing around 20% of the industrial output of the Irkutsk oblast.\nIn recent times, Bratsk has attracted attention due to the reported presence of bitcoin operations in the city.\nPollution.\nBratsk has often attracted negative attention due to the reported pollution levels of the city. The city was among the Blacksmith Institute's \"Dirty Thirty\", the thirty most polluted places in the world.\nBratsk Reservoir is one of the world's largest, and has been at the centre of repeated claims about its level of pollution. According to Yuri Udodov, head of the Federal Committee on Ecology (FCE) in Irkutsk Oblast, the reservoir has \"the highest rate of discharge of metallic mercury into the environment [in] all of Siberia.\" The extent of mercury pollution in the ground around the nearby Usolye chemical plant is equal to half the total global production of mercury in 1992.\nBratsk Reservoir is the main source of drinking water for the city of Bratsk, and surrounding area. The drinking water is drawn from the part of the reservoir categorised as 'clean'. Due to a number of factors, both man-made and natural, the quality of the water from Bratsk reservoir ranges from 'clean', down to 'dirty'.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nBratsk is twinned with:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57943", "revid": "15756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57943", "title": "Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy", "text": ""}
{"id": "57944", "revid": "50236370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57944", "title": "Koryaks", "text": "Ethnic group of far northeastern Russia\nKoryaks () are an Indigenous people of the Russian Far East who live immediately north of the Kamchatka Peninsula in Kamchatka Krai and inhabit the coastlands of the Bering Sea. The cultural borders of the Koryaks include Tigilsk in the south and the Anadyr basin in the north.\nThe Koryaks are culturally similar to the Chukchis of extreme northeast Siberia. The Koryak language and Alutor (which is often regarded as a dialect of Koryak), are linguistically close to the Chukchi language. All of these languages are members of the Chukotko-Kamchatkan language family. They are more distantly related to the Itelmens on the Kamchatka Peninsula. All of these peoples and other, unrelated minorities in and around Kamchatka are known collectively as Kamchadals.\nNeighbors of the Koryaks include the Evens to the west, the Alutor to the south (on the isthmus of Kamchatka Peninsula), the Kerek to the east, and the Chukchi to the northeast.\nThe Koryak are typically split into two groups. The coastal people are called \"Nemelan\" (or \"Nymylan\") meaning 'village dwellers', due to their living in villages. Their lifestyle is based on local fishing and marine mammal hunting. The inland Koryak, reindeer herders, are called \"Chaucu\" (or \"Chauchuven\"), meaning 'rich in reindeer'. They are more nomadic, following the herds as they graze with the seasons.\nAccording to the 2010 census, there were 7,953 Koryaks in Russia.\nEtymology.\nThe name Koryak was from the exonym word 'Korak', meaning 'with the reindeer (kor)' in a nearby group Chukotko-Kamchatkan language. The earliest references to the name 'Koryak' were recorded in the writings of the Russian cossack Vladimir Atlasov, who conquered Kamchatka for the Tsar in 1695. The variant name was adopted by Russia in official state documents, hence popularizing it ever since.\nOrigin.\nThe origin of the Koryak is unknown. Anthropologists have speculated that a land bridge connected the Eurasian and North American continent during Late Pleistocene. It is possible that migratory peoples crossed the modern-day Koryak land \"en route\" to North America. Scientists have suggested that people traveled back and forth between this area and Haida Gwaii before the ice age receded. They theorize that the ancestors of the Koryak had returned to Siberian Asia from North America during this time. Cultural and some linguistic similarity exists between the Nivkh and the Koryak.\nHistory.\nThe Koryak once occupied a much larger area of the Russian Far East. Their overlapping borders extended to the Nivkh areas in Khabarovsk Krai until the Evens arrived, and pushed them into their present region. A smallpox epidemic in 1769\u20131770 and warfare with Russian Cossacks reduced the Koryak population from 10-11,000 in 1700 to 4,800 in 1800.\nUnder the Soviet Union, the Koryak Autonomous Okrug was formed in 1931 and named after the Koryak people. Based on a local referendum in 2005, this was merged with Kamchatka Krai effective 1 July 2007.\nCulture.\nFamilies usually gathered into groups of six or seven, forming bands. The nominal chief had no predominating authority, and the groups relied on consensus to make decisions, resembling common small group egalitarianism.\nThe lives of the people in the interior revolved around reindeer, their main source of food. They also used all the parts of its body to make sewing materials and clothing, tools and weapons. The meat was mostly eaten roasted and the blood, marrow, and milk were drunk or eaten raw. The liver, heart, kidneys, and tongue were considered delicacies. Salmon and other freshwater fish as well as berries and roots played a major part in the diet, as reindeer flesh did not contain some necessary vitamins and minerals, nor dietary fibre, needed to survive in the harsh tundra.\nToday, the Koryaks also buy processed food, such as bread, cereal, and canned fish. They sell some reindeer each year for money, but can build up their herds due to the large population of reindeer.\nClothing was made out of reindeer hides, but nowadays men and women often have replaced that with cloth. The men wore baggy pants and a hide shirt, which often had a hood attached to it, boots and traditional caps made of reindeer skin. They still use the boots and caps. The women wore the same as the men, but with a longer shirt reaching to the calves. Today, women often wear a head cloth and skirt, but wear the reindeer skin robe in cold weather.\nThe Koryak lived in domed shaped tents, called \"jajanga,\" or yaranga (from the more famous Chukchi term) similar to a tipi of the American Plains Indians, but less vertical, while some lived in yurts. The framework was covered in many reindeer skins. Few families still use the yaranga as dwellings, but some use them for trips to the tundra. The centre of the yaranga had a hearth, which has been replaced by an iron stove. Reindeer hide beds are placed to the east in the chum. They used small cupboards to store the families' food, clothing and personal items.\nTransportation.\nThe inland Koryak rode reindeer to get around, cutting off their antlers to prevent injuries. They also fitted a team of reindeer with harnesses and attached them to sleds to transport goods and people when moving camp. Today the Koryak use snowmobiles more often than reindeer. Most inter-village transport is by air or boat, although tracked vehicles are used for travel to neighboring villages.\nThey developed snowshoes, which they used in winter (and still do) when the snow is deep. Snowshoes are made by lashing reindeer sinew and hide strips to a tennis racket-shaped birch bark or willow hoop. The sinew straps are used to attach the shoe to the foot.\nChildren learned to ride a reindeer, sleigh, and use snowshoes at a very young age.\nThe other Koryak were skilled seafarers hunting whales and other marine mammals.\nReligion.\nKoryaks believe in a Supreme Being whom they call by various names: \"\u014baj\u014b\u0259nen\" (Universe/World), \"ine\u0263itel\u0294\u0259n\" (Supervisor), \"\u0263\u0259t\u0361\u0255\u0263olet\u0259nv\u0259l\u0294\u0259n\" (Master-of-the-Upper-World), \"\u0263\u0259t\u0361\u0255\u0263ol\u0294\u0259n\" (One-on-High), etc. He is considered to reside in Heaven with his family and when he wishes to punish mankind for immoral acts, he falls asleep and thus leaves man vulnerable to unsuccessful hunting and other ills. Koryak mythology centers on the supernatural shaman \"Quikil\" (Big-Raven), who was created by the Supreme Being as the first man and protector of the Koryak. Big Raven myths are also found in Southeast Alaska in the Tlingit culture, and among the Haida, Tsimshian, and other natives of the Pacific Northwest Coast Amerindians.\nEnvironment.\nKoryak lands are mountains and volcanic, covered in mostly Arctic tundra. Coniferous trees lie near the southern regions along the coast of the Shelekhova Bay of the Sea of Okhotsk. The northern regions inland are much colder, where only various shrubs grow, but these are enough to sustain reindeer migration. The mean temperature in winter is while the short summers are . The area they covered before Russian colonization was , roughly corresponding to the Koryak Okrug, of which the administrative centre is Palana. Today the Koryak are the largest minority group with 8,743 people. The krai's population is now majority ethnic Russian, descendants of the Cossack colonizers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57945", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57945", "title": "Bratsk, Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "57947", "revid": "50781845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57947", "title": "Theobroma cacao", "text": "Species of tree grown for its seeds\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheobroma cacao (cacao tree or cocoa tree) is a small ( tall) evergreen tree in the Malvaceae family. Its seeds\u2014cocoa beans\u2014are used to make chocolate liquor, cocoa solids, cocoa butter and chocolate. Although the tree is native to the tropics of the Americas, the largest producer of cocoa beans in 2022 was Ivory Coast. The plants leaves are alternate, entire, unlobed, long and broad.\nDescription.\nFlowers.\nThe flowers are produced in clusters directly on the trunk and older branches; this is known as cauliflory. The flowers are small, diameter, with pink calyx. The floral formula, used to represent the structure of a flower using numbers, is \u2736 K5 C5 A(5\u00b0+52) G(5).\nWhile many of the world's flowers are pollinated by bees (Hymenoptera) or butterflies/moths (Lepidoptera), cacao flowers are pollinated by tiny flies, \"Forcipomyia\" biting midges. Using the natural pollinator \"Forcipomyia\" midges produced more fruit than using artificial pollinators.\nFruit.\nThe fruit, called a cacao pod, is ovoid, long and wide, ripening yellow to orange, and weighs about when ripe. The pod contains 20 to 60 seeds, usually called \"beans\", embedded in a white pulp.\nThe seeds are the main ingredient of chocolate, while the pulp is used in some countries to prepare juice, smoothies, jelly, and cream. Usually discarded until practices changed in the 21st century, the fermented pulp may be distilled into an alcoholic beverage. The pulp tastes like lychee or tropical melon. Each seed contains a significant amount of fat (40\u201350%) as cocoa butter.\nThe fruit's active constituent is the stimulant theobromine, a compound similar to caffeine.\nNomenclature.\nThe generic name \"Theobroma\" is derived from the Greek for \"food of the gods\"; from (), meaning 'god' or 'divine', and (), meaning 'food'. The specific name \"cacao\" is the Hispanization of the name given to the plant in indigenous Mesoamerican languages such as in Tzeltal, K\u02bciche\u02bc and Classic Maya; in Sayula Popoluca; and in Nahuatl meaning \"bean of the cocoa-tree\". While the tree and seeds are generally called cacao, they are sometimes referred to as 'cocoa'.\nTaxonomy.\nCacao (\"Theobroma cacao\") is one of 26 species belonging to the genus \"Theobroma\" classified under the subfamily Byttnerioideae of the mallow family Malvaceae.\nIn 2008, researchers proposed a new classification based upon morphological, geographic, and genomic criteria: 10 groups have been named according to their geographic origin or the traditional cultivar name. These groups are: Amelonado, Criollo, Nacional, Contamana, Curaray, Cacao guiana, Iquitos, Mara\u00f1on, Nanay, and Pur\u00fas.\nDistribution and domestication.\n\"T. cacao\" is widely distributed from southeastern Mexico to the Amazon basin. There were originally two hypotheses about its domestication; one said that there were two foci for domestication, one in the Lacandon Jungle area of Mexico and another in lowland South America. More recent studies of patterns of DNA diversity, however, suggest that this is not the case. One study sampled 1241 trees and classified them into 10 distinct genetic clusters. This study also identified areas, for example around Iquitos in modern Peru and Ecuador, where representatives of several genetic clusters originated more than 5000 years ago, leading to development of the variety, Nacional cocoa bean. This result suggests that this is where \"T. cacao\" was originally domesticated, probably for the pulp that surrounds the beans, which is eaten as a snack and fermented into a mildly alcoholic beverage. Using the DNA sequences and comparing them with data derived from climate models and the known conditions suitable for cacao, one study refined the view of domestication, linking the area of greatest cacao genetic diversity to a bean-shaped area that encompasses Ecuador, the border between Brazil and Peru and the southern part of the Colombian\u2013Brazilian border. Climate models indicate that at the peak of the last ice age 21,000 years ago, when habitat suitable for cacao was at its most reduced, this area was still suitable, and so provided a refugium for species.\nCacao trees grow well as understory plants in humid forest ecosystems. This is equally true of abandoned cultivated trees, making it difficult to distinguish truly wild trees from those whose parents may originally have been cultivated.\nCultivation.\nIn 2023, cocoa beans were cultivated on roughly worldwide. Cocoa beans are grown by large agroindustrial plantations and small producers, the bulk of production coming from millions of farmers with small plots. A tree begins to bear when it is four or five years old. A mature tree may have 6,000 flowers in a year, yet only about 20 pods. About 1,200 seeds (40 pods) are required to produce of cocoa paste.\nHistorically, chocolate makers have recognized three main cultivar groups of cacao beans used to make cocoa and chocolate: Forastero, Criollo and Trinitario. The most prized, rare, and expensive is the Criollo group, the cocoa bean used by the Maya. Only 10% of chocolate is made from Criollo, which is arguably less bitter and more aromatic than any other bean. In November 2000, the cacao beans coming from Chuao were awarded an appellation of origin under the title (from Spanish: 'cacao of Chuao').\nThe cacao bean in 80% of chocolate is made using beans of the Forastero group, the main and most ubiquitous variety being the Amenolado variety, while the Arriba variety (such as the Nacional variety) are less commonly found in Forastero produce. Forastero trees are significantly hardier and more disease-resistant than Criollo trees, resulting in cheaper cacao beans.\nMajor cocoa bean processors include Hershey's, Nestl\u00e9 and Mars. Chocolate can be made from \"T. cacao\" through a process of steps that involve harvesting, fermenting of \"T. cacao\" pulp, drying, harvesting, and then extraction. Roasting \"T. cacao\" by using superheated steam was found to be better than conventional oven-roasting because it resulted in the same quality of cocoa beans in a shorter time.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2023, world production of cocoa beans was 5.6 million tonnes, led by Ivory Coast with 42.5% of the total (table). Other major producers were Ghana (11.7%) and Indonesia (11.5%).\nConservation.\nThe pests and diseases to which cacao is subject, along with climate change, mean that new varieties will be needed to respond to these challenges. Breeders rely on the genetic diversity conserved in field genebanks to create new varieties, because cacao has recalcitrant seeds that cannot be stored in a conventional genebank. In an effort to improve the diversity available to breeders, and ensure the future of the field genebanks, experts have drawn up A Global Strategy for the Conservation and Use of Cacao Genetic Resources, as the Foundation for a Sustainable Cocoa Economy. The strategy has been adopted by the cacao producers and their clients, and seeks to improve the characterization of cacao diversity, the sustainability and diversity of the cacao collections, the usefulness of the collections, and to ease access to better information about the conserved material. Some natural areas of cacao diversity are protected by various forms of conservation, for example national parks. However, a recent study of genetic diversity and predicted climates suggests that many of those protected areas will no longer be suitable for cacao by 2050. It also identifies an area around Iquitos in Peru that will remain suitable for cacao and that is home to considerable genetic diversity, and recommends that this area be considered for protection. Other projects, such as the International Cocoa Quarantine Centre, aim to combat cacao diseases and preserve genetic diversity.\nPhytopathogens (parasitic organisms) cause much damage to \"Theobroma cacao\" plantations around the world. Many of those phytopathogens, which include many of the pests named below, were analyzed using mass spectrometry and allow for guiding on the correct approaches to get rid of the specific phytopathogens. This method was found to be quick, reproducible, and accurate showing promising results in the future to prevent damage to \"Theobroma cacao\" by various phytopathogens.\nA specific bacterium \"Streptomyces camerooniansis\" was found to be beneficial for \"T. cacao\" by helping plant growth by accelerating seed germination of \"T. cacao,\" inhibiting growth of various types of microorganisms (such as different oomycetes, fungi, and bacteria), and preventing rotting by \"Phytophthora megakarya\".\nPests.\nVarious plant pests and diseases can cause serious problems for cacao production.\nGenome.\nThe genome of \"T. cacao\" is diploid, its size is 430 Mbp, and it comprises 10 chromosome pairs (2n=2x=20). In September 2010, a team of scientists announced a draft sequence of the cacao genome (Matina1-6 genotype). In a second, unrelated project, the International Cocoa Genome Sequencing Consortium-ICGS, coordinated by CIRAD, first published in December 2010 (online, paper publication in January 2011), the sequence of the cacao genome, of the Criollo cacao (of a landrace from Belize, B97-61/B2). In their publication, they reported a detailed analysis of the genomic and genetic data.\nThe sequence of the cacao genome identified 28,798 protein-coding genes, compared to the roughly 23,000 protein-coding genes of the human genome. About 20% of the cacao genome consists of transposable elements, a low proportion compared to other plant species. Many genes were identified as coding for flavonoids, aromatic terpenes, theobromine and many other metabolites involved in cocoa flavor and quality traits, among which a relatively high proportion code for polyphenols, which constitute up to 8% of cacao pods dry weight. The cacao genome appears close to the hypothetical hexaploid ancestor of all dicotyledonous plants, and it is proposed as an evolutionary mechanism by which the 21 chromosomes of the dicots' hypothetical hexaploid ancestor underwent major fusions leading to cacao's 10 chromosome pairs.\nThe genome sequence enables cacao molecular biology and breeding for elite varieties through marker-assisted selection, in particular for genetic resistance to fungal, oomycete and viral diseases responsible for huge yield losses each year. In 2017\u201318, due to concerns about survivability of cacao plants in an era of global warming in which climates become more extreme in the narrow band of latitudes where cacao is grown (20 degrees north and south of the equator), the commercial company, Mars, Incorporated and the University of California, Berkeley are using CRISPR to adjust DNA for improved hardiness of cacao in hot climates.\nHistory of cultivation.\nDomestication.\nThe cacao tree, native of the Amazon rainforest, was first domesticated at least 5,300 years ago, in equatorial South America from the Santa Ana-La Florida (SALF) site in what is present-day southeast Ecuador (Zamora-Chinchipe Province) by the Mayo-Chinchipe culture before being introduced in Mesoamerica.\nIn Mesoamerica, ceramic vessels with residues from the preparation of cacao beverages have been found from the Early Formative (1900\u2013900 BC) period. For example, one such vessel found at an Olmec archaeological site on the Gulf Coast of Veracruz, Mexico dates cacao's preparation by pre-Olmec peoples as early as 1750 BC. On the Pacific coast of Chiapas, Mexico, a Mokaya archaeological site provides evidence of even earlier cacao beverages, to 1900 BC. The initial domestication was probably related to the making of a fermented alcoholic beverage. In 2018, researchers who analysed the genome of cultivated cacao trees concluded that the domesticated cacao trees all originated from a single domestication event that occurred about 3,600 years ago somewhere in Central America.\nAncient uses.\nSeveral mixtures of cacao are described in ancient texts, for ceremonial or medicinal, as well as culinary, purposes. Some mixtures included maize, chili, vanilla (\"Vanilla planifolia\"), and honey. Archaeological evidence for use of cacao, while relatively sparse, has come from the recovery of whole cacao beans at Uaxactun, Guatemala and from the preservation of wood fragments of the cacao tree at Belize sites including Cuello and Pulltrouser Swamp. In addition, analysis of residues from ceramic vessels has found traces of theobromine and caffeine in early formative vessels from Puerto Escondido, Honduras (1100\u2013900 BC) and in middle formative vessels from Colha, Belize (600\u2013400\u00a0BC) using similar techniques to those used to extract chocolate residues from four classic period (around 400\u00a0AD) vessels from a tomb at the Maya archaeological site of Rio Azul. As cacao is the only known commodity from Mesoamerica containing both of these alkaloid compounds, it seems likely these vessels were used as containers for cacao drinks. In addition, cacao is named in a hieroglyphic text on one of the Rio Azul vessels. Cacao is also believed to have been ground by the Aztecs and mixed with tobacco for smoking purposes. Cocoa was being domesticated by the Mayo Chinchipe of the upper Amazon around 3,000 BC.\nThe Maya believed the (cacao) was discovered by the gods in a mountain that also contained other delectable foods to be used by them. According to Maya mythology, the Plumed Serpent gave cacao to the Maya after humans were created from maize by divine grandmother goddess Xmucane. The Maya celebrated an annual festival in April to honor their cacao god, Ek Chuah, an event that included the sacrifice of a dog with cacao-colored markings, additional animal sacrifices, offerings of cacao, feathers and incense, and an exchange of gifts. In a similar creation story, the Mexica (Aztec) god Quetzalcoatl discovered cacao (: \"bitter water\"), in a mountain filled with other plant foods. Cacao was offered regularly to a pantheon of Mexica deities and the Madrid Codex depicts priests lancing their ear lobes (autosacrifice) and covering the cacao with blood as a suitable sacrifice to the gods. The cacao beverage was used as a ritual only by men, as it was believed to be an intoxicating food unsuitable for women and children.\nCacao beans constituted both a ritual beverage and a major currency system in pre-Columbian Mesoamerican civilizations. At one point, the Aztec empire received a yearly tribute of 980 loads () of cacao, in addition to other goods. Each load represented exactly 8,000 beans. The buying power of quality beans was such that 80\u2013100 beans could buy a new cloth mantle. The use of cacao beans as currency is also known to have spawned counterfeiters during the Aztec empire.\nModern history.\nThe first European knowledge about chocolate came in the form of a beverage which was first introduced to the Spanish at their meeting with Moctezuma in the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan in 1519. Cort\u00e9s and others noted the vast quantities of this beverage the Aztec emperor consumed, and how it was carefully whipped by his attendants beforehand. Examples of cacao beans, along with other agricultural products, were brought back to Spain at that time, but it seems the beverage made from cacao was introduced to the Spanish court in 1544 by Kekchi Maya nobles brought from the New World to Spain by Dominican friars to meet Prince Philip. Within a century, chocolate had spread to France, England and elsewhere in Western Europe. Demand for this beverage led the French to establish cacao plantations in the Caribbean, while Spain subsequently developed their cacao plantations in their Venezuelan and Philippine colonies (Bloom 1998, Coe 1996). A painting by Dutch Golden Age artist Albert Eckhout shows a wild cacao tree in mid-seventeenth century Dutch Brazil. The Nahuatl-derived Spanish word \"cacao\" entered scientific nomenclature in 1753 after the Swedish naturalist Linnaeus published his taxonomic binomial system and coined the genus and species \"Theobroma cacao\". Traditional pre-Hispanic beverages made with cacao are still consumed in Mesoamerica. These include the Oaxacan beverage known as \"tejate\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57948", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57948", "title": "NORAD (disambiguation)", "text": "NORAD is the North American Aerospace Defense Command, a United States/Canada military alliance.\nNORAD or Norad may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "57950", "revid": "4071608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57950", "title": "Chukchi people", "text": "Indigenous people in Russia\nThe Chukchi, or Chukchee (, \"\u1e37yg\u02baorav\u00e8t\u1e37\u02b9\u00e8t, o'rav\u00e8t\u1e37\u02b9\u00e8t\"), are a Siberian ethnic group native to the Chukchi Peninsula, the shores of the Chukchi Sea and the Bering Sea region of the Arctic Ocean all within modern Russia. They speak the Chukchi language. The Chukchi originated from the people living around the Okhotsk Sea.\nAccording to several studies on genomic research conducted from 2014 to 2018, the Chukchi are the closest Asian relatives of the indigenous peoples of the Americas, as such they are descendants of the settlers of Beringia who remained on the Russian side when the sea levels rose.\nThe majority of Chukchi reside within Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, but some also reside in the neighboring Sakha Republic to the west, Magadan Oblast to the southwest, and Kamchatka Krai to the south. Some Chukchi also reside in other parts of Russia, as well as in Europe and North America. The total number of Chukchi in the world slightly exceeds\u00a016,000.\nCulture.\nThe Chukchi are traditionally divided into the \"Maritime Chukchi\", who had settled homes on the coast and lived primarily from sea mammal hunting, and the \"Reindeer Chukchi\", who lived as nomads in the inland tundra region, migrating seasonally with their herds of reindeer. The Russian name \"Chukchi\" is derived from the Chukchi word \"Chauchu\" (\"rich in reindeer\"), which was used by the 'Reindeer Chukchi' to distinguish themselves from the 'Maritime Chukchi,' called \"Anqallyt\" (\"the sea people\"). Their name for a member of the Chukchi ethnic group as a whole is \"Luoravetlan\" (literally 'genuine person').\nThe anthropologist Marshall Sahlins called the Chukchi \"tribes without rulers\". They often lacked formal political structures, but had a formal cosmic hierarchy.\nTraditions.\nOne of the Chukchi's forms of folk art is sculpture and carving on bones and walrus tusks but only men engage in this. Common traditional themes of these arts are landscapes, hunting scenes, and animals. The women are skilled seamstresses. The traditional dress for both genders is made of skins and fur, decorated with beads and embroidery on holidays and special occasions. Men wear loose shirts and trousers made of the same material at important traditional events.\nReligion.\nIn Chukchi religion, every object, whether animate or inanimate, is assigned a spirit. This spirit can be either harmful or benevolent. Some of Chukchi myths reveal a dualistic cosmology. A Chukchi shaman once explained to the ethnographer Vladimir Bogoraz that \"The lamp walks around. The walls of the house have voices of their own. ... Even the shadows on the wall constitute definite tribes and have their own country, where they live in huts and subsist by hunting.\" During Chukchi rituals, shamans fall into trances (sometimes with the aid of hallucinogenic mushrooms), communicate with spirits, allow the spirits to speak through them, predict the future and cast spells.\nEarly Russian ethnographers observed that Chukchi shamans were said to be called by spirits, dreams, or omens, and were believed to be capable of flight, exorcism, and healing. Some shamans were called by mystical forces to engage in a form of ritualized homosexual relations with other men. This ritual typically involved a gender change through a religious ceremony that, it was believed, transformed his genitalia into that of a female. After the change, he might dress in women's clothing and behave in feminine ways. He was then believed to \"lose\" masculine traits like hunting skill, and instead take on \"feminine\" traits, like healing and nurturing. Some of these shamans would take male lovers, and could even marry other men, and the shaman would take on a \"wifely\" role.\nSubsistence.\nIn prehistoric times, the Chukchi engaged in nomadic hunter gatherer modes of existence. In current times, there continue to be some elements of subsistence hunting, including that of polar bears, seals, walruses, whales, and reindeer. There are some differences between the traditional lifestyles of the coastal and inland Chukchi. The coastal Chukchi were largely settled fishers and hunters, mainly of sea mammals. The inland Chukchi were partial reindeer herders.\nBeginning in the 1920s, the Soviets organized the economic activities of both coastal and inland Chukchi and eventually established 28\u00a0collectively run, state-owned enterprises in Chukotka. All of these were based on reindeer herding, with the addition of sea mammal hunting and walrus ivory carving in the coastal areas. Chukchi were educated in Soviet schools and today are almost 100% literate and fluent in the Russian language. Only a portion of them today work directly in reindeer herding or sea mammal hunting, and continue to live a nomadic lifestyle in yaranga tents.\nRelations with Russians.\nThe Chukchi participated in endemic warfare against neighboring tribes, especially the Koryaks. Russians first began contacting the Chukchi when they reached the Kolyma (1643) and the Anadyr (1649). The route from Nizhnekolymsk to the fort at Anadyrsk along the southwest of the main Chukchi area became a major trade route. The overland journey from Yakutsk to Anadyrsk took about six months.\nThe Chukchi were generally ignored for the next fifty years because they were warlike and did not provide furs or other valuable commodities to tax. Armed skirmishes flared up around 1700 when the Russians began operating in the Kamchatka Peninsula and needed to protect their communications from the Chukchi and Koryak. The first attempt to conquer them was made in 1701. Other expeditions were sent out in 1708, 1709 and 1711 with considerable bloodshed but little success and unable to eliminate the local population on the large territory. War was renewed in 1729, when the Chukchi defeated an expedition from Okhotsk and killed its commander. Command passed to Major Dmitry Pavlutsky, who adopted very destructive tactics, burning, driving off reindeer, killing men and capturing women and children.\nIn 1742, the government at Saint Petersburg ordered another war in which the Chukchi and Koryak were to be \"totally extirpated\". The war (1744\u201347) was conducted with similar brutality and ended when Pavlutsky was killed in March 1747. It is said that the Chukchi kept his head as a trophy for several years. The Russians waged war again in the 1750s, but some Chukchi did survive these extermination plans in the very far northeast.\nIn 1762, when Catherine the Great was crowned, Saint Petersburg adopted a different policy. Maintaining the fort at Anadyrsk had cost some 1,380,000 rubles, but the area had returned only 29,150 rubles in taxes, so the government abandoned Anadyrsk in 1764. The Chukchi, no longer attacked by the Russian Empire, began to trade peacefully with the Russians. From 1788, they participated in an annual trade fair on the lower Kolyma. Another was established in 1775 on the Angarka, a tributary of the Bolshoy Anyuy. This trade declined in the late 19th century when American whalers and others began landing goods on the coast.\nThe first Christian missions from the Eastern Orthodox Church entered Chukchi territory some time after 1815. The strategy worked, and trade flourished between the Cossacks and the Chukchi. As the annual trade fairs where goods were exchanged continued, a common language between the two peoples was spoken. The natives, however, never paid yasak (a fur tribute), and their status as subjects was little more than a formality. The formal annexation of the Chukotka Peninsula did not happen until much later, during the time of the Soviet Union.\nSoviet period.\nApart from four Orthodox schools, there were no schools in the Chukchi land until the late 1920s. In 1926, there were 72 literate Chukchis. The Soviets introduced a Latin alphabet in 1932 to transcribe their language, replacing it with Cyrillic in 1937. In 1934, 71% of the Chukchis were nomadic. In 1941, 90% of the reindeer were still privately owned. So-called kulaks roamed with their private herds up into the 1950s.\nPopulation estimates from Forsyth:\nChukchi jokes are a staple of Soviet humor, where they are depicted as primitive, uncivilized, and simple-minded, but clever in their own way.\nPost-Soviet period.\nAfter 1990 and the fall of the Soviet Union, there was a major exodus of Russians from the area because of the underfunding of the local industry.\nAfter the collapse of the Soviet Union, the state-run farms were reorganized and nominally privatized. This process was ultimately destructive to the village-based economy in Chukotka. The region has still not fully recovered. Many rural Chukchi, as well as Russians in Chukotka's villages, have survived in recent years only with the help of direct humanitarian aid. Some Chukchi have attained university degrees, becoming poets, writers, politicians, teachers and doctors.\nIn the context of the Russian invasion of Ukraine since 2022, the Chukchis have been reported as one of Russia's ethnic minority groups suffering from a disproportionally large casualty rate among Russian forces.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57951", "revid": "50847049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57951", "title": "Provinces of the Netherlands", "text": " \nThere are twelve provinces ( or ; sing.\u00a0 ) of the Netherlands representing the administrative layer between the national government and the local governments, with responsibility for matters of subnational or regional importance.\nThe most populous province is South Holland, with just over 3.8 million inhabitants as of January\u00a02023[ [update]], and also the most densely populated province with . With 391,124 inhabitants, Zeeland has the smallest population. However Drenthe is the least densely populated province with . In terms of area, Friesland is the largest province with a total area of . If water is excluded, Gelderland is the largest province by land area at . The province of Utrecht is the smallest with a total area of , while Flevoland is the smallest by land area at . In total about 10,000 people were employed by the provincial administrations in 2018.\nThe provinces of the Netherlands are joined in the Association of Provinces of the Netherlands (IPO). This organisation promotes the common interests of the provinces in the national government of the Netherlands in The Hague.\nPolitics and governance.\nThe government of each province consists of three major parts: \nElections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe members of the provincial council are elected every four years in direct elections. To a large extent, the same political parties are enlisted in these elections in the national elections. The chosen provincial legislators elect the members of the national Senate within three months after the provincial elections. The elections for the water boards take place on the same date as the provincial elections.\nThe last provincial elections were held in 2023. The next provincial elections are scheduled for 2027.\nCompetencies.\nThe provinces of the Netherlands have seven core tasks:\nFinancing.\nTo a large extent, the provinces of the Netherlands are financed by the national government. Also, provinces have income from a part of the Vehicle Excise Duty. Several provinces have made a large profit in the past from privatising utility companies originally owned or partly owned by the provinces. Essent, which was originally owned by six provinces and more than a hundred municipalities, was sold for around 9.3 billion euros.\nList.\nThe constituent country of the Netherlands, being the largest part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, is divided into twelve provinces (\"provincies\" in Dutch) and three overseas special municipalities; Bonaire, Sint Eustatius, and Saba in the Caribbean Netherlands that are not part of any province. Previously these were part of public bodies (\"openbare lichamen\").\nHistory.\nNearly all Dutch provinces can trace their origin to a medieval county or duchy, as can the provinces of regions in Belgium. Their status changed when they came under a single ruler who centralised their administration, reducing their powers. There were 17 in total: from these unified Netherlands, seven northern provinces from 1588 formed the Republic of the Seven United Provinces, namely Holland, Zeeland, Gelderland, Utrecht, Friesland, Overijssel and Groningen.\nThe Republic's lands also included Drenthe (one of the 17, but without the autonomous status of the others), and parts of the Duchy of Brabant, Duchy of Limburg and County of Flanders, which were considered to be \"conquered lands\" and were governed directly by the States General, hence their name Generality Lands. They were called \"Staats-Brabant\", \"Staats-Limburg\" and \"Staats-Vlaanderen\", meaning \"governed by the States General\".\nEach of these \"Netherlands\" had a high degree of autonomy, cooperating with each other mainly on defense and foreign relations, but otherwise keeping to their own affairs.\nOn 1 January 1796, under the Batavian Republic, Drenthe and Staats-Brabant became the eighth and ninth provinces of the Netherlands. The latter, which had been known as Bataafs Brabant (English: Batavian Brabant), changed its name to Noord-Brabant, North Brabant, in 1815 when it became part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, which also contained (then) South Brabant, a province now in Belgium. This new unified state featured the provinces in their modern form, as non-autonomous subdivisions of the national state, and again numbering 17, though they were not all the same as the 16th century ones. In 1839, following the separation of Belgium, the province of Limburg was divided between the two countries, each now having a province called Limburg. A year later, Holland, the largest and most populous of the Dutch provinces, was also split into two provinces, for a total of 11. The 12th province to be created was Flevoland, consisting almost entirely of reclaimed land, established on 1 January 1986.\nFrench period.\nDuring the Batavian Republic, the Netherlands was from 1798 to 1801 completely reorganised into eight new departments, most named after rivers, inspired by the French revolutionary example, in an attempt to do away with the old semi-autonomous status of the provinces. They are listed below, with their capitals and the territory of the former provinces that they mostly incorporated:\n \nAfter only three years, following a coup d'\u00e9tat, the borders of the former provinces were restored, though not their autonomous status. They were now also called \"departments\" and Drenthe was added to Overijssel. In 1806 the Kingdom of Holland replaced the republic to further French interests. It was during this administration that Holland was first split in two, with the department of to the north and that of to the south. East Frisia, then as now in Germany, was added to the kingdom as a department in 1807 and Drenthe split off again making a total of 11 departments.\nWhen the Netherlands finally did become fully part of France in 1810, the departments of the kingdom and their borders were largely maintained, with some joined. They were however nearly all renamed, again mainly after rivers, though the names differed from their Batavian counterparts. Following are their names and the modern day province they mostly correspond to:\nWith the defeat and withdrawal of the French in 1813, the old provinces and their names were re-established, Holland was reunited and East-Frisia went its separate way. The 17 provinces of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands were for a significant part based on the former French departments and their borders, in particular in what would later become Belgium.\nThere is continuous discussion within the Netherlands about the future of the provinces. Before 2014, the national government was planning to merge the provinces Flevoland, North Holland and Utrecht into a single province Noordvleugelprovincie. Due to significant protest the plan was abandoned.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57952", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57952", "title": "Jean-Francois Champollion", "text": ""}
{"id": "57953", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57953", "title": "Montgomery County, Georgia", "text": "County in Georgia, United States\nMontgomery County is a county located in the southern portion of the U.S. state of Georgia. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 8,610. The county seat is Mount Vernon. Montgomery County is part of the Vidalia, GA micropolitan statistical area.\nHistory.\nMontgomery County is named in honor of Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed in 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City, Canada. It was created on December 19, 1793, from a southern portion of Washington County, Georgia.\nArthur Lott's Plantation was designated the first county seat in 1797.\nIn 1801, Tattnall County, Georgia was formed from the southern part of Montgomery County. The dividing line between Tatnall and Montgomery ran from the mouth of Limestone Creek on the Oconee River, just below modern Mount Vernon, Georgia, to the mouth of Wolf Creek on the Canoochee River below Metter, Georgia.\nThe Great Revision.\nOn December 11, 1811, the county lines between Washington County, Montgomery County, and Laurens County were adjusted by the Georgia General Assembly. The northern section of Montgomery between the Oconee River and the Ohoopee River was transferred to Laurens. On December 10, 1812, the county line of Montgomery was significantly adjusted as part of the creation of Emanuel County. Its new boundaries became from the then Laurens and Telfair county line on the Oconee River to the north prong of the Little Ocmulgee River (near present Chauncey, Dodge County, Georgia) down the Little Ocmulgee River as it meanders to its confluence with the Ocmulgee River then downstream as it meanders to the Oconee River, then North 30 degrees to Milligan's Creek in Tatnall County, and then with it to the Montgomery County line. Pendleton Creek (in modern Treutlen and Toombs counties) was used as the border between Montgomery and Emanuel. Because of these transitions Montgomery regained part of the land it had lost in the creation of Tatnall County in 1801 (land along the lower Oconee River), but also lost land along the upper Oconee River to Laurens County.\nThe creation of Emanuel County put the old county seat within Emanuel's border. On December 12, the Georgia General Assembly appointed the justices of the inferior court of Montgomery county to a commission to designate a new county seat and called for county business to be held until then at the home of James Alston. In 1813, the General Assembly recognized Mount Vernon as the new county seat.\nThe county line between Telfair County and Montgomery was adjusted once again in 1820 by the Georgia Genera Assembly. The new line differed in the upstream portion of the Little Ocmulgee River and better defined the line and gave Montgomery a small border with Pulaski County, Georgia and Telfair County some land on the northeast side of the Little Ocmulgee River. The line was to go upstream to its fork then to Browning's mill, a straight line to the mouth of Joiner's Creek (Near modern McRae, Georgia) at the second fork of the Little Ocmulgee River, and then up the second prong to Pulaski County Line.\nThe land gained by Telfair County from Montgomery County on the northeast side of the Little Ocmulgee River was reversed by the Georgia General Assembly on December 18, 1833.\nAmerican Civil War.\nAt the time of the 1850 United States Census, Montgomery had 1,541 whites, 613 slaves. By the 1860 census, there were 2,014 whites, 977 slaves, and 6 Free people of color. The pine barrens and soil quality outside of the river lands made the area unsuitable for slave-heavy cotton producing plantation culture. Montgomery's status as a majority white county led the region developing different attitudes about secession from other areas of Georgia.\nOn January 22, 1861, Montgomery County representatives, Thomas M. McRae and Solon Homer Latimer, were among the 89 delegates who voted no to Georgia's immediate secession from the Union at the state secession convention. In addition, McRae and Latimer were among the 6 delegates who voiced their protest by against the Ordinance of Secession in the published document.\nIn the interior of the county around Gum Swamp (Modern Chauncey, Georgia) near the Pulaski County, Telfair County, and Montgomery County lines a deserter gang fought against Confederate forces.\nAdditional counties created.\nOn August 18, 1905, Montgomery County gained and lost some territory during the creation of Toombs County. On August 14, 1912, the parts of Montgomery County between the Little Ocmulgee River and the Oconee River became Wheeler County. On August 21, 1917, Montgomery lost additional territory during the creation of Treutlen County, Georgia.\nModern.\nMore recently, the county was noted for its practice of organizing segregated proms, a practice that had continued since integration of its schools in the 1970s. Following publicity about this practice, Montgomery County students took the initiative to integrate the prom in 2010.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.1%) is water.\nThe southeastern quarter of Montgomery County is located in the Altamaha River sub-basin of the larger river basin by the same name. The western half of the county, from Tarrytown south, is located in the Lower Oconee River sub-basin of the Altamaha River basin. The northeastern quarter of Montgomery County, northeast of a line from Tarrytown to Higgston, is located in the Ohoopee River sub-basin of the same Altamaha River basin.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 8,610 people, 3,097 households, and 2,102 families residing in the county.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57954", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57954", "title": "Montgomery County, Illinois", "text": "County in Illinois, United States\nMontgomery County is a county located in the U.S. state of Illinois. According to the 2020 United States census, it had a population of 28,288. Its county seat is Hillsboro.\nHistory.\nMontgomery County was formed in 1821 out of Bond and Madison counties. It was named in honor of Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed in 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City, Canada. Perrin's 1882 \"History of Montgomery County\" relates that the county was named in honor of Gen. Montgomery, but goes on to say that \"others are dubious as to whence it received its name.\"\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.8%) is water.\nClimate and weather.\nIn recent years, average temperatures in the county seat of Hillsboro have ranged from a low of in January to a high of in July, although a record low of was recorded in February 1905 and a record high of was recorded in July 1954. Average monthly precipitation ranged from in February to in May.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nLitchfield Municipal Airport is located in Montgomery County, two nautical miles (3.7\u00a0km) southwest of the central business district of Litchfield, Illinois.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 30,104\u00a0people, 11,652\u00a0households, and 7,806\u00a0families living in the county. The population density was . There were 13,080 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 95.1% white, 3.2% black or African American, 0.4% Asian, 0.2% American Indian, 0.5% from other races, and 0.7% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 1.5% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 27.8% were German, 11.2% were Irish, 10.1% were English, and 9.8% were American.\nOf the 11,652\u00a0households, 29.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.7% were married couples living together, 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present, 33.0% were non-families, and 28.4% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 2.87. The median age was 41.9 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $40,864 and the median income for a family was $56,945. Males had a median income of $40,749 versus $29,426 for females. The per capita income for the county was $21,700. About 10.9% of families and 14.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.7% of those under age 18 and 7.4% of those age 65 or over.\nCommunities.\nVillages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57955", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57955", "title": "Montgomery County, Arkansas", "text": "County in Arkansas, United States\nMontgomery County is a county in the U.S. state of Arkansas. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 8,484. The county seat is Mount Ida. Montgomery County is Arkansas's 45th county, formed on December 9, 1842, and named after Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general.\nHistory.\nStone spear and dart points found in the area verify that people from the Dalton tradition were present in Montgomery County around 8500 BC. Early signs of houses and American Indian cemeteries are present in and around Caddo Gap, Arkansas, indicating the definite presence of the Caddo Indians having settled in the area in the 13th century and 14th century. In 1541, the explorer Hernando de Soto fought the Tula Indians at Caddo Gap, and he was injured during that battle.\nThe first white settlers arrived in 1812, when Martin and Mary Collier settled what is now Caddo Gap. They befriended the local tribes, and seemingly had no problems from them whatsoever. Granville Whittington arrived in 1835, and built a road that led from Hot Springs, Arkansas to his farm about a mile north of the settlement of Montgomery. By 1836 when Arkansas received statehood, most of the native Indians were gone. Some of the native Indian women had intermingled and intermarried with local white settlers. Whittington opened a general store that drew customers from the surrounding area, and in 1842 he opened the Mount Ida Post Office in Mount Ida. West of the Ouachita River, settlers from a wagon train wintered in what is now Oden, and decided to stay when the weather cleared. Montgomery County was named after General Richard Montgomery, an American general who died during the American Revolution.\nOriginally part of the Louisiana Purchase, it was first claimed by Spain, then France, and in 1813 was part of Arkansas County, then in 1818 was part of Clark County. On December 9, 1842, Montgomery County became its own county, with Montgomery as its county seat. In 1850 Salem became the county seat, but later that same year the county seat changed again, to Mount Ida, where Whittington's Post Office was located. Mount Ida incorporated in 1854.\nCivil War era.\nWhen the Civil War broke out, most of Montgomery County favored the Confederacy. Mount Ida settlers John Lavender and John Simpson formed one company to serve in the Confederate Army, and the 4th Arkansas Infantry Regiment originated in Mount Ida also, but after the war few from the company organized by Lavender and Simpson returned to Montgomery County. With mostly women left to tend to the farms, soldiers from both the Confederate and the Union Army raided homes and farms for supplies, leaving settlers with little to eat. After the war, soldiers from both armies settled in the area, building schools and homes. In 1884 Oden built a steam saw, a cotton gin and a gristmill.\nUp to modern times.\nWith the arrival of the Missouri Pacific Railroad in Caddo Gap around the turn of the 20th century, Caddo Gap and Black Springs began to thrive. In 1910 the county population reached its peak, with sawmills springing up in several locations. That same year, the town of Womble was settled. It changed its name to Norman in 1925. In 1918 the logging camp of Mauldin, Arkansas sprang up, and a railroad line was built to it from Norman. However, almost overnight in 1936, Mauldin closed up, dismantled everything, and moved on having depleted the virgin timber in the area. This, combined with the Great Depression, had a devastating effect on the county.\nMany people moved away to find work elsewhere, while others found employment with the Civilian Conservation Corps. During World War II, people continued to leave Montgomery County, with the men going off to war, and others leaving to find employment in war plants. Mining became one source of local employment for a time, but did not last. Most mines were due to a large abundance of quartz in the county. In 1922 there were eighty three school districts in Montgomery County. Today there are three, Caddo Hills, Mount Ida, and Ouachita River. Cattle, swine, and poultry are now the main areas of employment in the region.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.6%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 8,484 people, 3,754 households, and 2,563 families residing in the county.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 United States census, there were 9,245 people, 3,785 households, and 2,747 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 5,048 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 95.42% White, 0.29% Black or African American, 1.11% Native American, 0.37% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 1.56% from other races, and 1.23% from two or more races. 2.53% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 3,785 households, out of which 28.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.60% were married couples living together, 7.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.40% were non-families. 24.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.85.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 23.50% under the age of 18, 6.20% from 18 to 24, 25.00% from 25 to 44, 26.30% from 45 to 64, and 18.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females there were 96.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.00 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $28,421, and the median income for a family was $32,769. Males had a median income of $25,865 versus $18,063 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,668. About 13.00% of families and 17.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.50% of those under age 18 and 16.00% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nGovernment.\nThe county government is a constitutional body granted specific powers by the Constitution of Arkansas and the Arkansas Code. The quorum court is the legislative branch of the county government and controls all spending and revenue collection. Representatives are called \"justices of the peace\" and are elected from county districts every even-numbered year. The number of districts in a county vary from nine to fifteen, and district boundaries are drawn by the county election commission. The Montgomery County Quorum Court has nine members. Presiding over quorum court meetings is the \"county judge\", who serves as the chief operating officer of the county. The county judge is elected at-large and does not vote in quorum court business, although capable of vetoing quorum court decisions.\nThe composition of the Quorum Court following the 2024 elections is 9 Republicans. Justices of the Peace (members) of the Quorum Court following the elections are:\nAdditionally, the townships of Montgomery County are entitled to elect their own respective constables, as set forth by the Constitution of Arkansas. Constables are largely of historical significance as they were used to keep the peace in rural areas when travel was more difficult. The township constables as of the 2024 elections are:\nPolitics.\nOver the past few election cycles Montgomery County has trended heavily towards the GOP. The last Democrat (as of 2024) to carry this county was Bill Clinton in 1996.\nCommunities.\nTownships.\nTownships in Arkansas are the divisions of a county. Each township includes unincorporated areas; some may have incorporated cities or towns within part of their boundaries. Arkansas townships have limited purposes in modern times. However, the United States census does list Arkansas population based on townships (sometimes referred to as \"county subdivisions\" or \"minor civil divisions\"). Townships are also of value for historical purposes in terms of genealogical research. Each town or city is within one or more townships in an Arkansas county based on census maps and publications. The townships of Montgomery County are listed below; listed in parentheses are the cities, towns, and/or census-designated places that are fully or partially inside the township.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57956", "revid": "21417351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57956", "title": "Montgomery County, Iowa", "text": "County in Iowa, United States\nMontgomery County is a county located in the southwestern area of the U.S. state of Iowa. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 10,330. Its population has declined since a peak in 1900, since urbanization and decline of family farms. The county seat is Red Oak. The county was founded by European-American migrants from eastern areas in 1851. It was named in honor of Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed in 1775 while trying to capture Quebec City, Canada.\nThe county has been largely rural and devoted to agriculture. The county was first surveyed in 1852. It is famous as the location of the unsolved Villisca axe murders committed in 1912. Clyde Cessna, the founder of the Cessna Aircraft Company was born here.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.2%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nThe 2020 census recorded a population of 10,330 in the county, with a population density of . 96.38% of the population reported being of one race. 90.29% were non-Hispanic White, 0.24% were Black, 3.59% were Hispanic, 0.34% were Native American, 0.25% were Asian, 0.02% were Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander and 5.27% were some other race or more than one race. There were 5,007 housing units, of which 4,456 were occupied.\n2010 census.\nThe 2010 census recorded a population of 10,740 in the county, with a population density of . There were 5,239 housing units, of which 4,558 were occupied.\n2000 census.\nAt the 2000 census there were 11,771 people, 4,886 households, and 3,258 families in the county. The population density was . There were 5,399 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 98.20% White, 0.08% Black or African American, 0.35% Native American, 0.25% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.68% from other races, and 0.44% from two or more races. 1.30%. were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nOf the 4,886 households 29.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.40% were married couples living together, 8.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.30% were non-families. 29.50% of households were one person and 14.70% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 2.91.\nThe age distribution was 25.00% under the age of 18, 6.50% from 18 to 24, 25.50% from 25 to 44, 22.80% from 45 to 64, and 20.30% 65 or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 90.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.30 males.\nThe median household income was $33,214 and the median family income was $40,129. Males had a median income of $28,531 versus $20,835 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,373. About 6.50% of families and 9.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.30% of those under age 18 and 6.00% of those age 65 or over.\nCommunities.\nTownships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation ranking.\nThe population ranking of the following table is based on the 2020 United States census.\n\u2020 \"county seat\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57957", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57957", "title": "Montgomery County, Kentucky", "text": "County in Kentucky, United States\nMontgomery County is a county located in the U.S. state of Kentucky. As of the 2020 census, the population was 28,114. Its county seat is Mount Sterling. With regard to the sale of alcohol, it is classified as a moist county\u2014a county in which alcohol sales are prohibited (a dry county), but containing a \"wet\" city where package alcohol sales are allowed, in this case Mount Sterling. Montgomery County is part of the Mount Sterling, KY Micropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Lexington-Fayette\u2013Richmond\u2013Frankfort, KY combined statistical area.\nHistory.\nIn 1793 Shoe Boots (\"Tarsekayahke\") led Cherokee and Shawnee warriors in a raid on Morgan's Station, in what was known as the last Indian raid in Kentucky. Some settlers were killed and two adolescent girls, including Clarinda Allington, were taken captive and the party returned to Cherokee territory. Believing he had saved Clarinda's life, Shoe Boots later married her, and they had three children together. He was a wealthy, successful leader. Several years later, Clarinda gained a visit back to her family in Kentucky with her children and decided to stay. They could not support her, but the state voted a 3-year pension for her.\nMontgomery County was established in 1796 from land given by Clark County. Montgomery was the 22nd Kentucky county in order of formation.\nMontgomery County was named in honor of Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War Brigadier General killed in 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City, Canada. An alternative story holds that the county was named for Thomas Montgomery from Virginia, who served in the Revolutionary War. In 1793 Thomas Montgomery settled in Mt. Sterling. In 1805, Thomas Montgomery moved on to Gibson County, Indiana.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.7%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 22,554 people, 8,902 households, and 6,436 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 9,682 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 75.07% White, 23.48% Black or African American, 0.15% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.35% from other races, and 0.82% from two or more races. 1.15% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 8,902 households, out of which 33.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.70% were married couples living together, 11.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.70% were non-families. 23.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.50% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.49 and the average family size was 2.93.\nThe age distribution was 24.90% under the age of 18, 8.70% from 18 to 24, 30.20% from 25 to 44, 23.40% from 45 to 64, and 12.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.00 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $31,746, and the median income for a family was $36,939. Males had a median income of $31,428 versus $20,941 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,701. About 12.50% of families and 15.20% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.10% of those under age 18 and 17.30% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nIt is in the Montgomery County School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57958", "revid": "46396906", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57958", "title": "Montgomery County, Kansas", "text": "County in Kansas, United States\nMontgomery County is a county located in Southeast Kansas. Its county seat is Independence, and its most populous city is Coffeyville. As of the 2020 United States census, the county population was 31,486. The county was named after Richard Montgomery, a major general during the American Revolutionary War.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nFor many millennia, the Great Plains of North America was inhabited by nomadic Native Americans. From the 16th century to 18th century, the Kingdom of France claimed ownership of large parts of North America. In 1762, after the French and Indian War, France secretly ceded New France to Spain, per the Treaty of Fontainebleau.\n19th century.\nIn 1802, Spain returned most of the land to France, but keeping title to about 7,500 square miles. In 1803, most of the land for modern day Kansas was acquired by the United States from France as part of the 828,000 square mile Louisiana Purchase for 2.83 cents per acre.\nIn 1854, the Kansas Territory was organized, then in 1861 Kansas became the 34th U.S. state. Montgomery County was established on February 26, 1867. It was named in honor of Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed in 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City, in Canada, after successfully capturing two forts and the city of Montreal.\nWhen Kansas was admitted to the Union as a state in 1861, the Osage Indian reservation occupied a large tract of land near the southern border. The reservation had been established in 1825. After the Civil War ended, the Osage lands were coveted as the largest and last reserve of good land in the eastern part of the state. As early as 1866, the Osages were forced to cede tracts at the eastern and northern edges of the reservation. This treaty conceded white settlement on land in the eastern part of what is now Montgomery County.\nFor a brief time, the Osages attempted to maintain a boundary at the Verdigris River. The Verdigris flows from north to south through the center of Montgomery County. From the west the Elk River joins the Verdigris at a confluence slightly northwest of the geographical center of the county. In 1867 Frank and Fred Bunker established a primitive cattle camp on the west side of the Verdigris south of the confluence. Like the Osages, the Bunkers thought they were beyond the boundaries of civilization.\nEarly in 1869, however, settlers began to cross the Verdigris River, \"at first under protest of the Indians, but the immense throng of settlers soon made all protests futile.\" Montgomery County was surveyed and organized in 1869; the governor appointed commissioners June 3.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.2%) is water. The lowest point in the state of Kansas is located on the Verdigris River in Cherokee Township in Montgomery County (just southeast of Coffeyville), where it flows out of Kansas and into Oklahoma. Western portions of the county contain parts of the northern Cross Timbers eco-region, which separates the forested eastern portion of the United States with the Plains.\nGoogle Maps uses Fawn Creek Township within Montgomery County as the zero-mile point of the United States. In other words, all directions to the \"United States\" will lead to a point in Fawn Creek.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Coffeyville Micropolitan Statistical Area includes all of Montgomery County.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 36,252 people, 14,903 households, and 9,955 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 17,207 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 85.77% White, 6.07% Black or African American, 3.19% Native American, 0.47% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.13% from other races, and 3.34% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.08% of the population.\nThere were 14,903 households, out of which 29.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.00% were married couples living together, 10.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.20% were non-families. 29.70% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.70% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.93.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 25.00% under the age of 18, 8.60% from 18 to 24, 24.70% from 25 to 44, 23.30% from 45 to 64, and 18.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 93.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.60 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $30,997, and the median income for a family was $38,516. Males had a median income of $29,745 versus $20,179 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,421. About 9.20% of families and 12.60% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.80% of those under age 18 and 10.90% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nPresidential elections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Presidential election results\nLike almost all of Kansas, Montgomery County votes predominantly Republican. Since 1920, the only Democrat to carry the county has been Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964, and even then by only 16 votes. However, Alf Landon, in the landslide loss of 1936, won his home county by only thirty votes, whilst Herbert Hoover won the county in 1932 by only seventeen votes out of over nineteen thousand cast.\nLaws.\nFollowing amendment to the Kansas Constitution in 1986, the county remained a prohibition, or \"dry\", county until 1998, when voters approved the sale of alcoholic liquor by the individual drink without a food sales requirement.\nMedia with Office Hours in Montgomery County, Kansas.\nThe Good News &lt;br&gt;\nIndependence Daily Reporter &lt;br&gt;\nMontgomery County Chronicle &lt;br&gt;\nThe Coffeyville Journal &lt;br&gt;\nParsons Sun &lt;br&gt;\nChanute Tribune &lt;br&gt;\nKGGF-AM &lt;br&gt;KIND-AM &lt;br&gt;KUSN-FM &lt;br&gt;KQQF-FM &lt;br&gt;KGGF Classic Hits - FM&lt;br&gt;\nMy FM 94.9 Kind\nCommunities.\nList of townships / incorporated cities / unincorporated communities / extinct former communities within Montgomery County.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n\u2020 means a community is designated a Census-Designated Place (CDP) by the United States Census Bureau.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\nMontgomery County is divided into twelve townships. The cities of Caney, Cherryvale, Coffeyville, and Independence are considered \"governmentally independent\" and are excluded from the census figures for the townships. In the following table, the population center is the largest city (or cities) included in that township's population total, if it is of a significant size.\nPopulation estimates for Montgomery County both townships (displayed first) and Cities (displayed second): 2024* (2022**, 2023***), not actual headcount, per \"Montgomery County Chronicle\" July 10, 2025 (as certified by the Kansas Division of Budget as of July 1, 2025)\nCaney township: 924* (938**, 927***)\nCaney proper: 1,726* (1,759** 1,732***)\nCherokee township: 400* (404**, 400***)\nCherry township: 458* (464**, 457***)\nWest Cherry township: 267* (271**, 266***)\nCherryvale proper: 2,114* (2,157**, 2,128***)\nCoffeyville proper: 8,525* (8,690**, 8,570**)\nDearing proper: 372* (377**, 373***)\nDrum Creek township: 480* (490**, 483***)\nElk City proper: 250* (257**, 254***)\nFawn Creek township: 1,351* (1,372**, 1,353***)\nHavana proper: 83* (82**, 81***)\nIndependence township: 2,181* (2,224**, 2,198***)\nIndependence proper: 8,287* (8,436**, 8,315***)\nLiberty township: 371* (380**, 374***)\nLiberty proper: 95* (99**, 95***)\nLouisburg township: 275* (279**, 275***)\nParker township: 1,061* (1,074**, 1,060**)\nRutland township: 259* (263**, 260**)\nSycamore township: 791* (806**, 795***)\nTyro proper: 169* (174**, 172***)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nForgotten Faces of The Montgomery County Poor Farm by Cherilyn Hearn"}
{"id": "57959", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57959", "title": "Montgomery County, Mississippi", "text": "County in Mississippi, United States\nMontgomery County is a county located in the U.S. state of Mississippi. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 9,822. Its county seat is Winona.\nThe county is said to be named in honor either of Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed in 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City, Canada, or for Montgomery County, Tennessee, from which an early settler came. In the latter case, it would have been indirectly named after John Montgomery, a settler in Montgomery County, Tennessee, who founded the city of Clarksville, Tennessee, in the same county.\nThe Big Black River passes through the southern part of the county, flowing southwest to its confluence with the Mississippi River south of Vicksburg.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.2%) is water. It is the fourth-smallest county in Mississippi by total area.\nHistory.\nThis area was occupied in historic times by the Choctaw people. Their ancestors had inhabited the area for thousands of years. Under the Indian Removal Act of 1830, the United States forced most of the Native Americans west of the Mississippi River in order to open their lands to settlement by European Americans.\nMuch of the area of present-day Montgomery County was developed for cotton plantations before and after the Civil War, when it was still part of Choctaw County. Most of the labor was supplied by African Americans, enslaved before the war and freed afterward. The county was organized by the legislature in 1871, during the Reconstruction era. The eastern hilly areas became a center of timber industry.\nFrom 1877 to 1950, there were 10 known lynchings of blacks in the county, fewer than in many other counties of the state. It was a form of racial terrorism that was at its height at the turn of the 20th century. Some studies have shown that the rate of lynchings related to economic stresses among whites. Beginning in 1890, Mississippi and other southern states largely excluded blacks from the formal political system by disenfranchisement, creating barriers to voter registration through constitutional amendments and other laws.\nOn April 13, 1937, two African-American men, Roosevelt Townes and \"Bootjack\" McDaniels, were arraigned at the county courthouse in Winona, after being charged in the December 1936 murder of a white merchant in Duck Hill, after Townes purportedly confessed to police. They were abducted from the courthouse and lynched. A white crowd estimated at 100 had gathered on April 13. A group of 12 white men took the two blacks by school bus to a site in Duck Hill, where they were tortured to confess before being shot and burned to death. A crowd estimated at 300 to 500 whites gathered to watch. By 1 pm, the wire services and other national media had learned of the event and were trying to gain more information.\nThe lynchings were reported nationally in the United States and widely condemned. Representative Hatton W. Sumners (D-Texas), chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, sent a telegram to Governor Hugh L. White decrying the lynching. He said, \"It is the sort of thing which makes it hard for those of us who are here trying to protect the governmental sovereignty of the state...\" At the time a federal anti-lynching bill was under consideration by Congress. It passed the House, but it was defeated in the Senate by the Solid South, conservative white Democrats. As was typical of lynchings, no one was ever prosecuted for the murders. Nazi Germany reported the lynching, comparing it to the \"humanism\" of its anti-Semitic laws.\nAs in much of rural Mississippi, population in this county declined markedly from 1910 to 1920, and from 1940 to 1970. The peak of population in the county was in 1910. In addition to labor changes because of mechanization of agriculture, blacks left in two waves of the Great Migration out of the rural and small town South seeking jobs, education, relief from Jim Crow and violence, and better opportunities in other regions. As a result, Mississippi changed from majority black (56%) in population in 1910 to majority white (63%) by 1970.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 9,822 people, 4,539 households, and 3,064 families residing in the county.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 10,925 people living in the county. 53.0% were White, 45.5% Black or African American, 0.4% Asian, 0.1% Native American, 0.5% of some other race and 0.5% of two or more races. 0.9% were Hispanic or Latino (of any race).\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 12,189 people, 4,690 households, and 3,367 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 5,402 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 54.25% White, 44.95% Black or African American, 0.08% Native American, 0.25% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.07% from other races, and 0.37% from two or more races. 0.85% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nAccording to the census of 2000, the largest ancestry groups in Montgomery County were African 44.95%, English 42.1%, and Scots-Irish 1%.\nThere were 4,690 households, out of which 32.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.50% were married couples living together, 18.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.20% were non-families. 26.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 3.10.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 26.80% under the age of 18, 8.90% from 18 to 24, 25.30% from 25 to 44, 22.40% from 45 to 64, and 16.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 86.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 81.10 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $25,270, and the median income for a family was $31,602. Males had a median income of $26,590 versus $17,639 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,040. About 21.90% of families and 24.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 34.80% of those under age 18 and 25.40% of those age 65 or over.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57960", "revid": "37302570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57960", "title": "Dilworth", "text": "Dilworth may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "57961", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57961", "title": "Montgomery County, Tennessee", "text": "County in Tennessee, United States\nMontgomery County is a county in the U.S. state of Tennessee. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 220,069. The county seat (and only incorporated municipality) is Clarksville. The county was created in 1796. Montgomery County is included in the Clarksville, TN\u2013KY Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe county was named for John Montgomery, a soldier in the American Revolutionary War and an early settler who founded the city of Clarksville. It was authorized on April 9, 1796, when the western portion of Tennessee County, which since 1790 had been part of the Territory South of the River Ohio, became part of the new state of Tennessee. (In 1790, North Carolina had ceded its western lands to the Federal government to create what was also known as the Southwest Territory.) The eastern portion of old Tennessee County was, at the same time Montgomery County was formed, combined with land taken from Sumner County to form Robertson County, Tennessee. Later acts of the Tennessee General Assembly had further reduced Montgomery County by 1871 to its current size and boundaries.\nMontgomery County was the site of several early saltpeter mines. Saltpeter is the main ingredient of gunpowder and was obtained by leaching the earth from local caves. Bellamy Cave near Stringtown still contains the remains of two dozen saltpeter leaching vats. It appears to have been a large operation. Cooper Creek Cave shows evidence of extensive mining and contains the remains of \"many saltpeter hoppers.\" Both were probably mined during the War of 1812. Dunbar Cave is reported to have been mined for saltpeter during the Mexican War of 1848, but commercial development has destroyed any evidence of this. Little mining is likely to have happened here during the Civil War, since the Union Army captured and occupied this part of Tennessee in early 1862.\nGeography.\nMontgomery County lies on the northern line of Tennessee; its northern border abuts the state of Kentucky. The hilly terrain is marked by drainages and largely covered with trees. The Cumberland River meanders westward through the lower central part of the county. The highest point on the county terrain ( ASL) is a small hill ENE from Slayden in Dickson County.\nAccording to the US Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.9%) is water.\nUnlike most of Tennessee, a sizable part of northern Montgomery County is outside of the Sun Belt due to a past error surveying the northern border of Middle and East Tennessee. Most of Clarksville in particular is north of the Sun Belt. The Sun Belt is defined by the Kinder Institute as being south of 36\u00b030'N latitude, which was intended to be the northern border of Tennessee and is the actual northern border of West Tennessee.\nDunbar Cave.\nMontgomery County lies in a region of well-developed karst topography. A large cave system under the county is named Dunbar Cave; it is the centerpiece of Dunbar Cave State Park, which encompasses approximately 110 acres and is one of the most visited units in the Tennessee State Park System.\nDunbar Cave was extensively used by prehistoric Indians, who inhabited this area for thousands of years before European encounters. Remains of their cane torches have been found in the cave, and archaeologists have excavated numerous artifacts inside the entrance. During a research trip into the cave on January 15, 2005, Park Ranger Amy Wallace, History professor Joe Douglas, local historian Billyfrank Morrison, and Geologist Larry E. Matthews discovered Indian glyphs on the walls of the cave. Subsequent investigations by archaeologists from the University of Tennessee at Knoxville confirmed the drawings were from people of the Mississippian culture, which was active about 1000-1300 CE. These glyphs were featured for a few years on the tour of the cave.\nIn 2010, the State of Tennessee closed Dunbar Cave to the public because White Nose Syndrome was diagnosed in a bat, and they did not want the disease to spread. The cave has since reopened, and tours are conducted seasonally, from May to August (with special hygiene procedures in place).\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 220,069 people, 76,974 households, and 53,563 families residing in the county.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 United States census, there were 134,768 people, 48,330 households, and 35,957 families in the county. The population density was . There were 52,167 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 73.17% White, 19.18% Black or African American, 0.53% Native American, 1.82% Asian, 0.21% Pacific Islander, 2.18% from other races, and 2.91% from two or more races. 5.16% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 48,330 households, out of which 40.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.70% were married couples living together, 12.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.60% were non-families. 20.20% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.50% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.70, and the average family size was 3.11.\nThe county population contained 28.40% under the age of 18, 12.30% from 18 to 24, 34.30% from 25 to 44, 17.20% from 45 to 64, and 7.80% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females, there were 101.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.80 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $38,981, and the median income for a family was $43,023. Males had a median income of $30,696 versus $22,581 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,265. About 7.90% of families and 10.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.70% of those under age 18 and 10.70% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment and politics.\nCounty Government.\nThe county mayor is the chief executive officer. Voters elect the county mayor at-large and certain other county-level positions, including the sheriff. The current mayor is Republican Wes Golden.\nThe Board of County Commissioners, which is the county legislative body, consists of 21 members elected for four-year terms from Single-member districts based on roughly equal populations.\nPolitical history.\nMontgomery County has historically been a Democratic stronghold. Since the 2000 presidential election, however, the county started voting for the Republican Party, and is now a Republican stronghold.\nThe last time Montgomery County voted for a Democratic candidate in a statewide race was for Phil Bredesen in 2006, and the last time it voted for a Democratic candidate on a presidential level, was in 1996 when it voted for Democrat Bill Clinton.\nAlthough Montgomery County is a Republican stronghold, the city of Clarksville has been competitive for both major political parties. In the 2024 presidential election, Clarksville voted for Donald Trump by a margin of 6.2%.\nMontgomery County mayoral elections.\n! scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\" style=\"width: 15em\" |Party\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 17em\" |Candidate\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 5em\" |Votes\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 3.5em\" |%\n!scope=row style=\"text-align:left; font-weight:normal; color:inherit; background:inherit;\" class=fn | Jim Durrett (Incumbent) \n!scope=row style=\"text-align: left; font-weight:normal; color:inherit; background:inherit;\" class=fn| Donnie Trice\n!scope=row style=\"text-align: left; font-weight:normal; color:inherit; background:inherit;\" class=fn| Write-in\n! scope=row colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:right;\" | Total votes\n! scope=\"col\" colspan=\"2\" style=\"width: 15em\" |Party\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 17em\" |Candidate\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 5em\" |Votes\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 3.5em\" |%\n!scope=row style=\"text-align:left; font-weight:normal; color:inherit; background:inherit;\" class=fn | Wes Golden \n!scope=row style=\"text-align: left; font-weight:normal; color:inherit; background:inherit;\" class=fn| Jodi O'Connor\n!scope=row style=\"text-align: left; font-weight:normal; color:inherit; background:inherit;\" class=fn| Write-in\n! scope=row colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:right;\" | Total votes\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nClarksville-Montgomery County School System serves most of the county. Portions in Fort Campbell however are zoned to Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA) schools. Fort Campbell High School is the zoned high school for Fort Campbell.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57962", "revid": "44127043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57962", "title": "Thomas Dilworth", "text": "English cleric and author\nThe Reverend Mr. Thomas Dilworth (died 1780) was an English cleric and author of a widely used schoolbook, both in Great Britain and America, \"A New Guide to the English Tongue.\" Noah Webster as a boy studied Dilworth's book, and was inspired partly by it to create his own spelling book on completely different principles, using pictures and stories of interest to children. By some accounts Dilworth was one of the few schoolbooks used by Abraham Lincoln. Published in 1740, by 1773, it was in its thirty-sixth edition. The last American edition was published in 1827 in New Haven, Connecticut. The full-page frontispiece portrait of the author was well known to generations of doodling school children and is mentioned in Dickens; in \"Sketches by Boz.\" Chapter X there is a humorous description of rowers' togs on the Thames:\nThey approach in full aquatic costume, with round blue jackets, striped shirts, and caps of all sizes and patterns, from the velvet skull-cap of French manufacture, to the easy head-dress familiar to the students of the old spelling-books, as having, on the authority of the portrait, formed part of the costume of the Reverend Mr. Dilworth.\nThe other front matter provides an extensive preface, a dedication to the Anglican schools of Great Britain and Ireland, recommendations from educators and a full-page poetic encomium to Dilworth by J. Duick:\n&lt;poem&gt;\n What thanks, my friend, should to thy care be given\n Which makes the paths to science smooth and even. \n Henceforth our youth who tread thy flowery way,\n Shall ne'er from rules of proper diction stray;\n No more their speech with barbarous terms be filled\n No more their pens a crop of nonsense yield.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nDilworth's book plays the part of a paragon in the poem \"The Rising Village\" by Oliver Goldsmith about the influences of improper education in a Nova Scotia community.\nDilworth also wrote other schoolbooks on arithmetic and bookkeeping."}
{"id": "57963", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57963", "title": "Montgomery County, Missouri", "text": "County in Missouri, United States\nMontgomery County is a county in the east central part of the U.S. state of Missouri. As of the 2020 census, the population was 11,322. Its county seat is Montgomery City. The county was named in honor of Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed in 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City, Canada.\nThe county comprises a portion of the Missouri Rhineland. It is approximately halfway between Columbia and St. Louis.\nHistory.\nThe county has evidence of human habitation from 10,000 years ago, the Archaic period of indigenous Americans. An ancient site was found during archaeological excavations at Graham Cave on the Loutre River.\nIn the early 19th century, European settlement started at a greater pace, after exploration during previous decades by French trappers and British and American fur traders.\nAlthough the Loutre Island area is commonly associated with the German-founded towns of Rhineland and Starkenburg, established by immigrants of the mid-19th century and later, it was originally settled by Missouri's Anglo-southern settlers from places such as Kentucky or Virginia. Although the southern part of the county is more closely associated with Missouri's Rhineland, its northern part is more associated with Missouri's \"Little Dixie\" region, earning Montgomery county the nickname \"Gateway to Little Dixie\".\nAn early house of worship was a log church, which is still maintained as a chapel. St. Martin's Church is also located in Starkenburg, built in 1873 and listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Above its entrance is the text: \"This is the House Of God and the Gate Of Heaven.\"\nStarkenburg is also the site of the Shrine of Our Lady of Sorrows Catholic Church, built in the early 20th century and listed on the NRHP. For further devotions and pilgrimage, the community created an outdoor area for representations of the Stations of the Cross, Mount Calvary and Holy Sepulchre. Starkenburg is located inland from the Missouri River. After the destructive Great Flood of 1993, Rhineland citizens used federal funds to relocate their houses inland away from the river.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.1%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 12,136 people, 4,775 households, and 3,337 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 5,726 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 95.97% White, 2.04% Black or African American, 0.24% Native American, 0.26% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.21% from other races, and 1.28% from two or more races. Approximately 0.77% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 39.1% were of German, 18.4% American, 10.2% English and 9.2% Irish ancestry.\nThere were 4,775 households, out of which 31.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.90% were married couples living together, 8.60% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.10% were non-families. 26.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 2.97.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 25.40% under the age of 18, 7.40% from 18 to 24, 26.10% from 25 to 44, 23.90% from 45 to 64, and 17.20% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 98.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.70 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $32,772, and the median income for a family was $38,632. Males had a median income of $27,933 versus $19,809 for females. The per capita income for the county was $15,092. About 8.40% of families and 11.80% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.60% of those under age 18 and 10.60% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther unincorporated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nLocal.\nThe Republican Party controls politics at the local level in Montgomery County. Republicans hold all of the elected positions in the county.\nState.\nMontgomery County is part of Missouri's 42nd district in the Missouri House of Representatives and is represented by http:// (R-High Hill)."}
{"id": "57965", "revid": "42899727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57965", "title": "Moraceae", "text": "Family of flowering plants\nMoraceae is a family of flowering plants comprising about 48 genera and over 1100 species, and is commonly known as the mulberry or fig family. Most are widespread in tropical and subtropical regions, less so in temperate climates; however, their distribution is cosmopolitan overall. The only common characteristics within the family are the presence of latex-producing glands in the leaves and stems, and milky sap in the soft tissues; but generally useful field characters include two carpels sometimes with one reduced, compound inconspicuous flowers, and compound fruits. The family includes well-known plants such as the common fig, breadfruit, jackfruit and mulberry. The 'flowers' of Moraceae are often pseudanthia (reduced inflorescences).\nDescription.\nOverall.\nThe family varies from colossal trees like the Indian Banyan (\"Ficus benghalensis\") which can cover of ground, to \"Dorstenia barnimiana\" which is a small stemless, bulbous succulent 2\u20135\u00a0cm in diameter that produces a single peltate leaf on a 4\u201315\u00a0cm petiole. These two species have an approximately one billion fold difference in mass.\nFlowers.\nThe individual flowers are often small, with single whorled or absent perianth. Most flowers have either petals or sepals, but not both, known as monochlamydeae, and have pistils and stamens in different flowers, known as diclinous. Except for \"Brosimum gaudichaudii\" and \"Castilla elastica\", the perianth in all species of the Moraceae contain sepals. If the flower has an inflexed stamen, then pollen is released and distributed by wind dispersal; however, if the stamen is straight, then insect pollination is most likely to occur. Insect pollination occurs in \"Antiaropsis\", \"Artocarpus\", \"Castilla\", \"Dorstenia\", \"Ficus\", and \"Mesogyne\".\nLeaves.\nThe leaves are much like the flowers when analyzing diversity. The leaves can be singly attached to the stem or alternating, they may be lobed or unlobed, and can be evergreen or deciduous depending on the species in question. The red mulberry can host numerous leaf types on the same tree. Leaves can be both lobed and unlobed and appear very different, but coexist on the same plant.\nFruits and seeds.\nPlant species in the Moraceae are best known for their fruits. Overall, most species produced a fleshy fruit containing seeds. Examples include the breadfruit from \"Artocarpus altilis\", the mulberry from \"Morus rubra\", the fig from \"Ficus carica\", and the jackfruit from \"Artocarpus heterophyllus\".\nTaxonomy.\nFormerly included within the now defunct order Urticales, recent molecular studies have resulted in the family's placement within the Rosales in a clade called the urticalean rosids that also includes Ulmaceae, Celtidaceae, Cannabaceae, and Urticaceae. \"Cecropia\", which has variously been placed in the Moraceae, Urticaceae, or their own family, Cecropiaceae, is now included in the Urticaceae.\nDioecy (having individuals with separate sexes) appears to be the primitive state in Moraceae. Monoecy has evolved independently at least four times within the family.\nPhylogeny.\nModern molecular phylogenetics suggest these relationships:\nTribes and genera.\nMoraceae comprises 48 genera in seven tribes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther genera accepted by Plants of the World Online as of April\u00a02024[ [update]]:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFossil genera and species.\nIn addition to the living species, a number of fossil genera have been ascribed to the family:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEvolution.\nWhile the fossil record of Moraceae goes back to the late Cretaceous, molecular clock estimates suggest that the family had begun to diversify by the mid-Cretaceous, with some major clades emerging during the Tertiary period.\nDistribution.\nMoraceae can be found throughout the world with a cosmopolitan distribution. The majority of species originate in the Old World tropics, particularly in Asia and the Pacific islands.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57968", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57968", "title": "RATO", "text": ""}
{"id": "57969", "revid": "1149767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57969", "title": "JATO", "text": "Type of aircraft assisted take-off\nJATO (acronym for jet-assisted take-off) is a type of assisted take-off for helping overloaded aircraft into the air by providing additional thrust in the form of small rockets. The term \"JATO\" is used interchangeably with the (more specific) term RATO, for \"rocket-assisted take-off\" (or, in RAF parlance, RATOG, for \"rocket-assisted take-off gear\").\nEarly experiments and World War II.\nIn 1927 the Soviet research and development laboratory Gas Dynamics Laboratory developed solid-propellant rockets to assist aircraft take-off and in 1931 the world's first successful use of rockets to assist take-off of aircraft were carried out on a , the Soviet designation for a Avro 504 trainer, which achieved about one hundred successful assisted takeoffs. Successful assisted takeoffs were also achieved on the Tupolev TB-1. and Tupolev TB-3 Heavy Bombers. The official test of the Tupolev TB-1 in 1933 shortened the takeoff by 77% when using the rockets.\nEarly experiments using rockets to boost gliders into the air were conducted in Germany in the 1920s (Lippisch Ente), and later both the Royal Air Force and the Luftwaffe introduced such systems in World War II. The British system used fairly large solid fuel rockets to shoot planes (typically the Hawker Hurricane) off a small ramp fitted to the fronts of merchant ships, known in service as Catapult armed merchantmen (or CAM Ships), in order to provide some cover against German maritime patrol planes. After firing, the rocket was released from the back of the plane to fall into the water and sink. The task done, the pilot would fly to friendly territory if possible or parachute from the plane, hopefully to be picked up by one of the escort vessels. Over two years the system was only employed nine times to attack German aircraft with eight kills recorded for the loss of a single pilot.\nThe Luftwaffe also used the technique with both liquid-fueled units made by the Walter firm and BMW\u00a0\u2013 and solid fuel, themselves made both by the Schmidding and WASAG firms\u00a0\u2013 as both firmly attached and jettisonable rocket motors, to get airborne more quickly and with shorter takeoff runs. These were used to boost the takeoff performance of their medium bombers, and the enormous 55-meter wingspan \"Gigant\", Messerschmitt Me 321 glider, conceived in 1940 for the invasion of Britain, and used to supply the Russian front. The enormous Me 321s originally had air tow assistance from up to three Messerschmitt Bf 110 heavy fighters in a so-called \"Troika-Schlepp\" arrangement into the air with loads that would have made the takeoff run too long otherwise, but with much attendant risk of aerial collision from the trio of vee-formation Bf 110s involved in a simultaneous towplane function, meant to be greatly eased with the substitution of the trio of Bf 110s with a single example of the unusual, twin-fuselage Heinkel He 111Z purpose-designed five-engined towplane. The use of rocket-assisted takeoff methods became especially important late in the war when the lengths of usable runways were severely curtailed due to the results of Allied bombing. Their system typically used jettisonable, self-contained Walter HWK 109-500 \"Starthilfe\" (\"takeoff-help\"), also known as \"Rauchger\u00e4t\" \u2013 smoke generator, unitized liquid-fuel monopropellant rocket booster units whose engines driven by chemical decomposition of \"T-Stoff\", essentially almost pure hydrogen peroxide, with a Z-Stoff catalytic compound. A parachute pack at the blunt-contour front of the motor's exterior housing was used to slow its fall after being released from the plane, so the system could be re-used. First experiments were held in 1937 on a Heinkel He 111, piloted by test-pilot Erich Warsitz at Neuhardenberg, a large field about 70 kilometres east of Berlin, listed as a reserve airfield in the event of war. Other German experiments with JATO were aimed at assisting the launch of interceptor aircraft such as the Messerschmitt Me 262C, as the \"Heimatsch\u00fctzer\" special versions, usually fitted with either a version of the Walter HWK 109-509 liquid fuelled rocket engine from the Me 163 \"Komet\" program either in the extreme rear of the fuselage or semi-\"podded\" beneath it just behind the wing's trailing edge, to assist its Junkers Jumo 004 turbojets, or a pair of specially rocket-boosted BMW 003R combination jet-rocket powerplants in place of the Jumo 004s, so that the Me 262C \"Heimatsch\u00fctzer\" interceptors could reach enemy bomber formations sooner. Two prototypes of the \"Heimatsch\u00fctzer\" versions of the Me 262 were built and test flown, of the three designs proposed. In contrast to the wide variety of aircraft types that the HWK-designed \"Starthilfe\" modular liquid monopropellant booster designs were tested with, seeing some degree of front-line use; the aforementioned solid-fueled RATO booster designs from both the Schmidding and WASAG firms remained almost strictly experimental in nature, with the Schmidding 500 kg thrust solid-fueled booster units intended to see service, a quartet mounted per airframe for use with the radical Bachem Ba 349 VTO rocket interceptor design in 1945, for its vertical launch needs. The strictly experimental, HWK 109-501 \"Starthilfe\" RATO system used a similar bi-propellant \"hot\" motor to that on the Me 163B \"Komet\" rocket fighter, adding a 20\u00a0kg mass of a combination of B-stoff hydrazine, mixed with \"Br-stoff\" (ligroin hydrocarbon distillate) for a main \"fuel\" to the T-Stoff monopropellant still destabilized with the Z-Stoff permanganate for ignition as the oxidizer, tripling the 109-500's thrust figure of 4.95\u00a0kN (at 14.71\u00a0kN/1,500 kgf) with a burn of 30 second duration. Due to the \"hot\" system's similar risks demanding similar special fueling and handling procedures to that of the Komet's 509A rocket motor, the 109-501 seems to have remained a strictly experimental design, only being used for the test flights of the Junkers Ju 287 V1 prototype jet bomber.\nIn early 1939, the National Academy of Sciences in the United States provided $1,000 to Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n and the Rocket Research Group (including Jack Parsons, Frank Malina, Edward Forman and Apollo M. O. Smith) at the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology (GALCIT) to research rocket-assisted take-off of aircraft. This JATO research was the first rocket research to receive financial assistance from the U.S. government since World War I when Robert H. Goddard had an Army contract to develop solid fuel rocket weapons. \nIn late 1941 von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n and his team attached several 50-pound thrust, solid fuel Aerojet JATOs to an Ercoupe, and Army Captain Homer Boushey took off on test runs. On the last run they removed the propeller, attached six JATO units under the wings, and Boushey was thrust into the air for a short flight, the first American to fly by rocket power only. Both armed services used solid fuel JATO during the war.\nPost WWII.\nAfter World War II JATO was often used to overcome the poor thrust of early jet engines at low speeds or for assisting heavily loaded aircraft to take off. For example, the propeller engined Avro Shackleton, when heavily laden with fuel for long maritime surveillance flights, relied on Armstrong Siddeley Viper turbojets for takeoff.\nThe world's first jet airliner, the de Havilland DH 106 Comet, included a design provision to carry two hydrogen peroxide\u2013powered de Havilland Sprite booster rockets intended to be installed for \"hot and high\" conditions from airports such as Khartoum and Nairobi. These were tested on thirty flights, but the de Havilland Ghost jet engines alone were considered powerful enough and some airlines concluded that rocket motors were impractical. Nevertheless, Sprite fittings were retained on production Comet 1s but were rendered unnecessary with subsequent engine upgrades.\nIn the late 1950s, zero-length launch experimental programs for launching fighter aircraft were carried out by the United States Air Force, the German Air Force and the Soviet Air Forces using high-thrust, short-burn duration booster designs of similar appearance and function. The USAF used a modified Republic F-84, designated EF-84G, which used the MGM-1 Matador cruise missile's Aerojet General\u2013designed, 240\u00a0kN (26 short ton) thrust-level solid fuel booster of two second thrust duration. The Soviet VVS used a modified MiG-19 fighter, designated SM-30, launched from a special launcher, and using a nearly identical solid-fueled rocket booster design to that of the EF-84G, but of a much more powerful, 600\u00a0kN (64 short ton) thrust level. The F-100 and F-104 were also used for zero-length launch experiments, with similarly powerful drop-away booster units to the Soviets' SM-30 experiments.\nAlso in the 1950s the JATO Junior was an attempt by Aerojet Engineering to introduce smaller JATO units to small commercial aircraft, but was blocked by the U.S. Navy Bureau of Aeronautics. Aerojet claimed that the smaller JATO bottle, delivering 250 pounds of thrust for 12 seconds could help a light private plane, that normally requires almost of runway to clear a high obstacle, could do the same with of runway with a JATO Jr unit. JATO Junior bottles mounted to the engine nacelles were briefly offered as a factory option on the Beechcraft Twin Bonanza; they were promoted not as a takeoff aid, but rather as a means to extend glide distance during a forced landing in unfavorable terrain. However, it is not known whether the bottles were ever actually installed on a production Twin Bonanza or used in any instance other than factory test flights. Junior JATO was also offered as an option on Beech 18s and the system was installed on 64 aircraft.\nThe Boeing 727 had provision for Aerojet JATO assist for use in \"hot and high\" conditions, particularly at Mexico City and La Paz. A JATO option was available for the Fairchild Swearingen Metroliner to increase take-off weight while maintaining one-engine inoperative climb requirements.\nIn late 1980 the United States military operation plan Operation Credible Sport was intended to rescue hostages held by Iran using C-130 cargo planes modified with rocket engines to enable a very short take off and landing. The plan was canceled after an accident occurred during a test landing when the forward-facing JATO units designed to slow the aircraft fired before the downward-facing units (designed to cushion the landing) did, causing the aircraft to crash-land.\nJATO became largely unnecessary as the take-off thrust of jet engines improved and is now rarely used even when operating heavily laden from short runways or in \"hot and high\" conditions. It is occasionally used in exceptional circumstances, on specially equipped, mostly military, aircraft.\nUrban legend.\nThe JATO Rocket Car is an urban legend that relates the story of a car equipped with JATO units that is later found smashed into a mountainside. This story is often given as an example of a Darwin Award; it appears to be apocryphal, with no basis in fact.\nThe legend has been examined several times on the Discovery Channel show \"MythBusters\". For the first attempt, in a 2003 pilot episode, the crew replicated the scene and the thrust of the JATO with some commercially available amateur rocket motors. The car did go very fast, outrunning the chase helicopter, but nowhere near the 300\u00a0mph (500\u00a0km/h) reported in the original story, and failed to become airborne. The myth was revisited in 2007, using a different configuration of rockets in an attempt to make the car fly; it exploded before reaching the end of its launch ramp. The myth was again revisited in 2013 in the 1st episode of \"Mythbusters\" Season 12, as a celebration of their 10th year on the air.\nA JATO-equipped 1958 Dodge Coronet car on the El Mirage dry lake was used for a TV advertisement to demonstrate the power of their \"total contact\" brakes. This was broadcast during \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" in the late 1950s.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57970", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57970", "title": "Hawker Hurricane", "text": "British fighter aircraft of the 1930s and 40s\nThe Hawker Hurricane is a British single-seat fighter aircraft of the 1930s\u201340s which was designed and predominantly built by Hawker Aircraft Ltd. for service with the Royal Air Force (RAF). It was overshadowed in the public consciousness by the Supermarine Spitfire during the Battle of Britain in 1940, but the Hurricane inflicted 60% of the losses sustained by the \"Luftwaffe\" in the campaign, and fought in all the major theatres of the Second World War.\nThe Hurricane originated from discussions between RAF officials and aircraft designer Sir Sydney Camm about a proposed monoplane derivative of the Hawker Fury biplane in the early 1930s. Despite an institutional preference for biplanes and lack of interest by the Air Ministry, Hawker refined its monoplane proposal, incorporating several innovations which became critical to wartime fighter aircraft, including retractable landing gear and the more powerful Rolls-Royce Merlin engine. The Air Ministry ordered Hawker's \"Interceptor Monoplane\" in late 1934, and the prototype Hurricane \"K5083\" performed its maiden flight on 6 November 1935.\nThe Hurricane went into production for the Air Ministry in June 1936 and entered squadron service in December 1937. Its manufacture and maintenance were eased by using conventional construction methods so that squadrons could perform many major repairs without external support. The plane was rapidly procured prior to the outbreak of the Second World War; in September 1939, the RAF had 18 Hurricane-equipped squadrons in service. It was relied upon to defend against German aircraft operated by the Luftwaffe, including dogfighting with Messerschmitt Bf 109s in multiple theatres of action.\nThe Hurricane was developed through several versions: bomber interceptors, fighter-bombers, and ground support aircraft as well as fighters. Versions designed for the Royal Navy known as the Sea Hurricane had modifications including an arrestor hook near the tail, enabling operation from ships. Some were converted as catapult-launched convoy escorts. By the end of production in July 1944, 14,487 units had been completed in Britain and Canada, with others built in Belgium and Yugoslavia.\nDevelopment.\nBackground.\nDuring the early 1930s, when Hawker Aircraft company developed the Hurricane, RAF Fighter Command had just 13 squadrons, equipped with the Hawker Fury, Hawker Demon, or the Bristol Bulldog, all biplanes with fixed-pitch wooden propellers and non-retractable undercarriages. At the time, there was an institutional reluctance towards change within the Air Staff; some senior figures were prejudiced against the adoption of monoplane fighter aircraft, while mid-level officers were typically more open-minded.\nIn 1934 the British Air Ministry issued Specification F.5/34 in response to demands within the Royal Air Force (RAF) for a new generation of fighter aircraft. Earlier, during 1933, British aircraft designer Sydney Camm had conducted discussions with Major John Buchanan of the Directorate of Technical Development on a monoplane based on the existing Fury. Mason attributes Camm's discussions with figures within the RAF, such as Squadron Leader Ralph Sorley, as having provoked the specification and some of its details, such as the preference for armaments being installed within the wings instead of within the aircraft's nose.\nAn outline of the \"Fury Monoplane\" armed with two guns in the wings and two in the nose and powered by the Goshawk engine was prepared and discussed with Roger Liptrot of the Air Ministry in December 1933. The design was reworked with the PV.12, following detailed work working drawings of the \"Interceptor Monoplane\" were begun in May 1934. The complete design was presented to the Air Ministry on 4 September.\nCamm's initial submission in response to the earlier fighter specification F.7/30 was a development of the Fury, the Hawker P.V.3, However, the P.V.3 was not among the proposals which the Air Ministry selected to be built as prototype to official contract. After the rejection of the P.V.3 proposal, Camm started work on a new design involving a cantilever monoplane arrangement with a fixed undercarriage, armed with four machine guns and powered by the Rolls-Royce Goshawk engine. The original 1934 armament specifications for what evolved into the Hurricane were for a similar armament fitment to the Gloster Gladiator: four machine guns; two in the wings and two in the fuselage, synchronised to fire through the propeller arc. By January 1934, the proposal's detail drawings had been finished, but these failed to impress the Air Ministry enough for a prototype to be ordered.\nCamm's response to this rejection was to further develop the design, introducing a retractable undercarriage and replacing the unsatisfactory Goshawk engine with a new Rolls-Royce design, initially designated the \"PV-12\", which went on to become famous as the Merlin. In August 1934, a one-tenth scale model of the design was produced and sent to the National Physical Laboratory at Teddington, where a series of wind tunnel tests confirmed the aerodynamics were satisfactory, and in September 1934 Camm again approached the Air Ministry. This time, the Ministry's response was favourable, and a prototype of the \"Interceptor Monoplane\" was promptly ordered.\nIn July 1934, at a meeting chaired by Air Commodore Arthur Tedder (director of training), the Air Ministry Science Officer Captain F.W. \"Gunner\" Hill presented his calculation showing that future fighters must carry no fewer than eight machine guns, each capable of firing 1,000 rounds per minute./ Hill's assistant in making his calculations was his 13-year-old daughter Hazel Hill. Of the decision to place eight machine guns in fighters, Claude Hilton Keith, at the time assistant director of armament research and development, said \"The battle was brisk and was carried into very high quarters before the implementing authority was given. My Branch had made out a sound case for 8-gun fighters and if this recommendation had not been accepted and we had been content with half-measures, it might indeed have gone ill for us during the late summer of 1940\". Present at the meeting was Squadron Leader Ralph Sorley of the Air Ministry's Operational Requirements branch, who played an important role in the decision. In November 1934, the Air Ministry issued Specification F.5/34 which called for new fighter aircraft to be armed with a total of eight guns. However, by this time, work had progressed too far to immediately modify the planned four-gun installation. By January 1935, a wooden mock-up had been finished, and although a number of suggestions for detail changes were made, construction of the prototype was approved, and a new specification (F.36/34) was written around the design. In July 1935, this specification was amended to include installation of eight guns.\nThe mock-up conference with Air Ministry staff was on 10 January 1935 at Kingston. The ministry order to purchase a prototype to the September proposal was placed on 21 February 1935. At the time the armament was two Vickers Mark V machine guns in the fuselage and one Browning machine gun in each wing. Work on stressed skin outer wings to replace the fabric covered ones began in July and the contract was altered in August to include another set of wings with eight guns in them; the guns were to be either Vickers or Brownings. These wings were delivered in June 1936.\nPrototype and trials.\nBy the end of August 1935, work on the airframe had been completed at Hawker's Kingston upon Thames facility and the aircraft components were transported to Brooklands, Surrey, where Hawker had an assembly shed; the prototype was fully re-assembled on 23 October 1935. Ground testing and taxi trials took place over the following two weeks. On 6 November 1935 the prototype \"K5083\" took to the air for the first time at the hands of Hawker's chief test pilot, Flight Lieutenant George Bulman. Bulman was assisted by two other pilots in subsequent flight testing; Philip Lucas flew some of the experimental test flights, while John Hindmarsh conducted the firm's production flight trials. As completed, the prototype had been fitted with ballast to represent the aircraft's armament prior to the acceptance of the final multi-gun wing armament.\nBy March 1936, the prototype had completed ten flying hours, covering all major portions of the flight envelope. Early testing had gone reasonably well, especially in light of the trial status of the Merlin engine, which had yet to achieve full flight certification at this time and thus severe restrictions had been imposed upon use of the engine. In early 1936, the prototype was transferred to RAF Martlesham Heath, Suffolk, to participate in initial service trials under the direction of Squadron Leader D.F. Anderson. Sammy Wroath, later to be the founding commandant of the Empire Test Pilots' School, was the RAF test pilot for the Hurricane: his report was favourable, stating that: \"The aircraft is simple and easy to fly and has no apparent vices\" and proceeded to praise its control response.\nIn the course of RAF trials, despite the problems with the Merlin engine, which had suffered numerous failures and necessitating several changes, enthusiastic reports were produced on the aircraft and its performance. The trials had proved the aircraft to possess a maximum level speed of at an altitude of , climb to in 5.7 minutes, and a stalling speed of (only marginally higher than the Gladiator biplane), the last achieved using its flaps.\nIn the course of further testing, it was found that the Hurricane had poor spin recovery characteristics, in which all rudder authority could be lost due to shielding of the rudder. Hawker's response to the issue was to request that spinning tests be waived, but the Air Ministry refused the request; the situation was resolved by the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), who established that the aerodynamic problem had been caused by a breakdown of the airflow over the lower fuselage, and could be cured by the addition of a small ventral fairing and extension of the bottom of the rudder. This discovery had come too late for the changes to be incorporated in the first production aircraft, but were introduced upon the 61st built and all subsequent aircraft.\nIn early 1936, the Hawker board of directors had decided, in the absence of official authorisation and at company expense, to proceed with the issue of the design drawings to the production design office and to start tooling-up for a production line capable of producing a batch of 1,000 Hurricanes.\nProduction.\nIn June 1936 the Air Ministry placed its first order for 600 aircraft. On 26 June 1936 the Air Ministry approved the type name of \"Hurricane\" that had been proposed by Hawker, and an informal naming ceremony occurred the following month during an official visit by King Edward VIII to Martlesham Heath.\nIt was significantly cheaper to produce than the Supermarine Spitfire and took 10,300 man hours per airframe to produce, compared to 15,200 for the Spitfire, which had many parts formed by hand, with English wheels. As war was looking likely, and time was of the essence in providing the RAF with an effective fighter, the authorities expected there to be problems with the more advanced Spitfire, while the Hurricane made use of well proven manufacturing techniques. The service squadrons were also already experienced in maintaining aircraft structurally similar to the Hurricane. A fabric-covered wing was initially adopted in order to accelerate production, while a higher-performing stressed-skin metal wing was introduced in late 1939.\nThe first production Hurricane I first flew on 12 October 1937, flown by Flight Lieutenant Philip Lucas and powered by a Merlin II engine. While a contract for 600 Hurricanes was received on 2 June 1936, deliveries lagged by roughly six months due to a decision in December 1936 to replace the Merlin I with the improved Merlin II, which resulted in many detail alterations.\nMerlin I production ended after 180 were built. This engine had been prioritised for the Fairey Battle light bomber and the Hawker Henley, a failed competitor to the Battle briefly adapted as a target tug which shared common elements with the Hurricane design. By the following December, the first four aircraft to enter service with the RAF had joined No. 111 Squadron, stationed at RAF Northolt. By February 1938, No. 111 Squadron had received 16 Hurricanes. Upon the outbreak of the Second World War, over 550 Hurricanes had been produced equipping 18 squadrons, with 3,500 more on order.\nDuring 1940, Lord Beaverbrook, the Minister of Aircraft Production, established the Civilian Repair Organisation through which a number of manufacturers were to repair and overhaul battle-damaged aircraft including Hurricanes. Some of these were later sent to training units or to other air forces. Factories involved included the Austin Aero Company's Cofton Hackett plant and David Rosenfield Ltd, based at Barton aerodrome near Manchester.\nThe Canadian Car and Foundry of Fort William, Ontario, Canada was a major Hurricane manufacturer, producing them from November 1938 after receiving their initial contract for 40 Hurricanes. The facility's chief engineer, Elsie MacGill, became known as the \"Queen of the Hurricanes\". The initiative was commercially driven, but was endorsed by the British government. Hawker recognised that a major conflict was inevitable after the Munich Crisis of 1938 and drew up preliminary plans to expand Hurricane production at a new factory in Canada. Under this plan, samples, pattern aircraft, and design documents stored on microfilm were shipped to Canada. In 1938/39 the RCAF ordered 24 Hurricanes to equip one fighter squadron, 20 of which were delivered, and two were supplied to Canadian Car and Foundry as pattern aircraft but one probably did not arrive, while the other was returned to Britain in 1940. The first Hurricane built at Canadian Car and Foundry was completed in February 1940. Canadian-built Hurricanes shipped to Britain participated in the Battle of Britain.\nOverall, some 14,487 Hurricanes and Sea Hurricanes were produced in England and Canada. The majority of Hurricanes, 9,986 were built by Hawker (who produced the type at Brooklands from December 1937 to October 1942 and Langley from October 1939 to July 1944), while Hawker's sister company, the Gloster Aircraft Company, constructed 2,750. The Austin Aero Company completed 300 Hurricanes. Canada Car and Foundry produced 1,451 Hurricanes. However those shipped to Britain were often incomplete airframes and about 80% were delivered without an engine.\nIn 1939, production of 100 Hurricanes was initiated in Yugoslavia by Zmaj and Rogo\u017earski. Of these, 20 were built by Zmaj by April 1941. Recognising that the supply of British-made Merlin engines might not be guaranteed, it was decided to fit one of the Yugoslavian Hurricanes with a Daimler-Benz DB 601 engine instead. This aircraft was flown in 1941. In 1938, a contract for 80 Hurricanes was placed with Fairey's Belgian subsidiary Avions Fairey SA for the Belgian Air Force, and it was intended to arm these aircraft with four Browning machine guns. Three were built and two flown with this armament by the time of the German invasion of Belgium in May 1940, with at least 12 more constructed by Avions Fairey armed with the conventional eight rifle calibre machine gun armament.\nDesign.\nThe Hawker Hurricane is a low-wing cantilever monoplane with retractable undercarriage and an enclosed cockpit. The primary structure of the fuselage was a Warren truss box-girder with high-tensile steel longerons and duralumin cross-bracing, which were mechanically fastened rather than being welded. Over this, a secondary structure composed of wooden formers and stringers covered with doped linen gave the fuselage a rounded section. The majority of the external surfaces were linen, except for a section between the cockpit and the engine cowling which used lightweight metal panels instead. Camm had decided to use traditional Hawker construction techniques instead of more advanced options, such as a stressed-skin metal construction. This form of construction resembled that of earlier biplanes and was already considered to be somewhat outdated when the Hurricane was introduced to service . The Hurricane was initially armed with an arrangement of eight remotely-operated wing-mounted Browning machine guns, intended for conducting rapid engagements. The Hurricane was typically equipped for flying under both day and night conditions, being provided with navigation lights, Harley landing lights, complete blind-flying equipment, and two-way radios. Upon its entry to service, much of the performance data was intentionally concealed from the general public, but it was known that the type possessed a speed range of 6:1. A simple steel tube structure supported the engine; detachable cowling panels allowed access to most of the engine's areas for maintenance. Installed underneath the fuselage, the liquid-cooled radiator has a rectangular opening to its aft; this is covered by a hinged flap, allowing the pilot to control the cooling level. An atypical feature for the era was the use of Tungum alloy pipes throughout the cooling system.\nInitially, the structure of the Hurricane's cantilever wing consisted of two steel spars, which possessed considerable strength and stiffness. The wing was described by \"Flight\" as relatively straightforward to manufacture, employing simple vertical jigs to attach the two spars, after which the wing ribs were installed using horizontal bolts, forming separate units between the front and rear spars. Hydraulically-actuated split trailing edge flaps were fitted to the inner end of the wings. This wing was predominantly fabric-covered, like the fuselage, although some lightweight metal sheets were used on the inner wing and its leading edge. The majority of the flight control surfaces, such as the Frise-type ailerons, also had fabric coverings.\nAn all-metal, stressed-skin wing of duraluminium (a DERD specification similar to AA2024) was introduced in April 1939 and was used for all of the later marks. \"The metal skinned wings allowed a diving speed that was higher than the fabric-covered ones. They were very different in construction but were interchangeable with the fabric-covered wings; one trials Hurricane, \"L1877\", was even flown with a fabric-covered port wing and metal-covered starboard wing. The great advantage of the metal-covered wings over the fabric ones was that the metal ones could carry far greater stress loads without needing as much structure.\" Several fabric-wing Hurricanes were still in service during the Battle of Britain, although a good number had had their wings replaced during servicing or after repair. Changing the wings required only three hours work per aircraft.\nThe Hurricane had an inward-retracting undercarriage, the main undercarriage units being housed in recesses in the wing. Hinged telescopic Vickers-built legs are attached to the bottom boom of the wing's forward spar, but with an angled pivot to allow the strut to be perpendicular to the thrust line when extended and angle rearwards when retracted to clear the forward spar. A hydraulic jack actuated the undercarriage. Two separate hydraulic systems, one being power-operated and the other hand-operated, are present for the deployment and retraction of the undercarriage; in the event of both failing, pilots can release the retaining catches holding the undercarriage in place, deploying the wheels to the 'down' position using weight alone. A wide wheel-track was used to allow for considerable stability during ground movements and to enable tight turns to be performed.\nThe prototype and early production Hurricanes were fitted with a Watts two-bladed fixed-pitch wooden propeller. \"Flight\" commented of this arrangement: \"Many have expressed surprise that the Hurricane is not fitted with variable-pitch airscrews\". The original two-bladed propeller was found to be inefficient at low airspeeds and the aircraft required a long ground run to get airborne, which caused concern at Fighter Command. Accordingly, trials with a de Havilland variable-pitch propeller demonstrated a reduction in the Hurricane's take-off run from . Deliveries of these began in April 1939: this was later replaced by the hydraulically operated constant-speed Rotol propeller, which came into service in time for the Battle of Britain.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Then, with tail trimmer set, throttle and mixture lever fully forward... and puffs of grey exhaust smoke soon clearing at maximum r.p.m. came the surprise! There was no sudden surge of acceleration, but with a thunderous roar from the exhausts just ahead on either side of the windscreen, only a steady increase in speed... In retrospect that first Hurricane sortie was a moment of elation, but also of relief. Apart from the new scale of speeds that the pilot had to adapt to, the Hurricane had all the qualities of its stable, secure biplane predecessor the Hart, but enhanced by livelier controls, greater precision and all this performance.\n Roland Beamont describing his first flight in a Hurricane as a trainee pilot.\nCamm's priority was to provide the pilot with good all-round visibility. To this end, the cockpit was mounted reasonably high in the fuselage, creating a distinctive \"hump-backed\" silhouette. Pilot access to the cockpit was aided by a retractable \"stirrup\" mounted below the trailing edge of the port wing. This was linked to a spring-loaded hinged flap which covered a handhold on the fuselage, just behind the cockpit. When the flap was shut, the footstep retracted into the fuselage. In addition, both wing roots were coated with strips of non-slip material.\nAn advantage of the steel-tube structure was that cannon shells could pass right through the wood and fabric covering without exploding. Even if one of the steel tubes were damaged, the repair work required was relatively simple and could be done by ground crew at the airfield. Damage to a stressed skin structure, as used by the Spitfire, required more specialised equipment to repair. The old-fashioned structure also permitted the assembly of Hurricanes with relatively basic equipment under field conditions. Crated Hurricanes were assembled at Takoradi in West Africa and flown across the Sahara to the Middle East theatre and, to save space, some Royal Navy aircraft carriers carried their reserve Sea Hurricanes dismantled into their major assemblies, which were slung up on the hangar bulkheads and deckhead for reassembly when needed.\nIn contrast, the contemporary Spitfire used all-metal monocoque construction and was thus both lighter and stronger, though less tolerant of bullet damage. With its ease of maintenance, widely set landing gear and benign flying characteristics, the Hurricane remained in use in theatres of operations where reliability, easy handling and a stable gun platform were more important than performance, typically in roles like ground attack. One of the design requirements of the original specification was that both the Hurricane and the Spitfire were also to be used as night fighters. The Hurricane proved to be a relatively simple aircraft to fly at night, and shot down several German aircraft on night raids. From early 1941 the Hurricane was also used as an \"intruder\" aircraft, patrolling German airfields in France at night to catch bombers taking off or landing.\nOperational history.\nPre-war.\nBy the middle of 1938, the first 50 Hurricanes had reached squadrons and, at that time, it had been assessed that the rate of production was slightly greater than the RAF's capacity to introduce the new aircraft, which had already been accelerated. Accordingly, the British government gave Hawker the clearance to sell excess aircraft to nations that were likely to oppose German expansion. As a result, there were some modest export sales made to other countries; at the earliest opportunity, a former RAF Hurricane I was dispatched to Yugoslavia for evaluation purposes. Shortly after this evaluation, an order for 24 Hurricane Mk.Is for the Royal Yugoslav Air Force was received; this was followed by the purchase of a production licence for the Hurricane by Yugoslavia. Yugoslavian Hurricanes saw action against the Luftwaffe during the invasion of Yugoslavia in 1941 by the Axis powers.\nTo the end of August 1939, 14 Hurricanes had been sent to Poland (SS \"Lassel\" left Liverpool on 30 August 1939 heading to Constanza in Romania, these planes never reached Poland and ultimately were sold to Turkey), seven ex-RAF Hurricanes had been sent to South Africa, while another 13 ex-RAF Hurricanes were sent to Turkey, 13 Hurricanes had been built for Belgium, 21 for Canada including one as a pattern for Canadian Car and Foundry, one for Iran, one for Poland, three for Romania and 12 for Yugoslavia. All the built for export aircraft were taken from the RAF order and so all originally had an RAF serial. Further exports were done in the final four months of 1939 and early 1940.\nHurricane production was increased as part of a plan to create a reserve of attrition aircraft as well as re-equip existing squadrons and newly formed ones such as those of the Auxiliary Air Force. Expansion scheme E included a target of 500 fighters of all types by the start of 1938. By the time of the Munich Crisis, there were only two fully operational RAF squadrons of the planned 12 to be equipped with Hurricanes. By the time of the German invasion of Poland there were 16 operational Hurricane squadrons as well as a further two more that were in the process of converting.\nPhoney War.\nOn 24 August 1939, the British government gave orders partially to mobilise and No. 1 Group RAF (Air Vice-Marshal Patrick Playfair) sent its 10 Fairey Battle day-bomber squadrons to France, according to plans established by the British and French earlier in the year. The group was the first echelon of the RAF Advanced Air Striking Force (AASF) and flew from bases at Abingdon, Harwell, Benson, Boscombe Down and Bicester. The group HQ became the AASF when the order to move to France was received and the home station HQs, 71, 72 74\u201376 Wings.\nIn response to a request from the French government for the provision of 10 fighter squadrons to provide air support, Air Chief Marshal Sir Hugh Dowding, Commander-in-Chief of RAF Fighter Command, insisted that this number would deplete British defences severely, and so initially only four squadrons of Hurricanes, 1, 73, 85 and 87, were relocated to France, keeping Spitfires back for \"Home\" defence. The first to arrive was 73 Squadron on 10 September 1939, followed shortly by the other three. A little later, 607 and 615 Squadrons joined them.\nOwing to the Hurricane's rugged construction, ease of maintenance and repair in the field, and its docile landing and take-off characteristics, coupled with a wide-track undercarriage, it was selected to go to France as the principal RAF fighter. Two Hurricane squadrons, No. 1 and No. 73, formed 67 Wing of the Advanced Air Striking Force (No. 1 to Berry-au-Bac, north-west of Paris; No. 73 to Rouvres) while two more, No. 85 and No. 87, formed 60 Wing of the Air Component, BEF.\nWhile the two squadrons of No. 60 Wing had their Hurricanes painted in the standard colour scheme and markings of Home-based fighters, those of No. 67 Wing differed considerably. It was probably because No. 1 and No. 73 Squadrons were operating in close proximity to French fighter squadrons that these units painted red, white, and blue stripes over the entire height of the rudders on their Hurricanes in a similar manner to the standard French AF National markings.\nAs the French squadrons were not familiar with the British use of code letters, and there could have been cause for error in aircraft identification, both Hurricane squadrons removed their squadron identification letters, leaving the grey-painted aircraft letter aft of the fuselage roundel. The decision to adopt these special changes in markings seems to have been made at 67 Group HQ (the immediate command authority for the two squadrons involved) to suit local circumstances.\nThe Hurricane had its first combat action on 21 October 1939, at the start of the Phoney War. That day, \"A\" Flight of 46 Squadron took off from North Coates satellite airfield, on the Lincolnshire coast, and was directed to intercept a formation of nine Heinkel He 115B floatplanes from 1/K\u00fcFlGr 906, searching for ships to attack in the North Sea. The Heinkels, which were flying at sea level in an attempt to avoid fighter attacks, had already been attacked and damaged by two Spitfires from 72 Squadron when six Hurricanes intercepted them. The Hurricanes shot down four of the enemy in rapid succession, 46 Squadron claiming five and the Spitfire pilots two.\nAfter his first flight in October 1939, Hurricane pilot Roland Beamont subsequently flew operationally with 87 Squadron, claiming three enemy aircraft during the French campaign, and delivered great praise for his aircraft's performance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Throughout the bad days of 1940, 87 Squadron had maintained a proficient formation aerobatic team, the precise flying controls and responsive engines permitting precision formation through loops, barrel rolls, 1\u00a0g semi-stall turns and rolls off half-loops ... My Hurricane was never hit in the Battles of France and Britain, and in over 700 hr on type I never experienced an engine failure.\u2014\u200a\nWhile the opening months of the war were characterised by little air activity in general, there were sporadic engagements and aerial skirmishes between the two sides. On 30 October 1939 Hurricanes saw action over France. That day, Pilot Officer P. W. O. \"Boy\" Mould of 1 Squadron, flying Hurricane L1842, shot down a Dornier Do 17P from 2(F)/123. The German aircraft, sent to photograph Allied airfields close to the border, fell in flames about west of Toul. Mould was the first RAF pilot to down an enemy aircraft on the European continent in the Second World War. According to Mason, the experiences gained in these early engagements proved invaluable in developing tactics which became tried and tested, and rapidly spread throughout Fighter Command.\nOn 6 November 1939, Pilot Officer Peter Ayerst from 73 Squadron was the first to clash with a Messerschmitt Bf 109. After the dogfight, he came back with five holes in his fuselage. Flying Officer Cobber Kain, a New Zealander, was responsible for 73 Squadron's first victory, on 8 November 1939 while stationed at Rouvres. He went on to become one of the RAF's first fighter aces of the war, being credited with 16 kills. On 22 December, the Hurricanes in France suffered their first losses: three, while trying to intercept an unidentified aircraft between Metz and Thionville, were jumped by four Bf 109Es from III./JG 53, with their \"Gruppenkommandeur\", Spanish Civil War ace Captain Werner M\u00f6lders, in the lead. M\u00f6lders and \"Leutnant\" Hans von Hahn shot down the Hurricanes of Sergeant R. M. Perry and J. Winn for no loss.\nBattle of France.\nIn May 1940, Nos. 3, 79 and 504 Squadrons reinforced the earlier units as Germany's \"Blitzkrieg\" gathered momentum. On 10 May, the first day of the Battle of France, Flight Lieutenant R. E. Lovett and Flying Officer \"Fanny\" Orton, of 73 Squadron, were the first RAF pilots to engage enemy aircraft in the campaign. They attacked one of three Dornier Do 17s from \"4. Staffel/KG 2\" that were flying over their airfield at Rouvres-en-Woevre. The Dornier went away unscathed, while Orton was hit by defensive fire and had to force land. On the same day the Hurricane squadrons claimed 42 German aircraft, none of them fighters, shot down during 208 sorties; seven Hurricanes were lost but no pilots were killed.\nOn 12 May several Hurricanes units were committed to escort bombers. That morning, five Fairey Battle volunteer crews from 12 Squadron took off from Amifontaine base to bomb Vroenhoven and Veldwezelt bridges on the Meuse, at Maastricht. The escort consisted of eight Hurricanes of 1 Squadron, with Squadron Leader P. J. H. \"Bull\" Halahan in the lead. When the formation approached Maastricht, it was bounced by 16 Bf 109Es from \"2./JG 27\". Two Battles and two Hurricanes (including Halahan's) were shot down, two more Battles were brought down by flak and the fifth bomber had to crash-land. The 1 Squadron pilots claimed four Messerschmitts and two Heinkel He 112s, while the Luftwaffe actually lost only one Bf 109.\nOn 13 May 1940, a further 32 Hurricanes arrived. All 10 requested Hurricane squadrons were then operating from French soil and felt the full force of the Nazi offensive. The following day, Hurricanes suffered heavy losses: 27 being shot down, 22 by Messerschmitts, with 15 pilots killed (another died some days later), including Squadron Leader J. B. Parnall (504 Squadron), and the Australian ace Flying Officer Les Clisby (1 Squadron). On the same day, 3 Squadron claimed 17 German aircraft shot down, 85 and 87 Squadrons together claimed four victories, while 607 Squadron claimed nine. During the following three days (15\u201317 May), no fewer than 51 Hurricanes were lost, in combat or in accidents.\nBy 17 May, the end of the first week of fighting, only three of the squadrons were near operational strength, but the Hurricanes had managed to destroy nearly twice as many German aircraft. On 18 May 1940, air combat continued from dawn to dusk; Hurricane pilots claimed 57 German aircraft and 20 probables (Luftwaffe records show 39 aircraft lost). The following day, 1 and 73 Squadrons claimed 11 German aircraft (three by \"Cobber\" Kain and three by Paul Richey). On these two days Hurricanes suffered heavier losses, with 68 Hurricanes shot down or forced to crash-land due to combat damage. Fifteen pilots were killed, eight were taken prisoner and 11 injured. Two-thirds of the Hurricanes had been shot down by Messerschmitt Bf 109s and Bf 110s.\nIn the afternoon of 20 May 1940, the Hurricane units based in northern France were ordered to abandon their bases on the continent and return to Great Britain. On the same day, \"Bull\" Halahan requested the repatriation of the pilots serving in 1 Squadron. During the previous 10 days, the unit had been the most successful of the campaign; it had claimed 63 victories for the loss of five pilots: two killed, one taken prisoner and two hospitalised. 1 Squadron was awarded 10 DFCs and three DFMs during the \"Blitzkrieg\". On the evening of 21 May, the only Hurricanes still operational were those of the AASF that had been moved to bases around Troyes.\nDuring the 11 days of fighting in France and over Dunkirk from 10 to 21 May, Hurricane pilots claimed 499 kills and 123 probables. Contemporary German records, examined postwar, attribute 299 Luftwaffe aircraft destroyed and 65 seriously damaged by RAF fighters. The last 66 Hurricanes of the 452 engaged during the Battle of France left France on 21 June; 178 were abandoned at several airfields, notably Merville, Abbeville, and Lille/Seclin.\nOperation Dynamo.\nDuring Operation Dynamo (the evacuation from Dunkirk of British, French and Belgian troops cut off by the German army during the Battle of Dunkirk), the Hawker Hurricanes operated from British bases. Between 26 May and 3 June 1940, the 14 Hurricane units involved were credited with 108 air victories. A total of 27 Hurricane pilots became aces during Operation Dynamo, led by Canadian Pilot Officer W. L. Willie McKnight (10 victories) and Pilot Officer Percival Stanley Turner (seven victories), who served in No. 242 Squadron, consisting mostly of Canadian personnel. Losses were 22 pilots killed and three captured.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOver Dunkirk, the Luftwaffe suffered its first serious rebuff of the war. As Galland has noted, the nature and style of the air battles over the beaches should have provided a warning as to the inherent weaknesses of the Luftwaffe's force structure. ...[T]he Bf 109 was at the outer limits of its range and possessed less flying time over Dunkirk than did the \"Hurricanes\" and \"Spitfires\" operating from southern England. German bombers were still located in western Germany and had even farther to fly. Thus, the Luftwaffe could not bring its full weight to bear so that when its bombers hammered those on the beaches or embarking, the RAF intervened in a significant fashion. German aircraft losses were high, and British fighter attacks often prevented German bombers from performing with full effectiveness. Both sides suffered heavy losses. During the nine days from May 26 through June 3, the RAF lost 177 aircraft destroyed or damaged; the Germans lost 240. For much of the Luftwaffe, Dunkirk came as a nasty shock. Fliegerkorps II reported in its war diary that it lost more aircraft on the 27th attacking the evacuation than it had lost in the previous ten days of the campaign.\nMurray. \"Strategy for Defeat: The Luftwaffe 1935\u20131945\"\nOn 27 May 1940, in one of the final mass encounters of the \"Blitzkrieg\", 13 Hurricanes from 501 Squadron intercepted 24 Heinkel He 111s escorted by 20 Bf 110s; during the ensuing battle, 11 Heinkels were claimed as \"kills\" and others damaged, with little damage to the Hurricanes. On 7 June 1940, \"Cobber\" Kain, the first RAF ace of the war, got word that he was to return to England for \"rest leave\" at an Operational Training Unit. On leaving his airfield, he put on an impromptu aerobatic display and was killed when his Hurricane crashed after completing a loop and attempting some low altitude \"flick\" rolls.\nInitial engagements with the Luftwaffe showed the Hurricane to be a tight-turning and steady platform, but the Watts two-bladed propeller was clearly unsuitable. At least one pilot complained of how a Heinkel 111 was able to pull away from him in a chase, yet by this time the Heinkel was obsolete. At the start of the war, the engine ran on standard 87 octane aviation spirit. From early 1940, increasing quantities of 100 octane fuel imported from the U.S. became available. In February 1940, Hurricanes with the Merlin II and III engines began to receive modifications to allow for an additional of supercharger boost for five minutes (although there are accounts of its use for 30 minutes continuously).\nThe extra supercharger boost, which increased engine output by nearly , gave the Hurricane an approximate increase in speed of , under altitude and greatly increased the aircraft's climb rate. \"Overboost\" or \"pulling the plug\", a form of war emergency power as it was called in later Second World War aircraft, was an important wartime modification that allowed the Hurricane to be more competitive against the Bf 109E and to increase its margin of superiority over the Bf 110C, especially at low altitude. With the + \"emergency boost\", the Merlin III was able to generate at .\nFlight Lieutenant Ian Gleed of 87 Squadron wrote about the effect of using the extra boost on the Hurricane while chasing a Bf 109 at low altitude on 19 May 1940: \"Damn! We're flat out as it is. Here goes with the tit. A jerk\u00a0\u2013 boost's shot up to 12 pounds; speed's increased by 30 mph. I'm gaining ground\u00a0\u2013 700, 600, 500 yards. Give him a burst. No, hold your fire you fool! He hasn't seen you yet...\" Gleed ran out of ammunition before he could shoot the 109 down although he left it heavily damaged and flying at about .\nHurricanes equipped with Rotol constant-speed propellers were delivered to RAF squadrons in May 1940, with deliveries continuing throughout the Battle of Britain. According to aviation author David Donald, the Rotol propeller had the effect of transforming the Hurricane's performance from \"disappointing\" to \"acceptable mediocrity\"; modified aircraft were reportedly much sought after among squadrons which had also been equipped with Hurricanes that were fitted with the older de Havilland two-position propeller.\nBattle of Britain.\nAt the end of June 1940, following the fall of France, 31 of Fighter Command's 61 fighter squadrons were equipped with Hurricanes. The Battle of Britain officially lasted from 10 July until 31 October 1940, but the heaviest fighting took place between 8 August and 21 September. Both the Supermarine Spitfire and the Hurricane are renowned for their part in having defended Britain against the Luftwaffe; generally, the Spitfires intercepted the German fighters, leaving Hurricanes to concentrate on the bombers, and, despite the undoubted abilities of the \"thoroughbred\" Spitfire, it was the \"workhorse\" Hurricane that scored the higher number of RAF victories during this period, accounting for 55% of the 2,739 German losses, according to Fighter Command, compared with 42% by Spitfires. On 8 August 1940, Hurricanes of No. 145 Squadron were recorded as having fired the first shots of the Battle of Britain. The highest scoring Hurricane squadron during the Battle of Britain was the No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron. This squadron also had the distinction of having the highest ratio of enemy aircraft destroyed to own losses suffered.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnother thing we did was to devise a manoeuvre which was aimed at getting us out of a difficult corner if we ever got into one. This may sound very extraordinary, probably, to practising pilots today, but it consisted of putting everything into the left hand front corner of the cockpit. If you saw a 109 on your tail, and it hadn't shot you down at that point, you put on full throttle, fine pitch, full left rudder, full left stick and full forward stick. This resulted in a horrible manoeuvre which was, in fact, a negative \"g\" spiral dive. But you would come out of the bottom with no 109 on your tail and your aeroplane intact.\n Roland Beamont describing how a Hurricane can get away from a Bf 109.\nAs a fighter, the Hurricane had some drawbacks. It was slightly slower than both the Spitfire I and II and the Messerschmitt Bf 109E, and the thicker wing profiles compromised acceleration; but it could out-turn both of them. In spite of its performance deficiencies against the Bf 109, the Hurricane was still capable of destroying the German fighter, especially at lower altitudes. The standard tactic of the 109s was to attempt to climb higher than the RAF fighters and \"bounce\" them in a dive; the Hurricanes could evade such tactics by turning into the attack or going into a \"corkscrew dive\", which the 109s, with their lower rate of roll, found hard to counter. If a 109 was caught in a dogfight, the Hurricane was just as capable of out-turning the 109 as the Spitfire. In a stern chase, the 109 could evade the Hurricane.\nIn September 1940, the more powerful Mk.IIa series 1 Hurricanes started entering service, although only in small numbers. This version was capable of a maximum speed of . The Hurricane was a steady gun platform and had demonstrated its ruggedness as several were badly damaged yet returned to base. The Hurricane's construction made it dangerous if it caught fire; the wood frames and fabric covering of the rear fuselage allowed fire to spread through the rear fuselage structure easily. The gravity fuel tank in the forward fuselage sat right in front of the instrument panel, without any form of protection for the pilot. Many Hurricane pilots were seriously burned as a consequence of a jet of flame which could burn through the instrument panel. This became of such concern to Hugh Dowding that he had Hawker retrofit the fuselage tanks of the Hurricanes with Linatex, a self-expanding rubber coating. If the tank happened to be punctured by a bullet, the Linatex coating expanded when soaked with petrol and sealed it. However, some Hurricane pilots felt that the fuel tanks in the wings, although they were also protected with a layer of Linatex, were vulnerable from behind, and it was thought that those, and not the fuselage tank, were the main fire risk.\nFrom 10 July to 11 August 1940, RAF fighters fired at 114 German bombers and shot down 80, a destruction ratio of 70%. Against the Bf 109, the RAF fighters attacked 70 and shot down 54 of these, a ratio of 77%. It has been suggested that part of the success of the British fighters was possibly due to the use of the de Wilde incendiary round. The Hurricane with the highest number of kills during the Battle of Britain was P3308, a Mk.I, flown between 15 August and 7 October 1940 by RAF (auxiliary) pilot Archie McKellar of 605 Squadron. He is credited with 21 kills, 19 of those in a Hurricane during the Battle of Britain. On 7 October he is credited with shooting down five Bf 109s, making him one of only two RAF pilots (the other being Brian Carbury of New Zealand) to become an \"ace in a day\" during the Battle of Britain. During his brief fighting career, McKellar earned the DSO, DFC &amp; Bar. McKellar has remained in relative obscurity in Battle of Britain history, as he was killed in action one day after the date set by the War Ministry (after the war) as the official end date for the Battle of Britain. He died on 1 November 1940 while taking on a superior number of Bf 109s. As in the Spitfire, the Merlin engine suffered from negative-G cut-out, a problem not cured until the introduction of Miss Shilling's orifice in early 1941.\nThe only Battle of Britain Victoria Cross, and the only one awarded to a member of Fighter Command during the war, was awarded to Flight Lieutenant James Brindley Nicolson of 249 Squadron as a result of an action on 16 August 1940 when his section of three Hurricanes was \"bounced\" from above by Bf 110 fighters. All three were hit simultaneously. Nicolson was badly wounded, and his Hurricane was damaged and engulfed in flames. While attempting to leave the cockpit, Nicolson noticed that one of the Bf 110s had overshot his aircraft. He returned to the cockpit, which by now was in an inferno, engaged the enemy, and may have shot down the Bf 110. Afterward, he parachuted to safety, although he was mistakenly shot at by the Home Guard after landing.\nNight fighters and intruders.\nFollowing the Battle of Britain the Hurricane continued to give service; through the Blitz of 1941 it was the principal single-seat night fighter in Fighter Command. F/Lt. Richard Stevens claimed 14 Luftwaffe bombers flying Hurricanes in 1941. In 1942 the cannon-armed Mk.IIc performed further afield, as a night intruder over occupied Europe. F/Lt. Karel Kuttelwascher of 1 Squadron proved the top scorer, with 15 Luftwaffe bombers claimed shot down. The year 1942 also saw the manufacture of 12 Hurricane II C(NF) night fighters, equipped with pilot-operated air interception Mark VI radar. After a brief operational deployment with No. 245 and No. 247 Squadron RAF during which these aircraft proved too slow for operations in Europe, the aircraft were sent to India to serve with No. 176 Squadron RAF in the defence of Calcutta. They were withdrawn from service at the end of December 1943.\nNorth Africa.\nA Hurricane Mk.I undertook tropical trials in Sudan in mid 1939, and a number were hastily tropicalised following Italy's entry into the war in June 1940. These aircraft were initially ferried through France and Malta by air to 80 Squadron in Egypt, replacing Gladiator biplanes. The Hurricane claimed its first kill in the Mediterranean on 19 June 1940, when F/O P.G. Wykeham-Barnes reported shooting down two Fiat CR.42 Falcos.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe 109 was faster, had a better climb and much better altitude performance, which constantly enabled it to attack with the advantage of height but the old 'Hurri' provided some considerable comfort in its ruggedness and extreme manoeuvrability. I certainly had the feeling that with this ruggedness and manoeuvrability no one could get me as long as I could see him coming\n Wing Commander George Keefer in \"Hurricane : The plane that saved Britain\".\nHurricanes served with several British Commonwealth squadrons in the Desert Air Force. They suffered heavy losses over North Africa after the arrival of Bf 109E and F-variants and were progressively replaced in the air superiority role from June 1941 by Curtiss Tomahawks/Kittyhawks. However, fighter-bomber variants (\"Hurribombers\") retained an edge in the ground attack role, due to their impressive armament of four cannon and a bomb load.\nFrom November 1941, beginning in the Libyan desert, it had to face a new formidable opponent: the new Regia Aeronautica Macchi C.202 \"Folgore\". The Italian aircraft proved superior to the Hawker fighter and, thanks to its excellent agility and a new, more powerful inline engine licence-built by Alfa Romeo, could outperform it in a dogfight.\nDuring and following the five-day Second Battle of El Alamein artillery barrage that commenced on the night of 23 October 1942, six squadrons of Hurricanes, including the cannon-armed Hurricane Mk.IID version, claimed to have destroyed 39 tanks, 212 lorries and armoured troop-carriers, 26 bowsers, 42 guns, 200 various other vehicles and four small fuel and ammunition dumps, flying 842 sorties with the loss of 11 pilots. Whilst performing in a ground support role, Hurricanes based at RAF Castel Benito, Tripoli, knocked out six tanks, 13 armoured vehicles, 10 lorries, five half-tracks, a gun and trailer, and a wireless van on 10 March 1943, with no losses to themselves.\nIn the spring of 1943, during the German \"Ochsenkopf\" offensive in Tunisia, Hurricane IIDs conducted many sorties after fog had lifted, helping to blunt the final attack at Hunts Gap.\nDefence of Malta.\nThe Hurricane played a significant role in the defence of Malta. When Italy entered the war on 10 June 1940, Malta's air defence rested on Gloster Gladiators, which managed to hold out against vastly superior numbers of the Italian air force during the following 17 days. Initially there were six Gladiators, though after a while, only three were able to be flown at any one time because of a shortage of spare parts, and for whatever reason (five different explanations have been given), they became known as \"Faith, Hope and Charity\". Four Hurricanes joined them at the end of June, and together they faced attacks throughout July from the 200 enemy aircraft based in Sicily, with the loss of one Gladiator and one Hurricane. Further reinforcements arrived on 2 August in the form of 12 more Hurricanes and two Blackburn Skuas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n For weeks a handful of Hurricane IIs, aided by Group Captain A.B. Woodhall's masterly controlling, had been meeting, against all the odds, the rising crescendo of Field Marshal Kesselring's relentless attacks on Grand Harbour and the airfields. Outnumbered, usually, by 12 or 14 to one and, later\u00a0\u2013 with the arrival of the Bf 109Fs in Sicily\u00a0\u2013 outperformed, the pilots of the few old aircraft which the ground crews struggled valiantly to keep serviceable, went on pressing their attacks, ploughing their way through the German fighter screens, and our flak, to close in with the Ju 87s and 88s as they dived for their targets.\n Wing Commander Percy Lucas quoted in Bader (2004)\nThe increasing number of British aircraft on the island, at last, prompted the Italians to employ German Junkers Ju 87 dive bombers to try to destroy the airfields. Finally, in an attempt to overcome the stiff resistance put up by these few aircraft, the Luftwaffe took up base on the Sicilian airfields, only to find that Malta was not an easy target. After numerous attacks on the island over the following months, and the arrival of an extra 23 Hurricanes at the end of April 1941, and a further delivery a month later, the Luftwaffe left Sicily for the Russian Front in June that year.\nAs Malta was situated on the increasingly important sea supply route for the North African campaign, the Luftwaffe returned with a vengeance for a second assault on the island at the beginning of 1942. It was not until March, when the onslaught was at its height, that 15 Spitfires arrived from the carrier to bolster the defence, but many of the new aircraft were lost on the ground and the Hurricane bore the brunt of the early fighting until further reinforcements arrived.\nAir defence in the Soviet Union.\nThe Hawker Hurricane was the first Allied Lend-Lease aircraft to be delivered to the Soviet Union with a total of 2,952 Hurricanes eventually delivered, becoming the most numerous British aircraft in Soviet service. Many Soviet pilots were disappointed by the Hawker fighter, regarding it as inferior to both German and Soviet aircraft.\nIn July 2023, a crate of 8 Hurricanes was found buried in Ukraine. These had been supplied by the US but under the terms of Lease Lend, the Russians did not have to pay for equipment which didn't survive the war.\nDuring 1941, Mk.II Hurricanes played an important air defence role when the Soviet Union found itself under threat from the approaching German Army, who were advancing across a broad front stretching from Leningrad and Moscow to the oil fields in the south. Britain's decision to aid the Soviets meant sending supplies by sea to the far northern ports, and as the convoys needed to sail within range of enemy air attack from the Luftwaffe based in neighbouring Finland, it was decided to deliver a number of Hurricane Mk.IIBs, flying with Nos. 81 and 134 Squadrons of No. 151 Wing RAF, to provide protection. Twenty-four were transported on the carrier \"Argus\", arriving just off Murmansk on 28 August 1941, and another 15 crated aircraft on board merchant vessels. In addition to their convoy protection duties, the aircraft also acted as escorts to Soviet bombers.\nEnemy attention to the area declined in October, at which point the RAF pilots trained their Soviet counterparts to operate the Hurricanes themselves. By the end of the year, the RAF's direct role in the region had ended, but the aircraft themselves remained behind and became the first of thousands of Allied aircraft that were accepted by the Soviet Union. Although Soviet pilots were not universally enthusiastic about the Hurricane, twice Hero of the Soviet Union Lt. Col. Boris Safonov \"loved the Hurricane\", and RAF Hurricane Mk.IIB fighters operating from Soviet soil in defence of Murmansk, destroyed 15 Luftwaffe aircraft for only one loss in combat. However, in some Soviet war memoirs, the Hurricane has been described in very unflattering terms.\nThe \"Soviet\" IIB Hurricane as a multi-role fighter-bomber had quite a few drawbacks. First of all, it was slower than its main opponent, the Bf 109E interceptor, at low and medium height, and had a slower rate of climb. The Messerschmitt could outdive the Hurricane because of the thicker wing profile of the British fighter. But the main source of complaints was the Hurricane's armament. On occasion, the eight or 12 rifle-calibre machine guns did not damage the sturdy and heavily armoured German aircraft; consequently, Soviet ground crews started to remove the Brownings. Retaining only four or six of the 12 machine guns, two Berezin UBs or two or even four ShVAK cannons were substituted, but overall performance deteriorated as a result.\nThe British archives file AIR 22/310 reports 218 Mk.IIA sent to the Soviet Union or handed over, 22 lost before arrival, 1,884 Mk.IIB sent or handed over, 278 lost before arrival, 1,182 Mk.IIC sent or handed over, 46 lost before arrival, 117 rejected, 60 IID sent or handed over, 14 rejected, 30 Mk.IV handed over, total 3,374 Hurricanes sent or handed over, 346 lost before delivery, 2,897 accepted by the Soviets, 131 rejected.\nSouth-East Asia.\nFollowing the outbreak of the war with Japan, 51 Hurricane Mk.IIBs en route to Iraq were diverted to Singapore; 10 were in crates, the others partially disassembled, these and the 24 pilots (many of whom were veterans of the Battle of Britain), who had been transferred to the theatre, formed the nucleus of five squadrons. They arrived on 13 January 1942, by which time the Allied fighter squadrons in Singapore, flying Brewster Buffalos, had been overwhelmed during the Malayan campaign. The fighters of the Imperial Japanese Army Air Force, especially the Nakajima Ki-43 Oscar, had been underestimated in its capability, numbers and the strategy of its commanders.\nThanks to the efforts of No. 151 Maintenance Unit RAF, the 51 Hurricanes were assembled and ready for testing within 48 hours and of these, 21 were ready for operational service within three days. The Hurricanes, originally intended for the Middle East theatre, were fitted with bulky Vokes dust filters under the nose and were armed with 12, rather than eight, machine guns. The additional weight and drag made them slow to climb and unwieldy to manoeuvre at altitude, although they were more effective bomber killers.\nThe recently arrived pilots were formed into 232 Squadron and 488 (NZ) Squadron, flying Buffalos, converted to Hurricanes. On 18 January, the two squadrons formed the basis of 226 Group; 232 Squadron became operational on 22 January and suffered the first losses and victories for the Hurricane in Southeast Asia. Between 27 and 30 January, another 48 Hurricanes Mk.IIB arrived with the aircraft carrier , from which they flew to airfields code-named P1 and P2, near Palembang, Sumatra in the Netherlands East Indies.\nThe Hurricanes first saw action on the morning of 20 January 1942, when twelve aircraft of 232 Squadron intercepted a mixed IJN and IJAAF formation of about 80 bombers escorted by fighters, the heaviest air raid on Singapore. Eight were claimed shot down and three probables, but three Hurricanes were lost along with two pilots, including Squadron Leader Leslie Ninian Landels.\nBecause of inadequate early warning systems (the first British radar stations became operational only towards the end of February), Japanese air raids were able to destroy 30 Hurricanes on the ground in Sumatra, most of them in one raid on 7 February. After Japanese landings in Singapore, on 10 February, the remnants of 232 and 488 Squadrons were withdrawn to Palembang. Japanese paratroopers began the invasion of Sumatra on 13 February. Hurricanes destroyed six Japanese transport ships on 14 February but lost seven aircraft in the process. On 18 February, the remaining Allied aircraft and aircrews moved to Java, with only 18 serviceable Hurricanes out of the original 99. That month, 12 Hurricane Mk.IIB Trops were supplied to the Dutch forces on Java. With dust filters removed and fuel and ammo load in wings halved, these were able to stay in a turn with the Oscars they fought. After Java was invaded, some of the New Zealand pilots were evacuated by sea to Australia.\nWhen a Japanese carrier task force under the command of Admiral Ch\u016bichi Nagumo made a sortie into the Indian Ocean in April 1942, RAF Hurricanes based on Ceylon saw action against Nagumo's forces during attacks on Colombo on 5 April 1942 and on Trincomalee harbour on 9 April 1942.\nOn 5 April 1942, Captain Mitsuo Fuchida of the Imperial Japanese Navy, who led the attack on Pearl Harbor, led a strike against Colombo with 53 Nakajima B5N torpedo bombers and 38 Aichi D3A dive bombers, escorted by 36 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters. They were opposed by 35 Hurricane I and IIBs of 30 and 258 Squadrons, together with six Fairey Fulmars of 803 and 806 Naval Air Squadrons of the Fleet Air Arm. The Hurricanes mainly tried to shoot down the attacking bombers, but were engaged heavily by the escorting Zeros. A total of 21 Hurricanes were shot down (although two of these were repairable), together with four Fulmars and six Swordfish of 788 Naval Air Squadron that had been surprised in flight by the raid. The RAF claimed 18 Japanese aircraft destroyed, seven probably destroyed and nine damaged, with one aircraft claimed by a Fulmar and five by anti-aircraft fire. This compared with actual Japanese losses of one Zero and six D3As, with a further seven D3As, five B5Ns and three Zeros damaged.\nOn 9 April 1942, the Japanese task force sent 91 B5Ns escorted by 41 Zeros against Trincomalee port and the nearby China Bay airfield. Sixteen Hurricanes opposed the raid, of which eight were lost with a further three damaged. They claimed eight Japanese aircraft destroyed with a further four probably destroyed and at least five damaged. Actual Japanese losses were three A6Ms and two B5Ns, with a further 10 B5Ns damaged.\nAir battles over Arakan in 1943 represented the last large-scale use of the Hurricane as a pure fighter. However, in Burma, several squadrons flew Mk II and Mk IV Hurricanes, in the ground attack role, until the end of the war. Its pilots were occasionally caught up in air combat; for example, on 15 February 1944, Flg Off Jagadish Chandra Verma of No. 6 Squadron, Royal Indian Air Force (RIAF), shot down a Japanese Ki-43 Oscar \u2013 the only air-to-air victory for the RIAF during the Second World War.\nThe Hurricane remained in service as a fighter-bomber over the Balkans and at home as well where it was used mainly for second-line tasks and occasionally flown by ace pilots. For example, in mid-1944, Squadron Leader \"Jas\" Storrar of No. 1687 Flight RAF, used a Hurricane to courier documents to Allied ground forces in France, during the Normandy invasion.\nAircraft carrier operations.\nThe Sea Hurricane became operational in mid-1941 and scored its first kill while operating from on 31 July 1941. During the next three years, Fleet Air Arm Sea Hurricanes were to feature prominently while operating from Royal Navy aircraft carriers. The Sea Hurricane scored an impressive kill-to-loss ratio, primarily while defending Malta convoys, and operating from escort carriers in the Atlantic Ocean. For example, on 26 May 1944, Royal Navy Sea Hurricanes operating from the escort carrier HMS \"Nairana\" claimed the destruction of three Ju 290 reconnaissance aircraft during the defence of a convoy.\nFinland.\nDuring the Winter War, the Finnish Air Force were in dire need of modern fighters and sourced them from several countries, including the United Kingdom. Finland bought 12 Hurricanes and the delivery commenced on 2 February 1940. The Hurricanes were flown from St Athan, Wales to V\u00e4ster\u00e5s, Sweden, via Scotland and Norway by Finnish pilots in two batches. The first batch arrived in V\u00e4ster\u00e5s on 29 February, with the last aircraft arriving on 10 March. During the second batch flight, two Hurricanes were lost, with one crashing in Norway and the other being damaged during landing in Scotland and left there. The Hurricanes were initially deployed to LLv 22. Later they were transferred to LLv 28 and finally moved to LLv 30. During the period of Interim Peace, two further Hurricanes were lost in accidents.\nAt the start of the Continuation War on 25 June 1941, the Hurricanes were allocated to LLv 30. On 2 July 1941, a Hurricane were mistakenly shot down by friendly anti-aircraft at Vainikkala. The Finnish Hurricanes' first combat came on 3 July, when three Hurricanes encountered several Soviet fighters and shot down an I-153 \"Chaika\". In the next day, the Hurricane shot down a Tupolev SB bomber. Other encounters with Soviet fighters took place on 15 July above the Karelian Isthmus, with two I-153 claimed as being shot down. The last aircraft shot down by Finnish Hurricanes was an I-15 on 6 January 1942.\nHurricane aces.\nTop scoring Hurricane pilots:\nPilots of Note\nFirst production version, with fabric-covered wings, a wooden two-bladed, fixed-pitch propeller (first 435) or three blade two -pitch propeller, powered by the Rolls-Royce Merlin Mk.II (first 364) or III engines and armed with eight Browning machine guns. Produced between 1937 and 1939.\nA revised Hurricane Mk.I series built with a de Havilland or Rotol constant speed propeller (from February 1940), metal-covered wings, armour and other improvements. A total of 4,200 Mk.Is were built; 1,924 by Hawker, 1,850 by Gloster Aircraft Company and 426 by Canadian Car and Foundry between December 1937 and October 1941. Apart from 30 retained in Canada the Canadian Car and Foundry Hurricanes were shipped to England to be fitted with engines.\nHurricane Mk.I powered by the improved Merlin XX engine with two-speed supercharger. This new engine used a coolant mix of 30% glycol and 70% water. Pure glycol is flammable, so not only was the new mix safer, but the engine also ran approximately 21\u00a0\u00b0C (38\u00a0\u00b0F) cooler, which gave longer engine life and greater reliability. The new engine was longer than the earlier Merlin and so the Hurricane gained a 4.5 in \"plug\" in front of the cockpit, which made the aircraft slightly more stable due to the slight forward shift in centre of gravity. First flew on 11 June 1940 and went into squadron service in September 1940. Hawker built 418 and Gloster Aircraft Company 33. The series 1 may refer to the first production batch which did not have all the proposed changes incorporated, becoming series 2 when the changes were made. 33 Mk. IIA built by Gloster, 418 by Hawker.\nCarrying four additional wing-mounted Browning machine guns; for a total of 12 guns, 230 were factory fitted with racks allowing them to carry two or two bombs. This lowered the top speed of the Hurricane to , but by this point mixed sweeps of Hurricanes carrying bombs, protected by a screen of fighter Hurricanes were not uncommon. The same racks allowed the Hurricane to carry two drop tanks instead of the bombs, nearly doubling the Hurricane's fuel load.\nA total of 3,178 IIBs built in Britain to November 1942, 2,011 by Hawker, 867 by Gloster Aircraft Company and 300 by the Austin Aero Company, plus another 515 by Canadian Car and Foundry built November 1941 to March 1943. Many of the Canadian built aircraft being fitted with C (cannon) wings before delivery to the RAF.\nFor use in North Africa the Hawker Hurricane Mk.IIB (and other variants) were tropicalised. They were fitted with Vokes and Rolls-Royce engine dust filters and the pilots were issued with a desert survival kit, including a bottle of water behind the cockpit.\nReplaced the machine-gun armament with four Hispano Mk.II cannons, two per wing. The new wings later included a hardpoint for a bomb and, later again, fuel tanks. By then performance was inferior to the latest German fighters, and the Hurricane changed to the ground-attack role, sometimes referred to as the Hurribomber. The Mk. IIC also served as a night fighter and intruder with about three quarters converted to fighter bombers. There were 4,751 IICs built by Hawker between February 1941 and July 1944.\nArmed with two anti-tank autocannon in a gondola-style pod, one under each wing and a single Browning machine gun in each wing loaded with tracers for aiming purposes. The first aircraft flew on 18 September 1941 and deliveries started in 1942. Had additional armour for the pilot, radiator and engine, and were armed with a Rolls-Royce gun with 12 rounds, later changed to the Vickers S gun with 15 rounds. The outer wing attachments were strengthened so that 4G could be pulled at a weight of . The weight of guns and armour protection marginally impaired the aircraft's performance. These Hurricanes were nicknamed \"Flying Can Openers\", perhaps a play on the logo of No. 6 Squadron, which flew the Hurricane starting in 1942. A total of 296 built by Hawker from January 1942 to February 1943.\nNot an official Mark number. First used informally by the RAF for 100 mark IIB factory fitted with bomb racks built September to December 1941, which were then redesignated mark IIBB. Also used by the Ministry of Aircraft Production March to October 1942 for further production, all up 270 considered built, comprising 230 IIBB and 40 IICB by the later RAF designation (230 IIB and 40 IIC). A signal to the Middle East dated 31 October 1942 states the IIE was not an official mark. The Mk.IIE was not an early Mk.IV.\nTwo-seat training version of the Mk. IIC. Only two aircraft were built, for the Imperial Iranian Air Force.\nVersion of the Hurricane Mk.II powered by a US Packard-built Merlin engine, intending to enable supplies of the British-built engines for other designs. Probably two Canadian built aircraft test flown in Britain with a Merlin 28 starting in May/June 1942 before becoming mark IIB with Merlin XX. By the time production was to have started, British Merlin production had increased to the point where the idea was abandoned.\nThe last major change to the Hurricane was the introduction of the \"universal wing\", a single design able to mount two bombs, or two Vickers S guns, or two 40 mm (1.57 in) Rolls-Royce B.H. type guns, two SBC (small bomb containers) or SCI (smoke curtain installation), or two 45 or 90 gallon drop tanks or eight \"60 pounder\" RP-3 rockets. Two Brownings were fitted to aid aiming of the heavier armament. Despite persistent reports, Mk.IVs were actually fitted with the same Merlin XX as the Mk.II. All Merlin 27s were modified to Merlin 25 and used in Mosquitoes, there were only 16 production Merlin 24s by the time over 300 Mk.IV had been delivered. The individual aircraft cards held by the RAF museum reports the final Mk.IV had a Merlin XX. The radiator was deeper and armoured. Additional armour was also fitted around the engine. 524 built by Hawker between December 1942 and March 1944.\nThe final variant to be produced. Only one was purpose built and two Mk.IV converted, though the variant never reached full-scale production. This was planned to be powered by a Merlin 27 but also tested with a Merlin 32 boosted engine to give at low level and was intended as a dedicated ground-attack aircraft to use in Burma. All three prototypes had four-bladed propellers. The Mk. V replaced the twin 7.7mm machine guns on the Mk. IV with two 20mm cannons, only completed on the third prototype. Speed was at \nNot an official Mark number. The Mk.X designation is used by some RAF documents for Canadian Car and Foundry built Mk.I but many references define it as Mk.II airframes fitted with a Merlin 28 Canadian Car and Foundry report building a total of 915 Mk.II airframes for Holland (one), the RAF (514) and the RCAF (400), between November 1941 and May 1943. About two thirds of the Canadian Car and Foundry built Mk.II airframes shipped to Britain did so without an engine, the remainder being fitted with Merlin 28s, but the engine was nearly always removed upon arrival and a Merlin XX fitted instead. These aircraft were considered a Mk.II by the RAF. Apart from some test flights in Canada and England no Hurricane flew powered by a Merlin 28. Canada only imported 285 Merlin 28 for Hurricanes, all of which were shipped to Britain either as a separate engine or attached to a Hurricane.\nNot an official Mark. number. Designation used by many references for 150 aircraft from the RCAF Mk.XII order sent to Britain, these aircraft had many items and their Merlin 29 removed before being shipped without an engine or fitted with a Merlin 28. Fitted with Merlin XX on arrival in Britain and called a Mk.II by the RAF.\nCanadian-built variant. On 19 August 1941, the Canadian government placed an order with Canadian Car and Foundry for 400 Hurricanes, with 100 meant for the Netherlands and 300 for China, the Netherlands order was amended to 72, the Chinese decided to buy American, which resulted in 328 being offered to the USSR, to be shipped across the Pacific. Amended to all 400 for the RCAF. Originally designated the Mk.IIB (Can), designation changed to Mk.XII in April 1943. Single-seat fighter and fighter-bomber, powered by a Packard Merlin 29, armed with twelve machine guns, production starting in June 1942, 250 served with the RCAF and 150 were sent to Britain in 1943 either without an engine or fitted with a Merlin 28 which was replaced by a Merlin XX on arrival and they became Mk.IIs\nCanadian-built variant. The survivors of a batch of 30 RAF order Mk.I airframes retained in Canada in late 1941 that were fitted with Merlin III and propellers from Fairey Battles, became Mk. XIIA when fitted with Merlin 29. Armed with eight machine guns\nCanadian built variant. RAF serial airframe AM270 was completed around early March 1942 to Dutch standards, including US built Merlin, instruments and gun sight, as the prototype of an order for the Netherlands East Indies (KM/KNIL). Given the Dutch serial HC3-287, its subsequent fate is unclear beyond being used by Canadian Car and Foundry for test flying. AM270 was also used by the RAF for a Consolidated San Diego built Catalina, creating a further level of confusion.\nThe Sea Hurricane Mk.IA was a Hurricane Mk.I modified by General Aircraft Limited. They were modified to be carried by CAM ships (catapult-armed merchantman), whose ships' crews were Merchant Marine and whose Hurricanes were crewed and serviced by RAF personnel, or Fighter Catapult Ships, which were Naval Auxiliary Vessels crewed by naval personnel and aircraft operated by the Fleet Air Arm. These ships were equipped with a catapult for launching an aircraft, but without facilities to recover them. Consequently, if the aircraft were not in range of a land base, pilots had to bail out or to ditch.\nBoth of these options had their problems\u2014there was always a chance of striking part of the fuselage when bailing out, and a number of pilots had been killed in this way. Ditching the Hurricane in the sea called for skill as the radiator housing acted as a water brake, pitching the nose of the fighter downwards when it hit the water, while also acting as a very efficient scoop, helping to flood the Hurricane so that a quick exit was necessary before the aircraft sank. Then the pilot had to be picked up by a ship. More than 80 modifications were needed to convert a Hurricane into a Sea Hurricane, including new radios to conform with those used by the Fleet Air Arm and new instrumentation to read in knots rather than miles per hour. They were informally known as \"Hurricats\".\nThe majority of the aircraft modified had suffered wear-and-tear serving with front line squadrons, so much so that at least one example used during trials broke up under the stress of a catapult launching. CAM Sea Hurricanes were launched operationally on eight occasions and the Hurricanes shot down six enemy aircraft for the loss of one Hurricane pilot killed. The first Sea Hurricane Mk.IA kill was an Fw 200C \"Condor\", shot down on 2 August 1941. The Hurricanes performance was somewhat hindered as a result of the extra equipment carried that was necessary for carrier operations, although this doesn't seem to have effected its reputation among FAA pilots, with whom it was extremely popular.\nHurricane Mk.I version equipped with catapult spools plus an arrester hook. From July 1941 they operated from and from October 1941, they were used on merchant aircraft carrier (MAC) ships, which were large cargo vessels with a flight deck fitted, enabling aircraft to be launched and recovered. The first Sea Hurricane Mk.IB kill occurred on 31 July 1941 when Sea Hurricanes of 880 squadron FAA operating from HMS \"Furious\" shot down a Do 18 flying-boat.\nApart from the conversions in Britain, 50 Sea Hurricane Mk.I were built in Canada and delivered in late 1941 and early 1942. Initially fitted with a Merlin III, they became Mk.XIIA when later fitted with a Merlin 29.\nA Sea Hurricane Mk.I version reported equipped with the four-cannon wing. Despite persistent reports of hundreds converted from early 1942 only eight have been traced, all from a batch of 10 Sea Hurricanes that were sent to General Aircraft Limited in February 1943 from The Merchant Ship Fighter Unit, 7 being returned in May as Ic.\nThe Sea Hurricane I used during \"Operation Pedestal\" had their Merlin III engines modified to accept boost, and could generate more than at low altitude. Lt. R. J. Cork was credited with five kills while flying a Sea Hurricane I during \"Operation Pedestal\".\nVariants.\nThe RAF reports as of end June 1944 a total of 378 conversions to Sea Hurricane I, less any conversions back to standard Hurricanes, photographic evidence suggests it was 378 transfers to the Royal Navy, most of which were converted to Sea versions.\n60 built by Hawker between November 1942 and May 1943, version equipped with naval radio gear; other standard Mk.IICs were converted and used on fleet carriers. The Merlin XX engine on the Sea Hurricane generated at and at . Top speed was at and at . Another 47 mark IIB converted to Sea mark II, with 45 of them given C wings as part of the conversion.\n50 Canadian built Sea Hurricane I delivered in late 1941 and early 1942. Initially fitted with Merlin III as Mk.I, the survivors became Mk.XII when fitted with Merlin 29.\nA full-scale version of the Hills &amp; Son Bi-mono slip-wing biplane/monoplane, using a Hawker Hurricane Mk.I returned from Canada as RCAF ser no 321 (RAF serial L1884). Taxi and flight trials carried out at RAF Sealand during May 1943, and at the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment, Boscombe Down from September 1943. The upper wing was not released in flight before the programme was terminated due to poor performance.\nThe Service Depot at Heliopolis in Egypt converted several Hurricanes Is for photo reconnaissance. The first three were converted in January 1941. Two carried a pair of F24 cameras with 8-inch focal length lenses. The third carried one vertical and two oblique F24s with 14-inch focal length lenses mounted in the rear fuselage, close to the trailing edge of the wing, and a fairing was built up over the lenses aft of the radiator housing. A further five Hurricanes were modified in March 1941, and two were converted in a similar manner in Malta during April 1941. During October 1941 a batch of six Hurricane Mk.IIs were converted to PR Mk.II status and a final batch, thought to be of 12 aircraft, was converted in late 1941. The PR Mk.II was said to be capable of slightly over and was able to reach .\nFor duties closer to the front lines some Hurricanes were converted to Tactical Reconnaissance (Tac R) aircraft. An additional radio was fitted for liaison with ground forces who were better placed to direct the Hurricane. Some Hurricane Tac R aircraft also had a vertical camera fitted in the rear fuselage, so to compensate for the extra weight either one or two Brownings or two cannon would be omitted. Externally these aircraft were only distinguishable by the missing armament.\nOperators.\nThe Hurricane had a long operational life in many theatres of war and was also built by, or exported to, several other countries. In some cases such as Portugal and Ireland, the Hurricane was pressed into service after being forced to land in a neutral country.\nIn 1939 Latvia ordered and paid for 30 Hurricane fighters, but due to the start of the Second World War later that year, the aircraft were never delivered.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSurviving aircraft.\nOf more than 14,483 Hurricanes that were built, approximately 16 (including three Sea Hurricanes) are in airworthy condition worldwide, although many other non-flying examples survive in various air museums.\nSpecifications (Hurricane Mk.IIC).\n\"Data from\" \"Jane's Fighting Aircraft of World War II\"General characteristics* Crew: One* Length: * Wingspan: * Height: * Wing area: * Airfoil: root: Clark YH (19%); tip: Clark YH (12.2%)* Empty weight: * Gross weight: * Max takeoff weight: * Powerplant: 1 \u00d7 Rolls-Royce Merlin XX V-12 liquid-cooled piston engine, at* Propellers: 3-bladed\nPerformance* Maximum speed: (, ) at * Range: (, ) * Service ceiling: * Rate of climb: * Wing loading: * Power/mass: \nArmament\nTurn performance.\nAlthough the Hawker Hurricane did not have the speed or climb rate of the Supermarine Spitfires or the Messerschmitt Bf 109, its lower wing loading meant that it was able to turn in a tighter circle, an important advantage in some phases of fighter combat. It has sometimes been claimed the Bf 109 could turn inside the Hurricane, a matter considered below.\nSignificance.\nFighter aircraft have been classified into \"turn performance\" and \"energy performance\" types; the latter have higher speeds and can climb faster; but the former have better instantaneous turn, and a tighter sustained turn radius.\nFrom the early 1930s onwards, in what aeronautical engineer Georg Hans Madelung called the \"speed craze\", fighter designers prioritised maximum speeds and climb rates. Not until much later was there a general requirement for a better balance of performance, reducing wing loads to get extra agility in the turn.\nIn the Battle of Britain the Hurricanes were assigned to a defensive role i.e. they were encouraged to seek out enemy bombers not fighters. The bombers were escorted by fighters, often Messerschmitt Bf 109s or Bf 110s, whose task, therefore, was to attack any incoming Hurricanes. A standard fighter manouevre, taught to most fighter pilots, was to attack from astern, preferably by ambush from above. If the attacker was not seen coming in and could get close enough the result was probably a victory. If, however, he was seen in time, the basic evasive manouevre was the \"break\", in which the defending aircraft turned hard in the direction of the attacker, if possible getting onto his tail.\nWrote Pilot Officer Geoffrey Page:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the Hurricane we knew that the Me 109 could out-dive us, but not out-turn us. With that knowledge, one obviously used the turning manouevre rather than trying to beat the man at the game in which he was clearly superior. With a 109 sitting behind you, you'd stay in a really tight turn, and after a few turns the position would be reversed and you'd be on his tail.\nTurning radius of Hurricane and other Battle of Britain fighters.\nAn aircraft's minimum turning radius cannot be quoted as a single number since it varies with altitude and loading. Accurate historical data are sparse because they were not published at the time, presumably for security reasons, or later for lack of archival research.\nIn May 1940 a Messerschmitt Bf 109E3 captured by French forces was tested against a Hurricane, both flown by British pilots. The pilots reported that the Messerschmitt was faster than the Hurricane, and could out-climb and out-dive it, but could not turn as well. In climbing and diving turns at high speed, although the Bf 109 was placed line astern to start with, it could not keep the Hurricane in its gunsights and the latter was able to get onto its tail in only four turns. However, these trials were restricted to below 15,000 feet owing to lack of oxygen equipment.\nLikewise, a RAF Fighter Command report stated that \"the Hurricane will easily out-turn the Spitfire in a simple tailchase, and bring guns to bear in two or three turns\".\nHowever in 1967, in \"The Hawker Hurricane I\" (Profile Publications, No. 111, an 18-page booklet), aviation author Francis K. Mason wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Much has been written of the relative manouevrability of the four principal Battle of Britain fighters. Published here for the first time are comparative turning radii attainable, resolved to a combat altitude of 10,000 feet\u2014the most common area of combat chosen by the Hurricane pilots in 1940 ... if and when the choice was theirs. True airspeed, 300 m.p.h.\nMason did not state his sources. His numbers were repeated in Len Deighton's 1977 book , achieving wider publicity. They were criticised by Ackroyd and Lamont of the Aerospace department of Manchester University, who said Mason had arrived at them by calculation, which calculations were flawed.\nAccording to them, to arrive at those values Mason had assumed the aircraft were flown at 300 m.p.h. while in a sustained angle of bank so steep - about 80\u00b0 - that the g forces would have been \"beyond the limits of any pilot at that time and most probably beyond the structural limits of the aircraft\". Further, none of the aircraft engines could have delivered the required thrust, since far more power is required to overcome aircraft drag in a very steep turn.\nRecalculating for thrusts actually achievable with those engines, and assuming the aircraft were flown at maximum power as near to the stall as possible, again at 10,000 feet, Ackroyd and Lamont arrived at the following among other parameter values:\nThey accepted those were still only estimates, but believed them to provide a reasonable assessment. They said they tended to be confirmed by a contemporaneous flight report on a captured Bf109 E-3.\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57973", "revid": "50516570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57973", "title": "Tony Robinson", "text": "British actor (born 1946)\nSir Anthony Robinson (born 15 August 1946) is an English actor, author, broadcaster, and political activist. He played Baldrick in the BBC television sitcom \"Blackadder\" and has presented many historical documentaries, including the Channel 4 series \"Time Team\" and \"The Worst Jobs in History\". He has written 16 children's books.\nAs a member of the Labour Party, Robinson was knighted in the 2013 Queen's Birthday Honours for his public and political service.\nEarly life.\nRobinson was born on 15 August 1946 in Homerton, London, to Phyllis (1916\u20132005) and Leslie Robinson (1913\u20131989). His parents were from working-class Hackney backgrounds; his father was a civil servant and council employee who served in the RAF, and his mother, an audio-typist, served in the WAAF. He attended the private Woodford Green Preparatory School and Wanstead County High grammar school. He passed four O-levels (English language, English literature, history, and geography) and went on to study for A-levels, but did not complete them and decided to study at a drama school instead. Too young to attend the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, Robinson enrolled at the Central School of Speech and Drama in 1963, graduating in 1966.\nRobinson had his first acting role at the age of 13, as a member of Fagin's band in the original production of the musical \"Oliver!\", including a stint as the Artful Dodger when the boy playing the role failed to turn up. Over the next five years, he appeared in a number of West End theatre shows, and in film, and television.\nThrough genealogical research, Robinson found that one of his great-great-great grandmothers, Julia Levy, was Jewish; his father, unaware of this ancestry, had been beaten by Fascists in the East End of London in the 1930s who assumed he was a Jew.\nActing career.\nEarly career.\nAfter drama school, he spent four years in repertory theatre most notably at the West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds. Robinson won an Arts Council bursary to work as a director at the Midlands Arts Centre, Birmingham, and founded the Avon Touring Company, a Bristol-based community theatre company, with writer David Illingworth. He played a small role as student doctor Grace in the 1972\u201373 series of \"Doctor In Charge\".\nRobinson appeared in the 1974\u201375 season at Chichester Festival Theatre, as Angel Chicago in the nativity musical \"Follow The Star\". In the 1975 season, he appeared as Hovstad in Henrik Ibsen's \"An Enemy of the People\". In 1976, he appeared as Feste in \"Twelfth Night\", and as Majorin in \"Monsieur Perrichon's Travels\".\nIn 1972, Robinson starred in the children's educational programme \"Sam on Boffs' Island\" and was later a presenter on \"Play Away\". He also appeared in the award-winning \"Horizon\" documentary \"Joey\", and in the title role in the BBC production of \"The Miracle of Brother Humphrey\". He also appeared in the film \"Brannigan\" starring John Wayne, in which he shared two speaking part scenes with Wayne, playing a motorcycle courier who is pushed off a quay into the Thames by Wayne. He was also one of the team in the Channel 4 comedy/satirical series \"Who Dares Wins\" in the early/mid-1980s. He was also seen in \"The Rag Trade\"'s 1970s reboot.\n\"Blackadder\" period (1983\u20131989).\nRobinson came to prominence in 1983 for his role in the British historical sitcom \"Blackadder\", as Edmund Blackadder's dogsbody Baldrick. In the first series, broadcast as \"The Black Adder\", he was quite astute, while his master was an idiot. Later series (\"Blackadder II\", \"Blackadder the Third\", \"Blackadder Goes Forth\") moved the duo through history and switched the relationship: the Edmund Blackadder of \"Blackadder II\" was a brilliant schemer, whereas Baldrick had devolved into a buffoon whose catchphrase was \"I have a cunning plan\".\nIn addition to his acting on \"Blackadder\", Robinson also wrote and narrated several \"Jackanory\"-style children's programmes, encouraged by Richard Curtis. Programmes in this style included \"Tales From Fat Tulip's Garden\" (continued in \"Fat Tulip Too\"), \"Odysseus: The Greatest Hero of Them All\" (a retelling of the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\") and \"Blood and Honey\" (tales from the Old Testament, filmed on location).\nRobinson also performed within the BBC Radio 4 comedy \"Delve Special\" (1984\u20131987), written by Tony Sarchet.\nAfter \"Blackadder\" (1989\u20131999).\nAfter \"Blackadder\", Robinson became the narrator and one of the lead actors for the British animated series \"Nellie the Elephant\", based on the song of the same name. The series ran from 1989 until 1991 and was screened on Children's ITV.\nRobinson also provided voice-over for the cartoon short \"Free-Ranger\", an English child-scripted arts-funded production in 1989. Robinson also presented the early-Saturday evening series \"Stay Tooned\" for BBC 1, which featured a selection of classic Warner Bros. and MGM cartoons. In 1989, after attending a pantomime at Tyndale Baptist Church, Bristol, which was based on the Robin Hood story but featuring Maid Marian as the lead role, he created the children's comedy series \"Maid Marian and her Merry Men\", a loose retelling of the legend of Robin Hood in which he appeared as the Sheriff of Nottingham. Four series were broadcast on BBC1 from 1989 until 1994. In 1990 he appeared as \"Shlomo Denkoviz\" in an episode of \"Bergerac\", entitled \"My Name's Sergeant Bergerac\" (Series 8, Episode 2).\nAlso in 1994, Robinson played a minor part in an episode of the television series \"Minder\", called \"One Flew Over the Parents' Nest\", in which he played a character called \"Willie the Weed\".\n1999\u20132010.\nIn 1999, Robinson returned to star as Baldrick in a one-off short film in the \"Blackadder\" series, made to celebrate the new millennium. Entitled \"\", it was screened in the Millennium Dome throughout 2000 and was later aired on BBC One in 2002.\nRobinson also contributed the voiceover for the television series \"Airline\" screened from 1999 and focusing on the daily routine of EasyJet staff at a selection of airports. The series was made for ITV and is often repeated today on Sky Real Lives, Sky One, Sky Two, Sky Three (now Sky Mix), and ITV2. Robinson worked as the narrator for six of the remaining nine series until 2006 when it ended.\n\"Tony Robinson's Cunning Night Out\", a largely improvised one-man stage show, followed in early 2005 and included a mix of the many themes from his career for which Robinson is famous. The show was later released on DVD.\nIn addition to telling his own stories, Robinson narrated the abridged audiobook versions of Terry Pratchett's \"Discworld\" novels. Nigel Planer, Celia Imrie, and Stephen Briggs narrated the unabridged versions. He also provided the voicing for several characters in the videogame \"Discworld\". He followed on this \"Discworld\" work by playing a role in the live action television dramatisation of \"Hogfather\", broadcast on Sky over the Christmas season in 2006.\nRobinson also presented Classic FM's \"Friendly Guide to Classical Music\" which aired on a Sunday at 4pm. The whole 16-episode series was repeated on 26 December 2006. He revealed on the BBC Radio 2 feature \"Tracks of My Years\" that his favourite songs are: \"I Can Help\" by Billy Swan, \"Bleeding Love\" by Leona Lewis, \"Chasing Cars\" by Snow Patrol, \"Beautiful\" by Christina Aguilera, \"Unfinished Sympathy\" by Massive Attack, \"Tangled Up In Blue\" by Bob Dylan, \"Shoulda Woulda Coulda\" by Beverley Knight, \"This Woman's Work\" by Maxwell, \"He's So Fine\" by the Chiffons, and \"Falling Slowly\" by the Frames.\nIn 2007, Robinson narrated television advertisements for Honda, in the humorous style of \"Tales From Fat Tulip's Garden\". The advertisements feature plastic cars with expressive faces (similar to \"Thomas the Tank Engine\"). He also did voiceovers for cleaning products Domestos and Vanish from 2007 until 2009. Also in 2007, Robinson visited 30 towns in Britain and Ireland with \"A Cunning Night Out\".\nIn July 2009, Robinson appeared in the light-hearted BBC1 series \"Hotel Babylon\" as a sly hit-man named Arthur Barnes. The character is knocked unconscious by a flying bottle expertly lobbed by the hotel manager during a showdown in the lobby.\n2010\u2013present.\nIn September 2013, Robinson played the Fool in the Gala Performance of William Shakespeare's \"King Lear\" at the Old Vic in London, directed by Jonathan Miller .\nIn 2014, Robinson played the title role in a touring production of \"The Hypochondriac\", Richard Bean's new translation of Moli\u00e8re's \"Le malade imaginaire\", directed by Lindsay Posner.\nIn 2016 and 2017, Robinson played the antagonist 'Daddy' in Man Down alongside Greg Davies and Roisin Conaty.\nIn 2019, Robinson guested in the episode 'The Dig' in Series 5 of the ITV comedy Plebs (TV series) as an Archaeologist called Daedalus Graeco.\nHistory presenter.\nBeginnings and \"Time Team\" (1994\u20132001).\nIn 1994, Robinson began presenting \"Time Team\", a TV programme devoted to archaeological investigations limited to three days. The series spanned 20 years, and included 59 one-off specials, which paved the way for his later history presenting career.\nIn 2005 Exeter University conferred an honorary doctorate on Robinson, and honorary professorships on principal presenter Mick Aston and producer Tim Taylor, to reflect its great appreciation for what \"Time Team\" has done for the public understanding of archaeology in the UK. In the 2011 episode \"Hitler's Island Fortress\", Robinson described himself as an amateur archaeologist.\nBroader history presenting (2001\u20132012).\nFrom 2001, Robinson branched out into other history documentary series, including the series \"Fact or Fiction\" (which debunked historical myths and gave the true story), followed by \"Romans\" in 2003 and the highly successful \"The Worst Jobs in History\" in 2006, researching and re-enacting some of the more horrible jobs of the past millennium. He also took this show on tour around the country along with an autobiographical question and answer session. This first series was followed by \"The Worst Christmas Jobs in History\" in December 2005 and then a second series of \"The Worst Jobs in History\" on Channel 4 in April 2006.\nFollowing this, he presented one-off specials such as \"Britain's Real Monarch\" (2004) and \"The Real Da Vinci Code\" (2005).\nWith Channel 4 in 2005, Robinson presented a special called \"Tony Robinson's Titanic Adventure\" where he joined director James Cameron on his final dive to the wreck of the RMS Titanic. Also with Channel 4, he presented \"Tony Robinson's Crime and Punishment\", \"Catastrophe\" and \"Man on Earth\" focusing on humanity's struggle with climate change in the past 200,000 years. \"Unexplained with Tony Robinson\" was first broadcast on Channel 4 in December 2008. In this series, Robinson investigates paranormal phenomena combining the fields of archaeology, parapsychology, history and spiritualism to investigate paranormal evidence. He also presented \"The Doomsday Code\" in 2006.\nFrom 1 September 2010, Robinson hosted a series on the National Geographic Channel called \"Birth of Britain\" which was repeated on Channel 4 beginning in January 2011. In 2011 he also presented \"Gods and Monsters\".\n\"Tony Robinson Explores Australia\" was first broadcast in the first half of 2012. Filmed in High Definition, the series roughly follows a chronology from the earliest sightings of \"Terra Australis Incognita\" through to the present with each era defined by a theme rather than equal blocks of time.\nFrom 10 September 2012, Robinson hosted a series on History Channel called \"Tony Robinson's Time Walks\". The series uncovers stories that shaped the character of various cities and suburbs around Australia, including Fremantle, Melbourne, Hobart, Woolloomooloo, Bendigo, Newcastle, Carlton, Brisbane, St Kilda, Adelaide, Canberra, Kalgoorlie, Townsville and Launceston. He also went to Christchurch, New Zealand. In 2015, Robinson continued his history presenting in Australia with \"Tour of Duty\", again on History Channel.\nDuring October 2012, it was announced that \"Time Team\" would be cancelled after nearly 20 years on television. Tara Conlan from \"The Guardian\" called the show \"television history\". When talking about the successful run of the show, Robinson said, \"Not many performers are given the privilege of featuring in two iconic TV series\u2014but I've been lucky.\" The show's ratings were falling, causing Channel 4 to pursue an alternative \"innovative\" approach to historical documentary programming.\nPost-\"Time Team\" and presenting other history documentaries (2012\u2013present).\nBetween 2012 and 2014, Robinson presented a series of programmes for Channel 4 called \"Walking Through History\". It featured Robinson hiking through iconic British landscapes, including the Cairngorms, the Jurassic Coast and Stonehenge. At least 16 hour-long episodes were aired, in four series. A further three-part series called \"Britain's Ancient Tracks with Tony Robinson\" was shown on Channel 4 in 2016. A second four-part series of \"Britain's Ancient Tracks\" was aired in 2017.\nIn 2014, Robinson presented a history of The Great War titled \"Tony Robinson's World War 1\". He also presented \"The Real Mill\", revealing the true history to the Channel 4 series, The Mill.\nIn 2015, Robinson presented a three-hour-long programmes for Discovery TV, \"Tony Robinson's Wild West\" (also known as \"Tony Robinson's Wild West in 3D\"), in which he attempted to uncover the reality of America's Wild West in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Featuring such key figures as Wyatt Earp, Geronimo and Buffalo Bill, it included artefacts and stereographic images. Also in 2015 he hosted a short-lived programme \"Time Crashers.\"\nIn 2016, Robinson hosted \"Hidden Britain By Drone\", exploring parts of Britain only accessible by drone. A second series ran in 2018.\nIn March 2017, Robinson hosted his self-titled Channel Five programme \"\".\nIn 2018 Robinson continued his work with Channel Five presenting \"Britain's Great Cathedrals\" where he uncovers the history behind six of Britain's best cathedrals. He also presented a two-part series on Ancient Egypt called \"Egyptian Tomb Hunting\".\nIn March 2019, Robinson premiered \"Around the World by Train with Tony Robinson\" on Channel 5 where he travelled to Asia, Australia and South America by rail. Series two of the programme premiered in March 2020.\nIn June 2019, Robinson presented a four-part series on Channel 5 titled \"The Thames: Britain's Great River with Tony Robinson\" where he walks the River Thames from source to the mouth.\nIn January 2020 Robinson premiered a new programme on Channel 5, \"Tony Robinson's History of Britain\". A second series was broadcast in 2021.\nIn January 2021 Robinson returned to present the third series of his shows about the River Thames on Channel 5, now retitled \"The Secret Life of the Thames with Tony Robinson\".\nIn 2021, Robinson narrated a series \"World War 2 From Above\" on UKTV.\nIn 2022, Robinson presented a new show for Channel 4 titled \"Tony Robinson's Museum of Us\".\nIn 2022, Robinson was confirmed to return to the re-boot of Time Team in 2023.\nIn September 2025, Robinson's debut novel \"The House of Wolf\" was published. The novel is set in the 9th century, and depicts the lives of Alfred the Great and his courtier and biographer, the Welsh monk Asser.\nBroadcasting career.\nIn 2023, Robinson started broadcasting a weekly history podcast called \"Tony Robinson's Cunningcast\".\nPolitics and charity work.\nRobinson identifies as a democratic socialist and an allied member of the Jewish Labour Movement. From 1996 to 2000, Robinson was vice-president of the actors' union Equity, helping with a restructuring programme which turned a \u00a3500,000 deficit into a small surplus. He continues to work within Equity. In 2000, he was elected to the Labour Party's National Executive Committee, a position he held until 2004.\nRobinson was active in the Make Poverty History campaign in 2005, and is the patron for UK-based charity Street Child Africa.\nIn March 2011, Robinson participated in the \"March for the Alternative\" protests in Central London, which opposed the Cameron\u2013Clegg coalition's spending cuts programme.\nRobinson is honorary president of the Young Archaeologists' Club of the Council for British Archaeology. Robinson has shown his support for the Burma Campaign UK, an NGO that aims to highlight human rights violations in Myanmar under the State Peace and Development Council.\nRobinson is a patron of older people's charity Alive, saying that the organisation is \"at the forefront of promoting stimulating activities which help improve the quality of life of people in care\". Alive works to transform the residential care sector, so that older people's mental, social and emotional well-being is prioritised alongside their physical care.\nRobinson is a patron of the RSPCA Derby Abbey street animal rehoming centre in Derby, after adopting a dog from the centre.\nRobinson was knighted in the 2013 Birthday Honours for public and political service.\nOn 23 June 2018, Robinson appeared at the People's Vote march in London to mark the second anniversary of the referendum to leave the European Union. People's Vote was a campaign group calling for a referendum on the final Brexit deal between the UK and the European Union.\nOn 3 May 2019, Robinson announced that he had left the Labour Party after more than 40 years of membership, citing his dissatisfaction with the leadership of Jeremy Corbyn and the party's handling of Brexit and antisemitism allegations. He subsequently rejoined on 4 April 2020 after Corbyn's resignation and Keir Starmer's election as Labour leader.\nOn the day of the 2024 general election, Robinson campaigned for the Labour party, and posted to TikTok and Twitter, telling voters to \"vote today, vote change, [and] vote Labour\" in the \"crucial\" election.\nPersonal life.\nRobinson was first married in 1969 to Barbara (\"Bardy\") Henshall, and divorced four years later. He was married from the late 1970s until 1992 to Mary Shepherd, with whom he had two children. He married Louise Hobbs in 2011.\nIn 2006, Robinson appeared in \"Tony Robinson: Me and My Mum\", a documentary surrounding his decision to find a nursing home for his mother, and the difficulty he had doing so. The documentary showed his mother's death in the home. It also featured stories from other families in similar situations. It appeared as part of Channel 4's short series of programmes titled \"The Trouble with Old People\".\nIn late 2009, Robinson was invited to be guest speaker at the Pride of Craegmoor Awards, where he gave a speech about his time with his mother and finding a care home. He then went on to give the prizes to Craegmoor's Shining Star and Leading Light. In January 2016, he described Alzheimer's as \"one of the last great medical terrors\" and announced he would be leaving money to the Alzheimer's Society in his will.\nRobinson is a fan of EFL Championship club Bristol City F.C. He is also a fan of the rock band Genesis and provided sleeve notes for the reissue of the album \"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\" as part of the \"Genesis 1970\u20131975\" box set.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57974", "revid": "49480732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57974", "title": "Battle of Britain", "text": "WWII air battle fought between German and British air forces\nThe Battle of Britain () was a military campaign of the Second World War, in which the Royal Air Force (RAF) and the Fleet Air Arm (FAA) of the Royal Navy defended the United Kingdom against large-scale attacks by Nazi Germany's air force, the Luftwaffe. It was the first major military campaign fought entirely by air forces. It takes its name from the speech given by Prime Minister Winston Churchill to the House of Commons on 18 June, 1940: \"What General Weygand called the 'Battle of France' is over. I expect that the Battle of Britain is about to begin.\"\nThe Germans had rapidly overwhelmed France and the Low Countries in the Battle of France, leaving Britain to face the threat of invasion by sea. The German high command recognised the difficulties of a seaborne attack while the Royal Navy controlled the English Channel and the North Sea. The primary objective of the German forces was to compel Britain to agree to a negotiated peace settlement.\nThe British officially recognise the battle's duration as being from 10 July until 31 October 1940, which overlaps the period of large-scale night attacks known as the Blitz, that lasted from 7 September 1940 to 11 May 1941. German historians do not follow this subdivision and regard the battle as a single campaign lasting from July 1940 to May 1941, including the Blitz.\nIn July 1940, the air and sea blockade began, with the Luftwaffe mainly targeting coastal-shipping convoys, as well as ports and shipping centres such as Portsmouth. On 16 July, Hitler ordered the preparation of Operation Sea Lion as a potential amphibious and airborne assault on Britain, to follow once the Luftwaffe had air superiority over the Channel. On 1 August, the Luftwaffe was directed to achieve air superiority over the RAF, with the aim of incapacitating RAF Fighter Command; 12 days later, it shifted the attacks to RAF airfields and infrastructure. As the battle progressed, the Luftwaffe also targeted factories involved in aircraft production and strategic infrastructure. Eventually, it employed terror bombing on areas of political significance and on civilians. In September, RAF Bomber Command night raids disrupted the German preparation of converted barges, and the Luftwaffe's failure to overwhelm the RAF forced Hitler to postpone and eventually cancel Operation Sea Lion. The Luftwaffe proved unable to sustain daylight raids, but their continued night-bombing operations on Britain became known as the Blitz.\nGermany's failure to destroy Britain's air defences and force it out of the conflict was the first major German defeat in the Second World War.\nBackground.\nStrategic bombing during World War I introduced air attacks intended to panic civilian targets and led in 1918 to the merger of the British army and navy air services into the Royal Air Force (RAF). Its first Chief of the Air Staff, Hugh Trenchard, was among the military strategists in the 1920s, like Giulio Douhet, who saw air warfare as a new way to overcome the bloody stalemate of trench warfare. Interception was expected to be nearly impossible, with fighter planes no faster than bombers. Their slogan was that the bomber will always get through, and that the only defence was a deterrent bomber force capable of matching retaliation. Predictions were made that a bomber offensive would quickly cause thousands of deaths and civilian hysteria leading to capitulation. However, widespread pacifism following the horrors of the First World War contributed to a reluctance to provide resources.\nDeveloping air strategies.\nGermany was forbidden a military air force by the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, and therefore air crew were trained by means of civilian and sport flying. Following a 1923 memorandum, the Deutsche Luft Hansa airline developed designs for aircraft such as the Junkers Ju 52, which could carry passengers and freight, but also be readily adapted into a bomber. In 1926, the secret Lipetsk fighter-pilot school began training Germans in the Soviet Union. Erhard Milch organised rapid expansion, and following the 1933 Nazi seizure of power, his subordinate Robert Knauss formulated a deterrence theory incorporating Douhet's ideas and Tirpitz's \"risk theory\". This proposed a fleet of heavy bombers to deter a preventive attack by France and Poland before Germany could fully rearm. A 1933\u201334 war game indicated a need for fighters and anti-aircraft protection as well as bombers. On 1 March 1935, the Luftwaffe was formally announced, with Walther Wever as Chief of Staff. The 1935 Luftwaffe doctrine for \"Conduct of Air War\" (\"Luftkriegf\u00fchrung\") set air power within the overall military strategy, with critical tasks of attaining (local and temporary) air superiority and providing battlefield support for army and naval forces. Strategic bombing of industries and transport could be decisive longer-term options, dependent on opportunity or preparations by the army and navy. It could be used to overcome a stalemate, or used when only destruction of the enemy's economy would be conclusive. The list excluded bombing civilians to destroy homes or undermine morale, as that was considered a waste of strategic effort, but the doctrine allowed revenge attacks if German civilians were bombed. A revised edition was issued in 1940, and the continuing central principle of Luftwaffe doctrine was that destruction of enemy armed forces was of primary importance.\nThe RAF responded to Luftwaffe developments with its 1934 Expansion Plan A rearmament scheme, and in 1936 it was restructured into Bomber Command, Coastal Command, Training Command and Fighter Command. The last was under Hugh Dowding, who opposed the doctrine that bombers were unstoppable: the invention of radar at that time could allow early detection, and prototype monoplane fighters were significantly faster. Priorities were disputed, but in December 1937, the Minister in charge of Defence Coordination, Sir Thomas Inskip, sided with Dowding that \"The role of our air force is not an early knock-out blow\" but rather was \"to prevent the Germans from knocking us out\" and fighter squadrons were just as necessary as bomber squadrons.\nThe Spanish Civil War (1936\u20131939) gave the Luftwaffe Condor Legion the opportunity to test air fighting tactics with their new aeroplanes. Wolfram von Richthofen became an exponent of air power providing ground support to other services. The difficulty of accurately hitting targets prompted Ernst Udet to require that all new bombers had to be dive bombers, and led to the development of the Knickebein system for night time navigation. Priority was given to producing large numbers of smaller aeroplanes, and plans for a long-range, four-engined strategic bomber were cancelled.\nFirst stages of the Second World War.\n The early stages of the Second World War saw successful German invasions on the continent, aided decisively by the air power of the Luftwaffe, which was able to establish tactical air superiority with great effectiveness. The speed with which German forces defeated most of the defending armies in Norway in early 1940 created a significant political crisis in Britain. In early May 1940, the Norway Debate questioned the fitness for office of the British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain. On 10 May, the same day Winston Churchill became British Prime Minister, the Germans initiated the Battle of France with an aggressive invasion of French territory. RAF Fighter Command was desperately short of trained pilots and aircraft. Churchill sent fighter squadrons, the Air Component of the British Expeditionary Force, to support operations in France, where the RAF suffered heavy losses. This was despite the objections of its commander Hugh Dowding that the diversion of his forces would leave home defences under-strength.\nAfter the evacuation of British and French soldiers from Dunkirk and the French surrender on 22 June 1940, Hitler mainly focused his energies on the possibility of invading the Soviet Union. He believed that the British, defeated on the continent and without European allies, would quickly come to terms. The Germans were so convinced of an imminent armistice that they began constructing street decorations for the homecoming parades of victorious troops. Although the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Halifax, and certain elements of the British public favoured a negotiated peace with an ascendant Germany, Churchill and a majority of his Cabinet refused to consider an armistice. Instead, Churchill used his skilful rhetoric to harden public opinion against capitulation and prepare the British for a long war.\nThe Battle of Britain has the unusual distinction that it gained its name before being fought. The name is derived from the \"This was their finest hour\" speech delivered by Winston Churchill in the House of Commons on 18 June, more than three weeks prior to the generally accepted date for the start of the battle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Winston Churchill\nGerman aims and directives.\n From the outset of his rise to power, Adolf Hitler expressed admiration for Britain, and throughout the Battle period he sought neutrality or a peace treaty with Britain. In a secret conference on 23 May 1939, Hitler set out his rather contradictory strategy that an attack on Poland was essential and \"will only be successful if the Western Powers keep out of it. If this is impossible, then it will be better to attack in the West and to settle Poland at the same time\" with a surprise attack. \"If Holland and Belgium are successfully occupied and held, and if France is also defeated, the fundamental conditions for a successful war against England will have been secured. England can then be blockaded from Western France at close quarters by the Air Force, while the Navy with its submarines extend the range of the blockade.\"\nWhen war commenced, Hitler and the OKW (\"Oberkommando der Wehrmacht\" or \"High Command of the Armed Forces\") issued a series of directives ordering, planning and stating strategic objectives. \"Directive No. 1 for the Conduct of the War\", dated 31 August 1939, instructed the invasion of Poland on 1 September as planned. Potentially, Luftwaffe \"operations against England\" were to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBoth France and the UK declared war on Germany; on 9 October, Hitler's \"Directive No. 6\" planned the offensive to defeat these allies and \"win as much territory as possible in the Netherlands, Belgium, and northern France to serve as a base for the successful prosecution of the air and sea war against England\". On 29 November, OKW \"Directive No. 9 \u2013 Instructions For Warfare Against The Economy Of The Enemy\" stated that once this coastline had been secured, the Luftwaffe together with the Kriegsmarine (German Navy) was to blockade UK ports with sea mines. They were to attack shipping and warships and make air attacks on shore installations and industrial production. This directive remained in force in the first phase of the Battle of Britain. It was reinforced on 24 May during the Battle of France by \"Directive No. 13\", which authorised the Luftwaffe \"to attack the English homeland in the fullest manner, as soon as sufficient forces are available. This attack will be opened by an annihilating reprisal for English attacks on the Ruhr Basin.\"\nBy the end of June 1940, Germany had defeated Britain's allies on the continent, and on 30 June the OKW Chief of Staff, Alfred Jodl, issued his review of options to increase pressure on Britain to agree to a negotiated peace. The first priority was to eliminate the RAF and gain air supremacy. Intensified air attacks against shipping and the economy could affect food supplies and civilian morale in the long term. Reprisal attacks of terror bombing had the potential to cause quicker capitulation, but the effect on morale was uncertain. On the same day, the Luftwaffe Commander-in-Chief, Hermann G\u00f6ring issued his operational directive: to destroy the RAF, thus protecting German industry, and also to block overseas supplies to Britain. The German Supreme Command argued over the practicality of these options.\nIn \"Directive No. 16 \u2013 On preparations for a landing operation against England\" on 16 July, Hitler required readiness by mid-August for the possibility of an invasion he called Operation Sea Lion, unless the British agreed to negotiations. The Luftwaffe reported that it would be ready to launch its major attack early in August. The Kriegsmarine Commander-in-Chief, Grand Admiral Erich Raeder, continued to highlight the impracticality of these plans and said sea invasion could not take place before early 1941. Hitler now argued that Britain was holding out in hope of assistance from Russia, and the Soviet Union was to be invaded by mid 1941. G\u00f6ring met his air fleet commanders, and on 24 July issued \"Tasks and Goals\" of firstly gaining air supremacy, secondly protecting invasion forces and attacking the Royal Navy's ships. Thirdly, they were to blockade imports, bombing harbours and stores of supplies.\nHitler's \"Directive No. 17 \u2013 For the conduct of air and sea warfare against England\" issued on 1 August attempted to keep all the options open. The Luftwaffe's \"Adlertag\" campaign was to start around 5 August, subject to weather, with the aim of gaining air superiority over southern England as a necessary precondition of invasion, to give credibility to the threat and give Hitler the option of ordering the invasion. The intention was to incapacitate the RAF so much that the UK would feel open to air attack, and would begin peace negotiations. It was also to isolate the UK and damage war production, beginning an effective blockade. Following severe Luftwaffe losses, Hitler agreed at a 14 September OKW conference that the air campaign was to intensify regardless of invasion plans. On 16 September, G\u00f6ring gave the order for this change in strategy, to the first independent strategic bombing campaign.\nNegotiated peace or neutrality.\nHitler's 1925 book \"Mein Kampf\" mostly set out his hatreds: he only admired ordinary German World War I soldiers and Britain, which he saw as an ally against communism. In 1935 Hermann G\u00f6ring welcomed news that Britain, as a potential ally, was rearming. In 1936 he promised assistance to defend the British Empire, asking only a free hand in Eastern Europe, and repeated this to Lord Halifax in 1937. That year, von Ribbentrop met Churchill with a similar proposal; when rebuffed, he told Churchill that interference with German domination would mean war. To Hitler's great annoyance, all his diplomacy failed to stop Britain from declaring war when he invaded Poland. During the fall of France, he repeatedly discussed peace efforts with his generals.\nWhen Churchill came to power, there was still wide support for Halifax, who as Foreign Secretary openly argued for peace negotiations in the tradition of British diplomacy, to secure British independence without war. On 20 May, Halifax secretly requested a Swedish businessman to make contact with G\u00f6ring to open negotiations. Shortly afterwards, in the May 1940 War Cabinet Crisis, Halifax argued for negotiations involving the Italians, but this was rejected by Churchill with majority support. An approach made through the Swedish ambassador on 22 June was reported to Hitler, making peace negotiations seem feasible. Throughout July, as the battle started, the Germans made wider attempts to find a diplomatic solution. On 2 July, the day the armed forces were asked to start preliminary planning for an invasion, Hitler got von Ribbentrop to draft a speech offering peace negotiations. On 19 July Hitler made this speech to the German Parliament in Berlin, appealing \"to reason and common sense\", and said he could \"see no reason why this war should go on\". His sombre conclusion was received in silence, but he did not suggest negotiations and this was perceived as being effectively an ultimatum by the British government, which rejected the offer. Halifax kept trying to arrange peace until he was sent to Washington in December as ambassador, and in January 1941 Hitler expressed continued interest in negotiating peace with Britain.\nBlockade and siege.\nA May 1939 planning exercise by Luftflotte 3 found that the Luftwaffe lacked the means to do much damage to Britain's war economy beyond laying naval mines. Joseph Schmid, in charge of Luftwaffe intelligence, presented a report on 22 November 1939, stating that, \"Of all Germany's possible enemies, Britain is the most dangerous.\" This \"Proposal for the Conduct of Air Warfare\" argued for a counter to the British blockade and said \"Key is to paralyse the British trade\". Instead of the Wehrmacht attacking the French, the Luftwaffe with naval assistance was to block imports to Britain and attack seaports. \"Should the enemy resort to terror measures\u00a0\u2013 for example, to attack our towns in western Germany\" they could retaliate by bombing industrial centres and London. Parts of this appeared on 29 November in \"Directive No. 9\" as future actions once the coast had been conquered. On 24 May 1940 \"Directive No. 13\" authorised attacks on the blockade targets, as well as retaliation for RAF bombing of industrial targets in the Ruhr.\nAfter the defeat of France, the OKW felt they had won the war, and some more pressure would persuade Britain to give in. On 30 June, the OKW Chief of Staff Alfred Jodl issued his paper setting out options: the first was to increase attacks on shipping, economic targets and the RAF: air attacks and food shortages were expected to break morale and lead to capitulation. Destruction of the RAF was the first priority, and invasion would be a last resort. G\u00f6ring's operational directive issued the same day ordered the destruction of the RAF to clear the way for attacks cutting off seaborne supplies to Britain. It made no mention of invasion.\nInvasion plans.\nIn November 1939, the OKW reviewed the potential for an air- and seaborne invasion of Britain: the Kriegsmarine was faced with the threat the Royal Navy's larger Home Fleet posed to a crossing of the English Channel, and together with the German Army viewed control of airspace as a necessary precondition. The German navy thought air superiority alone was insufficient; the German naval staff had already produced a study (in 1939) on the possibility of an invasion of Britain and concluded that it also required naval superiority. The Luftwaffe said invasion could only be \"the final act in an already victorious war.\"\nHitler first discussed the idea of an invasion at a 21 May 1940 meeting with Grand Admiral Erich Raeder, who stressed the difficulties and his own preference for a blockade. OKW Chief of Staff Jodl's 30 June report described invasion as a last resort once the British economy had been damaged and the Luftwaffe had full air superiority. On 2 July, OKW requested preliminary plans.\nIn Britain, Churchill described \"the great invasion scare\" as \"serving a very useful purpose\" by \"keeping every man and woman tuned to a high pitch of readiness\". Historian Len Deighton stated that on 10 July Churchill advised the War Cabinet that invasion could be ignored, as it \"would be a most hazardous and suicidal operation\".\nOn 11 July, Hitler agreed with Raeder that invasion would be a last resort, and the Luftwaffe advised that gaining air superiority would take 14 to 28 days. Hitler met his army chiefs, von Brauchitsch and Halder, at the Berchtesgaden Obersalzberg on 13 July where they presented detailed plans on the assumption that the navy would provide safe transport. Von Brauchitsch and Halder were surprised that Hitler took no interest in the invasion plans, unlike his usual attitude toward military operations, but on 16 July he issued Directive No. 16, ordering preparations for Operation Sea Lion.\nThe navy insisted on a narrow beachhead and an extended period for landing troops; the army rejected these plans: the Luftwaffe could begin an air attack in August. Hitler held a meeting of his army and navy chiefs on 31 July. The navy said 22 September was the earliest possible date and proposed postponement until the following year, but Hitler preferred September. He then told von Brauchitsch and Halder that he would decide on the landing operation eight to fourteen days after the air attack began. On 1 August, he issued Directive No. 17 for intensified air and sea warfare, to begin with Adlertag on or after 5 August, subject to weather, keeping options open for negotiated peace or blockade and siege.\nIndependent air attack.\nUnder the continuing influence of the 1935 \"Conduct of the Air War\" doctrine, the main focus of the Luftwaffe command (including G\u00f6ring) was in concentrating attacks to destroy enemy armed forces on the battlefield, and \"blitzkrieg\" close air support of the army succeeded brilliantly. They reserved strategic bombing for a stalemate situation or revenge attacks, but doubted if this could be decisive on its own and regarded bombing civilians to destroy homes or undermine morale as a waste of strategic effort.\nThe defeat of France in June 1940 introduced the prospect for the first time of independent air action against Britain. A July \"Fliegercorps I\" paper asserted that Germany was by definition an air power: \"Its chief weapon against England is the Air Force, then the Navy, followed by the landing forces and the Army.\" In 1940, the Luftwaffe would undertake a \"\"strategic offensive\" ... on its own and independent of the other services\", according to an April 1944 German account of their military mission. G\u00f6ring was convinced that strategic bombing could win objectives that were beyond the army and navy, and gain political advantages in the Third Reich for the Luftwaffe and himself. He expected air warfare to decisively force Britain to negotiate, as all in the OKW hoped, and the Luftwaffe took little interest in planning to support an invasion.\nOpposing forces.\nThe Luftwaffe faced a more capable opponent than any it had previously met: a sizeable, highly coordinated, well-supplied, modern air force.\nFighters.\nThe Luftwaffe's Messerschmitt Bf 109E and Bf 110C fought against the RAF's workhorse Hurricane Mk I and the less numerous Spitfire Mk I; Hurricanes outnumbered Spitfires in RAF Fighter Command by about 2:1 when war broke out. The Bf 109E had a better climb rate and was up to 40\u00a0mph faster in level flight than the Rotol (constant speed propeller) equipped Hurricane Mk I, depending on altitude. The speed and climb disparity with the original non-Rotol Hurricane was even greater. By mid-1940, all RAF Spitfire and Hurricane fighter squadrons converted to 100 octane aviation fuel, which allowed their Merlin engines to generate significantly more power and an approximately 30\u00a0mph increase in speed at low altitudes through the use of an Emergency Boost Override. In September 1940, the more powerful Mk IIa series 1 Hurricanes started entering service in small numbers. This version was capable of a maximum speed of , some 20\u00a0mph more than the original (non-Rotol) Mk I, though it was still 15 to 20\u00a0mph slower than a Bf 109 (depending on altitude).\nThe performance of the Spitfire over Dunkirk came as a surprise to the \"Jagdwaffe\", although the German pilots retained a strong belief that the 109 was the superior fighter. The British fighters were equipped with eight Browning .303 (7.7mm) machine guns firing bullets, while most Bf 109Es had two 20mm cannons firing explosive shells, supplemented by two 7.92mm machine guns. The 20mm cannons were much more effective than the .303; during the Battle it was not unknown for damaged German bombers to limp home with up to two hundred .303 hits. At some altitudes, the Bf 109 could outclimb the British fighter. It could also engage in vertical-plane negative-\"g\" manoeuvres without the engine cutting out because its DB 601 engine used fuel injection; this allowed the 109 to dive away from attackers more readily than the carburettor-equipped Merlin. On the other hand, the Bf 109E had the disadvantage of a much larger turning circle than its two foes. In general, though, as Alfred Price noted in \"The Spitfire Story\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0the differences between the Spitfire and the Me 109 in performance and handling were only marginal, and in a combat they were almost always surmounted by tactical considerations of which side had seen the other first, which had the advantage of sun, altitude, numbers, pilot ability, tactical situation, tactical co-ordination, amount of fuel remaining, etc.\nThe Bf 109E was also used as a \"Jabo\" (\"jagdbomber\", fighter-bomber)\u00a0\u2013 the E-4/B and E-7 models could carry a 250\u00a0kg bomb underneath the fuselage, the later model arriving during the battle. The Bf 109, unlike the \"Stuka\", could fight on equal terms with RAF fighters after releasing its ordnance.\nAt the start of the battle, the twin-engined Messerschmitt Bf 110C long-range \"Zerst\u00f6rer\" (\"Destroyer\") was also expected to engage in air-to-air combat while escorting the Luftwaffe bomber fleet. Although the 110 was faster than the Hurricane and almost as fast as the Spitfire, its lack of manoeuvrability and acceleration meant that it was a failure as a long-range escort fighter. On 13 and 15 August, thirteen and thirty aircraft were lost, the equivalent of an entire \"Gruppe\", and the type's worst losses during the campaign. This trend continued with a further eight and fifteen lost on 16 and 17 August.\nThe most successful role of the Bf 110 during the battle was as a \"Schnellbomber\" (fast bomber). The Bf 110 usually used a shallow dive to bomb the target and escape at high speed. One unit, \"Erprobungsgruppe 210\" \u2013 initially formed as the service test unit (\"Erprobungskommando\") for the emerging successor to the 110, the Me 210 \u2013 proved that the Bf 110 could still be used to good effect in attacking small or \"pinpoint\" targets.\nThe RAF's Boulton Paul Defiant had some initial success over Dunkirk because of its resemblance to the Hurricane; Luftwaffe fighters attacking from the rear were surprised by its unusual gun turret, which could fire to the rear. During the Battle of Britain, it proved hopelessly outclassed. The Defiant, designed to attack bombers without fighter escort, lacked any form of forward-firing armament, and the heavy turret and second crewman meant it could not outrun or outmanoeuvre either the Bf 109 or Bf 110. By the end of August, after disastrous losses, the aircraft was withdrawn from daylight service.\nBombers.\nThe Luftwaffe's primary bombers were the Heinkel He 111, Dornier Do 17, and Junkers Ju 88 for level bombing at medium to high altitudes, and the Junkers Ju 87 \"Stuka\" for dive-bombing. The He 111 was used in greater numbers than the others during the conflict, and was better known, partly due to its distinctive wing shape. Each level bomber also had a few reconnaissance versions accompanying them that were used during the battle.\nAlthough it had been successful in previous Luftwaffe engagements, the \"Stuka\" suffered heavy losses in the Battle of Britain, particularly on 18 August, due to its slow speed and vulnerability to fighter interception after dive-bombing a target. As the losses went up \"Stuka\" units, with limited payload and range in addition to their vulnerability, were largely removed from operations over England and diverted to concentrate on shipping, until eventually re-deployed to the Eastern Front in 1941. For some raids they were called back, such as on 13 September to attack Tangmere airfield.\nThe remaining three bomber types differed in their capabilities; the Dornier Do 17 was both the slowest and had the smallest bomb load; the Ju 88 was the fastest once its mainly external bomb load was dropped; and the He 111 carried the largest, internal, bomb load. All three bomber types suffered heavy losses from the home-based British fighters, but the Ju 88 had significantly lower loss rates due to its greater speed and its ability to dive out of trouble (it was originally designed as a dive bomber). The German bombers required constant protection by the Luftwaffe's insufficiently numerous fighter force. Bf 109Es were ordered to support more than 300\u2013400 bombers on any given day. Later in the conflict, when night bombing became more frequent, all three were used. Due to its smaller bomb load, the lighter Do 17 was used less than the He 111 and Ju 88 for this purpose.\nOn the British side, three bomber types were mostly used on night operations against targets such as factories, invasion ports and railway centres; the Armstrong Whitworth Whitley, the Handley-Page Hampden and the Vickers Wellington were classified as heavy bombers by the RAF, although the Hampden was a medium bomber comparable to the He 111. The twin-engined Bristol Blenheim and the obsolescent single-engined Fairey Battle were both light bombers; the Blenheim was the most numerous of the aircraft equipping RAF Bomber Command, and was used in attacks against shipping, ports, airfields and factories on the continent by day and by night. The Fairey Battle squadrons, which had suffered heavy losses in daylight attacks during the Battle of France, were brought up to strength with reserve aircraft and continued to operate at night in attacks against the invasion ports, until the Battle was withdrawn from UK front-line service in October 1940.\nPilots.\nBefore the war, the RAF's processes for selecting potential candidates were opened to men of all social classes through the creation in 1936 of the RAF Volunteer Reserve, which \"...\u00a0was designed to appeal, to\u00a0... young men\u00a0... without any class distinctions\u00a0...\" The older squadrons of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force did retain some of their upper-class exclusiveness, but their numbers were soon swamped by the newcomers of the RAFVR; by 1 September 1939, 6,646 pilots had been trained through the RAFVR.\nBy mid-1940, there were about 9,000 pilots in the RAF to man about 5,000 aircraft, most of which were bombers. Fighter Command was never short of pilots, but the problem of finding sufficient numbers of fully trained fighter pilots became acute by mid-August 1940. With aircraft production running at 300 planes each week, only 200 pilots were trained in the same period. In addition, more pilots were allocated to squadrons than there were aircraft, as this allowed squadrons to maintain operational strength despite casualties and still provide for pilot leave. Another factor was that only about 30% of the 9,000 pilots were assigned to operational squadrons; 20% of the pilots were involved in conducting pilot training, and a further 20% were undergoing further instruction, like those offered in Canada and in Southern Rhodesia to the Commonwealth trainees, although already qualified. The rest were assigned to staff positions, since RAF policy dictated that only pilots could make many staff and operational command decisions, even in engineering matters. At the height of the fighting, and despite Churchill's insistence, only 30 pilots were released to the front line from administrative duties.\nFor these reasons, and the permanent loss of 435 pilots during the Battle of France alone along with many more wounded, and others lost in Norway, the RAF had fewer experienced pilots at the start of the Battle of Britain than the Luftwaffe. It was the lack of trained pilots in the fighting squadrons, rather than the lack of aircraft, that became the greatest concern for Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding, commander of Fighter Command. Drawing from regular RAF forces, the Auxiliary Air Force and the Volunteer Reserve, the British were able to muster some 1,103 fighter pilots on 1 July. Replacement pilots, with little flight training and often no gunnery training, suffered high casualty rates, exacerbating the problem.\nThe Luftwaffe, on the other hand, were able to muster a large number (1,450) of experienced fighter pilots. Drawing from a cadre of Spanish Civil War veterans, these pilots already had comprehensive courses in aerial gunnery and instructions in tactics suited for fighter-versus-fighter combat. Training manuals discouraged heroism, stressing the importance of attacking only when the odds were in the pilot's favour. Despite the high levels of experience, German fighter formations did not provide a sufficient reserve of pilots to allow for losses and leave, and the Luftwaffe was unable to produce enough pilots to prevent a decline in operational strength as the battle progressed.\nInternational participation.\nAllies.\nAbout 20% of pilots who took part in the battle were from non-British countries. The Royal Air Force roll of honour for the Battle of Britain recognises 595 non-British pilots (out of 2,936) as flying at least one authorised operational sortie with an eligible unit of the RAF or Fleet Air Arm between 10 July and 31 October 1940. These included 145 Poles, 127 New Zealanders, 112 Canadians, 88 Czechoslovaks, 10 Irish, 32 Australians, 28 Belgians, 25 South Africans, 13 French, 9 Americans, 3 Southern Rhodesians and individuals from Jamaica, Barbados and Newfoundland. \"Altogether in the fighter battles, the bombing raids, and the various patrols flown between 10 July and 31 October 1940 by the Royal Air Force, 1495 aircrew were killed, of whom 449 were fighter pilots, 718 aircrew from Bomber Command, and 280 from Coastal Command. Among those killed were 47 airmen from Canada, 24 from Australia, 17 from South Africa, 30 from Poland, 20 from Czechoslovakia and six from Belgium. Forty-seven New Zealanders lost their lives, including 15 fighter pilots, 24 bomber and eight coastal aircrew. The names of these Allied and Commonwealth airmen are inscribed in a memorial book that rests in the Battle of Britain Chapel in Westminster Abbey. In the chapel is a stained glass window which contains the badges of the fighter squadrons which operated during the battle and the flags of the nations to which the pilots and aircrew belonged. These pilots, some of whom had to flee their home countries because of German invasions, fought with distinction.\nThe No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron was the highest-scoring fighter squadron of the Battle of Britain, even though it joined the fray two months after the battle had begun. \"Had it not been for the magnificent material contributed by the Polish squadrons and their unsurpassed gallantry,\" wrote Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding, head of RAF Fighter Command, \"I hesitate to say that the outcome of the Battle would have been the same.\"\nAxis.\nAt the urging of Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, an element of the Italian Royal Air Force (\"Regia Aeronautica\") called the Italian Air Corps (\"Corpo Aereo Italiano\" or CAI) took part in the later stages of the Battle of Britain. It first saw action on 24 October 1940 when a force of Fiat BR.20 medium bombers attacked the port at Harwich. The CAI achieved limited success during this and subsequent raids. The unit was redeployed in January 1941, having claimed to have shot down at least nine British aircraft. This was inaccurate and their actual successes were much lower.\nLuftwaffe strategy.\nThe indecision of OKL over what to do was reflected in shifts in \"Luftwaffe\" strategy. The doctrine of concentrated close air support of the army at the battlefront succeeded against Poland, Denmark and Norway, the Low Countries and France but incurred significant losses. The \"Luftwaffe\" had to build or repair bases in the conquered territories, and rebuild their strength. In June 1940 they began regular armed reconnaissance flights and sporadic \"St\u00f6rangriffe\", nuisance raids of one or a few bombers by day and night. These gave crews practice in navigation and avoiding air defences and set off air raid alarms which disturbed civilian morale. Similar nuisance raids continued throughout the battle, into late 1940. Scattered naval mine-laying sorties began at the outset and increased gradually over the battle period.\nG\u00f6ring's operational directive of 30 June ordered the destruction of the RAF, including the aircraft industry, to end RAF bombing raids on Germany and facilitating attacks on ports and storage in the \"Luftwaffe\" blockade of Britain. Attacks on Channel shipping in the \"Kanalkampf\" began on 4 July, and were formalised on 11 July in an order by Hans Jeschonnek which added the arms industry as a target. On 16 July, Directive No. 16 ordered preparations for Operation Sea Lion and on the next day the \"Luftwaffe\" was ordered to stand by in full readiness. G\u00f6ring met his air fleet commanders and on 24 July issued orders for gaining air supremacy, protecting the army and navy if the invasion went ahead and attacking Royal Navy ships and continuing the blockade. Once the RAF had been defeated, \"Luftwaffe\" bombers were to move forward beyond London without the need for fighter escort, destroying military and economic targets.\nAt a meeting on 1 August the command reviewed plans produced by each \"Fliegerkorps\" with differing proposals for targets including whether to bomb airfields but failed to decide a priority. Intelligence reports gave G\u00f6ring the impression that the RAF was almost defeated, so that raids would attract British fighters for the \"Luftwaffe\" to shoot down. On 6 August he finalised plans for \"Adlertag\" (Eagle Day) with Kesselring, Sperrle and Stumpff; the destruction of RAF Fighter Command in the south of England was to take four days, with lightly escorted small bomber raids leaving the main fighter force free to attack RAF fighters. Bombing of military and economic targets was then to systematically extend up to the Midlands until daylight attacks could proceed unhindered over the whole of Britain.\nBombing of London was to be held back while these night time \"destroyer\" attacks proceeded over other urban areas, then, in the culmination of the campaign, a major attack on the capital was intended to cause a crisis, with refugees fleeing London just as Operation Sea Lion was to begin. With hopes fading for the possibility of invasion, on 4 September Hitler authorised a main focus on day and night attacks on tactical targets, with London as the main target, which became known as the Blitz. With increasing difficulty in defending bombers in day raids, the \"Luftwaffe\" shifted to a strategic bombing campaign of night raids aiming to overcome British resistance by damaging infrastructure and food stocks, though intentional terror bombing of civilians was not sanctioned.\nRegrouping of \"Luftwaffe\" in \"Luftflotten\".\nThe \"Luftwaffe\" regrouped after the Battle of France into three \"Luftflotten\" (Air Fleets) opposite Britain's southern and eastern coasts. \"Luftflotte\" 2 (\"Generalfeldmarschall\" Albert Kesselring), was responsible for the bombing of south-east England and the London area. \"Luftflotte\" 3 (\"Generalfeldmarschall\" Hugo Sperrle) concentrated on the West Country, Wales, the Midlands and north-west England. \"Luftflotte\" 5 (\"Generaloberst\" Hans-J\u00fcrgen Stumpff) from his headquarters in Norway, attacked the north of England and Scotland. As the battle progressed, command responsibility shifted, with \"Luftflotte\" 3 taking more responsibility for the night bombing and the main daylight operations fell upon \"Luftflotte\" 2.\nInitial \"Luftwaffe\" estimates were that it would take four days to defeat RAF Fighter Command in southern England. This would be followed by a four-week offensive during which the bombers and long-range fighters would destroy all military installations throughout the country and wreck the British aircraft industry. The campaign was planned to begin with attacks on airfields near the coast, gradually moving inland to attack the ring of sector airfields defending London. Later reassessments gave the \"Luftwaffe\" five weeks, from 8 August to 15 September, to establish temporary air superiority over England. Fighter Command had to be destroyed, either on the ground or in the air, yet the \"Luftwaffe\" had to preserve its strength to be able to support the invasion; the \"Luftwaffe\" had to maintain a high \"kill ratio\" over the RAF fighters. The only alternative to the goal of air superiority was a terror bombing campaign aimed at the civilian population but this was considered a last resort and it was forbidden by Hitler. The \"Luftwaffe\" kept broadly to this scheme but its commanders had differences of opinion on strategy. Sperrle wanted to eradicate the air defence infrastructure by bombing it. Kesselring championed attacking London directly, either to bombard the British government into submission or to draw RAF fighters into a decisive battle. G\u00f6ring did nothing to resolve this disagreement between his commanders and gave only vague directives during the initial stages of the battle, apparently unable to decide upon which strategy to pursue.\nTactics.\nFighter formations.\nLuftwaffe formations employed a loose section of two (called \"Rotte\" [pack]), based on a leader (\"Rottenf\u00fchrer\") followed at a distance of about by his wingman, \"Rottenhund\" pack dog or \"Katschmarek\", the turning radius of a Bf 109, enabling both aircraft to turn together at high speed. The \"Katschmarek\" flew slightly higher and was trained always to stay with his leader. With more room between them, both could spend less time maintaining formation and more time looking around and covering each other's blind spots. Attacking aircraft could be sandwiched between the two 109s. The formation was developed from principles formulated by the First World War ace Oswald Boelcke in 1916. In 1934 the Finnish Air Force adopted similar formations, called \"partio\" (patrol; two aircraft) and \"parvi\" (two patrols; four aircraft), for similar reasons, though \"Luftwaffe\" pilots during the Spanish Civil War (led by G\u00fcnther L\u00fctzow and Werner M\u00f6lders, among others) are generally given credit. The \"Rotte\" allowed the \"Rottenf\u00fchrer\" to concentrate on shooting down aircraft but few wingmen had the chance, leading to some resentment in the lower ranks where it was felt that the high scores came at their expense. Two \"Rotten\" combined as a \"Schwarm\", where all the pilots could watch what was happening around them. Each \"Schwarm\" in a \"Staffel\" flew at staggered heights and with about between them, making the formation difficult to spot at longer ranges and allowing for a great deal of flexibility. By using a tight \"cross-over\" turn, a \"Schwarm\" could quickly change direction.\nThe Bf 110s adopted the same \"Schwarm\" formation as the 109s but were seldom able to use this to the same advantage. The Bf 110's most successful method of attack was the \"bounce\" from above. When attacked, \"Zerst\u00f6rergruppen\" increasingly resorted to forming large defensive circles, where each Bf 110 guarded the tail of the aircraft ahead of it. G\u00f6ring ordered that they be renamed \"offensive circles\" in a vain bid to improve rapidly declining morale. These conspicuous formations were often successful in attracting RAF fighters that were sometimes \"bounced\" by high-flying Bf 109s. This led to the often repeated misconception that the Bf 110s were escorted by Bf 109s.\nHigher-level dispositions.\n\"Luftwaffe\" tactics were influenced by their fighters. The Bf 110 proved too vulnerable against the nimble single-engined RAF fighters and the bulk of fighter escort duties devolved to the Bf 109. Fighter tactics were then complicated by bomber crews who demanded closer protection. After the hard-fought battles of 15 and 18 August, G\u00f6ring met his unit leaders. The need for the fighters to meet up on time with the bombers was stressed. It was also decided that one bomber \"Gruppe\" could only be properly protected by several \"Gruppen\" of 109s. G\u00f6ring stipulated that as many fighters as possible were to be left free for \"Freie Jagd\" (\"Free Hunts\": a free-roving fighter sweep preceded a raid to try to sweep defenders out of the raid's path). The Ju 87 units, which had suffered heavy casualties, were only to be used under favourable circumstances. In early September, due to increasing complaints from the bomber crews about RAF fighters seemingly able to get through the escort screen, G\u00f6ring ordered an increase in close escort duties. This decision shackled many of the Bf 109s to the bombers and, although they were more successful at protecting the bombers, casualties amongst the fighters mounted, primarily because they were forced to fly and manoeuvre at reduced speeds.\nThe \"Luftwaffe\" varied its tactics to break Fighter Command. It launched many \"Freie Jagd\" to draw up RAF fighters. RAF fighter controllers were often able to detect these and position squadrons to avoid them, keeping to Dowding's plan to preserve fighter strength for the bomber formations. The \"Luftwaffe\" also tried using small formations of bombers as bait, covering them with large numbers of escorts. This was more successful, but escort duty kept the fighters tied to the slower bombers making them more vulnerable.\nBy September, standard tactics for raids had become an amalgam of techniques. A \"Freie Jagd\" would precede the main attack formations. The bombers would fly in at altitudes between , closely escorted by fighters. Escorts were divided into two parts (usually \"Gruppen\"), some operating close to the bombers and others a few hundred yards away and a little above. If the formation was attacked from the starboard, the starboard section engaged the attackers, the top section moving to starboard and the port section to the top position. If the attack came from the port side the system was reversed. British fighters coming from the rear were engaged by the rear section and the two outside sections similarly moving to the rear. If the threat came from above, the top section went into action while the side sections gained height to be able to follow RAF fighters down as they broke away. If attacked, all sections flew in defensive circles. These tactics were skilfully evolved and carried out and were difficult to counter.\nAdolf Galland noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We had the impression that, whatever we did, we were bound to be wrong. Fighter protection for bombers created many problems which had to be solved in action. Bomber pilots preferred close screening in which their formation was surrounded by pairs of fighters pursuing a zigzag course. Obviously, the visible presence of the protective fighters gave the bomber pilots a greater sense of security. However, this was a faulty conclusion, because a fighter can only carry out this purely defensive task by taking the initiative in the offensive. He must never wait until attacked because he then loses the chance of acting. We fighter pilots certainly preferred the free chase during the approach and over the target area. This gives the greatest relief and the best protection for the bomber force.\nThe biggest disadvantage faced by Bf 109 pilots was that without the benefit of long-range drop tanks (which were introduced in limited numbers in the late stages of the battle), usually of capacity, the 109s had an endurance of just over an hour and, for the 109E, a range. Once over Britain, a 109 pilot had to keep an eye on a red \"low fuel\" light on the instrument panel: once this was illuminated, he was forced to turn back and head for France. With the prospect of two long flights over water and knowing their range was substantially reduced when escorting bombers or during combat, the \"Jagdflieger\" coined the term \"Kanalkrankheit\" or \"Channel sickness\".\nIntelligence.\nThe Luftwaffe was ill-served by its lack of military intelligence about the British defences. The German intelligence services were fractured and plagued by rivalry; their performance was \"amateurish\". By 1940, there were few German agents operating in Great Britain and a handful of attempts to insert spies into the country were foiled.\nAs a result of intercepted radio transmissions, the Germans began to realise that the RAF fighters were being controlled from ground facilities; in July and August 1939, for example, the airship \"Graf Zeppelin\", which was packed with equipment for listening in on RAF radio and RDF transmissions, flew around the coasts of Britain. Although the Luftwaffe correctly interpreted these new ground control procedures, they were incorrectly assessed as being rigid and ineffectual. A British radar system was well known to the Luftwaffe from intelligence gathered before the war, but the highly developed \"Dowding system\" linked with fighter control had been a well-kept secret. Even when good information existed, such as a November 1939 \"Abwehr\" assessment of Fighter Command strengths and capabilities by \"Abteilung V\", it was ignored if it did not match conventional preconceptions.\nOn 16 July 1940, \"Abteilung V\", commanded by \"Oberstleutnant\" \"Beppo\" Schmid, produced a report on the RAF and on Britain's defensive capabilities which was adopted by the frontline commanders as a basis for their operational plans. One of the most conspicuous failures of the report was the lack of information on the RAF's RDF network and control systems capabilities; it was assumed that the system was rigid and inflexible, with the RAF fighters being \"tied\" to their home bases. An optimistic (and, as it turned out, erroneous) conclusion reached was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;D. Supply Situation...\u00a0At present the British aircraft industry produces about 180 to 300 first line fighters and 140 first line bombers a month. In view of the present conditions relating to production (the appearance of raw material difficulties, the disruption or breakdown of production at factories owing to air attacks, the increased vulnerability to air attack owing to the fundamental reorganisation of the aircraft industry now in progress), it is believed that for the time being output will decrease rather than increase.\nIn the event of an intensification of air warfare it is expected that the present strength of the RAF will fall, and this decline will be aggravated by the continued decrease in production.\nBecause of this statement, reinforced by another more detailed report, issued on 10 August, there was a mindset in the ranks of the Luftwaffe that the RAF would run out of frontline fighters. The Luftwaffe believed it was weakening Fighter Command at three times the actual attrition rate. Many times, the leadership believed Fighter Command's strength had collapsed, only to discover that the RAF were able to send up defensive formations at will.\nThroughout the battle, the Luftwaffe had to use numerous reconnaissance sorties to make up for poor intelligence. Reconnaissance aircraft (initially mostly Dornier Do 17s, but increasingly Bf 110s) proved easy prey for British fighters, as it was seldom possible for them to be escorted by Bf 109s. Thus, the Luftwaffe operated \"blind\" for much of the battle, unsure of its enemy's true strengths, capabilities, and deployments. Many of the Fighter Command airfields were never attacked, while raids against supposed fighter airfields fell instead on bomber or coastal defence stations. The results of bombing and air fighting were consistently exaggerated, due to inaccurate claims, over-enthusiastic reports and the difficulty of confirmation over enemy territory. In the euphoric atmosphere of perceived victory, the Luftwaffe leadership became increasingly disconnected from reality. This lack of leadership and solid intelligence meant the Germans did not adopt a consistent strategy. Moreover, there was never a systematic focus on one type of target (such as airbases, radar stations, or aircraft factories); consequently, the effectiveness of attacks, and their contribution to wider operational or strategic goals was further diluted.\nNavigational aids.\nWhile the British were using radar for air defence more effectively than the Germans realised, the Luftwaffe attempted to press its own offensive with advanced radio navigation systems of which the British were initially not aware. One of these was \"Knickebein\" (\"bent leg\"); this system was used at night and for raids where precision was required. It was rarely used during the Battle of Britain.\nAir-sea rescue.\nThe Luftwaffe was much better prepared for the task of air-sea rescue than the RAF, specifically tasking the \"Seenotdienst\" unit, equipped with about 30 Heinkel He 59 floatplanes, with picking up downed aircrew from the North Sea, English Channel and the Dover Straits. In addition, Luftwaffe aircraft were equipped with life rafts and the aircrew were provided with sachets of a chemical called fluorescein which, on reacting with water, created a large, easy-to-see, bright green patch. In accordance with the Geneva Convention, the He 59s were unarmed and painted white with civilian registration markings and red crosses. Nevertheless, RAF aircraft attacked these aircraft, as some were escorted by Bf 109s.\nAfter single He 59s were forced to land on the sea by RAF fighters on 1 and 9 July, a controversial order was issued to the RAF on 13 July; this stated that from 20 July, \"Seenotdienst\" aircraft were to be shot down. One of the reasons given by Churchill was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We did not recognise this means of rescuing enemy pilots so they could come and bomb our civil population again\u00a0... all German air ambulances were forced down or shot down by our fighters on definite orders approved by the War Cabinet.\nThe British also believed that their crews would report on convoys, the Air Ministry issuing a communiqu\u00e9 to the German government on 14 July that Britain was\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;unable, however, to grant immunity to such aircraft flying over areas in which operations are in progress on land or at sea, or approaching British or Allied territory, or territory in British occupation, or British or Allied ships. Ambulance aircraft which do not comply with the above will do so at their own risk and peril.\nThe white He 59s were soon repainted in camouflage colours and armed with defensive machine guns. Although another four He 59s were shot down by RAF aircraft, the \"Seenotdienst\" continued to pick up downed Luftwaffe and Allied aircrew throughout the battle, earning praise from Adolf Galland for their bravery.\nRAF strategy.\nThe Dowding system.\nDuring early tests of the Chain Home system, the slow flow of information from the CH radars and observers to the aircraft often caused them to miss their \"bandits\". The solution, today known as the \"Dowding system\", was to create a set of reporting chains to move information from the various observation points to the pilots in their fighters. It was named after its chief architect, \"Stuffy\" Dowding.\nReports from CH radars and the Observer Corps were sent directly to Fighter Command Headquarters (FCHQ) at Bentley Priory where they were \"filtered\" to combine multiple reports of the same formations into single tracks. Telephone operators would then forward only the information of interest to the Group headquarters, where the map would be re-created. This process was repeated to produce another version of the map at the Sector level, covering a much smaller area. Looking over their maps, Group level commanders could select squadrons to attack particular targets. From that point, the Sector operators would give commands to the fighters to arrange an interception, as well as return them to base. Sector stations also controlled the anti-aircraft batteries in their area; an army officer sat beside each fighter controller and directed the gun crews when to open and cease fire.\nThe Dowding system dramatically improved the speed and accuracy of the information that flowed to the pilots. During the early war period, it was expected that an average interception mission might have a 30% chance of ever seeing their target. During the battle, the Dowding system maintained an average rate over 75%, with several examples of 100% rates \u2013 every fighter dispatched found and intercepted its target. In contrast, Luftwaffe fighters attempting to intercept raids had to randomly seek their targets and often returned home having never seen enemy aircraft. The result is what is now known as an example of \"force multiplication\"; RAF fighters were as effective as two or more Luftwaffe fighters, greatly offsetting, or overturning, the disparity in actual numbers.\nIntelligence.\nWhile Luftwaffe intelligence reports underestimated British fighter forces and aircraft production, the British intelligence estimates went the other way: they overestimated German aircraft production, numbers and range of aircraft available, and numbers of Luftwaffe pilots. In action, the Luftwaffe believed from their pilot claims and the impression given by aerial reconnaissance that the RAF was close to defeat, and the British made strenuous efforts to overcome the perceived advantages held by their opponents.\nIt is unclear how much the British intercepts of the Enigma cipher, used for high-security German radio communications, affected the battle. Ultra, the information obtained from Enigma intercepts, gave the highest echelons of the British command a view of German intentions. According to F. W. Winterbotham, who was the senior Air Staff representative in the Secret Intelligence Service, Ultra helped establish the strength and composition of the Luftwaffe's formations, the aims of the commanders and provided early warning of some raids. In early August it was decided that a small unit would be set up at FCHQ, which would process the flow of information from Bletchley and provide Dowding only with the most essential Ultra material; thus the Air Ministry did not have to send a continual flow of information to FCHQ, preserving secrecy, and Dowding was not inundated with non-essential information. Keith Park and his controllers were also told about Ultra. In a further attempt to camouflage the existence of Ultra, Dowding created a unit named No. 421 (Reconnaissance) Flight RAF. This unit (which later became No. 91 Squadron RAF), was equipped with Hurricanes and Spitfires and sent out aircraft to search for and report Luftwaffe formations approaching England. In addition, the radio listening service (known as Y\u00a0Service), monitoring the patterns of Luftwaffe radio traffic contributed considerably to the early warning of raids.\nTactics.\nFighter formations.\nIn the late 1930s, Fighter Command expected to face only bombers over Britain, not single-engined fighters. A series of \"Fighting Area Tactics\" were formulated and rigidly adhered to, involving a series of manoeuvres designed to concentrate a squadron's firepower to bring down bombers. RAF fighters flew in tight, v-shaped sections (\"vics\") of three aircraft, with four such \"sections\" in tight formation. Only the squadron leader at the front was free to watch for the enemy; the other pilots had to concentrate on keeping station. Training also emphasised by-the-book attacks by sections breaking away in sequence. Fighter Command recognised the weaknesses of this structure early in the battle, but it was felt too risky to change tactics during the battle because replacement pilots\u00a0\u2013 often with only minimal flying time\u00a0\u2013 could not be readily retrained, and inexperienced pilots needed firm leadership in the air only rigid formations could provide. German pilots dubbed the RAF formations \"Idiotenreihen\" (\"rows of idiots\") because they left squadrons vulnerable to attack.\nFront line RAF pilots were acutely aware of the inherent deficiencies of their own tactics. A compromise was adopted whereby squadron formations used much looser formations with one or two \"weavers\" flying independently above and behind to provide increased observation and rear protection; these tended to be the least experienced men and were often the first to be shot down without the other pilots even noticing that they were under attack. During the battle, 74 Squadron under Squadron Leader Adolph \"Sailor\" Malan adopted a variation of the German formation called the \"fours in line astern\", which was a vast improvement on the old three aircraft \"vic\". Malan's formation was later generally used by Fighter Command.\nSquadron- and higher-level deployment.\nThe weight of the battle fell upon 11 Group. Keith Park's tactics were to dispatch individual squadrons to intercept raids. The intention was to subject incoming bombers to continual attacks by relatively small numbers of fighters and try to break up the tight German formations. Once formations had fallen apart, stragglers could be picked off one by one. Where multiple squadrons intercepted a raid the intended procedure was for the slower Hurricanes to tackle the bombers while the more agile Spitfires engaged the fighter escort. This ideal was not always achieved, resulting in occasions when Spitfires and Hurricanes reversed roles. Park also issued instructions to his units to attack the bombers from the front, as they were more vulnerable to head-on approaches than to attacks from other angles. Again, in fast-moving, three-dimensional air battles, few RAF fighter units were able to attack the bombers head-on.\nDuring the battle, some commanders, notably Leigh-Mallory, proposed squadrons be formed into \"Big Wings,\" consisting of at least three squadrons, to attack the enemy \"en masse\", a method pioneered by Douglas Bader.\nProponents of this tactic claimed interceptions in large numbers caused greater enemy losses while reducing their own casualties. Opponents pointed out the big wings would take too long to form up, and the strategy ran a greater risk of fighters being caught on the ground refuelling. The big wing idea also caused pilots to overclaim their kills, due to the confusion of a more intense battle zone. This led to considerable overestimation of the effectiveness of Big Wings.\nThe issue caused intense friction between Park and Leigh-Mallory, as 12 Group was assigned the task of protecting 11 Group's airfields while Park's squadrons intercepted incoming raids. The delay in forming up Big Wings meant the formations often did not arrive at all or until after German bombers had hit 11 Group's airfields. Dowding, to highlight the problem of the Big Wing's performance, submitted a report compiled by Park to the Air Ministry on 15 November. In the report, he highlighted that during the period of 11 September \u2013 31 October, the extensive use of the Big Wing had resulted in just 10 interceptions and one German aircraft destroyed, but his report was ignored. Post-war analysis agrees Dowding and Park's approach was best for 11 Group.\nDowding's removal from his post in November 1940 has been blamed on this struggle between Park and Leigh-Mallory's daylight strategy. The intensive raids and destruction wrought during the Blitz damaged both Dowding and Park in particular, because of the failure to produce an effective night-fighter defence system - something for which the influential Leigh-Mallory had long criticised them.\nBomber and Coastal Command contributions.\nBomber Command and Coastal Command aircraft flew offensive sorties against targets in Germany and France during the battle. An hour after the declaration of war, Bomber Command launched raids on warships and naval ports by day, and in night raids dropped leaflets as it was considered illegal to bomb targets which could affect civilians. After the initial disasters of the war, with Vickers Wellington bombers shot down in large numbers attacking Wilhelmshaven and the slaughter of the Fairey Battle squadrons sent to France, it became clear that they would have to operate mainly at night to avoid incurring very high losses. Churchill came to power on 10 May 1940, and the War Cabinet on 12 May agreed that German actions justified \"unrestricted warfare\", and on 14 May they authorised an attack on the night of 14/15 May against oil and rail targets in Germany. At the urging of Clement Attlee, the Cabinet on 15 May authorised a full bombing strategy against \"suitable military objectives\", even where there could be civilian casualties. That evening, a night time bomber campaign began against the German oil industry, communications, and forests/crops, mainly in the Ruhr area. The RAF lacked accurate night navigation and carried small bomb loads. As the threat mounted, Bomber Command changed targeting priority on 3 June 1940 to attack the German aircraft industry. On 4 July, the Air Ministry gave Bomber Command orders to attack ports and shipping. By September, the build-up of invasion barges in the Channel ports had become a top priority target.\nOn 7 September, the government issued a warning that the invasion could be expected within the next few days and, that night, Bomber Command attacked the Channel ports and supply dumps. On 13 September, they carried out another large raid on the Channel ports, sinking 80 large barges in the port of Ostend. 84 barges were sunk in Dunkirk after another raid on 17 September and by 19 September, almost 200 barges had been sunk. The loss of these barges may have contributed to Hitler's decision to postpone Operation Sea Lion indefinitely. The success of these raids was in part because the Germans had few Freya radar stations set up in France, so that air defences of the French harbours were not nearly as good as the air defences over Germany; Bomber Command had directed some 60% of its strength against the Channel ports.\nThe Bristol Blenheim units also raided German-occupied airfields throughout July to December 1940, both during daylight hours and at night. Although most of these raids were unproductive, there were some successes; on 1 August, five out of twelve Blenheims sent to attack Haamstede and Evere (Brussels) were able to destroy or heavily damage three Bf 109s of II./JG 27 and apparently kill a \"Staffelkapit\u00e4n\" identified as a \"Hauptmann\" Albrecht von Ankum-Frank. Two other 109s were claimed by Blenheim gunners. Another successful raid on Haamstede was made by a single Blenheim on 7 August which destroyed one 109 of 4./JG 54, heavily damaged another and caused lighter damage to four more.\nThere were some missions that produced an almost 100% casualty rate amongst the Blenheims; one such operation was mounted on 13 August 1940 against a Luftwaffe airfield near Aalborg in north-eastern Denmark by 12 aircraft of 82 Squadron. One Blenheim returned early (the pilot was later charged and due to appear before a court martial, but was killed on another operation); the other eleven, which reached Denmark, were shot down, five by flak and six by Bf 109s. Of the 33 crewmen who took part in the attack, 20 were killed and 13 captured.\nAs well as the bombing operations, Blenheim-equipped units had been formed to carry out long-range strategic reconnaissance missions over Germany and German-occupied territories. In this role, the Blenheims again proved to be too slow and vulnerable against Luftwaffe fighters, and they took constant casualties.\nCoastal Command directed its attention towards the protection of British shipping, and the destruction of enemy shipping. As invasion became more likely, it participated in the strikes on French harbours and airfields, laying mines, and mounting numerous reconnaissance missions over the enemy-held coast. In all, some 9,180 sorties were flown by bombers from July to October 1940. Although this was much less than the 80,000 sorties flown by fighters, bomber crews suffered about half the total casualties borne by their fighter colleagues. The bomber contribution was, therefore, much more dangerous on a loss-per-sortie comparison.\nBomber, reconnaissance, and antisubmarine patrol operations continued throughout these months with little respite and none of the publicity accorded to Fighter Command. In his famous 20 August speech about \"The Few\", praising Fighter Command, Churchill also made a point of mentioning Bomber Command's contribution, adding that bombers were even then striking back at Germany; this part of the speech is often overlooked, even today. The Battle of Britain Chapel in Westminster Abbey lists in a roll of honour, 718 Bomber Command crew members, and 280 from Coastal Command who were killed between 10 July and 31 October.\nBomber and Coastal Command attacks against invasion barge concentrations in Channel ports were widely reported by the British media during September and October 1940. In what became known as 'the Battle of the Barges' RAF attacks were claimed in British propaganda to have sunk large numbers of barges, and to have created widespread chaos and disruption to German invasion preparations. Given the volume of British propaganda interest in these bomber attacks during September and earlier October, it is striking how quickly this was overlooked once the Battle of Britain had been concluded. Even by mid-war, the bomber pilots' efforts had been largely eclipsed by a continuing focus on the Few, this a result of the Air Ministry's continuing valorisation of the \u2033fighter boys\u2033, beginning with the March 1941 Battle of Britain propaganda pamphlet.\nAir-sea rescue.\nOne of the biggest oversights of the entire system was the lack of adequate air-sea rescue organisation. The RAF had started organising a system in 1940 with High Speed Launches (HSLs) based on flying boat bases and at some overseas locations, but it was still believed that the amount of cross-Channel traffic meant that there was no need for a rescue service to cover these areas. Downed pilots and aircrew, it was hoped, would be picked up by any boats or ships which happened to be passing by. Otherwise, the local life boat would be alerted, assuming someone had seen the pilot going into the water.\nRAF aircrew were issued with a life jacket, nicknamed the \"Mae West,\" but in 1940 it still required manual inflation, which was almost impossible for someone who was injured or in shock. The waters of the English Channel and Dover Straits are cold, even in the middle of summer, and clothing issued to RAF aircrew did little to insulate them against these freezing conditions. The RAF also imitated the German practice of issuing fluorescein. A conference in 1939 had placed air-sea rescue under Coastal Command. Because pilots had been lost at sea during the \"Channel Battle\", on 22 August, control of RAF rescue launches was passed to the local naval authorities and 12 Lysanders were given to Fighter Command to help look for pilots at sea. In all, some 200 pilots and aircrew were lost at sea during the battle. No proper air-sea rescue service was formed until 1941.\nPhases of the battle.\nThe battle covered a shifting geographical area, and there have been differing opinions on significant dates: when the Air Ministry proposed 8 August as the start, Dowding responded that operations \"merged into one another almost insensibly\", and proposed 10 July as the onset of increased attacks. With the caution that phases drifted into each other and dates are not firm, the Royal Air Force Museum states that five main phases can be identified:\nSmall scale raids.\nFollowing Germany's rapid territorial gains in the Battle of France, the Luftwaffe had to reorganise its forces, set up bases along the coast, and rebuild after heavy losses. It began small scale bombing raids on Britain on the night of 5/6 June, and continued sporadic attacks throughout June and July. The first large-scale attack was at night, on 18/19 June, when small raids scattered between Yorkshire and Kent involved in total 100 bombers. These \"St\u00f6rangriffe\" (\"nuisance raids\") which involved only a few aeroplanes, sometimes just one, were used to train bomber crews in both day and night attacks, to test defences and try out methods, with most flights at night. They found that, rather than carrying small numbers of large high explosive bombs, it was more effective to use more small bombs, similarly incendiaries had to cover a large area to set effective fires. These training flights continued through August and into the first week of September. Against this, the raids also gave the British time to assess the German tactics, and invaluable time for the RAF fighters and anti-aircraft defences to prepare and gain practice.\nThe attacks were widespread: over the night of 30 June alarms were set off in 20 counties by just 20 bombers, then next day the first daylight raids were carried out during 1 July, on both Hull in Yorkshire and Wick, Caithness. On 3 July most flights were reconnaissance sorties, but 15 civilians were killed when bombs hit Guildford in Surrey. Numerous small \"St\u00f6rangriffe\" raids, both day and night, were made daily through August, September and into the winter, with aims including bringing RAF fighters up to battle, destruction of specific military and economic targets, and setting off air-raid warnings to affect civilian morale: four major air-raids in August involved hundreds of bombers; in the same month 1,062 small raids were made, spread across the whole of Britain.\nChannel battles.\nThe \"Kanalkampf\" comprised a series of running fights over convoys in the English Channel. It was launched partly because Kesselring and Sperrle were not sure about what else to do, and partly because it gave German aircrews some training and a chance to probe the British defences. Dowding could provide only minimal shipping protection, and these battles off the coast tended to favour the Germans, whose bomber escorts had the advantage of altitude and outnumbered the RAF fighters. From 9 July reconnaissance probing by Dornier Do 17 bombers put a severe strain on RAF pilots and machines, with high RAF losses to Bf 109s. When nine 141 Squadron Defiants went into action on 19 July six were lost to Bf 109s before a squadron of Hurricanes intervened. On 25 July a coal convoy and escorting destroyers suffered such heavy losses to attacks by Stuka dive bombers that the Admiralty decided convoys should travel at night: the RAF shot down 16 raiders but lost 7 aircraft. By 8 August 18 coal ships and 4 destroyers had been sunk, but the Navy was determined to send a convoy of 20 ships through rather than move the coal by railway. After repeated Stuka attacks that day, six ships were badly damaged, four were sunk and only four reached their destination. The RAF lost 19 fighters and shot down 31 German aircraft. The Navy now cancelled all further convoys through the Channel and the cargo was sent by rail. Even so, these early combat encounters provided both sides with experience.\nMain assault.\nThe main attack upon the RAF's defences was code-named \"Adlerangriff\" (\"Eagle Attack\"). Intelligence reports gave G\u00f6ring the impression that the RAF was almost defeated, and raids would attract British fighters for the Luftwaffe to shoot down. The strategy agreed on 6 August was to destroy RAF Fighter Command across the south of England in four days, then bombing of military and economic targets was to systematically extend up to the Midlands until daylight attacks could proceed unhindered over the whole of Britain, culminating in a major bombing attack on London.\nAssault on RAF: radar and airfields.\nPoor weather delayed \"Adlertag\" (\"Eagle Day\") until 13 August 1940. On 12 August, the first attempt was made to blind the Dowding system, when aircraft from the specialist fighter-bomber unit \"Erprobungsgruppe\" 210 attacked four radar stations. Three were briefly taken off the air but were back working within six hours. The raids appeared to show that British radars were difficult to knock out. The failure to mount follow-up attacks allowed the RAF to get the stations back on the air, and the Luftwaffe neglected strikes on the supporting infrastructure, such as phone lines and power stations, which could have rendered the radars useless, even if the lattice-work towers themselves, which were very difficult to destroy, remained intact.\n\"Adlertag\" opened with a series of attacks, led again by \"Erpro\" 210, on coastal airfields used as forward landing grounds for the RAF fighters, as well as 'satellite airfields' including Manston and Hawkinge. As the week drew on, the airfield attacks moved further inland, and repeated raids were made on the radar chain. 15 August was \"The Greatest Day\" when the Luftwaffe mounted the largest number of sorties of the campaign. \"Luftflotte\" 5 attacked the north of England. Raiding forces from Denmark and Norway, which believed Fighter Command strength to be concentrated in the south, ran into resistance which was unexpectedly strong. Inadequately escorted by Bf 110s, Bf109s having insufficient range to escort raids from Norway, bombers were shot down in large numbers. North East England was attacked by 65 Heinkel 111s escorted by 34 Messerschmitt 110s, and RAF Great Driffield was attacked by 50 unescorted Junkers 88s. Out of 115 bombers and 35 fighters sent, 75 planes were destroyed and many others were damaged beyond repair. Furthermore, due to early engagement by RAF fighters, many of the bombers dropped their payloads ineffectively early. As a result of these casualties, \"Luftflotte\" 5 did not appear in strength again in the campaign.\n18 August, which had the greatest number of casualties to both sides, has been dubbed \"The Hardest Day\". Following this grinding battle, exhaustion and the weather reduced operations for most of a week, allowing the Luftwaffe to review their performance. \"The Hardest Day\" had sounded the end for the Ju 87 in the campaign. This veteran of \"Blitzkrieg\" was too vulnerable to fighters to operate over Britain. G\u00f6ring withdrew the \"Stuka\" from the fighting to preserve the \"Stuka\" force, removing the main Luftwaffe precision-bombing weapon and shifting the burden of pinpoint attacks onto the already-stretched \"Erpro\" 210. The Bf 110 proved too clumsy for dogfighting with single-engined fighters, and its participation was scaled back. It would be used only when range required it or when sufficient single-engined escort could not be provided for the bombers.\nG\u00f6ring made yet another important decision: to order more bomber escorts at the expense of free-hunting sweeps. To achieve this, the weight of the attack now fell on \"Luftflotte\" 2, and the bulk of the Bf 109s in \"Luftflotte 3\" were transferred to Kesselring's command, reinforcing the fighter bases in the Pas-de-Calais. Stripped of its fighters, \"Luftflotte 3\" would concentrate on the night bombing campaign. G\u00f6ring, expressing disappointment with the fighter performance thus far in the campaign, also made sweeping changes in the command structure of the fighter units, replacing many \"Geschwaderkommodore\" with younger, more aggressive pilots such as Adolf Galland and Werner M\u00f6lders.\nFinally, G\u00f6ring stopped the attacks on the radar chain. These were seen as unsuccessful, and neither the \"Reichsmarschall\" nor his subordinates realised how vital the Chain Home stations were to the defence systems. It was known that radar provided some early warning of raids, but the belief among German fighter pilots was that anything bringing up the \"Tommies\" to fight was to be encouraged.\nRaids on British cities.\nOn the afternoon of 15 August, \"Hauptmann\" Walter Rubensd\u00f6rffer leading \"Erprobungsgruppe\" 210 mistakenly bombed Croydon airfield (on the outskirts of London) instead of the intended target, RAF Kenley. German intelligence reports made the Luftwaffe optimistic that the RAF, thought to be dependent on local air control, was struggling with supply problems and pilot losses. After a raid on Biggin Hill on 18 August, Luftwaffe aircrew said they had been unopposed, the airfield was \"completely destroyed\", and asked, \"Is England already finished?\" In accordance with the strategy agreed on 6 August, defeat of the RAF was to be followed by bombing military and economic targets, systematically extending up to the Midlands.\nG\u00f6ring ordered attacks on aircraft factories on 19 August 1940. Sixty raids on the night of 19/20 August targeted the aircraft industry and harbours, and bombs fell on suburban areas around London: Croydon, Wimbledon and the Maldens. Night raids were made on 21/22 August on Aberdeen, Bristol and South Wales. That morning, bombs were dropped on Harrow and Wealdstone, on the outskirts of London. Overnight on 22/23 August, the output of an aircraft factory at Filton near Bristol was drastically affected by a raid in which Ju 88 bombers dropped over of high explosive bombs. On the night of 23/24 August over 200 bombers attacked the Fort Dunlop tyre factory in Birmingham, with a significant effect on production. A bombing campaign began on 24 August with the largest raid so far, killing 100 in Portsmouth, and that night, several areas of London were bombed; the East End was set ablaze and bombs landed on central London. Some historians believe that these bombs were dropped accidentally by a group of Heinkel He 111s which had failed to find their target and overshot Rochester and Thameshaven; this account has been contested as being three separate drops that night.\nMore night raids were made around London on 24/25 August, when bombs fell on Croydon, Banstead, Lewisham, Uxbridge, Harrow and Hayes. London was on red alert over the night of 28/29 August, with bombs reported in Finchley, St Pancras, Wembley, Wood Green, Southgate, Old Kent Road, Mill Hill, Ilford, Chigwell and Hendon.\nAttacks on airfields from 24 August.\nG\u00f6ring's directive issued on 23 August 1940 ordered ceaseless attacks on the aircraft industry and on RAF ground organisation to force the RAF to use its fighters, continuing the tactic of luring them up to be destroyed, and added that focussed attacks were to be made on RAF airfields.\nFrom 24 August onwards, the battle was a fight between Kesselring's \"Luftflotte\" 2 and Park's 11 Group. The Luftwaffe concentrated all their strength on knocking out Fighter Command and made repeated attacks on the airfields. Of the 33 heavy attacks in the following two weeks, 24 were against airfields. The key sector stations were hit repeatedly: Biggin Hill and Hornchurch four times each; Debden and North Weald twice each. Croydon, Gravesend, Rochford, Hawkinge and Manston were also attacked in strength. Coastal Command's Eastchurch was bombed at least seven times because it was believed to be a Fighter Command aerodrome. At times these raids caused some damage to the sector stations, threatening the integrity of the Dowding system.\nTo offset some losses, some 58 Fleet Air Arm fighter pilot volunteers were seconded to RAF squadrons, and a similar number of former Fairey Battle pilots were used. Most replacements from Operational Training Units (OTUs) had as little as nine hours flying time and no gunnery or air-to-air combat training. At this point, the multinational nature of Fighter Command came to the fore. Many squadrons and personnel from the air forces of the Dominions were already attached to the RAF, including top-level commanders \u2013 Australians, Canadians, New Zealanders, Rhodesians and South Africans. Other nationalities were also represented, including Free French, Belgian and a Jewish pilot from the British mandate of Palestine.\nThey were bolstered by the arrival of fresh Czechoslovak and Polish squadrons. These had been held back by Dowding, who thought non-English speaking aircrew would have trouble working within his control system, but Polish and Czech fliers proved to be especially effective. The pre-war Polish Air Force had lengthy and extensive training, and high standards; with Poland conquered and under brutal German occupation, the pilots of No. 303 (Polish) Squadron, which became the highest-scoring Allied unit, were experienced and strongly motivated. Josef Franti\u0161ek, a Czech regular airman who had flown from the occupation of his own country to join the Polish and then French air forces before arriving in Britain, flew as a guest of 303 Squadron and was ultimately credited with the highest \"RAF score\" in the Battle of Britain.\nThe RAF had the advantage of fighting over home territory. Pilots who bailed out after being shot down could be back at their airfields within hours, and aircraft low on fuel or ammunition could be immediately re-equipped. One RAF pilot interviewed in late 1940 had been shot down five times during the Battle of Britain, but was able to crash-land in Britain or bail out each time. For Luftwaffe aircrews, a bailout or crash landing in England meant capture \u2013 in the critical August period, almost as many Luftwaffe pilots were taken prisoner as were killed \u2013 while parachuting into the English Channel often meant drowning. Morale began to suffer, and \"Kanalkrankheit\" (\"Channel sickness\") \u2013 a form of combat fatigue \u2013 began to appear among the German pilots. Their replacement problem became worse than the British.\nAssessment of attempt to destroy the RAF.\nThe effect of the German attacks on airfields is unclear. According to Stephen Bungay, Dowding, in a letter to Hugh Trenchard accompanying Park's report on the period 8 August \u2013 10 September 1940, states that the Luftwaffe \"achieved very little\" in the last week of August and the first week of September. The only Sector Station to be shut down operationally was Biggin Hill, and it was non-operational for just two hours. Dowding admitted that 11 Group's efficiency was impaired but, despite serious damage to some airfields, only two out of 13 heavily attacked airfields were down for more than a few hours. The German refocus on London was not critical.\nRetired Air Vice-Marshal Peter Dye, head of the RAF Museum, discussed the logistics of the battle in 2000 and 2010, dealing specifically with the single-seat fighters. He said that not only was British aircraft production replacing aircraft, but replacement pilots were keeping pace with losses. The number of pilots in RAF Fighter Command increased during July, August and September. The figures indicate the number of pilots available never decreased: from July, 1,200 were available; from 1 August, 1,400; in September, over 1,400; in October, nearly 1,600; by 1 November, 1,800. Throughout the battle, the RAF had more fighter pilots available than the Luftwaffe. Although the RAF's reserves of single-seat fighters fell during July, the wastage was made up for by an efficient Civilian Repair Organisation (CRO), which by December had repaired and put back into service some 4,955 aircraft, and by aircraft held at Air Servicing Unit (ASU) airfields.\nRichard Overy agrees with Dye and Bungay. Overy says that only one airfield was temporarily put out of action and \"only\" 103 pilots were lost. British fighter production, not counting repaired aircraft, produced 496 new aircraft in July, 467 in August, and 467 in September, covering the losses of August and September. Overy indicates the number of serviceable and total strength returns reveal an \"increase\" in fighters from 3 August to 7 September, 1,061 on strength and 708 serviceable to 1,161 on strength and 746 serviceable. Moreover, Overy points out that the number of RAF fighter pilots grew by one-third between June and August 1940. Personnel records show a constant supply of around 1,400 pilots in the crucial weeks of the battle. In the second half of September it reached 1,500. The shortfall of pilots was never above 10%. The Germans never had more than between 1,100 and 1,200 pilots, a deficiency of up to one-third. \"If Fighter Command were 'the few', the German fighter pilots were fewer\".\nOther scholars assert that this period was the most dangerous of all. In \"The Narrow Margin\", published in 1961, historians Derek Wood and Derek Dempster believed that the two weeks from 24 August to 6 September represented a real danger. According to them, from 24 August to 6 September 295 fighters had been totally destroyed and 171 badly damaged, against a total output of 269 new and repaired Spitfires and Hurricanes. They say that 103 pilots were killed or missing and 128 were wounded, a total wastage of 120 pilots per week out of a fighting strength of just under 1,000, and that during August no more than 260 fighter pilots were turned out by OTUs, while casualties were just over 300. A full squadron establishment was 26 pilots, whereas the average in August was 16. In their assessment, the RAF was losing the battle. Denis Richards, in his 1953 contribution to the official British account \"History of the Second World War\", agreed that lack of pilots, especially experienced ones, was the RAF's greatest problem. He states that between 8 and 18 August 154 RAF pilots were killed, severely wounded, or missing, while only 63 new pilots were trained. Availability of aircraft was also a serious issue. While its reserves during the Battle of Britain never declined to a half dozen planes as some later claimed, Richards describes 24 August to 6 September as the critical period because during these two weeks Germany destroyed far more aircraft through its attacks on 11 Group's southeast bases than Britain was producing. Three more weeks of such a pace would indeed have exhausted aircraft reserves. Germany had also suffered heavy losses of pilots and aircraft, hence its shift to night-time attacks in September. On 7 September RAF aircraft losses fell below British production and remained so until the end of the war.\nDay and night attacks on London: start of the Blitz.\nHitler's \"Directive No. 17 \u2013 For the conduct of air and sea warfare against England\" issued on 1 August 1940, reserved to himself the right to decide on terror attacks as measures of reprisal. Hitler issued a directive that London was not to be bombed save on his sole instruction. In preparation, detailed target plans under the code name Operation Loge for raids on communications, power stations, armaments works and docks in the Port of London were distributed to the \"Fliegerkorps\" in July. The port areas were crowded next to residential housing and civilian casualties would be expected, but this would combine military and economic targets with indirect effects on morale. The strategy agreed on 6 August was for raids on military and economic targets in towns and cities to culminate in a major attack on London. In mid-August, raids were made on targets on the outskirts of London.\nLuftwaffe doctrine included the possibility of retaliatory attacks on cities, and since 11 May small-scale night raids by RAF Bomber Command had frequently bombed residential areas. The Germans assumed this was deliberate, and as the raids increased in frequency and scale the population grew impatient for measures of revenge. On 25 August 1940, 81 bombers of Bomber Command were sent out to raid industrial and commercial targets in Berlin. Clouds prevented accurate identification and the bombs fell across the city, causing casualties among the civilian population as well as damage to residential areas. Continuing RAF raids on Berlin led to Hitler withdrawing his directive on 30 August, and giving the go-ahead to the planned bombing offensive. On 3 September G\u00f6ring planned to bomb London daily, with General Albert Kesselring's enthusiastic support, having received reports the average strength of RAF squadrons was down to five or seven fighters out of twelve and their airfields in the area were out of action. Hitler issued a directive on 5 September to attack cities including London. In a widely publicised speech delivered on 4 September 1940, Hitler condemned the bombing of Berlin and presented the planned attacks on London as reprisals. The first daylight raid was titled \"Vergeltungsangriff\" (revenge attack).\nOn 7 September, a massive series of raids involving nearly four hundred bombers and more than six hundred fighters targeted docks in the East End of London, day and night. The RAF anticipated attacks on airfields, and 11 Group rose to meet them, in greater numbers than the Luftwaffe expected. The first official deployment of 12 Group's Leigh-Mallory's Big Wing took twenty minutes to form up, missing its intended target, but encountering another formation of bombers while still climbing. They returned, apologetic about their limited success, and blamed the delay on being scrambled too late.\nThe German press jubilantly announced that \"one great cloud of smoke stretches tonight from the middle of London to the mouth of the Thames.\" Reports reflected the briefings given to crews before the raids \u2013 \"Everyone knew about the last cowardly attacks on German cities, and thought about wives, mothers and children. And then came that word 'Vengeance!'\" Pilots reported seeing ruined airfields as they flew towards London, appearances which gave intelligence reports the impression of devastated defences. G\u00f6ring maintained that the RAF was close to defeat, making invasion feasible.\nFighter Command had been at its lowest ebb, short of men and machines, and the break from airfield attacks allowed them to recover. 11 Group had considerable success in breaking up daytime raids. 12 Group repeatedly disobeyed orders and failed to meet requests to protect 11 Group airfields, but their experiments with increasingly large Big Wings had some success. The Luftwaffe began to abandon their morning raids, with attacks on London starting late in the afternoon for fifty-seven consecutive nights.\nThe most damaging aspect to the Luftwaffe of targeting London was the increased distance. The Bf 109E escorts had a limited fuel capacity, giving them only a 660\u00a0km (410-mile) maximum range solely on internal fuel, and when they arrived had only 10 minutes of flying time before turning for home, leaving the bombers undefended. Its eventual stablemate, the Focke-Wulf Fw 190A, was flying only in prototype form in mid-1940; the first 28 Fw 190s were not delivered until November 1940. The Fw 190A-1 had a maximum range of 940\u00a0km (584 miles) on internal fuel, 40% greater than the Bf 109E. The Messerschmitt Bf 109E-7 corrected this deficiency by adding a ventral centre-line ordnance rack to take either an SC 250 bomb or a standard 300-litre Luftwaffe drop tank to double the range to 1,325\u00a0km (820\u00a0mi). The ordnance rack was not retrofitted to earlier Bf 109Es until October 1940.\nOn 14 September, Hitler chaired a meeting with the OKW staff. G\u00f6ring was in France directing the decisive battle, so Erhard Milch deputised for him. Hitler asked \"Should we call it off altogether?\" General Hans Jeschonnek, Luftwaffe Chief of Staff, begged for a last chance to defeat the RAF and for permission to launch attacks on civilian residential areas to cause mass panic. Hitler refused the latter, perhaps unaware of how much damage had already been done to civilian targets. He reserved for himself the power to unleash the terror weapon. Instead, political will was to be broken by destroying the material infrastructure, the weapons industry, and stocks of fuel and food.\nOn 15 September, two massive waves of German attacks were decisively repulsed by the RAF by deploying every aircraft in 11 Group. Sixty German and twenty-six RAF aircraft were shot down. The action was the climax of the Battle of Britain.\nTwo days after this German defeat Hitler postponed preparations for the invasion of Britain. Henceforth, in the face of mounting losses in men, aircraft and the lack of adequate replacements, the Luftwaffe completed their gradual shift from daylight bomber raids and continued with nighttime bombing. 15 September is commemorated as Battle of Britain Day.\nNight time Blitz, fighter-bomber day raids.\nAt the 14 September OKW conference, Hitler acknowledged that the Luftwaffe had still not gained the air superiority needed for the Operation Sea Lion invasion. In agreement with Raeder's written recommendation, Hitler said the campaign was to intensify regardless of invasion plans: \"The decisive thing is the ceaseless continuation of air attacks.\" Jeschonnek proposed attacking residential areas to cause \"mass panic\", but Hitler turned this down: he reserved to himself the option of terror bombing. British morale was to be broken by destroying infrastructure, armaments manufacturing, fuel and food stocks. On 16 September, G\u00f6ring gave the order for this change in strategy. This new phase was to be the first independent strategic bombing campaign, in hopes of a political success forcing the British to give up. Hitler hoped it might result in \"eight million going mad\" (referring to the population of London in 1940), which would \"cause a catastrophe\" for the British. In those circumstances, Hitler said, \"even a small invasion might go a long way\". Hitler was against cancelling the invasion as \"the cancellation would reach the ears of the enemy and strengthen his resolve\". On 19 September, Hitler ordered a reduction in work on Operation Sea Lion. He doubted if strategic bombing could achieve its aims, but ending the air war would be an open admission of defeat. He had to maintain the appearance of concentration on defeating Britain, to conceal from Joseph Stalin his covert aim to invade the Soviet Union.\nThroughout the battle, most Luftwaffe bombing raids had been at night. They increasingly suffered unsustainable losses in daylight raids, and the last massive daytime attacks were on 15 September. A raid of 70 bombers on 18 September also suffered badly, and day raids were gradually phased out leaving the main attacks at night. Fighter Command still lacked any effective capacity to intercept night-time raiders. The night fighters, mostly Blenheims and Beaufighters, at this time lacked airborne radar and so could not find the bombers. Anti-aircraft guns were diverted to London's defences, but had a much-reduced success rate against night attacks.\nFrom mid September, Luftwaffe daylight bombing was gradually taken over by Bf 109 fighters, adapted to take one 250\u00a0kg bomb. Small groups of fighter-bombers would carry out \"St\u00f6rangriffe\" raids escorted by large escort formations of about 200 to 300 combat fighters. They flew at altitudes over where the Bf 109 had an advantage over RAF fighters, except the Spitfire. The raids disturbed civilians, and continued the war of attrition against Fighter Command. The raids were intended to carry out precision bombing on military or economic targets, but it was hard to achieve sufficient accuracy with the single bomb. Sometimes, when attacked, the fighter-bombers had to jettison the bomb to function as fighters. The RAF was at a disadvantage and changed defensive tactics by introducing standing patrols of Spitfires at high altitude to monitor incoming raids. On a sighting, other patrols at lower altitude would fly up to join the battle.\nA Junkers Ju 88 returning from a raid on London was shot down in Kent on 27 September resulting in the Battle of Graveney Marsh, the last action between British and foreign military forces on British mainland soil.\nGerman bombing of Britain reached its peak in October and November 1940. In post-war interrogation, Wilhelm Keitel described the aims as economic blockade, in conjunction with submarine warfare, and attrition of Britain's military and economic resources. The Luftwaffe wanted to achieve victory on its own and was reluctant to cooperate with the navy. Their strategy for the blockade was to destroy ports and storage facilities in towns and cities. Priorities were based on the pattern of trade and distribution, so for these months, London was the main target. In November their attention turned to other ports and industrial targets around Britain.\nHitler postponed the Sealion invasion on 13 October \"until the spring of 1941\". It was not until Hitler's Directive 21 was issued, on 18 December 1940, that the threat to Britain of invasion finally ended.\nDuring the battle, and for the rest of the war, an important factor in keeping public morale high was the continued presence in London of King George VI and his wife Queen Elizabeth. When war broke out in 1939, the King and Queen decided to stay in London and not flee to Canada, as had been suggested. George VI and Elizabeth officially stayed in Buckingham Palace throughout the war, although they often spent weekends at Windsor Castle to visit their daughters, Elizabeth (the future queen) and Margaret. Buckingham Palace was damaged by bombs which landed in the grounds on 10 September and, on 13 September, more serious damage was caused by two bombs which destroyed the Royal Chapel. The royal couple were in a small sitting room about 80 yards from where the bombs exploded. On 24 September, in recognition of the bravery of civilians, King George VI inaugurated the award of the George Cross.\nAttrition statistics.\nOverall, by 2 November, the RAF fielded 1,796 pilots, an increase of over 40% from July 1940's count of 1,259 pilots. Based on German sources (from a Luftwaffe intelligence officer Otto Bechtle attached to KG 2 in February 1944) translated by the Air Historical Branch, Stephen Bungay asserts German fighter and bomber \"strength\" declined without recovery, and that from August\u2013December 1940, the German fighter and bomber strength declined by 30 and 25 per cent. In contrast, Williamson Murray argues (using translations by the Air Historical Branch) that 1,380 German bombers were on strength on 29 June 1940, 1,420 bombers on 28 September, 1,423 level bombers on 2 November and 1,393 bombers on 30 November 1940. In July\u2013September the number of Luftwaffe pilots available fell by 136, but the number of operational pilots had shrunk by 171 by September. The training organisation of the Luftwaffe was failing to replace losses. German fighter pilots, in contrast to popular perception, were not afforded training or rest rotations, unlike their British counterparts. The first week of September accounted for 25% of Fighter Command's and 24% of the Luftwaffe's overall losses. Between the dates 26 August \u2013 6 September, on only one day (1 September) did the Germans destroy more aircraft than they lost. Losses were 325 German and 248 British.\nLuftwaffe losses for August numbered 774 aircraft to all causes, representing 18.5% of all combat aircraft at the beginning of the month. Fighter Command's losses in August were 426 fighters destroyed, amounting to 40 per cent of 1,061 fighters available on 3 August. In addition, 99 German bombers and 27 other types were destroyed between 1 and 29 August.\nFrom July to September, the Luftwaffe's loss records indicate the loss of 1,636 aircraft, 1,184 to enemy action. This represented 47% of the initial strength of single-engined fighters, 66% of twin-engined fighters, and 45% of bombers. This indicates the Germans were running out of aircrew as well as aircraft.\nThroughout the battle, the Germans greatly underestimated the size of the RAF and the scale of British aircraft production. Across the Channel, the Air Intelligence division of the Air Ministry consistently overestimated the size of the German air enemy and the productive capacity of the German aviation industry. As the battle was fought, both sides exaggerated the losses inflicted on the other by an equally large margin. The intelligence picture formed before the battle encouraged the Luftwaffe to believe that such losses pushed Fighter Command to the very edge of defeat, while the exaggerated picture of German air strength persuaded the RAF that the threat it faced was larger and more dangerous than was the case. This led the British to the conclusion that another fortnight of attacks on airfields might force Fighter Command to withdraw their squadrons from the south of England. The German misconception, on the other hand, encouraged first complacency, then strategic misjudgement. The shift of targets from air bases to industry and communications was taken because it was assumed that Fighter Command was virtually eliminated.\nBetween 24 August and 4 September, German serviceability rates, which were acceptable at \"Stuka\" units, were running at 75% with Bf 109s, 70% with bombers and 65% with Bf 110s, indicating a shortage of spare parts. All units were well below established strength. The attrition was beginning to affect the fighters in particular. By 14 September, the Luftwaffe's Bf 109 \"Geschwader\" possessed only 67% of their operational crews against authorised aircraft. For Bf 110 units it was 46 per cent; and for bombers it was 59 per cent. A week later the figures had dropped to 64 per cent, 52% and 52 per cent. Serviceability rates in Fighter Command's fighter squadrons, between 24 August and 7 September, were listed as: 64.8% on 24 August; 64.7% on 31 August and 64.25% on 7 September 1940.\nDue to the failure of the Luftwaffe to establish air supremacy, a conference assembled on 14 September at Hitler's headquarters. Hitler concluded that air superiority had not yet been established and \"promised to review the situation on 17 September for possible landings on 27 September or 8 October. Three days later, when the evidence was clear that the German Air Force had greatly exaggerated the extent of their successes against the RAF, Hitler postponed \"Sea Lion\" indefinitely.\"\nPropaganda.\nPropaganda was an important element of the air war which began to develop over Britain from 18 June 1940 onwards, when the Luftwaffe began small, probing daylight raids to test RAF defences. One of many examples of these small-scale raids was the destruction of a school at Polruan in Cornwall, by a single raider. Into early July, the British media's focus on the air battles increased steadily, the press, magazines, BBC radio and newsreels daily conveying the contents of Air Ministry communiques. The German OKW communiques matched Britain's efforts in claiming the upper hand.\nCentral to the propaganda war on both sides of the Channel were aircraft claims, which are discussed under 'Attrition statistics' (above). These daily claims were important both for sustaining British home front morale and persuading America to support Britain, and were produced by the Air Ministry's Air Intelligence branch. Under pressure from American journalists and broadcasters to prove that the RAF's claims were genuine, RAF intelligence compared pilots' claims with actual aircraft wrecks and those seen to crash into the sea. It was soon realised that there was a discrepancy between the two, but the Air Ministry decided not to reveal this. In fact, it was not until May 1947 that the actual figures were released to the public, by which time it was no longer important. Many people refused to believe the revised figures, including Douglas Bader.\nThe place of the Battle of Britain in British popular memory partly stems from the Air Ministry's successful propaganda campaign from July to October 1940, and its praise of the defending fighter pilots from March 1941 onwards. The pamphlet \"The Battle of Britain\" sold in huge numbers internationally, leading even Goebbels to admire its propaganda value. Focusing only upon the fighter pilots, with no mention of RAF bomber attacks against invasion barges, the Battle of Britain was soon established as a major victory for Fighter Command. This inspired feature films, books, magazines, works of art, poetry, radio plays and MOI short films.\nThe Air Ministry also developed the Battle of Britain Sunday commemoration, supported a Battle of Britain clasp for issue to the pilots in 1945 and, from 1945, Battle of Britain Week. The Battle of Britain window in Westminster Abbey was also encouraged by the Air Ministry, with Trenchard and Dowding, now lords, on its committee. By July 1947 when the window was unveiled, the Battle of Britain had already attained central prominence as Fighter Command's most notable victory, the fighter pilots credited with preventing invasion in 1940. Although given widespread media coverage in September and October 1940, RAF Bomber and Coastal Command raids against invasion barge concentrations were less well-remembered.\nAftermath.\nThe Battle of Britain marked the first major defeat of Germany's military forces, with air superiority seen as the key to victory. Pre-war theories had led to exaggerated fears of strategic bombing, and UK public opinion was buoyed by coming through the ordeal. For the RAF, Fighter Command had achieved a great victory in successfully carrying out Sir Thomas Inskip's 1937 air policy of preventing the Germans from knocking Britain out of the war.\nThe battle also significantly shifted American opinion. During the battle, many Americans accepted the view promoted by Joseph Kennedy, the American ambassador in London, who believed that the United Kingdom could not survive. Roosevelt wanted a second opinion, and sent William \"Wild Bill\" Donovan on a brief visit to the UK; he became convinced the UK would survive and should be supported in every possible way. Before the end of the year, American journalist Ralph Ingersoll, after returning from Britain, published a book concluding that \"Adolf Hitler met his first defeat in eight years\" in what might \"go down in history as a battle as important as Waterloo or Gettysburg\". The turning point was when the Germans reduced the intensity of daylight attacks after 15 September. According to Ingersoll, \"[a] majority of responsible British officers who fought through this battle believe that if Hitler and G\u00f6ring had had the courage and the resources to lose 200 planes a day for the next five days, nothing could have saved London\"; instead, \"[the Luftwaffe's] morale in combat is definitely broken, and the RAF has been gaining in strength each week.\"\nBoth sides in the battle made exaggerated claims of numbers of enemy aircraft shot down. In general, claims were two to three times the actual numbers. Postwar analysis of records has shown that between July and September, the RAF claimed 2,698 kills, while the Luftwaffe fighters claimed 3,198 RAF aircraft shot down. Total losses, and start and end dates for recorded losses, vary for both sides. Luftwaffe losses from 10 July to 30 October 1940 total 1,977 aircraft, including 243 twin- and 569 single-engined fighters, 822 bombers and 343 non-combat types. In the same period, RAF Fighter Command aircraft losses number 1,087, including 53 twin-engined fighters. To the RAF figure should be added 376 Bomber Command and 148 Coastal Command aircraft lost conducting bombing, mining, and reconnaissance operations in defence of the country.\nStephen Bungay describes Dowding and Park's strategy of choosing when to engage the enemy whilst maintaining a coherent force as vindicated; their leadership, and the subsequent debates about strategy and tactics, had created enmity among RAF senior commanders and both were sacked from their posts in the immediate aftermath of the battle. All things considered, the RAF proved to be a robust and capable organisation that was to use all the modern resources available to it to the maximum advantage. Richard Evans writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Irrespective of whether Hitler was really set on this course, he simply lacked the resources to establish the air superiority that was the sine qua non [prerequisite] of a successful crossing of the English Channel. A third of the initial strength of the German air force, the Luftwaffe, had been lost in the western campaign in the spring. The Germans lacked the trained pilots, the effective fighter aircraft, and the heavy bombers that would have been needed.\nThe Germans launched some spectacular attacks against important British industries, but they could not destroy the British industrial potential, and made little systematic effort to do so. Hindsight does not disguise that the threat to Fighter Command was very real, and for the participants it seemed as if there was a narrow margin between victory and defeat. Nevertheless, even if the German attacks on the 11 Group airfields which guarded southeast England and the approaches to London had continued, the RAF could have withdrawn to the Midlands out of German fighter range and continued the battle from there. The victory was as much psychological as physical. Writes Alfred Price:\nThe truth of the matter, borne out by the events of 18 August, is more prosaic: neither by attacking the airfields nor by attacking London, was the Luftwaffe likely to destroy Fighter Command. Given the size of the British fighter force and the general high quality of its equipment, training and morale, the Luftwaffe could have achieved no more than a Pyrrhic victory. During the action on 18 August, it had cost the Luftwaffe five trained aircrew killed, wounded or taken prisoner, for each British fighter pilot killed or wounded; the ratio was similar on other days in the battle. And this ratio of 5:1 was very close to that between the number of German aircrew involved in the battle and those in Fighter Command. In other words, the two sides were suffering almost the same losses in trained aircrew, in proportion to their overall strengths. In the Battle of Britain, for the first time during the Second World War, the German war machine had set itself a major task which it patently failed to achieve, and so demonstrated that it was not invincible. In stiffening the resolve of those determined to resist Hitler the battle was an important turning point in the conflict.\nSome historians are more cautious in assessing the significance of Germany's failure to knock Britain out of the war. Bungay writes, \"Victory in the air achieved a modest strategic goal, for it did not bring Britain any closer to victory in the war, but merely avoided her defeat.\" Overy says, \"The Battle of Britain did not seriously weaken Germany and her allies, nor did it much reduce the scale of the threat facing Britain (and the Commonwealth) in 1940/41 until German and Japanese aggression brought the Soviet Union and the United States into the conflict.\"\nThe British victory in the Battle of Britain was achieved at a heavy cost. Total British civilian losses from July to December 1940 were 23,002 dead and 32,138 wounded, with one of the largest single raids on 19 December 1940, in which almost 3,000 civilians died. With the culmination of the concentrated daylight raids, Britain was able to rebuild its military forces and establish itself as an Allied stronghold, later serving as a base from which the liberation of Western Europe was launched.\nMemorials and cultural impact.\nWinston Churchill summed up the battle with the words, \"Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few\". Pilots who fought in the battle have been known as \"The Few\" ever since, at times being specially commemorated on 15 September, \"Battle of Britain Day\". On this day in 1940, the Luftwaffe embarked on their largest bombing attack yet, forcing the engagement of the entirety of the RAF in defence of London and the South East, which resulted in a decisive British victory that proved to mark a turning point in Britain's favour. Within the Commonwealth, Battle of Britain Day has been observed more usually on the third Sunday in September, and even on the 2nd Thursday in September in some areas in the British Channel Islands.\nPlans for the Battle of Britain window in Westminster Abbey were begun during wartime, the committee chaired by Lords Trenchard and Dowding. Public donations paid for the window itself, which replaced a window destroyed during the campaign, this officially opened by King George VI on 10 July 1947. Although not actually an 'official' memorial to the Battle of Britain in the sense that government paid for it, the window and chapel have since been viewed as such. During the late 1950s and 1960, various proposals were advanced for a national monument to the Battle of Britain, this also the focus of several letters in \"The Times\". In 1960 the Conservative government decided against a further monument, taking the view that the credit should be shared more broadly than Fighter Command alone, and there was little public appetite for one. All subsequent memorials are the result of private subscription and initiative, as discussed below.\nThere are numerous memorials to the battle. The most important ones are the Battle of Britain Monument in London and the Battle of Britain Memorial at Capel-le-Ferne in Kent. As well as Westminster Abbey, St James's Church, Paddington also has a memorial window to the battle, replacing a window destroyed during it. There is also a memorial at the former Croydon Airport, one of the RAF bases during the battle, and a memorial to the pilots at Armadale Castle on the Isle of Skye in Scotland, which is topped by a raven sculpture. The Polish pilots who served in the battle are among the names on the Polish War Memorial in west London.\nThere are also two museums to the battle: one at Hawkinge in Kent and one at Stanmore in London, at the former RAF Bentley Priory.\nIn 2015 the RAF created an online 'Battle of Britain 75th Anniversary Commemorative Mosaic' composed of pictures of \"the few\" \u2013 the pilots and aircrew who fought in the battle \u2013 and \"the many\" \u2013 'the often unsung others whose contribution during the Battle of Britain was also vital to the RAF's victory in the skies above Britain', submitted by participants and their families.\nOther post-war memorials include:\nThe battle was the subject of the film \"Battle of Britain\" (1969), starring Laurence Olivier as Hugh Dowding and Trevor Howard as Keith Park. It also starred Michael Caine, Christopher Plummer and Robert Shaw as squadron leaders. Former participants of the battle served as technical advisers, including Adolf Galland and Robert Stanford Tuck.\nIn the 2001 film \"Pearl Harbor\", American participation in the Battle of Britain was exaggerated, as none of the \"Eagle Squadrons\" of American volunteers saw action in Europe before 1941.\nAs of 2003[ [update]], a Hollywood film named \"The Few\" was in preparation for release in 2008, based on the story of real-life US pilot Billy Fiske, who ignored his country's neutrality rules and volunteered for the RAF. Bill Bond, who conceived the Battle of Britain Monument in London, described a \"Variety\" magazine outline of the film's historical content as \"Totally wrong. The whole bloody lot.\"\nThe 1941 Allied propaganda film \"Churchill's Island\" was the winner of the first Academy Award for Documentary Short Subject.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57975", "revid": "50930474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57975", "title": "Time Team", "text": "British archaeology television show\nTime Team is a British television programme that originally aired on Channel\u00a04 from 16\u00a0January 1994 to 7\u00a0September 2014. It returned in 2022 on online platforms YouTube and Patreon. Created by television producer Tim Taylor and presented by actor Tony Robinson, each episode features a team of specialists carrying out an archaeological dig over a period of three days, with Robinson explaining the process in lay terms. The specialists changed throughout the programme's run, although it consistently included professional archaeologists such as Mick Aston, Carenza Lewis, Francis Pryor and Phil Harding. The sites excavated ranged in date from the Palaeolithic to the Second World War.\nIn October\u00a02012, Channel\u00a04 announced that the final series would be broadcast in 2013. Series\u00a020 was screened from January\u2013March\u00a02013 and nine specials were screened between May\u00a02013 and September\u00a02014. In May\u00a02021, Taylor announced the return of the series, with free episodes to be shown on YouTube. The first episodes of the revival began appearing on YouTube in 2022.\nTeam members.\nA team of archaeologists, usually led by Mick Aston or Francis Pryor (the latter usually heading Bronze Age and Iron Age digs), and including field archaeologist Phil Harding, congregate at a site, usually in Britain. The original \"Time Team\" line-up from 1994 changed over the years. Historian and archivist Robin Bush was a regular in the first nine series, having been involved with the programme through his long friendship with Aston. Architectural historian Beric Morley featured in ten episodes between 1995 and 2002. In 2005, Carenza Lewis left to pursue other interests and was replaced by Helen Geake, an Anglo-Saxon specialist. The regular team also included Stewart Ainsworth, landscape investigator; John Gater and Chris Gaffney, archaeological geophysicists; Henry Chapman, surveyor; and Victor Ambrus, illustrator.\nThe team was supplemented by experts appropriate for the period and type of site. Guy de la B\u00e9doy\u00e8re has often been present for Roman digs, as well as those involving the Second World War (such as D-Day), and aircraft (such as the Spitfire). Architectural historian Jonathan Foyle has appeared in episodes relating to excavations of country estates. Paul Blinkhorn (pottery), Mark Corney (coins), Carl Thorpe (pottery), and Jackie McKinley (bones) have appeared from time to time. Mick 'the dig' Worthington, an excavator in the early series, occasionally returned as a dendrochronologist, whereupon he was dubbed 'Mick the twig'. Osteoarcheologist Margaret Cox often assisted with forensic archaeology, mainly between 1998 and 2005. Other specialists who appeared from time to time include historian Bettany Hughes, archaeologist Gustav Milne, East of England specialist Ben Robinson, architectural historian Richard K. Morriss, and David S. Neal, expert on Roman mosaics. Local historians also joined in.\nIn February\u00a02012, it was announced that Aston had left the show because of format changes. The disputed changes included hiring anthropologist Mary-Ann Ochota as a co-presenter, dispensing with other archaeologists and what he thought were plans to \"cut down the informative stuff about the archaeology\". \"The time had come to leave. I never made any money out of it, but a lot of my soul went into it. I feel really, really angry about it,\" he told \"British Archaeology\" magazine. \"Time Team\" producer Tim Taylor released a statement in response to the news reports saying \"His concerns are of great importance to me. We have addressed some of them\" and that \"you've not heard the last of Mick on \"Time Team\"\".\nRegular team members in later years included archaeologist Neil Holbrook, Roman coins specialist Philippa Walton, and historian Sam Newton. Younger members of \"Time Team\" who made regular appearances include Jenni Butterworth, Raksha Dave, Kerry Ely, Brigid Gallagher, Rob Hedge, Katie Hirst, Alex Langlands, Cassie Newland, Ian Powlesland, Alice Roberts, Faye Simpson, Barney Sloane, Tracey Smith, and Matt Williams.&lt;ref name=\"shropshirestar/2015/time-team\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"wessexarch/new-wales\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nProduction.\n\"Time Team\" developed from an earlier Channel\u00a04 programme, \"Time Signs\", first broadcast in 1991. Produced by Taylor, \"Time Signs\" had featured Aston and Harding, who went on to appear on \"Time Team\". Following \"Time Signs\"' cancellation, Taylor went on to develop a more attractive format, producing the idea for \"Time Team\", which Channel\u00a04 also picked up, broadcasting the first series in 1994. \"Time Team\" has had many companion shows during its run, including \"Time Team Extra\" (1998), \"History Hunters\" (1998\u20131999) and \"Time Team Digs\" (2002),\nwhilst several spin-off books have been published. The programme features special episodes, often documentaries on history or archaeology and live episodes. The programme has been exported to 35\u00a0other countries.\n\"Time Team America\", a US version of the programme, was broadcast on PBS in 2009.\nOn 13\u00a0September 2007, during the filming of a jousting reenactment for a special episode of \"Time Team\", a splinter from a balsa wood lance went through the eye-slit in the helmet of one of the participants and entered his eye socket. 54\u00a0year-old Paul Anthony Allen, a member of a re-enactment society, died a week later in hospital. Channel\u00a04 stated that the programme would be shown, but without the re-enactment sequence. The episode, dedicated to Allen, was transmitted on 25\u00a0February 2008.\nCancellation.\nIn 2012, Aston announced he was leaving the show after criticising format changes that focused less on archaeological activities. Channel\u00a04 subsequently announced that the final \"Time Team\" series would be broadcast in 2013. Viewing figures had been in decline from 2.5\u00a0million in 2008 to 1.5\u00a0million in November 2011. The regular \"Time Team\" programme ended on 24\u00a0March 2013. Aston died unexpectedly on 24\u00a0June 2013.\nIn October\u00a02013, Robinson said in an interview with \"Radio Times\" that he believed \"Time Team\" still had life in it and suggested that after a three- or four-year absence it could make a return. He also expressed support for a fan-organised Facebook campaign to bring the \"Time Team\" crew together again to carry out a dig in memory of Aston. The final \"Time Team\" special aired on 7\u00a0September 2014.\nRevival.\nIn December 2020, producer Tim Taylor announced that \"Time Team\" would begin airing episodes on a YouTube channel called \"Time Team Classics\". Taylor also announced the launch of the \"Time Team\" Patreon page, allowing fans to financially support efforts to revive the series. On 29\u00a0January 2021, the project exceeded its goal of 3,000 patrons.\nOn 17\u00a0May 2021, Taylor made an announcement on the return of the series, with episodes planned to air for free on the YouTube channel. Confirmed team members included Carenza Lewis, John Gater, Helen Geake, Stewart Ainsworth, Raysan Al-Kubaisi, Neil Emmanuel, Naomi Sewpaul, Matt Williams, Henry Chapman, Dani Wootton, Brigid Gallagher, Neil Holbrook, Suzannah Lipscomb, Jimmy Adcock, Natalie Haynes, Derek Pitman, Lawrence Shaw, Hilde van der Heul, Pete Spencer, and several returning production team members.\nIn September 2021, it was announced that Gus Casely-Hayford and Natalie Haynes would present the revived series.\nSeries 21 featured two three-part episodes, each covering a new dig conducted in 2021. The first of these episodes, which premiered between 18 and 20 March 2022, covered the excavation of an Iron Age settlement on the Lizard Peninsula in Cornwall. The second episode premiered between 8 and 10 April 2022 and featured the excavation of a Roman villa in the grounds of Broughton Castle in Oxfordshire, discovered by metal detectorist and amateur archaeologist Keith Westcott in 2016.\nTime Team returned to Broughton Castle to answer questions related to a mysterious stone sarcophagus. The first of this two-part episode premiered on 22 December 2022.\nFurther episodes were released in 2023 and 2024:\nOn 8 March 2024, the Time Team YouTube channel announced plans to dig Sutton Hoo, near Woodbridge, Suffolk, in June 2024. A 3 part feature-length documentary of the dig presented by Tony Robinson was released in 2025.\nMusic.\nThe series' original theme music was composed by Paul Greedus.\nThe majority of the incidental tracks and main themes for the show, and for many of the specials (Dinosaur Hunting in Montana, D-Day, The Big Dig etc.) were composed by Steve Day.\nFormat.\nAt the start of the programme, Tony Robinson explains, in an opening \"piece to camera\", the reasons for the team's visit to the site. During the dig, he enthusiastically encourages the archaeologists to explain their decisions, discoveries and conclusions, while trying to ensure that everything is comprehensible to the archaeologically uninitiated. The site is frequently suggested by a member of the viewing public. \"Time Team\" uncover as much as they can of the archaeology and history of the site in three days.\nExcavations are not just carried out to entertain viewers. Robinson claims that the archaeologists involved with \"Time Team\" have published more scientific papers on excavations carried out in the programme than all British university archaeology departments over the same period, and that by 2013, the programme had become the biggest funder of field archaeology in the country.\nOther formats.\n\"Time Team's Big Dig\" was an expansion on the live format. A weekend of live broadcasts in June\u00a02003 was preceded by a week of daily short programmes. It involved about a thousand members of the public in excavating test pits each one metre square by fifty centimetres deep. Most of these pits were in private gardens and the project stirred up controversies about approaches to public archaeology.\n\"Time Team's Big Roman Dig\" (2005) saw this format altered, in an attempt to avoid previous controversies, through the coverage of nine archaeological sites around the UK which were already under investigation by professional archaeologists. \"Time Team\" covered the action through live link-ups based at a Roman Villa at Dinnington in Somerset \u2013 itself a \"Time Team\" excavation from 2003. Over 60\u00a0other professionally supervised excavations were supported by \"Time Team\" and carried out around the country in association with the programme. A further hundred activities relating to Roman history were carried out by schools and other institutions around the UK.\n\"Time Team Specials\" are documentary programmes about topics in history and archaeology made by the same production company. They are generally presented by Robinson and often feature one or more of the familiar faces from the regular programme of \"Time Team\". In some cases the programme makers have followed the process of discovery at a large commercial or research excavation by another body, such as that to commemorate the 90th anniversary of the ending of the First World War at the Vampire dugout in Belgium. \"Time Team\" usually does not carry out excavations for these programmes, but may contribute a reconstruction.\n\"Time Team History of Britain\" saw Robinson and the team document everything they have learned up to now and show a history of Britain. \"Behind the Scenes of Time Team\" showed meetings of the archaeologists, and material not transmitted during the episode of the dig. \"10\u00a0Years of Time Team\" presented a round-up of what has happened in Time Team over the past 10\u00a0years and what they expect to happen in the future.\nThe Time Team website (editor Steve Platt) won a BAFTA for interactive entertainment (factual) in 2002.\nTime Team Podcast.\nIn 2024, Time Team's Dr Helen Geake and Martyn Williams began the podcast. This weekly podcast delves into the world of archaeology, offering exclusive access to digs and interviews with experts to uncover the stories of the past. The podcast is an accompanying format to the YouTube version of Time Team.\nInfluence.\n\"Time Team\" has been credited with promoting archaeology in the UK. In a 2008 report produced by English Heritage, a working group of Palaeolithic specialists recognised the importance of the show in \"promoting public awareness\" of Palaeolithic Britain, something which they argued was to be encouraged.\nDVD releases.\nComplete series have been released in Australia starting with Series\u00a015 in 2010.\nSince then, Series\u00a012 (2014),\nSeries\u00a014 (2012),\nSeries\u00a016 (2010),\nSeries\u00a017 (2011),\nSeries\u00a018 (2012),\nSeries\u00a019 (2012)\nand Series\u00a020 (2013) have all been released in Australia. 'Best Of' DVDs were released in the UK over the years; however, a complete series had never been released until Series\u00a018 was released by Acorn Media UK on 6\u00a0February 2012. On 15\u00a0May 2012, Acorn Media released a collection of Roman-themed episodes on Region One DVD.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57976", "revid": "1298256556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57976", "title": "Eusko Abendaren Ereserkia", "text": "Regional anthem of the Basque Country, Spain\n\"'\" (\"Anthem of the Basque Race\"), also known as \"'\" (\"Anthem of the Basque Country\"), is the official anthem of the Basque Country in northern Spain. The lyrics were written by Basque nationalist writer Sabino Arana, and its melody is based on an old Basque tune. The anthem was originally used for the Basque Nationalist Party (BNP/PNV), and it was adopted by the first Basque Government in the 1930s. Its re-proclamation by the Basque Parliament on 14 April 1983 was opposed by several parties that deemed it still to be bound to the PNV rather than to the rest of the Basques.\nLike the national anthem of Spain, \"Marcha Real\", the lyrics are not officially sung. The law makes official the music with no lyrics, since opposition parties felt Arana's text was too religious and linked to the BNP.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57977", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57977", "title": "Mad scientist", "text": "Stock character in fiction\nThe mad scientist (also mad doctor or mad professor) is a stock character of a scientist who is perceived as \"mad, bad and dangerous to know\" or \"insane\" owing to a combination of unusual or unsettling personality traits and the unabashedly ambitious, taboo or hubristic nature of their experiments. As a motif in fiction, the mad scientist may be villainous (evil genius) or antagonistic, benign, or neutral; may be insane, eccentric, or clumsy; and often works with fictional technology or fails to recognise or value common human objections to attempting to play God. Some may have benevolent intentions, even if their actions are dangerous or questionable, which can make them accidental antagonists.\nHistory.\nPrototypes.\nThe prototypical fictional mad scientist was Victor Frankenstein, creator of his eponymous monster, who made his first appearance in 1818, in the novel \"Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus\" by Mary Shelley. Though the novel's title character, Victor Frankenstein, is a sympathetic character, the critical element of conducting experiments that cross \"boundaries that ought not to be crossed\", heedless of the consequences, is present in Shelley's novel. Frankenstein was trained as both an alchemist and a modern scientist, which makes him the bridge between two eras of an evolving archetype. The book is said to be a precursor of a new genre, science fiction, although as an example of gothic horror it is connected with other antecedents as well.\nThe year 1896 saw the publication of H. G. Wells's \"The Island of Doctor Moreau,\" in which the titular doctor\u2014a controversial vivisectionist\u2014has isolated himself entirely from civilisation in order to continue his experiments in surgically reshaping animals into humanoid forms, heedless of the suffering he causes. In 1925, the novelist Alexander Belyaev introduced mad scientists to the Russian people through the novel \"Professor Dowell's Head\", in which the antagonist performs experimental head transplants on bodies stolen from the morgue, and reanimates the corpses.\nCinema depictions.\nFritz Lang's movie \"Metropolis\" (1927) brought the archetypical mad scientist to the screen in the form of Rotwang, the evil genius whose machines had originally given life to the dystopian city of the title. Rotwang's laboratory influenced many subsequent movie sets with its electrical arcs, bubbling apparatus, and bizarrely complicated arrays of dials and controls. Portrayed by actor Rudolf Klein-Rogge, Rotwang himself is the prototypically conflicted mad scientist; though he is master of almost mystical scientific power, he remains a slave to his own desires for power and revenge. \nA recent survey of 1,000 horror films distributed in the UK between the 1930s and 1980s reveals mad scientists or their creations have been the villains of 30 percent of the films; scientific research has produced 39 percent of the threats; and, by contrast, scientists have been the heroes of a mere 11 percent. Boris Karloff played mad scientists in several of his 1930s and 1940s films.\nMovie serials.\nThe mad scientist was a staple of the Republic/Universal/Columbia movie serials of the 1930s and 40s. Examples include:\nPost\u2013World War II depictions.\nMad scientists were most conspicuous in popular culture after World War II. The sadistic human experimentation conducted under the auspices of the Nazis, especially those of Josef Mengele, and the invention of the atomic bomb, gave rise in this period to genuine fears that science and technology had gone out of control. That the scientific and technological build-up during the Cold War brought about increasing threats of unparalleled destruction of the human species did not lessen the impression. Mad scientists frequently figure in science fiction and motion pictures from the period.\nAnimation.\nMad scientists in animation include Professor Frink from \"The Simpsons\", Professor Farnsworth from \"Futurama\", Rick Sanchez from \"Rick and Morty\", Rintaro Okabe from \"Science Adventure\", Dr. Heinz Doofenshmirtz from \"Phineas and Ferb\", and Dr. Lullah from \"StuGo\".\nWalt Disney Pictures had Mickey Mouse trying to save his dog Pluto from \"The Mad Doctor\" (1933).\nDepictions of mad scientists in Warner Brothers' \"Merrie Melodies\"/\"Looney Tunes\" cartoons include \"Hair-Raising Hare\" (1946, based on Peter Lorre), \"Birth of a Notion\" (1947, again based on Lorre), \"Water, Water Every Hare\" (1952, based on Boris Karloff).\nWhile both Tom and Jerry dabbled in mad science in some of the Hanna-Barbera cartoons, an actual mad scientist did not appear until \"Switchin' Kitten\" (1961).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57979", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57979", "title": "Disarmament", "text": "Act of reducing, limiting, or abolishing weapons, usually on a national scale\nDisarmament is the act of reducing, limiting, or abolishing weapons. Disarmament generally refers to a country's military or a specific type of weaponry. Disarmament is often taken to mean total elimination of weapons of mass destruction, such as nuclear arms. General and Complete Disarmament was defined by the United Nations General Assembly as the elimination of all weapons of mass destruction, coupled with the \u201cbalanced reduction of armed forces and conventional armaments, based on the principle of undiminished security of the parties with a view to promoting or enhancing stability at a lower military level, taking into account the need of all States to protect their security.\u201d\nHistory.\nAt the Hague Peace Conferences in 1899 and 1907 government delegations debated about disarmament and the creation of an international court with binding powers. The court was considered necessary because it was understood that nation-states could not disarm into a vacuum. After World War I revulsion at the futility and tremendous cost of the war was widespread. A commonly held belief was that the cause of the war had been the escalating buildup of armaments in the previous half century among the great powers (see Anglo-German naval arms race). Although the Treaty of Versailles effectively disarmed Germany, a clause was inserted that called on all the great powers to likewise progressively disarm over a period of time. The newly formed League of Nations made this an explicit goal in the covenant of the league, which committed its signatories to reduce armaments 'to the lowest point consistent with national safety and the enforcement by common action of international obligations'.\nOne of the earliest successful achievements in disarmament was obtained with the Washington Naval Treaty. Signed by the governments of Great Britain, the United States, Japan, France, and Italy, it prevented the continued construction of capital ships and limited ships of other classification to under 10,000 tons displacement. The size of the three country's navies (the Royal Navy, United States Navy and Imperial Japanese Navy) was set at the ratio 5-5-3.\nIn 1921, the Temporary Mixed Commission on Armaments was set up by the League of Nations to explore possibilities for disarmament. It was made up not of government representatives but of famous individuals who rarely agreed. Proposals ranged from abolishing chemical warfare and strategic bombing to the limitation of more conventional weapons, such as tanks. A draft treaty was assembled in 1923 that made aggressive war illegal and bound the member states to defend victims of aggression by force. Since the onus of responsibility would, in practice, be on the great powers of the League, it was opposed by the First MacDonald ministry of the British government, whose opposition to the treaty, made official on 5 July 1924, \"effectively buried the proposal for good.\" \nAnother commission in 1926, set up to explore the possibilities for the reduction of army size, met similar difficulties. However acting outside the League. French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand and US Secretary of State Frank Kellogg drafted a treaty known as the Kellogg\u2013Briand Pact, which denounced war of aggression. There were 65 signatories to the pact, but it set out no guidelines for action in the event of a war. It was in 1946 used to convict and execute Nazi leaders of war crimes.\nA final attempt was made at the Geneva Disarmament Conference from 1932 to 1937, chaired by former British Foreign Secretary Arthur Henderson. Germany demanded the revision of the Versailles Treaty and the granting of military parity with the other powers, while France was determined to keep Germany demilitarised for its own security. Meanwhile, the British and Americans were not willing to offer France security commitments in exchange for conciliation with Germany. The talks broke down in 1933, when Adolf Hitler withdrew Germany from the conference.\nNuclear disarmament.\nNuclear disarmament refers to both the act of reducing or eliminating nuclear weapons and to the end state of a nuclear-free world, in which nuclear weapons are completely eliminated.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) held an inaugural public meeting at Central Hall, Westminster, on 17 February 1958, attended by five thousand people. After the meeting a few hundred left to demonstrate at Downing Street.\nCND's declared policies were the unconditional renunciation of the use, production of or dependence upon nuclear weapons by Britain and the bringing about of a general disarmament convention. The first Aldermaston March was organised by the CND and took place at Easter 1958, when several thousand people marched for four days from Trafalgar Square, London, to the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment close to Aldermaston in Berkshire, England, to demonstrate their opposition to nuclear weapons. The Aldermaston marches continued into the late 1960s when tens of thousands of people took part in the four-day marches.\nIn 1961, US President John F. Kennedy gave a speech before the UN General Assembly where he announced the US \"intention to challenge the Soviet Union, not to an arms race, but to a peace race \u2013 to advance together step by step, stage by stage, until general and complete disarmament has been achieved.\" He went on to call for a global general and complete disarmament, offering a rough outline for how this could be accomplished:\nMajor nuclear disarmament groups include Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, Greenpeace and International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War. There have been many large anti-nuclear demonstrations and protests. On June 12, 1982, one million people demonstrated in New York City's Central Park against nuclear weapons and for an end to the Cold War arms race. It was the largest anti-nuclear protest and the largest political demonstration in American history. Following decades of campaigning the New Zealand government banned nuclear-armed and powered ships from entering the country's territorial waters in 1984 with the ban later extended to cover land and airspace.\nPolice disarmament.\nThe police disarmament movement is a political movement that advocates disarming police officers and law enforcement officers who regularly carry weaponry, such as those in the United States. Proposed police disarmament methods range from simply emphasizing de-escalation and less-lethal alternatives over lethal force; to limiting police access to firearms to specific units (such as police tactical units or authorised firearms officers) or to when authorized or necessary; to defunding or replacing police with other systems of public safety. The concept dates back to the 1900s and has historically been championed by anarchists and libertarians alike.\nProponents of police disarmament cite police brutality and militarization, safety and trust concerns, and the potential in other public safety apparatuses instead of armed police, as factors that make police disarmament ideal or necessary. Critics of police disarmament argue the concept is unrealistic, citing the need for police officers to defend themselves, the inability of unarmed public safety agents to effectively handle violent crime.\nDefinitions of disarmament.\nIn his definition of \"disarmament\", David Carlton writes in the Oxford University Press political dictionary, \"But confidence in such measures of arms control, especially when unaccompanied by extensive means of verification, has not been strengthened by the revelation that the Soviet Union in its last years successfully concealed consistent and systematic cheating on its obligations under the Biological Weapons Convention.\" He also notes, \"Now a freeze or a mutually agreed increase is not strictly speaking disarmament at all. And such measures may not even be intended to be a first step towards any kind of reduction or abolition. For the aim may simply be to promote stability in force structures. Hence a new term to cover such cases has become fashionable since the 1960s, namely, arms control.\""}
{"id": "57980", "revid": "37205404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57980", "title": "Shortwave radio", "text": "Radio transmissions using wavelengths between 10 m and 100 m\nShortwave radio is radio transmission using radio frequencies in the shortwave bands (SW). There is no official definition of the band range, but it always includes all of the high frequency band (HF), which extends from 3 to 30\u00a0MHz (approximately 100 to 10 metres in wavelength). It lies between the medium frequency band (MF) and the bottom of the VHF band.\nRadio waves in the shortwave band can be reflected or refracted from a layer of electrically charged atoms in the atmosphere called the ionosphere. Therefore, short waves directed at an angle into the sky can be reflected back to Earth at great distances, beyond the horizon. This is called skywave or \"skip\" propagation. Thus shortwave radio can be used for communication over very long distances, in contrast to radio waves of higher frequency, which travel in straight lines (line-of-sight propagation) and are generally limited by the visual horizon, about 64\u00a0km (40\u00a0miles).\nShortwave broadcasts of radio programs played an important role in international broadcasting for many decades, serving both to provide news and information and as a propaganda tool for an international audience. The heyday of international shortwave broadcasting was during the Cold War between 1960 and 1990. \nWith the wide implementation of other technologies for the long-distance distribution of radio programs, such as satellite radio, cable broadcasting and IP-based transmissions, shortwave broadcasting lost importance. Initiatives for the digitization of broadcasting did not bear fruit either, and , relatively few broadcasters continue to broadcast programs on shortwave. However, shortwave listening remains a niche hobby, with enthusiasts tuning into fringe stations.\nShortwave radio is important in war zones, such as in the Russo-Ukrainian war, and shortwave broadcasts can be transmitted over thousands of miles from a single transmitter, making it difficult for government authorities to censor them. Shortwave radio is also often used by aircraft.\nHistory.\nDevelopment.\nThe name \"shortwave\" originated during the beginning of radio in the early 20th century, when the radio spectrum was divided into long wave (LW), medium wave (MW), and short wave (SW) bands based on the length of the wave. Shortwave radio received its name because the wavelengths in this band are shorter than 200\u00a0m (1,500\u00a0kHz) which marked the original upper limit of the medium frequency band first used for radio communications. The broadcast medium wave band now extends above the 200\u00a0m / 1,500\u00a0kHz limit.\nEarly long-distance radio telegraphy used long waves, below 300\u00a0kilohertz (kHz) / above 1000 m. The drawbacks to this system included a very limited spectrum available for long-distance communication, and the very expensive transmitters, receivers and gigantic antennas. Long waves are also difficult to beam directionally, resulting in a major loss of power over long distances. Prior to the 1920s, the shortwave frequencies above 1.5\u00a0MHz were regarded as useless for long-distance communication and were designated in many countries for amateur use.\nGuglielmo Marconi, pioneer of radio, commissioned his assistant Charles Samuel Franklin to carry out a large-scale study into the transmission characteristics of short-wavelength waves and to determine their suitability for long-distance transmissions. Franklin rigged up a large antenna at Poldhu Wireless Station, Cornwall, running on 25\u00a0kW of power. In June and July\u00a01923, wireless transmissions were completed during nights on 97\u00a0meters (about 3\u00a0MHz) from Poldhu to Marconi's yacht \"Elettra\" in the Cape Verde Islands.\nIn September 1924, Marconi arranged for transmissions to be made day and night on 32 meters (about 9.4\u00a0MHz) from Poldhu to his yacht in the harbour at Beirut, to which he had sailed, and was \"astonished\" to find he could receive signals \"throughout the day\". Franklin went on to refine the directional transmission by inventing the curtain array aerial system. In July 1924, Marconi entered into contracts with the British General Post Office (GPO) to install high-speed shortwave telegraphy circuits from London to Australia, India, South Africa and Canada as the main element of the Imperial Wireless Chain. The UK-to-Canada shortwave \"Beam Wireless Service\" went into commercial operation on 25\u00a0October 1926. Beam Wireless Services from the UK to Australia, South Africa and India went into service in 1927.\nShortwave communications began to grow rapidly in the 1920s. By 1928, more than half of long-distance communications had moved from transoceanic cables and longwave wireless services to shortwave, and the overall volume of transoceanic shortwave communications had vastly increased. Shortwave stations had cost and efficiency advantages over massive longwave wireless installations. However, some commercial longwave communications stations remained in use until the 1960s. Long-distance radio circuits also reduced the need for new cables, although the cables maintained their advantages of high security and a much more reliable and better-quality signal than shortwave.\nThe cable companies began to lose large sums of money in 1927. A serious financial crisis threatened viability of cable companies that were vital to strategic British interests. The British government convened the Imperial Wireless and Cable Conference in 1928 \"to examine the situation that had arisen as a result of the competition of Beam Wireless with the Cable Services\". It recommended and received government approval for all overseas cable and wireless resources of the Empire to be merged into one system controlled by a newly formed company in 1929, Imperial and International Communications Ltd. The name of the company was changed to Cable and Wireless Ltd. in 1934.\nA resurgence of long-distance cables began in 1956 with the laying of TAT-1 across the Atlantic Ocean, the first voice frequency cable on this route. This provided 36 high-quality telephone channels and was soon followed by even higher-capacity cables all around the world. Competition from these cables soon ended the economic viability of shortwave radio for commercial communication.\nAmateur use of shortwave propagation.\nAmateur radio operators also discovered that long-distance communication was possible on shortwave bands. Early long-distance services used surface wave propagation at very low frequencies, which are attenuated along the path at wavelengths shorter than 1,000\u00a0meters. Longer distances and higher frequencies using this method meant more signal loss. This, and the difficulties of generating and detecting higher frequencies, made discovery of shortwave propagation difficult for commercial services.\nRadio amateurs may have conducted the first successful transatlantic tests in December\u00a01921, operating in the 200\u00a0meter mediumwave band (near 1,500\u00a0kHz, inside the modern AM broadcast band), which at that time was the shortest wavelength / highest frequency available to amateur radio. In 1922 hundreds of North American amateurs were heard in Europe on 200\u00a0meters and at least 20\u00a0North American amateurs heard amateur signals from Europe. The first two-way communications between North American and Hawaiian amateurs began in 1922 at 200\u00a0meters. Although operation on wavelengths shorter than 200\u00a0meters was technically illegal (but tolerated at the time as the authorities mistakenly believed that such frequencies were useless for commercial or military use), amateurs began to experiment with those wavelengths using newly available vacuum tubes shortly after World War\u00a0I.\nExtreme interference at the longer edge of the 150\u2013200\u00a0meter band \u2013 the official wavelengths allocated to amateurs by the Second National Radio Conference in 1923 \u2013 forced amateurs to shift to shorter and shorter wavelengths. However, regulations limited amateurs to wavelengths longer than 150\u00a0meters (2\u00a0MHz). A few fortunate amateurs who obtained special permission for experimental communications at wavelengths shorter than 150\u00a0meters completed hundreds of long-distance two-way contacts on 100\u00a0meters (3\u00a0MHz) in 1923 including the first transatlantic two-way contacts.\nBy 1924 many additional specially licensed amateurs were routinely making transoceanic contacts at distances of 6,000\u00a0miles (9,600\u00a0km) and more. On 21\u00a0September 1924 several amateurs in California completed two-way contacts with an amateur in New Zealand. On 19\u00a0October amateurs in New Zealand and England completed a 90\u00a0minute two-way contact nearly halfway around the world. On 10\u00a0October the Third National Radio Conference made three shortwave bands available to U.S. amateurs at 80\u00a0meters (3.75\u00a0MHz), 40\u00a0meters (7\u00a0MHz) and 20\u00a0meters (14\u00a0MHz). These were allocated worldwide, while the 10\u00a0meter band (28\u00a0MHz) was created by the Washington International Radiotelegraph Conference on 25\u00a0November 1927. The 15\u00a0meter band (21\u00a0MHz) was opened to amateurs in the United States on 1\u00a0May 1952.\nPropagation characteristics.\nShortwave radio frequency energy is capable of reaching any location on the Earth as it is influenced by ionospheric reflection back to Earth by the ionosphere, (a phenomenon known as \"skywave propagation\"). A typical phenomenon of shortwave propagation is the occurrence of a skip zone where reception fails. With a fixed working frequency, large changes in ionospheric conditions may create skip zones at night.\nAs a result of the multi-layer structure of the ionosphere, propagation often simultaneously occurs on different paths, scattered by the \u2018E\u2019 or \u2018F\u2019\u00a0layer and with different numbers of hops, a phenomenon that may be disturbed for certain techniques. Particularly for lower frequencies of the shortwave band, absorption of radio frequency energy in the lowest ionospheric layer, the \u2018D\u2019\u00a0layer, may impose a serious limit. This is due to collisions of electrons with neutral molecules, absorbing some of a radio frequency's energy and converting it to heat. Predictions of skywave propagation depend on:\nTypes of modulation.\nSeveral different types of modulation are used to incorporate information in a short-wave signal.\nAudio modes.\nAM.\nAmplitude modulation is the simplest type and the most commonly used for shortwave broadcasting. The instantaneous amplitude of the carrier is controlled by the amplitude of the signal (speech, or music, for example). At the receiver, a simple detector recovers the desired modulation signal from the carrier.\nSSB.\nSingle-sideband transmission is a form of amplitude modulation but in effect filters the result of modulation. An amplitude-modulated signal has frequency components both above and below the carrier frequency. If one set of these components is eliminated as well as the residual carrier, only the remaining set is transmitted. This reduces power in the transmission, as roughly &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 of the energy sent by an AM signal is in the carrier, which is not needed to recover the information contained in the signal. It also reduces signal bandwidth, enabling less than one-half the AM signal bandwidth to be used.\nThe drawback is the receiver is more complicated, because it must recreate the carrier to recover the signal. Small errors in the detection process greatly affect the pitch of the received signal. As a result, single sideband is not used for music or general broadcast. Single sideband is used for long-range voice communications by ships and aircraft, citizen's band, and amateur radio operators. In amateur radio operation lower sideband (LSB) is customarily used below 10\u00a0MHz and USB (upper sideband) above 10\u00a0MHz, non-amateur services use USB regardless of frequency.\nVSB.\nVestigial sideband transmits the carrier and one complete sideband, but filters out most of the other sideband. It is a compromise between AM and SSB, enabling simple receivers to be used, but requires almost as much transmitter power as AM. Its main advantage is that only half the bandwidth of an AM signal is used. It is used by the Canadian standard time signal station CHU. Vestigial sideband was used for analog television and by ATSC, the digital TV system used in North America.\nNFM.\nNarrow-band frequency modulation (NBFM or NFM) is used typically above 20\u00a0MHz. Because of the larger bandwidth required, NBFM is commonly used for VHF communication. Regulations limit the bandwidth of a signal transmitted in the HF bands, and the advantages of frequency modulation are greatest if the FM signal has a wide bandwidth. NBFM is limited to short-range transmissions due to the multiphasic distortions created by the ionosphere.\nDRM.\nDigital Radio Mondiale (DRM) is a digital modulation for use on bands below 30\u00a0MHz. It is a digital signal, like the data modes, below, but is for transmitting audio, like the analog modes above.\nData modes.\nCW.\nContinuous wave (CW) is on-and-off keying of a sine-wave carrier, used for Morse code communications and Hellschreiber facsimile-based teleprinter transmissions. It is a data mode, although often listed separately. It is typically received via lower or upper SSB modes.\nRTTY, FAX, SSTV.\nRadioteletype, fax, digital, slow-scan television, and other systems use forms of frequency-shift keying or audio subcarriers on a shortwave carrier. These generally require special equipment to decode, such as software on a computer equipped with a sound card.\nNote that on modern computer-driven systems, digital modes are typically sent by coupling a computer's sound output to the SSB input of a radio.\nUsers.\nSome established users of the shortwave radio bands may include:\nSporadic or non-traditional users of the shortwave bands may include:\nShortwave broadcasting.\nFrequency allocations.\nThe World Radiocommunication Conference (WRC), organized under the auspices of the International Telecommunication Union, allocates bands for various services in conferences every few years. The last WRC took place in 2023.\nAs of WRC-97 in 1997, these bands were allocated for international broadcasting. AM shortwave broadcasting channels are allocated with a 5\u00a0kHz separation for traditional analog audio broadcasting:\nAlthough countries generally follow the assigned bands, there may be small differences between countries or regions. For example, in the official bandplan of the Netherlands, the 49\u00a0m band starts at 5.95\u00a0MHz, the 41\u00a0m band ends at 7.45\u00a0MHz, the 11\u00a0m band starts at 25.67\u00a0MHz, and the 120\u00a0m, 90\u00a0m, and 60\u00a0m bands are absent altogether. International broadcasters sometimes operate outside the normal the WRC-allocated bands or use off-channel frequencies. This is done for practical reasons, or to attract attention in crowded bands (60\u00a0m, 49\u00a0m, 40\u00a0m, 41\u00a0m, 31\u00a0m, 25\u00a0m).\nThe new digital audio broadcasting format for shortwave DRM operates 10\u00a0kHz or 20\u00a0kHz channels. There are some ongoing discussions with respect to specific band allocation for DRM, as it mainly transmitted in 10\u00a0kHz format.\nThe power used by shortwave transmitters ranges from less than one watt for some experimental and amateur radio transmissions to 500 kilowatts and higher for intercontinental broadcasters and over-the-horizon radar. Shortwave transmitting centers often use specialized antenna designs (like the ALLISS antenna technology) to concentrate radio energy at the target area.\nAdvantages.\nShortwave possesses a number of advantages over newer technologies:\nDisadvantages.\nShortwave radio's benefits are sometimes regarded as being outweighed by its drawbacks, including:\nShortwave listening.\nThe Asia-Pacific Telecommunity estimates that there are approximately 600\u00a0million shortwave broadcast-radio receivers in use in 2002. WWCR claims that there are 1.5\u00a0billion shortwave receivers worldwide.\nMany hobbyists listen to shortwave broadcasters. In some cases, the goal is to hear as many stations from as many countries as possible \"(DXing)\"; others listen to specialized shortwave utility, or \"ute\", transmissions such as maritime, naval, aviation, or military signals. Others focus on intelligence signals from numbers stations, stations which transmit strange broadcast usually for intelligence operations, or the two way communications by amateur radio operators. Some short wave listeners behave analogously to \"lurkers\" on the Internet, in that they listen only, and never attempt to send out their own signals. Other listeners participate in clubs, or actively send and receive QSL cards, or become involved with amateur radio and start transmitting on their own.\nMany listeners tune the shortwave bands for the programmes of stations broadcasting to a general audience (such as Radio Taiwan International, China Radio International, Voice of America, Radio France Internationale, BBC World Service, Voice of Korea, Radio Free Sarawak etc.). Today, through the evolution of the Internet, the hobbyist can listen to shortwave signals via remotely controlled or web controlled shortwave receivers around the world, even without owning a shortwave radio. Many international broadcasters offer live streaming audio on their websites and a number have closed their shortwave service entirely, or severely curtailed it, in favour of internet transmission.\nShortwave listeners, or SWLs, can obtain QSL cards from broadcasters, utility stations or amateur radio operators as trophies of the hobby. Some stations even give out special certificates, pennants, stickers and other tokens and promotional materials to shortwave listeners.\nShortwave broadcasts and music.\nSome musicians have been attracted to the unique aural characteristics of shortwave radio which \u2013 due to the nature of amplitude modulation, varying propagation conditions, and the presence of interference \u2013 generally has lower fidelity than local broadcasts (particularly via FM stations). Shortwave transmissions often have bursts of distortion, and \"hollow\" sounding loss of clarity at certain aural frequencies, altering the harmonics of natural sound and creating at times a strange \"spacey\" quality due to echoes and phase distortion. Evocations of shortwave reception distortions have been incorporated into rock and classical compositions, by means of delays or feedback loops, equalizers, or even playing shortwave radios as live instruments. Snippets of broadcasts have been mixed into electronic sound collages and live musical instruments, by means of analogue tape loops or digital samples. Sometimes the sounds of instruments and existing musical recordings are altered by remixing or equalizing, with various distortions added, to replicate the garbled effects of shortwave radio reception.\nThe first attempts by serious composers to incorporate radio effects into music may be those of the Russian physicist and musician L\u00e9on Theremin, who perfected a form of radio oscillator as a musical instrument in 1928 (regenerative circuits in radios of the time were prone to breaking into oscillation, adding various tonal harmonics to music and speech); and in the same year, the development of a French instrument called the Ondes Martenot by its inventor Maurice Martenot, a French cellist and former wireless telegrapher. Karlheinz Stockhausen used shortwave radio and effects in works including \"Hymnen\" (1966\u20131967), \"Kurzwellen\" (1968) \u2013 adapted for the Beethoven Bicentennial in \"Opus\u00a01970\" with filtered and distorted snippets of Beethoven pieces \u2013 \"Spiral\" (1968), \"Pole\", \"Expo\" (both 1969\u20131970), and \"Michaelion\" (1997).\nCypriot composer Yannis Kyriakides incorporated shortwave numbers station transmissions in his 1999 \"ConSPIracy cantata\".\nHolger Czukay, a student of Stockhausen, was one of the first to use shortwave in a rock music context. In 1975, German electronic music band Kraftwerk recorded a full length concept album around simulated radiowave and shortwave sounds, entitled \"Radio-Activity\". The The's Radio Cineola monthly broadcasts drew heavily on shortwave radio sound.\nShortwave's future.\nThe development of direct broadcasts from satellites has reduced the demand for shortwave receiver hardware, but there are still a great number of shortwave broadcasters. A new digital radio technology, Digital Radio Mondiale (DRM), is expected to improve the quality of shortwave audio from very poor to adequate. The future of shortwave radio is threatened by the rise of power line communication (PLC), also known as Broadband over Power Lines (BPL), which uses a data stream transmitted over unshielded power lines. As the BPL frequencies used overlap with shortwave bands, severe distortions can make listening to analog shortwave radio signals near power lines difficult or impossible.\nAccording to Andy Sennitt, former editor of the \"World Radio TV Handbook\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, Thomas Witherspoon, editor of shortwave news site \"SWLingPost.com\" wrote that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;shortwave remains the most accessible international communications medium that still provides listeners with the protection of complete anonymity.\nIn 2018, Nigel Fry, head of Distribution for the BBC World Service Group,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDuring the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the BBC World Service launched two new shortwave frequencies for listeners in Ukraine and Russia, broadcasting English-language news updates in an effort to avoid censorship by the Russian state. American commercial shortwave broadcasters WTWW and WRMI also redirected much of their programming to Ukraine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57982", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57982", "title": "Me 163 Komet", "text": ""}
{"id": "57983", "revid": "1755837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57983", "title": "Datura stramonium", "text": "Species of flowering plant in the nightshade family\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDatura stramonium, known by the common names thornapple, jimsonweed (jimson weed), or devil's trumpet, is a poisonous flowering plant in the \"Daturae\" tribe of the nightshade family Solanaceae. Its likely origin was in Central America, and it has been introduced in many world regions.&lt;ref name= 'NPGS/GRIN'&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It is an aggressive invasive weed in temperate climates and tropical climates across the world. \"D. stramonium\" has frequently been employed in traditional medicine to treat a variety of ailments. It has also been used as a hallucinogen (of the anticholinergic/antimuscarinic, deliriant type), taken entheogenically to cause intense, sacred or occult visions. It is unlikely ever to become a major drug of abuse owing to effects upon both mind and body frequently perceived as being highly unpleasant, giving rise to a state of profound and long-lasting disorientation or delirium (anticholinergic syndrome) with a potentially fatal outcome. It contains tropane alkaloids which are responsible for the psychoactive effects, and may be severely toxic.\nDescription.\n\"Datura stramonium\" is an erect, annual, freely branching herb that forms a bush tall.\nThe root is long, thick, fibrous, and white. The stem is stout, erect, leafy, smooth, and pale yellow-green to reddish purple in color. The stem forks off repeatedly into branches and each fork forms a leaf and a single, erect flower.\nThe leaves are about long, smooth, toothed, soft, and irregularly undulated. The upper surface of the leaves is a darker green, and the bottom is a light green. The leaves have a bitter and nauseating taste, which is imparted to extracts of the herb, and remains even after the leaves have been dried.\n\"Datura stramonium\" generally flowers throughout the summer. The fragrant flowers have a pleasing odour; are trumpet-shaped, white to creamy or violet, and long; and grow on short stems from either the axils of the leaves or the places where the branches fork. The calyx is long and tubular, swollen at the bottom, and sharply angled, surmounted by five sharp teeth. The corolla, which is folded and only partially open, is white, funnel-shaped, and has prominent ribs. The flowers open at night, emitting a pleasant fragrance, and are fed upon by nocturnal moths.\nThe egg-shaped seed capsule is in diameter and either covered with spines or bald. At maturity, it splits into four chambers, each with dozens of small, black seeds.\nEtymology and common names.\nThe genus name is derived from the plant's Hindi name, , ultimately from Sanskrit , 'white thorn-apple'. The origin of Neo-Latin \"stramonium\" is unknown; the name \"Stramonia\" was used in the 17th century for various \"Datura\" species. There is some evidence that \"Stramonium\" is originally from Greek , 'nightshade' and , 'which makes mad'. It is called () in Telugu, and () in Tamil.; both of which are believed to have derived from the Sanskrit word (), meaning 'mad' or 'insane'.\nIn the United States, the plant commonly known as \"Jimsonweed\" (or, more rarely, \"Jamestown weed\"). This name derives from Jamestown, Virginia, where soldiers sent to suppress Bacon's Rebellion in the English colony of Virginia reportedly consumed the plant and spent eleven days in altered mental states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The James-Town Weed (which resembles the Thorny Apple of Peru, and I take to be the plant so call'd) is supposed to be one of the greatest coolers in the world. This being an early plant, was gather'd very young for a boil'd salad, by some of the soldiers sent thither to quell the rebellion of Bacon; and some of them ate plentifully of it, the effect of which was a very pleasant comedy, for they turned natural fools upon it for several days: one would blow up a feather in the air; another would dart straws at it with much fury; and another, stark naked, was sitting up in a corner like a monkey, grinning and making mows [grimaces] at them; a fourth would fondly kiss and paw his companions, and sneer in their faces with a countenance more antic than any in a Dutch droll.In this frantic condition they were confined, lest they should, in their folly, destroy themselves\u2014though it was observed that all their actions were full of innocence and good nature. Indeed, they were not very cleanly; for they would have wallowed in their own excrements if they had not been prevented. A thousand such simple tricks they played, and after eleven days returned themselves again, not remembering anything that had passed.\u2014\u200a\nCommon names for \"Datura stramonium\" vary by region and include thornapple, moon flower, hell's bells, devil's trumpet, devil's weed, \"tolguacha\", Jamestown weed, stinkweed, locoweed, pricklyburr, false castor oil plant, and devil's cucumber.\nRange and habitat.\n\"Datura stramonium\" is native to Central America, but was spread widely to the Old World early where it has also become naturalized. It was scientifically described and named by Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus in 1753, although it had been described a century earlier by botanists such as Nicholas Culpeper. Today, it grows wild in all the world's warm and temperate regions, where it is found along roadsides and at dung-rich livestock enclosures. In Europe, it is found as a weed in garbage dumps and wastelands, and is toxic to animals consuming it. In South Africa, it is colloquially known by the Afrikaans name ('mad seeds').\nThrough observation, the seed is thought to be carried by birds and spread in their droppings. Its seeds can lie dormant underground for years and germinate when the soil is disturbed. The Royal Horticultural Society has advised worried gardeners to dig it up or have it otherwise removed, while wearing gloves to handle it.\nToxicity.\nAll parts of \"Datura\" plants contain dangerous levels of the tropane alkaloids atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopolamine, all of which are classified as deliriants, or anticholinergics. The risk of fatal overdose is high among uninformed users, and many hospitalizations occur among recreational users who ingest the plant for its psychoactive effects. Deliberate or inadvertent poisoning resulting from smoking jimsonweed and other related species has been reported. Numerous other alkaloids have been detected at lower levels in the plant including methylecgonine in the roots, apoatropine in the stems, leaves, and other parts, and tropine in the flowers and other parts.\nThe amount of toxins varies widely from plant to plant. As much as a 20:1 variation can be found between plants, and a given plant's toxicity depends on its age, where it is growing, and the local weather conditions. A particularly strong difference has been found between plants growing in their native ranges and plants that have adjusted to growing in non-native ranges: in the latter, the atropine and scopolamine concentration may be up to 20\u201340 times lower than in the native range. It is suspected that this is an evolutionary response to lower predatory pressures. Additionally, within a given plant, toxin concentration varies by part and even from leaf to leaf. When the plant is younger, the ratio of scopolamine to atropine is about 3:1; after flowering, this ratio is reversed, with the amount of scopolamine continuing to decrease as the plant gets older. In traditional cultures, a great deal of experience and detailed knowledge of \"Datura\" was critical to minimize harm. An individual seed contains about 0.1\u00a0mg of atropine, and the approximate fatal dose for adult humans is &gt;10\u00a0mg atropine or &gt;2\u20134\u00a0mg scopolamine.\nRecently a rodent study investigating a methanolic extract derived from the whole plant reported significant behavioural and neurochemical effects. The extract induced memory deficits, along with anxiogenic and depressive-like behaviours. These effects were associated with elevated lipid peroxidation and a marked depletion of antioxidant enzymes in the brain. Histological analysis revealed disrupted neuronal morphology in the hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex, providing evidence suggestive of the plant's neurotoxic potential.\n\"Datura\" intoxication typically produces delirium, hallucination, hyperthermia, tachycardia, bizarre behavior, urinary retention, and severe mydriasis, with resultant painful photophobia that can last several days. Pronounced amnesia is another commonly reported effect. The onset of symptoms generally occurs around 30 to 60 minutes after ingesting the herb. These symptoms generally last from 24 to 48 hours, but have been reported in some cases to last as long as two weeks.\nAs with other cases of anticholinergic poisoning, intravenous physostigmine can be administered in severe cases as an antidote.\nNatural defenses.\nThese chemical production responses present in \"Datura stramonium\" function as a natural defense for the plant against dangers. Such dangers can range from biotic factors such as herbivores, pathogens, viruses, fungi and oomycetes to abiotic conditions such as drought, light, temperature, and nutrient deprivation. \"Datura stramonium\" can adjust to all these conditions through protein activity that is correlated with specific domains. Examples of this are terpenoid production to target herbivores present in multiple sites and abiotic stress responses. The abiotic responses are driven primarily by protein kinase regulatory subunits which are over-represented, expanded, and positively selected. These traits also show signs of physicochemical divergence, which put emphasis on the plant's overall adaptability. In addition to this, terpenoids play a key role in mediating plant defense responses, as they trigger terpene metabolite activity. Such activity has the effect of defending against herbivore damage through a sulfakinin (SK) domain that reduces sensitivity of taste receptors for certain insects that come into contact with the plant. Additionally, terpenoids serve as attractants for carnivorous entities that would then attack these same herbivores. Gene domains relating to this immune response have been seen in positively selected and expanded proteins in Datura stramonium. Overall, these compounds target the central nervous systems of organisms that ingest them, to deter the herbivorous behavior. Terpenoids are also used for plant-to-plant communication, which could be used for a community-wide threat response. \"Datura stramonium\" also features leaf trichomes as a defensive trait to prevent herbivory.\nThe physiology of the plant itself is important for understanding patterns of defense as its status as an annual plant limits opportunities for biomass regrowth post-destruction, due to its inability to engage regrowth meristems. This results in the leaves being susceptible to injury from even small instances of attacks. To compensate, they have a large initial size for redundancy. These leaves also have a greater longevity and ability to metabolize even when damaged. However, the way these plants have evolved to display these characteristics differs from traditional defense mechanisms, as \"Datura stramonium\" uses a combination of both resistance and growth simultaneously to address these issues, instead of relying exclusively on one or the other. It has been hypothesized that this is due to the fact that these two methods have no negative correlation between them in experimental conditions. However, resource limitations may result in a tradeoff between one method of defense versus the other. In addition, herbivores are not solely the driving force that triggers these responses within the plant. Another factor that impacts behavior is the fact that due to the wide habitat range, a number of different, region-specific response patterns have been observed. However, these defensive responses have been observed to have varying impacts on growth and fitness when put to the test against predators. Studies in ecological reserves have shown that herbivore presence can either increase or decrease plant growth, fitness, and resistance. These results can be attributed to the significant genetic variation of the individual variants present in testing.\nRegional variation.\nThe \"Datura\" genus itself has seen little research done in regards to its various genomic sequences. As such, it is difficult to track the evolution of its traits (aside from a few instances of model species), which results in a limited understanding of how it has evolved to adapt to various environmental conditions. However, some limited studies have been done into \"Datura\" diversity. \"Datura stramonium\" diverged from the rest of the \"Datura\" genus around 30million years ago. This terminal branch has the most rapidly significant, evolving gene families compared to other members of the Solanaceae family. The most recent contractions in the tree also correspond with the most recent common ancestor of the \"Datura\" species clade. However, the subspecies of \"Datura stramonium\" tend to vary greatly in regards to both gene family contractions and expansions. Variables such as immunity, response to abiotic stress, and defense against biotic threats determine gene expansion signaling, positive selection, and physicochemical divergence. Despite this, \"Datura\" genomes have high amounts of repetitive DNA elements even compared to other Solanaceae species' genomes, in addition to a recent, yet independent surge in retrotransposon expansion. Major genomic variations have been witnessed, most likely through the rapid spread of the plant's range due to human behavior. An example of this is a 59-fold difference in tropane alkaloid concentration present in different regions of Mexico. \"Datura stramonium\" regional variants have been observed to have an overall similar genome size to each other.\nTropane alkaloid evolution and implementation.\nTropane alkaloid biosynthesis is another avenue of defense with codons positively selected and expanded in the \"Datura\" branch. It is aided by the tropane alkaloid Littorine rearrangement which is very important to scopolamine and atropine/hyoscyamine production, all of which serve to debilitate any organism that would come into contact with them. \"Datura stramonium\" has the highest tropane alkaloid production level in all the Solanaceae family, with scopolamine, atropine, and anisodamine being the primary tropane alkaloids found in the plant that inhibit neurotransmitters. The \"pmt\" gene family responsible for tropane alkaloid development has been observed to have significant gene expansion in the \"Datura\" genus evolution. The least common ancestor had only one gene copy, while modern variants have a\u00a0range of three to two present, which results in higher mutation rates for traits involved with these various alkaloids. Use of tropane alkaloids, however, has had development spread out around many angiosperm families and evolutionary distances. Their presence has been reported to have arisen multiple times in Solanaceae lineages, some instances of which being independent of each other. This gives credence to the same diversification of tropane alkaloid production witnessed in the \"Datura stramonium\" regional variants. Another aspect of these varying Solanaceae lineages is that enzymes from completely different protein groups have been observed to be utilized to form similar biosynthesis reactions. In addition to this, differing protein folds and domain expressions correlate to different levels of tropane alkaloid production.\nPoisoning incidents.\nIn Australia in December 2022, around 200 people reported becoming ill after eating products containing spinach, sold mostly through Costco. \"Datura stramonium\" was identified as the contaminant, whose young leaves had been picked alongside the spinach leaves. The weed had spread due to increased rainfall. The grower, Riviera Farms, is from the Gippsland region of Victoria, and acted promptly to eradicate the weed.\nUses.\nTraditional medicine.\nOne of the primary active agents in \"Datura\" is atropine, which has been used in traditional medicine and for recreation over centuries. The leaves are generally smoked, either in a cigarette or a pipe.\nDuring the late 18th century, James Anderson, the English Physician General of the East India Company, learned of the practice and popularized it in Europe. The Chinese also used it as a form of anesthesia during surgery.\nEarly folk medicine.\nJohn Gerard's \"Herball\" (1597) states,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he juice of Thornapple, boiled with hog's grease, cureth all inflammations whatsoever, all manner of burnings and scaldings, as well of fire, water, boiling lead, gunpowder, as that which comes by lightning and that in very short time, as myself have found in daily practice, to my great credit and profit.\nWilliam Lewis reported, in the late 18th century, that the juice could be made into \"a very powerful remedy in various convulsive and spasmodic disorders, epilepsy and mania,\" and was also \"found to give ease in external inflammations and haemorrhoids\".\nHenry Hyde Salter discusses \"D. stramonium\" as a treatment for asthma in his 19th-century work \"On Asthma: its Pathology and Treatment\". Smoking of herbs, including \"D. stramonium\", was thought to provide relief for asthmatics since antiquity and into the early 20th century. The use of smoking \"D. stramonium\" to treat asthma would later wane following new understandings of asthma as an allergic inflammatory reaction, and developments in pharmacology that provided more effective treatments.\nSpiritualism and the occult.\nAcross the Americas, indigenous peoples, such as the Algonquian, Aztecs, Navajo, Cherokee, Luise\u00f1o and the indigenous peoples of Marie-Galante used this plant or other \"Datura\" species in sacred ceremonies for its hallucinogenic properties. In Ethiopia, some students and \"debtrawoch\" (lay priests), use \"D. stramonium\" to \"open the mind\" to be more receptive to learning, and creative and imaginative thinking.\nThe common name \"datura\" has its origins in India, where the sister species \"Datura metel\" is considered particularly sacred \u2013 believed to be a favorite of Shiva in Shaivism. Both \"Datura stramonium\" and \"D. metel\" have reportedly been used by some sadhus and charnel ground ascetics, such as the Aghori, as both an entheogen and ritual poison. It was sometimes mixed with cannabis, as well as highly poisonous plants like \"Aconitum ferox\", to intentionally create dysphoric experiences. The ascetics have used unpleasant or toxic plants such as these in order to achieve spiritual liberation (\"moksha\"), in settings of extreme horror and discomfort.\nAmong its visionary purposes, jimsonweed also garnered a reputation for supposed magical uses in various cultures throughout history. In his book, \"The Serpent and the Rainbow\", Wade Davis identified \"D. stramonium\", called \"zombi cucumber\" in Haiti, as a central ingredient of the concoction vodou priests use to create zombies. However, it has been noted that the process of \"zombification\" is not directly performed by vodou priests of the loa but rather by \"bokors\". In European witchcraft, \"D. stramonium\" was also supposedly a common ingredient used for making witches' flying ointment along with other poisonous plants of the nightshade family. It was often responsible for the hallucinogenic effects of magical or lycanthropic salves and potions. During the witch-phobia craze in Early Modern times in England and parts of the colonial Northeastern United States, it was often considered unlucky or inappropriate to grow the plant in one's garden, as it was considered to be an aid to incantations.\nCultivation.\n\"Datura stramonium\" prefers rich, calcareous soil. Adding nitrogen fertilizer to the soil increases the concentration of alkaloids present in the plant. \"D. stramonium\" can be grown from seed, which is sown with several feet between plants. It is sensitive to frost, so should be sheltered during cold weather. The plant is harvested when the fruits are ripe, but still green. To harvest, the entire plant is cut down, the leaves are stripped from the plant, and everything is left to dry. When the fruits begin to burst open, the seeds are harvested. For intensive plantations, leaf yields of and seed yields of are possible.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57984", "revid": "26472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57984", "title": "Hawaiian people", "text": ""}
{"id": "57985", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57985", "title": "Ian Fleming", "text": "English author (1908\u20131964)\nIan Lancaster Fleming (28 May 1908\u00a0\u2013 12 August 1964) was a British writer, best known for his postwar \"James Bond\" series of spy novels. Fleming came from a wealthy family connected to the merchant bank Robert Fleming &amp; Co., and his father was the Member of Parliament (MP) for Henley from 1910 until his death on the Western Front in 1917. Educated at Eton, Sandhurst, and, briefly, the universities of Munich and Geneva, Fleming moved through several jobs before he started writing.\nWhile working for Britain's Naval Intelligence Division during the Second World War, Fleming was involved in planning Operation Goldeneye and in the planning and oversight of two intelligence units: 30 Assault Unit and T-Force. He drew from his wartime service and his career as a journalist for much of the background, detail, and depth of his \"James Bond\" novels.\nFleming wrote his first Bond novel, \"Casino Royale\", in 1952, at age 44. It was a success, and three print runs were commissioned to meet the demand. Eleven Bond novels and two collections of short stories followed between 1953 and 1966. The novels centre around James Bond, an officer in the Secret Intelligence Service, commonly known as MI6. Bond is also known by his code number, 007, and was a commander in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. The Bond stories rank among the best-selling series of fictional books of all time, having sold over 100\u00a0million copies worldwide. Fleming also wrote the children's story \"Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang\" (1964) and two works of non-fiction. In 2008, \"The Times\" ranked Fleming 14th on its list of \"The 50 greatest British writers since 1945\".\nFleming was married to Anne Charteris. She had divorced her husband, the 2nd Viscount Rothermere, because of her affair with the author. Fleming and Charteris had a son, Caspar. A heavy smoker and drinker for most of his life, Fleming died from complications of heart disease in 1964, at the age of 56. Two of his James Bond books were published posthumously; other writers have since produced Bond novels. Fleming's creation has appeared in film twenty-seven times, portrayed by six actors in the official film series.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiography.\nBirth and family.\nIan Lancaster Fleming was born on 28\u00a0May 1908, at 27\u00a0Green Street in the wealthy London district of Mayfair. His mother was Evelyn \"Eve\" Fleming, \"n\u00e9e\" Rose, and his father was Valentine Fleming, the Member of Parliament for Henley from 1910 to 1917. As an infant he briefly lived with his family at Braziers Park in Oxfordshire. Fleming was a grandson of the Scottish financier Robert Fleming, who co-founded the Scottish American Investment Company and the merchant bank Robert Fleming &amp; Co.\nIn 1914, with the start of the First World War, Valentine Fleming joined \"C\" Squadron of Queen's Own Oxfordshire Hussars, and rose to the rank of major. He was killed by German shelling on the Western Front on 20\u00a0May 1917. Winston Churchill wrote an obituary for him that appeared in \"The Times\". Because Valentine had owned an estate at Arnisdale, his death was commemorated on the Glenelg War Memorial.\nFleming's elder brother Peter became a travel writer and married actress Celia Johnson. Peter served with the Grenadier Guards during the Second World War, was later commissioned under Colin Gubbins to help establish the Auxiliary Units, and became involved in behind-the-lines operations in Norway and Greece during the war.\nFleming had two younger brothers, Richard and Michael, who also served in the Second World War. Richard served with Scottish regiments (Lovat Scouts and Seaforth Highlanders) and was the father of author, James Fleming. Michael died of wounds in October 1940 after being captured at Normandy while serving with the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. Fleming also had a younger maternal half-sister born out of wedlock, the cellist Amaryllis Fleming (1925\u20131999), whose father was the artist Augustus John. Amaryllis was conceived during a long-term affair between John and Evelyn which had started in 1923, six years after the death of Valentine.\nEducation and early life.\nIn 1914 Fleming attended Durnford School, a preparatory school on the Isle of Purbeck in Dorset. He did not enjoy his time at Durnford; he suffered unpalatable food, physical hardship and bullying.\nIn 1921 Fleming enrolled at Eton College. Not a high achiever academically, he excelled at athletics and held the title of \"Victor Ludorum\" (\"Winner of the Games\") for two years between 1925 and 1927. He also edited a school magazine, \"The Wyvern\". His lifestyle at Eton brought him into conflict with his housemaster, E. V. Slater, who disapproved of Fleming's attitude, his hair oil, his ownership of a car and his relations with women. Slater persuaded Fleming's mother to remove him from Eton a term early for a crammer course to gain entry to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He spent less than a year there, leaving in 1927 without gaining a commission, after contracting gonorrhea.\nIn 1927, to prepare Fleming for possible entry into the Foreign Office, his mother sent him to the Tennerhof in Kitzb\u00fchel, Austria, a small private school run by the Adlerian disciple and former British spy Ernan Forbes Dennis and his novelist wife, Phyllis Bottome. After improving his language skills there, he studied briefly at Munich University and the University of Geneva. While in Geneva, Fleming began a romance with Monique Panchaud de Bottens and the couple became engaged just before he returned to London in September 1931 to take the Foreign Office exam. He scored an adequate pass standard, but failed to get a job offer. His mother intervened in his affairs, lobbying Sir Roderick Jones, head of Reuters News Agency, and in October 1931 he was given a position as a sub-editor and journalist for the company. In April 1933 Fleming spent time in Moscow, where he covered the Stalinist show trial of six engineers from the British company Metropolitan-Vickers, generally known as the Metro-Vickers Affair. While there he applied for an interview with Soviet premier Joseph Stalin, and was amazed to receive a personally signed note apologising for not being able to attend. Upon returning from Moscow he ended the engagement to Monique after his mother threatened to cut off his trust fund allowance.\nFleming bowed to family pressure again in October 1933, and went into banking with a position at the financiers Cull &amp; Co. In 1935 he moved to Rowe and Pitman on Bishopsgate as a stockbroker. Fleming was unsuccessful in both roles. The same year, Fleming met Muriel Wright whilst skiing in Kitzb\u00fchel, and began a long-term relationship with her. After her death during a World War II bombing raid in London in 1944, Fleming was overcome with guilt and remorse, and it is generally thought that she provided the inspiration for the women he was to create for his future novels. Early in 1939 Fleming began an affair with Ann O'Neill, \"n\u00e9e\" Charteris, who was married to the 3rd Baron O'Neill; she was also having an affair with Esmond Harmsworth, the heir to Lord Rothermere, owner of the \"Daily Mail\".\nSecond World War.\nIn May 1939 Fleming was recruited by Rear Admiral John Godfrey, Director of Naval Intelligence of the Royal Navy, to become his personal assistant. He joined the organisation full-time in August 1939, with the codename \"17F\", and worked out of a Room 39 at the Admiralty. Fleming's biographer, Andrew Lycett, notes that Fleming had \"no obvious qualifications\" for the role. As part of his appointment, Fleming was commissioned into the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in July 1939, initially as lieutenant, but was promoted to lieutenant commander a few months later.\nFleming proved invaluable as Godfrey's personal assistant and excelled in administration. Godfrey was known as an abrasive character who made enemies within government circles. He frequently used Fleming as a liaison with other sections of the government's wartime administration, such as the Secret Intelligence Service, the Political Warfare Executive, the Special Operations Executive (SOE), the Joint Intelligence Committee and the Prime Minister's staff.\nOn 29 September 1939, soon after the start of the war, Godfrey circulated a memorandum that, \"bore all the hallmarks of\u00a0... Lieutenant Commander Ian Fleming\", according to historian Ben Macintyre. It was called the Trout Memo and compared the deception of an enemy in wartime to fly fishing. The memo contained several schemes to be considered for use against the Axis powers to lure U-boats and German surface ships towards minefields. Number 28 on the list was an idea to plant misleading papers on a corpse that would be found by the enemy; the suggestion is similar to Operation Mincemeat, the 1943 plan to conceal the intended invasion of Italy from North Africa, which was developed by Charles Cholmondoley in October 1942. The recommendation in the Trout Memo was titled: \"A Suggestion (not a very nice one)\", and continued: \"The following suggestion is used in a book by Basil Thomson: a corpse dressed as an airman, with despatches in his pockets, could be dropped on the coast, supposedly from a parachute that has failed. I understand there is no difficulty in obtaining corpses at the Naval Hospital, but, of course, it would have to be a fresh one.\"\nIn 1940 Fleming and Godfrey contacted Kenneth Mason, Professor of Geography at Oxford University, about the preparation of reports on the geography of countries involved in military operations. These reports were the precursors of the \"Naval Intelligence Division Geographical Handbook Series\" produced between 1941 and 1946.\nOperation Ruthless, a plan aimed at obtaining details of the Enigma codes used by the German Navy, was instigated by a memo written by Fleming to Godfrey on 12 September 1940. The idea was to \"obtain\" a Nazi bomber, man it with a German-speaking crew dressed in Luftwaffe uniforms, and crash it into the English Channel. The crew would then attack their German rescuers and bring their boat and Enigma machine back to England. Much to the annoyance of Alan Turing and Peter Twinn at Bletchley Park, the mission was never carried out. According to Fleming's niece, Lucy, an official of the Royal Air Force pointed out that if they were to drop a downed Heinkel bomber in the English Channel, it would probably sink rather quickly.\nFleming also worked with Colonel \"Wild Bill\" Donovan, President Franklin D. Roosevelt's special representative on intelligence co-operation between London and Washington. In May 1941 Fleming accompanied Godfrey to the United States, where he assisted in writing a blueprint for the Office of the Coordinator of Information, the department that turned into the Office of Strategic Services and eventually became the CIA.\nAdmiral Godfrey put Fleming in charge of Operation Goldeneye between 1941 and 1942; Goldeneye was a plan to maintain an intelligence framework in Spain in the event of a German takeover of the territory. Fleming's plan involved maintaining communication with Gibraltar and launching sabotage operations against the Nazis. In 1941 he liaised with Donovan over American involvement in a measure intended to ensure the Germans did not dominate the seaways.\n30 Assault Unit.\nIn 1942 Fleming formed a unit of commandos, known as No. 30 Commando or 30 Assault Unit (30AU), composed of specialist intelligence troops. 30AU's job was to be near the front line of an advance\u2014sometimes in front of it\u2014to seize enemy documents from previously targeted headquarters. The unit was based on a German group headed by Otto Skorzeny, who had undertaken similar activities in the Battle of Crete in May 1941. The German unit was thought by Fleming to be \"one of the most outstanding innovations in German intelligence\".\nFleming did not fight in the field with the unit, but selected targets and directed operations from the rear. On its formation the unit was 30 strong, but it grew to five times that size. The unit was filled with men from other commando units, and trained in unarmed combat, safe-cracking and lock-picking at the SOE facilities. In late 1942 Captain (later Rear-Admiral) Edmund Rushbrooke replaced Godfrey as head of the Naval Intelligence Division, and Fleming's influence in the organisation declined, although he retained control over 30AU. Fleming was unpopular with the unit's members, who disliked his referring to them as \"his\" \"Red Indians\".\nBefore the 1944 Normandy landings, most of 30AU's operations were in the Mediterranean, although it is possible that it secretly participated in the Dieppe Raid in a failed pinch raid for an Enigma machine and related materials. Fleming observed the raid from HMS \"Fernie\", 700 yards offshore. Because of its successes in Sicily and Italy, 30AU became greatly trusted by naval intelligence.\nIn March 1944 Fleming oversaw the distribution of intelligence to Royal Navy units in preparation for Operation Overlord. He was replaced as head of 30AU on 6 June 1944, but maintained some involvement. He visited 30AU in the field during and after Overlord, especially following an attack on Cherbourg for which he was concerned that the unit had been incorrectly used as a regular commando force rather than an intelligence-gathering unit. This wasted the men's specialist skills, risked their safety on operations that did not justify the use of such skilled operatives, and threatened the vital gathering of intelligence. Afterwards, the management of these units was revised. He also followed the unit into Germany after it located, in Tambach Castle, the German naval archives from 1870.\nIn December 1944 Fleming was posted on an intelligence fact-finding trip to the Far East on behalf of the Director of Naval Intelligence. Much of the trip was spent identifying opportunities for 30AU in the Pacific; the unit saw little action because of the Japanese surrender.\nT-Force.\nThe success of 30AU led to the August 1944 decision to establish a \"Target Force\", which became known as T-Force. The official memorandum, held at The National Archives in London, describes the unit's primary role: \"T-Force = Target Force, to guard and secure documents, persons, equipment, with combat and Intelligence personnel, after capture of large towns, ports etc. in liberated and enemy territory.\"\nFleming sat on the committee that selected the targets for the T-Force unit, and listed them in the \"Black Books\" that were issued to the unit's officers. The infantry component of T-Force was in part made up of the 5th Battalion, King's Regiment, which supported the Second Army. It was responsible for securing targets of interest for the British military, including nuclear laboratories, gas research centres and individual rocket scientists. The unit's most notable discoveries came during the advance on the German port of Kiel, in the research centre for German engines used in the V-2 rocket, Messerschmitt Me 163 fighters and high-speed U-boats. Fleming later used elements of the activities of T-Force in his writing, particularly in his 1955 Bond novel \"Moonraker\".\nIn 1942 Fleming attended an Anglo-American intelligence summit in Jamaica and, despite the constant heavy rain during his visit, he decided to live on the island once the war was over. His friend Ivar Bryce helped find a plot of land in Saint Mary Parish where, in 1945, Fleming had a house built, which he named Goldeneye. (His main residence remained in London, in Victoria). The name of the house and estate where he wrote his novels has many possible sources. Fleming himself mentioned both his wartime Operation Goldeneye and Carson McCullers' 1941 novel \"Reflections in a Golden Eye\", which described the use of British naval bases in the Caribbean by the American navy.\nFleming was demobilised in May 1945, but remained in the RNVR for several years, receiving a promotion to substantive lieutenant-commander (Special Branch) on 26 July 1947. In October 1947, he was awarded the King Christian X's Liberty Medal for his contribution in assisting Danish officers escaping from Denmark to Britain during the occupation of Denmark. He ended his service on 16 August 1952, when he was removed from the active list of the RNVR with the rank of lieutenant-commander.\nPost-war.\nUpon Fleming's demobilisation in May 1945, he became the foreign manager in the Kemsley newspaper group, which at the time owned \"The Sunday Times\". In this role he oversaw the paper's worldwide network of correspondents. His contract allowed him to take three months' holiday every winter, which he took in Jamaica. Fleming worked full-time for the paper until December 1959, but continued to write articles and attend the Tuesday weekly meetings until at least 1961.\nAfter Anne Charteris's first husband died in the war, she expected to marry Fleming, but he decided to remain a bachelor. On 28 June 1945, she married the second Viscount Rothermere. Nevertheless, Charteris continued her affair with Fleming, travelling to Jamaica to see him under the pretext of visiting his friend and neighbour No\u00ebl Coward. In 1948 she gave birth to Fleming's daughter, Mary, who was stillborn. Rothermere divorced Charteris in 1951 because of her relationship with Fleming, and the couple married on 24 March 1952 in Jamaica, a few months before their son Caspar was born in August. Both Fleming and Ann had affairs during their marriage, she with Hugh Gaitskell, the Leader of the Labour Party and Leader of the Opposition. Fleming had a long-term affair in Jamaica with one of his neighbours, Blanche Blackwell, the mother of Chris Blackwell of Island Records.\nFleming was also friends with British Prime Minister Anthony Eden whom he allowed to stay at Goldeneye in late November 1953 due to Eden's deteriorating health.\n1950s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe scent and smoke and sweat of a casino are nauseating at three in the morning. Then the soul erosion produced by high gambling\u2014a compost of greed and fear and nervous tension\u2014becomes unbearable and the senses awake and revolt from it.\nOpening lines of \"Casino Royale\"\nFleming had first mentioned to friends during the war that he wanted to write a spy novel, an ambition he achieved within two months with \"Casino Royale\". He started writing the book at Goldeneye on 15 January 1952, and was finished writing no later than 16 February 1952, averaging more than 2,000 words per day. He claimed afterwards that he wrote the novel to distract himself from his forthcoming wedding to the pregnant Charteris, and called the work his \"dreadful oafish opus\". His manuscript was typed in London by Joan Howe (mother of travel writer Rory MacLean), Fleming's red-haired secretary at \"The Times\" on whom the character Miss Moneypenny was partially based. Clare Blanchard, a former girlfriend, advised him not to publish the book, or at least to do so under a pseudonym.\nDuring \"Casino Royale's\" final draft stages, Fleming allowed his friend William Plomer to see a copy, and remarked \"so far as I can see the element of suspense is completely absent\". Despite this, Plomer thought the book had sufficient promise and sent a copy to the publishing house Jonathan Cape. At first, they were unenthusiastic about the novel, but Fleming's brother Peter, whose books they managed, persuaded the company to publish it. On 13 April 1953 \"Casino Royale\" was released in the UK in hardcover, priced at 10s 6d, with a cover designed by Fleming. It was a success and three print runs were needed to cope with the demand.\nThe novel centres on the exploits of James Bond, an officer in the Secret Intelligence Service, commonly known as MI6. Bond is also known by his code number, 007, and was a commander in the Royal Naval Reserve. Fleming took the name for his character from that of the American ornithologist James Bond, an expert on Caribbean birds and author of the definitive field guide \"Birds of the West Indies\". Fleming, himself a keen birdwatcher, had a copy of Bond's guide, and later told the ornithologist's wife, \"that this brief, unromantic, Anglo-Saxon and yet very masculine name was just what I needed, and so a second James Bond was born\". In a 1962 interview in \"The New Yorker\", he further explained: \"When I wrote the first one in 1953, I wanted Bond to be an extremely dull, uninteresting man to whom things happened; I wanted him to be a blunt instrument\u00a0... when I was casting around for a name for my protagonist I thought by God, [James Bond] is the dullest name I ever heard.\"\nFleming based his creation on individuals he met during his time in the Naval Intelligence Division, and admitted that Bond \"was a compound of all the secret agents and commando types I met during the war\". Among those types were his brother Peter, whom he worshipped, and who had been involved in behind-the-lines operations in Norway and Greece during the war. Fleming envisaged that Bond would resemble the composer, singer and actor Hoagy Carmichael; others, such as author and historian Ben Macintyre, identify aspects of Fleming's own looks in his description of Bond. General references in the novels describe Bond as having \"dark, rather cruel good looks\".\nFleming also modelled aspects of Bond on Conrad O'Brien-ffrench, a spy whom Fleming had met while skiing in Kitzb\u00fchel in the 1930s, Patrick Dalzel-Job, who served with distinction in 30AU during the war, and Bill \"Biffy\" Dunderdale, station head of MI6 in Paris, who wore cufflinks and handmade suits and was chauffeured around Paris in a Rolls-Royce. Sir Fitzroy Maclean was another possible model for Bond, based on his wartime work behind enemy lines in the Balkans, as was the MI6 double agent Du\u0161ko Popov. Fleming also endowed Bond with many of his own traits, including the same golf handicap, his taste for scrambled eggs, his love of gambling, and use of the same brand of toiletries.\nAfter the publication of \"Casino Royale\", Fleming used his annual holiday at his house in Jamaica to write another Bond story. Twelve Bond novels and two short-story collections were published between 1953 and 1966, the last two (\"The Man with the Golden Gun\" and \"Octopussy and The Living Daylights\") posthumously. Much of the background to the stories came from Fleming's previous work in the Naval Intelligence Division or from events he knew of from the Cold War. The plot of \"From Russia, with Love\" uses a fictional Soviet Spektor decoding machine as a lure to trap Bond; the Spektor had its roots in the wartime German Enigma machine. The novel's plot device of spies on the Orient Express was based on the story of Eugene Karp, a US naval attach\u00e9 and intelligence agent based in Budapest who took the Orient Express from Budapest to Paris in February 1950, carrying papers about blown US spy networks in the Eastern Bloc. Soviet assassins already on the train drugged the conductor, and Karp's body was found shortly afterwards in a railway tunnel south of Salzburg.\nMany of the names used in the Bond works came from people Fleming knew: Scaramanga, the principal villain in \"The Man with the Golden Gun\", was named after a fellow Eton schoolboy with whom Fleming fought; Goldfinger, from the eponymous novel, was named after British architect Ern\u0151 Goldfinger, whose work Fleming abhorred; Sir Hugo Drax, the antagonist of \"Moonraker\", was named after Fleming's acquaintance Admiral Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett-Ernle-Erle-Drax; Drax's assistant, Krebs, bears the same name as Hitler's last Chief of Staff; and one of the homosexual villains from \"Diamonds Are Forever\", \"Boofy\" Kidd, was named after one of Fleming's close friends\u2014and a relative of his wife\u2014Arthur Gore, 8th Earl of Arran, known as Boofy to his friends.\nFleming's first work of non-fiction, \"The Diamond Smugglers\", was published in 1957 and was partly based on background research for his fourth Bond novel, \"Diamonds Are Forever\". Much of the material had appeared in \"The Sunday Times\" and was based on Fleming's interviews with John Collard, a member of the International Diamond Security Organisation who had previously worked in MI5. The book received mixed reviews in the UK and US.\nFor the first five books (\"Casino Royale\", \"Live and Let Die\", \"Moonraker\", \"Diamonds Are Forever\" and \"From Russia, with Love\") Fleming received broadly positive reviews. That began to change in March 1958 when Bernard Bergonzi, in the journal \"Twentieth Century\", attacked Fleming's work as containing \"a strongly marked streak of voyeurism and sado-masochism\" and wrote that the books showed \"the total lack of any ethical frame of reference\". The article compared Fleming unfavourably with John Buchan and Raymond Chandler on both moral and literary criteria. A month later, \"Dr. No\" was published, and Fleming received harsh criticism from reviewers who, in the words of Ben Macintyre, \"rounded on Fleming, almost as a pack\". The most strongly worded of the critiques came from Paul Johnson of the \"New Statesman\", who, in his review \"Sex, Snobbery and Sadism\", called the novel \"without doubt, the nastiest book I have ever read\". Johnson went on to say that \"by the time I was a third of the way through, I had to suppress a strong impulse to throw the thing away\". Johnson recognised that in Bond there \"was a social phenomenon of some importance\", but this was seen as a negative element, as the phenomenon concerned \"three basic ingredients in \"Dr No\", all unhealthy, all thoroughly English: the sadism of a schoolboy bully, the mechanical, two-dimensional sex-longings of a frustrated adolescent, and the crude, snob-cravings of a suburban adult.\" Johnson saw no positives in \"Dr. No\", and said, \"Mr Fleming has no literary skill, the construction of the book is chaotic, and entire incidents and situations are inserted, and then forgotten, in a haphazard manner.\"\nLycett notes that Fleming \"went into a personal and creative decline\" after marital problems and the attacks on his work. \"Goldfinger\" had been written before the publication of \"Dr. No\"; the next book Fleming produced after the criticism was \"For Your Eyes Only\", a collection of short stories derived from outlines written for a television series that did not come to fruition. Lycett noted that, as Fleming was writing the television scripts and the short stories, \"Ian's mood of weariness and self-doubt was beginning to affect his writing\", which can be seen in Bond's thoughts.\n1960s.\nIn 1960 Fleming was commissioned by the Kuwait Oil Company to write a book on the country and its oil industry. The Kuwaiti government disapproved of the typescript, \"State of Excitement: Impressions of Kuwait\", and it was never published. According to Fleming: \"The Oil Company expressed approval of the book but felt it their duty to submit the typescript to members of the Kuwait Government for their approval. The Sheikhs concerned found unpalatable certain mild comments and criticisms and particularly the passages referring to the adventurous past of the country which now wishes to be 'civilised' in every respect and forget its romantic origins.\"\nFleming followed the disappointment of \"For Your Eyes Only\" with \"Thunderball\", the novelisation of a film script on which he had worked with others. The work had started in 1958 when Fleming's friend Ivar Bryce introduced him to a young Irish writer and director, Kevin McClory, and the three, together with Fleming and Bryce's friend Ernest Cuneo, worked on a script. In October McClory introduced experienced screenwriter Jack Whittingham to the newly formed team, and by December 1959 McClory and Whittingham sent Fleming a script. Fleming had been having second thoughts on McClory's involvement and, in January 1960, explained his intention of delivering the screenplay to MCA, with a recommendation from him and Bryce that McClory act as producer. He additionally told McClory that if MCA rejected the film because of McClory's involvement, then McClory should either sell himself to MCA, back out of the deal, or file a suit in court.\nWorking at Goldeneye between January and March 1960, Fleming wrote the novel \"Thunderball\", based on the screenplay written by himself, Whittingham and McClory. In March 1961 McClory read an advance copy, and he and Whittingham immediately petitioned the High Court in London for an injunction to stop publication. After two court actions, the second in November 1961, Fleming offered McClory a deal, settling out of court. McClory gained the literary and film rights for the screenplay, while Fleming was given the rights to the novel, provided it was acknowledged as \"based on a screen treatment by Kevin McClory, Jack Whittingham and the Author\".\nFleming's books had always sold well, but in 1961 sales increased dramatically. On 17 March 1961, four years after its publication and three years after the heavy criticism of \"Dr. No\", an article in \"Life\" listed \"From Russia, with Love\" as one of US President John F. Kennedy's 10 favourite books. Kennedy and Fleming had previously met in Washington. This accolade and the associated publicity led to a surge in sales that made Fleming the biggest-selling crime writer in the US. Fleming considered \"From Russia, with Love\" to be his best novel; he said \"the great thing is that each one of the books seems to have been a favourite with one or other section of the public and none has yet been completely damned.\"\nIn April 1961, shortly before the second court case on \"Thunderball\", Fleming had a heart attack during a regular weekly meeting at \"The Sunday Times\". While he was convalescing, one of his friends, Duff Dunbar, gave him a copy of Beatrix Potter's \"The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin\" and suggested that he take the time to write up the bedtime story that Fleming used to tell to his son Caspar each evening. Fleming attacked the project with gusto and wrote to his publisher, Michael Howard of Jonathan Cape, joking that \"There is not a moment, even on the edge of the tomb, when I am not slaving for you\"; the result was Fleming's only children's novel, \"Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang\", which was published in October 1964, two months after his death.\nIn June 1961 Fleming sold a six-month option on the film rights to his published and future James Bond novels and short stories to Harry Saltzman. Saltzman formed the production vehicle Eon Productions along with Albert R. \"Cubby\" Broccoli, and after an extensive search, they hired Sean Connery on a six-film deal, later reduced to five beginning with \"Dr. No\" (1962). Connery's depiction of Bond affected the literary character; in \"You Only Live Twice\", the first book written after \"Dr. No\" was released, Fleming gave Bond a sense of humour that was not present in the previous stories.\nFleming's second non-fiction book was published in November 1963: \"Thrilling Cities\", a reprint of a series of \"Sunday Times\" articles based on Fleming's impressions of world cities in trips taken during 1959 and 1960. Approached in 1964 by producer Norman Felton to write a spy series for television, Fleming provided several ideas, including the names of characters Napoleon Solo and April Dancer, for the series \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" However, Fleming withdrew from the project following a request from Eon Productions, who were keen to avoid any legal problems that might occur if the project overlapped with the Bond films.\nIn January 1964 Fleming went to Goldeneye for what proved to be his last holiday and wrote the first draft of \"The Man with the Golden Gun\". He was dissatisfied with it and wrote to William Plomer, the copy editor of his novels, asking for it to be rewritten. Fleming became increasingly unhappy with the book and considered rewriting it, but was dissuaded by Plomer, who considered it viable for publication.\nDeath.\nFleming was a heavy smoker and drinker throughout his adult life, and suffered from heart disease. In 1961, aged 53, he suffered a heart attack and struggled to recuperate. On 11 August 1964, while staying at a hotel in Canterbury, Fleming went to the Royal St George's Golf Club for lunch and later dined at his hotel with friends. The day had been tiring for him, and he collapsed with another heart attack shortly after the meal. Fleming died at age 56 at Kent and Canterbury Hospital in the early morning of 12 August 1964\u2014his son Caspar's 12th birthday. His last recorded words were an apology to the ambulance drivers for having inconvenienced them, saying \"I am sorry to trouble you chaps. I don't know how you get along so fast with the traffic on the roads these days.\" Fleming was buried in the churchyard of Sevenhampton, near Swindon. His will was proved on 4 November, with his estate valued at \u00a3302,147 (equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023).\nFleming's last two books, \"The Man with the Golden Gun\" and \"Octopussy and The Living Daylights\", were published posthumously. \"The Man with the Golden Gun\" was published eight months after Fleming's death and had not been through the full editing process by Fleming. As a result, the novel was thought by publishing company Jonathan Cape to be thin and \"feeble\". The publishers had passed the manuscript to Kingsley Amis to read on holiday, but did not use his suggestions. Fleming's biographer Henry Chandler observes that the novel \"received polite and rather sad reviews, recognising that the book had effectively been left half-finished, and as such did not represent Fleming at the top of his game\". The final Bond book, containing two short stories, \"Octopussy and The Living Daylights\", was published in Britain on 23 June 1966.\nIn October 1975 Fleming's son Caspar died from a barbiturate overdose at the age of 23, and was buried with his father. Fleming's widow, Ann, died in 1981 and was buried with her husband and their son.\nWriting.\nThe author Raymond Benson, who later wrote a series of Bond novels, noted that Fleming's books fall into two stylistic periods. Those books written between 1953 and 1960 tend to concentrate on \"mood, character development, and plot advancement\", while those released between 1961 and 1966 incorporate more detail and imagery. Benson argues that Fleming had become \"a master storyteller\" by the time he wrote \"Thunderball\" in 1961.\nJeremy Black divides the series on the basis of the villains Fleming created, a division supported by fellow academic Christoph Lindner. Thus the early books from \"Casino Royale\" to \"For Your Eyes Only\" are classed as \"Cold War stories\", with SMERSH as the antagonists. These were followed by Blofeld and SPECTRE as Bond's opponents in the three novels \"Thunderball\", \"On Her Majesty's Secret Service\" and \"You Only Live Twice\", after the thawing of East\u2013West relations. Black and Lindner classify the remaining books\u2014\"The Man with the Golden Gun\", \"Octopussy and The Living Daylights\" and \"The Spy Who Loved Me\"\u2014as \"the later Fleming stories\".\nStyle and technique.\nFleming said of his work, \"while thrillers may not be Literature with a capital L, it is possible to write what I can best describe as 'thrillers designed to be read as literature'\". He named Raymond Chandler, Dashiell Hammett, Eric Ambler and Graham Greene as influences. William Cook in the \"New Statesman\" considered James Bond to be \"the culmination of an important but much-maligned tradition in English literature. As a boy, Fleming devoured the Bulldog Drummond tales of Lieutenant Colonel H. C. McNeile (aka \"Sapper\") and the Richard Hannay stories of John Buchan. His genius was to repackage these antiquated adventures to fit the fashion of postwar Britain\u00a0... In Bond, he created a Bulldog Drummond for the jet age.\" Umberto Eco considered Mickey Spillane to have been another major influence.\nIn May 1963 Fleming wrote a piece for \"Books and Bookmen\" magazine in which he described his approach to writing Bond books: \"I write for about three hours in the morning\u00a0... and I do another hour's work between six and seven in the evening. I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written\u00a0... By following my formula, you write 2,000 words a day.\" Benson identified what he described as the \"Fleming Sweep\", the use of \"hooks\" at the end of chapters to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next. The hooks combine with what Anthony Burgess calls \"a heightened journalistic style\" to produce \"a speed of narrative, which hustles the reader past each danger point of mockery\".\nUmberto Eco analysed Fleming's works from a structuralist point of view, and identified a series of oppositions within the storylines that provide structure and narrative, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEco also noted that the Bond villains tend to come from Central Europe or from Slavic or Mediterranean countries and have a mixed heritage and \"complex and obscure origins\". Eco found that the villains were generally asexual or homosexual, inventive, organisationally astute, and wealthy. Black observed the same point: \"Fleming did not use class enemies for his villains instead relying on physical distortion or ethnic identity\u00a0... Furthermore, in Britain foreign villains used foreign servants and employees\u00a0... This racism reflected not only a pronounced theme of interwar adventure writing, such as the novels of Buchan, but also wider literary culture.\" Writer Louise Welsh found that the novel \"Live and Let Die\" \"taps into the paranoia that some sectors of white society were feeling\" as the civil rights movements challenged prejudice and inequality.\nFleming used well-known brand names and everyday details to support a sense of realism. Kingsley Amis called this \"the Fleming effect\", describing it as \"the imaginative use of information, whereby the pervading fantastic nature of Bond's world\u00a0... [is] bolted down to some sort of reality, or at least counter-balanced.\"\nMajor themes.\nBritain's position in the world.\nThe Bond books were written in post-war Britain, when the country was still an imperial power. As the series progressed, the British Empire was in decline; journalist William Cook observed that \"Bond pandered to Britain's inflated and increasingly insecure self-image, flattering us with the fantasy that Britannia could still punch above her weight.\" This decline of British power was referred to in several of the novels; in \"From Russia, with Love\", it manifested itself in Bond's conversations with Darko Kerim, when Bond admits that in England, \"we don't show teeth any more\u2014only gums.\" The theme is strongest in one of the later books of the series, the 1964 novel \"You Only Live Twice\", in conversations between Bond and the head of Japan's secret intelligence service, Tiger Tanaka. Fleming was acutely aware of the loss of British prestige in the 1950s and early 60s, particularly during the Indonesia\u2013Malaysia confrontation, when he had Tanaka accuse Britain of throwing away the empire \"with both hands\".\nBlack points to the defections of four members of MI6 to the Soviet Union as having a major impact on how Britain was viewed in US intelligence circles. The last of the defections was that of Kim Philby in January 1963, while Fleming was still writing the first draft of \"You Only Live Twice\". The briefing between Bond and M is the first time in the twelve books that Fleming acknowledges the defections. Black contends that the conversation between M and Bond allows Fleming to discuss the decline of Britain, with the defections and the Profumo affair of 1963 as a backdrop. Two of the defections had taken place shortly before Fleming wrote \"Casino Royale\", and the book can be seen as the writer's \"attempt to reflect the disturbing moral ambiguity of a post-war world that could produce traitors like Burgess and Maclean\", according to Lycett.\nBy the end of the series, in the 1965 novel, \"The Man with the Golden Gun\", Black notes that an independent inquiry was undertaken by the Jamaican judiciary, while the CIA and MI6 were recorded as acting \"under the closest liaison and direction of the Jamaican CID\": this was the new world of a non-colonial, independent Jamaica, further underlining the decline of the British Empire. The decline was also reflected in Bond's use of US equipment and personnel in several novels. Uncertain and shifting geopolitics led Fleming to replace the Russian organisation SMERSH with the international terrorist group SPECTRE in \"Thunderball\", permitting \"evil unconstrained by ideology\". Black argues that SPECTRE provides a measure of continuity to the remaining stories in the series.\nEffects of the war.\nA theme throughout the series was the effect of the Second World War. \"The Times\" journalist Ben Macintyre considers that Bond was \"the ideal antidote to Britain's postwar austerity, rationing and the looming premonition of lost power\", at a time when coal and many items of food were still rationed. Fleming often used the war as a signal to establish good or evil in characters: in \"For Your Eyes Only\", the villain, Hammerstein, is a former Gestapo officer, while the sympathetic Royal Canadian Mounted Police officer, Colonel Johns, served with the British under Montgomery in the Eighth Army. Similarly, in \"Moonraker\", Drax (Graf Hugo von der Drache) is a \"megalomaniac German Nazi who masquerades as an English gentleman\", and his assistant, Krebs, bears the same name as Hitler's last Chief of Staff. In this, Fleming \"exploits another British cultural antipathy of the 1950s. Germans, in the wake of the Second World War, made another easy and obvious target for bad press.\" As the series progressed, the threat of a re-emergent Germany was overtaken by concerns about the Cold War, and the novels changed their focus accordingly.\nComradeship.\nPeriodically in the series, the topic of comradeship or friendship arises, with a male ally who works with Bond on his mission. Raymond Benson believes that the relationships Bond has with his allies \"add another dimension to Bond's character, and ultimately, to the thematic continuity of the novels\". In \"Live and Let Die\", agents Quarrel and Leiter represent the importance of male friends and allies, seen especially in Bond's response to the shark attack on Leiter; Benson observes that \"the loyalty Bond feels towards his friends is as strong as his commitment to his job\". In \"Dr. No\", Quarrel is \"an indispensable ally\". Benson sees no evidence of discrimination in their relationship and notes Bond's genuine remorse and sadness at Quarrel's death.\nThe \"traitor within\".\nFrom the opening novel in the series, the theme of treachery was strong. Bond's target in \"Casino Royale\", Le Chiffre, was the paymaster of a French communist trade union, and the overtones of a fifth column struck a chord with the largely British readership, as Communist influence in the trade unions had been an issue in the press and parliament, especially after the defections of Burgess and Maclean in 1951. The \"traitor within\" theme continued in \"Live and Let Die\" and \"Moonraker\".\nGood versus evil.\nRaymond Benson considered the most obvious theme of the series to be good versus evil. This crystallised in \"Goldfinger\" with the Saint George motif, which is stated explicitly in the book: \"Bond sighed wearily. Once more into the breach, dear friend! This time, it really was St George and the dragon. And St George had better get a move on and do something\"; Black notes that the image of St. George is an English, rather than British personification.\nAnglo-American relations.\nThe Bond novels also dealt with the question of Anglo-American relations, reflecting the central role of the US in the defence of the West. In the aftermath of the Second World War, tensions surfaced between a British government trying to retain its empire and the American desire for a capitalist new world order, but Fleming did not focus on this directly, instead creating \"an impression of the normality of British imperial rule and action\". Author and journalist Christopher Hitchens observed that \"the central paradox of the classic Bond stories is that, although superficially devoted to the Anglo-American war against communism, they are full of contempt and resentment for America and Americans\". Fleming was aware of this tension between the two countries, but did not focus on it strongly. Kingsley Amis, in his exploration of Bond in \"The James Bond Dossier\", pointed out that \"Leiter, such a nonentity as a piece of characterization\u00a0... he, the American, takes orders from Bond, the Britisher, and that Bond is constantly doing better than he\".\nFor three of the novels, \"Goldfinger\", \"Live and Let Die\" and \"Dr. No\", it is Bond the British agent who has to sort out what turns out to be an American problem, and Black points out that although it is American assets that are under threat in \"Dr. No\", a British agent and a British warship, HMS \"Narvik\", are sent with British soldiers to the island at the end of the novel to settle the matter. Fleming became increasingly jaundiced about America, and his comments in the penultimate novel \"You Only Live Twice\" reflect this; Bond's responses to Tanaka's comments reflect the declining relationship between Britain and America\u2014in sharp contrast to the warm, co-operative relationship between Bond and Leiter in the earlier books.\nLegacy.\nIn the late 1950s, the author Geoffrey Jenkins had suggested to Fleming that he write a Bond novel set in South Africa, and sent him his own idea for a plot outline which, according to Jenkins, Fleming felt had great potential. After Fleming's death, Jenkins was commissioned by Bond publishers Glidrose Productions to write a continuation Bond novel, \"Per Fine Ounce\", but it was never published. Starting with Kingsley Amis's \"Colonel Sun\", under the pseudonym \"Robert Markham\" in 1968, several authors have been commissioned to write Bond novels, including Sebastian Faulks, who was asked by Ian Fleming Publications to write a new Bond novel in observance of what would have been Fleming's 100th birthday in 2008.\nDuring his lifetime Fleming sold thirty million books; double that number were sold in the two years following his death. In 2008 \"The Times\" ranked Fleming fourteenth on its list of \"The 50 greatest British writers since 1945\". In 2002 Ian Fleming Publications announced the launch of the CWA Ian Fleming Steel Dagger award, presented by the Crime Writers' Association to the best thriller, adventure or spy novel originally published in the UK.\nThe Eon Productions series of Bond films, which started in 1962 with \"Dr. No\", continued after Fleming's death. Along with two non-Eon produced films, there have been twenty-five Eon films, with the most recent, \"No Time to Die\", released in September 2021. The Eon Productions series has grossed over $6.2 billion worldwide, making it one of the highest-grossing film series.\nThe influence of Bond in the cinema and in literature is evident in films and books including the \"Austin Powers\" series, \"Carry On Spying\" and the Jason Bourne character. In 2011 Fleming became the first English-language writer to have an international airport named after him: Ian Fleming International Airport, near Oracabessa, Jamaica, was officially opened on 12 January 2011 by Jamaican Prime Minister Bruce Golding and Fleming's niece, Lucy. The Lilly Library at Indiana University houses a collection of Fleming manuscripts and first editions as well as his personal library of rare books.\nIn 2023, it was reported that Fleming's \"James Bond\" series was being re-published, removing a number of racial slurs and references. A disclaimer was added at the beginning of each book, reading \"This book was written at a time when terms and attitudes which might be considered offensive by modern readers were commonplace. A number of updates have been made in this edition, while keeping as close as possible to the original text and the period in which it is set.\" Most of the original versions are available from Project Gutenberg Canada.\nFleming's life is the subject of the 2024 biography, \"Ian Fleming: The Complete Man\", that spans 864 pages and was completed with the help of Fleming's estate. It was written by British novelist and biographer Nicholas Shakespeare.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57986", "revid": "40774701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57986", "title": "Gladius", "text": "Roman short sword; Latin word meaning \"sword\"\nGladius () is a Latin word properly referring to the type of sword that was used by ancient Roman foot soldiers starting from the 3rd century BC and until the 3rd century AD. Linguistically, within Latin, the word also came to mean \"sword\", regardless of the type used. \nEarly ancient Roman swords were similar to those of the Greeks, called \"xiphe\" (pl., sg.: \"xiphos\"). From the 3rd century BC, however, the Romans adopted a weapon based on the sword of the Celtiberians of Hispania in service to Carthage during the Punic Wars, known in Latin as the \"gladius hispaniensis\", meaning \"Hispanic-type sword\". The Romans improved the weapon and modified it depending on how their battle units waged war, and created over time new types of \"gladii\" such as the \"Mainz gladius\" and the \"Pompeii gladius\". Finally, in the third century AD the heavy Roman infantry replaced the \"gladius\" with the \"spatha\" (already common among Roman cavalrymen), relegating the \"gladius\" as a weapon for light Roman infantry.\nA fully equipped Roman legionary after the consulships of Gaius Marius (the Marian reforms) was armed with a sword (\"gladius\"), a shield (\"scutum\"), one or two javelins (\"pila\"), often a dagger (\"pugio\"), and perhaps, in the later empire period, darts (\"plumbatae\"). Conventionally, soldiers threw \"pila\" to disable the enemy's shields and disrupt enemy formations before engaging in close combat, for which they drew the . A soldier generally led with the shield and thrust with the sword.\nEtymology.\n\"Gladius\" is a Latin masculine noun. The nominative plural of it is . However, in Latin refers to any sword, not only the sword described here. The word appears in literature as early as the plays of Plautus (\"Casina\", \"Rudens\").\n\"Gladius\" is generally believed to be a Celtic loan in Latin (perhaps via an Etruscan intermediary), derived from ancient Celtic or \"sword\" (whence modern Welsh \"sword\", modern Breton , Old Irish /Modern Irish [itself perhaps a loan from Welsh]; the root of the word may survive in the Old Irish verb \"claidid\" \"digs, excavates\" and anciently attested in the Gallo-Brittonic place name element \"cladia\"/\"clado\" \"ditch, trench, valley hollow\").\nModern English words derived from include gladiator (\"swordsman\") and \"gladiolus\" (\"little sword\", from the diminutive form of \"gladius\"), a flowering plant with sword-shaped leaves.\nPredecessors and origins.\nAccording to Polybius, the sword used by the Roman army during the Battle of Telamon in 225 BC, though deemed superior to the cumbersome Gallic swords, was mainly useful to thrust. These thrusting swords used before the adoption of the Gladius were possibly based on the Greek \"xiphos\". Later, during the Battle of Cannae in 216 BC, they found Hannibal's Celtiberian mercenaries wielding swords that excelled at both slashing and thrusting. A text attributed to Polybius describes the adoption of this design by the Romans even before the end of the war, which canonical Polybius reaffirms by calling the later Roman sword \"gladius hispaniensis\" in Latin and \"iberik\u00e9 machaira\" in Greek. It is believed Scipio Africanus was the promoter of the change after the Battle of Cartagena in 209 BC, after which he set the inhabitants to produce weapons for the Roman army.\nIn 70 BC, both Claudius Quadrigarius and Livy relate the story of Titus Manlius Torquatus using a \"Hispanic sword\" (\"gladius Hispanus\") in a duel with a Gaul in 361 BC. However, the Gladius was not yet used by the Romans in the 4th century BC, and because of that this has been traditionally considered a terminological anachronism caused by the long established naming convention. It's possible that the Celtiberian sword was first adopted by Romans after encounters with Carthaginian mercenaries of that nationality during the First Punic War (264-241 BC), not the second. In any case, the \"gladius hispaniensis\" became particularly known in 200 BC during the Second Macedonian War, in which Macedonian soldiers became horrified at what Roman swords could do after an early cavalry skirmish. It has been suggested that the sword used by Roman cavalrymen was different from the infantry model, but most academics have discarded this view.\nArguments for the Celtiberian source of the weapon have been reinforced in recent decades by discovery of early Roman \"gladii\" that seem to highlight that they were copies of Celtiberian models. The weapon developed in Iberia after La T\u00e8ne I models, which were adapted to traditional Celtiberian techniques during the late 4th and early 3rd centuries BC. These weapons are quite original in their design, so that they cannot be confused with Gallic types. As for the origin of the word \"gladius\", one theory proposes the borrowing of the word from *\"kladi\"- during the Gallic wars, relying on the principle that \"K\" often became \"G\" in Latin. Ennius attests the word \"gladius\" may have replaced \"ensis\", which until then was used mainly by poets.\nManufacturing.\nTechnique.\nBy the time of the Roman Republic, which flourished during the Iron Age, steel and the steel-making process was known to the classical world. Pure iron is relatively soft, but pure iron is never found in nature. Natural iron ore contains various impurities in solid solution, which harden the reduced metal by producing irregular-shaped metallic crystals. The \"gladius\" was generally made out of steel.\nIn Roman times, workers reduced ore in a bloomery furnace. The resulting pieces were called \"blooms\", which they further worked to remove slag inclusions from the porous surface.\nA recent metallurgical study of two Etrurian swords, one in the form of a Greek \"kopis\" from 7th century BC Vetulonia, the other in the form of a \"gladius Hispaniensis\" from 4th century BC Clusium (Chiusi), gives insight concerning the manufacture of Roman swords. The Chiusi sword comes from Romanized \"etruria\"; thus, regardless of the names of the forms (which the authors do not identify), the authors believe the process was continuous from the Etruscans to the Romans.\nThe Vetulonian sword was crafted by the pattern welding process from five blooms reduced at a temperature of . Five strips of varying carbon content were created. A central core of the sword contained the highest: 0.15\u20130.25% carbon. On its edges were placed four strips of low-carbon steel, 0.05\u20130.07%, and the whole thing was welded together by forging on the pattern of hammer blows. A blow increased the temperature sufficiently to produce a friction weld at that spot. Forging continued until the steel was cold, producing some central annealing. The sword was long.\nThe Chiusian sword was created from a single bloom by forging from a temperature of . The carbon content increased from 0.05\u20130.08% at the back side of the sword to 0.35\u20130.4% on the blade, from which the authors deduce that some form of carburization may have been used. The sword was long and was characterized by a wasp-waist close to the hilt.\nRomans continued to forge swords, both as composites and from single pieces. Inclusions of sand and rust weakened the two swords in the study, and no doubt limited the strength of swords during the Roman period.\nProduction.\nThe craftsmen with the strategic task of making the \"gladii\" were called \"gladiarii\". They were part of the Roman legions as \"fabri\", enjoying the status of \"immunes\". There were also public workshops, \"fabricae\", dedicated to the making of the \"gladii\". Epigraphic attestations of the \"gladiarii\" have been found in Italy, especially in areas of ancient metallurgic tradition such as Capua and Aquileia.\nDescription.\nThe word \"gladius\" acquired a general meaning as any type of sword. This use appears as early as the 1st century AD in the \"Biography of Alexander the Great\" by Quintus Curtius Rufus. The republican authors, however, appear to mean a specific type of sword, which is now known from archaeology to have had variants.\n\"Gladii\" were two-edged for cutting and had a tapered point for stabbing during thrusting. A solid grip was provided by a knobbed hilt added on, possibly with ridges for the fingers. Blade strength was achieved by welding together strips, in which case the sword had a channel down the centre, or by fashioning a single piece of high-carbon steel, rhomboidal in cross-section. The owner's name was often engraved or punched on the blade.\nThe hilt of a Roman sword was the \"capulus\". It was often ornate, especially the sword-hilts of officers and dignitaries.\nStabbing was a very efficient technique, as stabbing wounds, especially in the abdominal area, were almost always deadly. However, the \"gladius\" in some circumstances was used for cutting or slashing, as is indicated by Livy's account of the Macedonian Wars, wherein the Macedonian soldiers were horrified to see dismembered bodies.\nThough the primary infantry attack was thrusting at stomach height, they were trained to take any advantage, such as slashing at kneecaps beneath the shield wall.\nThe \"gladius\" was sheathed in a scabbard mounted on a belt or shoulder strap. Some say the soldier reached across his body to draw it, and others claim that the position of the shield made this method of drawing impossible. A centurion wore it on the opposite side as a mark of distinction.\nTowards the end of the 2nd century AD and during the 3rd century the \"spatha\" gradually took the place of the \"gladius\" in the Roman legions.\nTypes.\nSeveral different designs were used; among collectors and historical reenactors, the three primary kinds are known as the \"Mainz gladius\", the \"Fulham gladius\", and the \"Pompeii gladius\" (these names refer to where or how the canonical example was found). More recent archaeological finds have uncovered an earlier version, the \"gladius Hispaniensis\".\nThe differences between these varieties are subtle. The original Hispanic sword, which was used during the republic, had a slight \"wasp-waist\" or \"leaf-blade\" curvature. The Mainz variety came into use on the frontier in the early empire. It kept the curvature, but shortened and widened the blade and made the point triangular. At home, the less battle-effective Pompeii version came into use. It eliminated the curvature, lengthened the blade, and diminished the point. The Fulham was a compromise, with straight edges and a long point.\n\"Gladius Hispaniensis\".\n\"The gladius Hispaniensis\" was a Roman sword used from around 216 BC until 20 BC. Its blade had a length of , and the sword was long. The width of the sword was . It was the largest and heaviest of the \"gladii\", weighing or . This gladius was also the earliest and longest blade. It had a pronounced leaf-shape.\n\"Mainz Gladius\".\n\"The Mainz Gladius\" is made of heavily corroded iron and a sheath made of tinned and gilded bronze. The blade was long and in width. The sword was long. The sword weighed . The point of the sword was more triangular than the Gladius Hispaniensis. The Mainz Gladius still had wasp-waisted curves. The decoration on the scabbard illustrates the ceding of military victory to Augustus by Tiberius after a successful Alpine campaign. Augustus is semi-nude, and sits in the pose of Jupiter, flanked by the Roman gods of Victory and Mars Ultor, while Tiberius, in military dress, presents Augustus with a statuette of Victory.\n\"Fulham gladius\".\nThe \"Fulham gladius\" or \"Mainz-Fulham gladius\" was a Roman sword that was used after Aulus Plautius' invasion of Britain in 43 AD. The Romans used it until the end of the 1st century. The \"Fulham gladius\" has a triangular tip. The length of the blade is . The length of the sword is . The width of the blade is . The swords weighs (wooden hilt). A full size replica can be seen at Fulham Palace, Fulham.\n\"Pompeii gladius\".\nThe \"Pompeii gladius\" was named by modern historians after the Roman town of Pompeii. This type of \"gladius\" was by far the most popular one. Four examples of the sword type were found in Pompeii, with others turning up elsewhere. The sword has parallel cutting edges and a triangular tip. This is the shortest of the \"gladii\". It is often confused with the \"spatha\", which was a longer, slashing weapon used initially by mounted \"auxilians\". Over the years, the Pompeii got longer, and these later versions are called semi-\"spathes\". The length of the blade was . The length of the sword is . The width of the blade is . The sword weighs (wooden hilt).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ This is only true for the nominative case; For more information, see the Latin declension page.\nExternal links.\nThe articles in the links below often differ both in theory and in detail. They should not necessarily be understood as fully professional articles but should be appreciated for their presentational value."}
{"id": "57987", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57987", "title": "Rudolf Carnap", "text": "German-American philosopher (1891\u20131970)\nRudolf Carnap (; ; 18 May 1891 \u2013 14 September 1970) was a German philosopher who was active in Europe before 1935 and in the United States thereafter. He was a major member of the Vienna Circle and an advocate of logical positivism.\nBiography.\nCarnap's father rose from being a poor ribbon-weaver to be the owner of a ribbon-making factory. His mother came from an academic family; her father was an educational reformer and her oldest brother was the archaeologist Wilhelm D\u00f6rpfeld. As a ten-year-old, Carnap accompanied Wilhelm D\u00f6rpfeld on an expedition to Greece. Carnap was raised in a profoundly religious Protestant family, but later became an atheist.\nHe began his formal education at the Barmen Gymnasium and the Carolo-Alexandrinum Gymnasium in Jena. From 1910 to 1914, he attended the University of Jena, intending to write a thesis in physics. He also intently studied Immanuel Kant's \"Critique of Pure Reason\" during a course taught by Bruno Bauch, and was one of the very few students to attend Gottlob Frege's courses in mathematical logic.\nDuring his university years, he became enthralled with the German Youth Movement.\nWhile Carnap held moral and political opposition to World War I, he served in the German army. After three years of service, he was given permission to study physics at the University of Berlin, 1917\u201318, where Albert Einstein was a newly appointed professor. In August 1918 Carnap joined the Independent Social Democratic Party and worked as a journalist for left-wing newspapers. He then attended the University of Jena, where he wrote a thesis defining an axiomatic theory of space and time. The physics department said it was too philosophical, and Bruno Bauch of the philosophy department said it was pure physics. Carnap then wrote another thesis in 1921, under Bauch's supervision, on the theory of space in a more orthodox Kantian style, published as \"Der Raum\" (\"Space\") in a supplemental issue of \"Kant-Studien\" (1922).\nFrege's course exposed him to Bertrand Russell's work on logic and philosophy, which gave a sense of direction to his studies. He accepted the effort to surpass traditional philosophy with logical innovations that inform the sciences. He wrote a letter to Russell, who responded by copying by hand long passages from his \"Principia Mathematica\" for Carnap's benefit, as neither Carnap nor his university could afford a copy of this epochal work. In 1924 and 1925, he attended seminars led by Edmund Husserl, the founder of phenomenology, and continued to write on physics from a logical positivist perspective.\nCarnap discovered a kindred spirit when he met Hans Reichenbach at a 1923 conference. Reichenbach introduced Carnap to Moritz Schlick, a professor at the University of Vienna who offered Carnap a position in his department, which Carnap accepted in 1926. Carnap thereupon joined an informal group of Viennese intellectuals that came to be known as the Vienna Circle, directed largely by Schlick and including Hans Hahn, Friedrich Waismann, Otto Neurath, and Herbert Feigl, with occasional visits by Hahn's student Kurt G\u00f6del. When Wittgenstein visited Vienna, Carnap would meet with him. He (with Hahn and Neurath) wrote the 1929 manifesto of the Circle, and (with Hans Reichenbach) initiated the philosophy journal \"Erkenntnis\".\nIn February 1930, Alfred Tarski lectured in Vienna, and during November 1930, Carnap visited Warsaw. On these occasions, he learned much about Tarski's model-theoretic method of semantics. Rose Rand, another philosopher in the Vienna Circle, noted, \"Carnap's conception of semantics starts from the basis given in Tarski's work, but a distinction is made between logical and non-logical constants, and between logical and factual truth... At the same time, he worked with the concepts of intension and extension, and took these two concepts as a basis of a new method of semantics.\"\nIn 1931, Carnap was appointed Professor at the German University in Prague. In 1933, W. V. Quine met Carnap in Prague and discussed the latter's work at some length. Thus began the lifelong mutual respect these two men shared, one that survived Quine's eventual forceful disagreements with a number of Carnap's philosophical conclusions.\nCarnap, whose socialist and pacifist beliefs put him at risk in Nazi Germany, emigrated to the United States in 1935 and became a naturalized citizen in 1941. Meanwhile, back in Vienna, Schlick was murdered in 1936. From 1936 to 1952, Carnap was a professor of philosophy at the University of Chicago. During the late 1930s, Carnap offered an assistant position in philosophy to Carl Gustav Hempel, who accepted and became one of his most significant intellectual collaborators. Thanks partly to Quine's help, Carnap spent the years 1939\u201341 at Harvard University, where he was reunited with Tarski. Carnap (1963) later expressed some irritation about his time at Chicago, where he and Charles W. Morris were the only members of the department committed to the primacy of science and logic. (Their Chicago colleagues included Richard McKeon, Charles Hartshorne, and Manley Thompson.) Carnap's years at Chicago were nonetheless very productive ones. He wrote books on semantics (Carnap 1942, 1943, 1956), modal logic, and on the philosophical foundations of probability and inductive logic (Carnap 1950, 1952).\nAfter a stint at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton (1952\u20131954), he joined the UCLA Department of Philosophy in 1954, Hans Reichenbach having died the previous year. He had earlier refused an offer of a similar job at the University of California, Berkeley, because accepting that position required that he sign a loyalty oath, a practice to which he was opposed on principle. While at UCLA, he wrote on scientific knowledge, the analytic\u2013synthetic distinction, and the verification principle. His writings on thermodynamics and on the foundations of probability and inductive logic were published posthumously as Carnap (1971, 1977, 1980).\nCarnap taught himself Esperanto when he was 14 years of age. He later attended the World Congress of Esperanto in Dresden in 1908. He also attended the 1924 Congress in Vienna, where he met his fellow Esperantist Otto Neurath for the first time.\nIn the US, Carnap was somewhat politically involved. Carnap was a signatory of an open appeal distributed by the National Committee to Secure Justice in the Rosenberg Case to appeal for clemency in the case. He was listed as a 'sponsor' for the \"National Conference to Appeal the Walter-McCarran Law and Defend Its Victims\" organised by the American Committee for the Protection of the Foreign Born, and also for the \"Scientific and Cultural Conference for World Peace\" organised by the National Council of Arts, Sciences and Professions.\nCarnap had four children by his first marriage to Elizabeth Sch\u00f6ndube, which ended in divorce in 1929. He married his second wife, Elizabeth Ina St\u00f6ger, in 1933. Ina committed suicide in 1964.\nPhilosophical work.\nBelow is an examination of the main topics in the evolution of the philosophy of Rudolf Carnap. It is not exhaustive, but it outlines Carnap's main works and contributions to modern epistemology and philosophy of logic.\n\"Der Raum\".\nFrom 1919 to 1921, Carnap worked on a doctoral thesis called \"Der Raum: Ein Beitrag zur Wissenschaftslehre\" (\"Space: A Contribution to the Theory of Science\", 1922). In this dissertation on the philosophical foundations of geometry, Carnap tried to provide a logical basis for a theory of space and time in physics. Considering that Carnap was interested in pure mathematics, natural sciences and philosophy, his dissertation can be seen as an attempt to build a bridge between the different disciplines that are geometry, physics, and philosophy. For Carnap thought that in many instances those disciplines use the same concepts, but with totally different meanings. The main objective of Carnap's dissertation was to show that the inconsistencies between theories concerning space only existed because philosophers, as well as mathematicians and scientists, were talking about different things while using the same \"space\" word. Hence, Carnap characteristically argued that there had to be three separate notions of space. \"Formal\" space is space in the sense of mathematics: it is an abstract system of relations. \"Intuitive\" space is made of certain contents of intuition independent of single experiences. \"Physical\" space is made of actual spatial facts given in experience. The upshot is that those three kinds of \"space\" imply three different kinds of knowledge and thus three different kinds of investigations. It is interesting to note that it is in this dissertation that the main themes of Carnap's philosophy appear, most importantly, the idea that many philosophical contradictions appear because of a misuse of language, and a stress on the importance of distinguishing formal and material modes of speech.\n\"Der Logische Aufbau der Welt\".\nFrom 1922 to 1925, Carnap worked on a book which became one of his major works, namely \"Der logische Aufbau der Welt\" (translated as \"The Logical Structure of the World\", 1967), which was accepted in 1926 as his habilitation thesis at the University of Vienna and published as a book in 1928. That achievement has become a landmark in modern epistemology and can be read as a forceful statement of the philosophical thesis of logical positivism. Indeed, the \"Aufbau\" suggests that epistemology, based on modern symbolic logic, is concerned with the logical analysis of scientific propositions, while science itself, based on experience, is the only source of knowledge of the external world, i.e. the world outside the realm of human perception. According to Carnap, philosophical propositions are statements about the language of science; they aren't true or false, but merely consist of definitions and conventions about the use of certain concepts. In contrast, scientific propositions are factual statements about the external reality. They are meaningful because they are based on the perceptions of the senses. In other words, the truth or falsity of those propositions can be verified by testing their content with further observations.\nIn the \"Aufbau\", Carnap wants to display the logical and conceptual structure with which all scientific (factual) statements can be organized. Carnap gives the label \"constitution theory\" to this epistemic-logical project. It is a constructive undertaking that systematizes scientific knowledge according to the notions of symbolic logic. Accordingly, the purpose of this constitutional system is to identify and discern different classes of scientific concepts and to specify the logical relations that link them. In the Aufbau, concepts are taken to denote objects, relations, properties, classes and states. Carnap argues that all concepts must be ranked over a hierarchy. In that hierarchy, all concepts are organized according to a fundamental arrangement where concepts can be reduced and converted to other basic ones. Carnap explains that a concept can be reduced to another when all sentences containing the first concept can be transformed into sentences containing the other. In other words, every scientific sentence should be translatable into another sentence such that the original terms have the same reference as the translated terms. Most significantly, Carnap argues that the basis of this system is psychological. Its content is the \"immediately given\", which is made of basic elements, namely perceptual experiences. These basic elements consist of conscious psychological states of a single human subject. In the end, Carnap argues that his constitutional project demonstrates the possibility of defining and uniting all scientific concepts in a single conceptual system on the basis of a few fundamental concepts.\nOvercoming metaphysics.\nFrom 1928 to 1934, Carnap published papers (\"Scheinprobleme in der Philosophie\", 1928; translated as \"Pseudoproblems in Philosophy\", 1967) in which he appears overtly skeptical of the aims and methods of metaphysics, i.e. the traditional philosophy that finds its roots in mythical and religious thought. Indeed, he discusses how, in many cases, metaphysics is made of meaningless discussions of pseudo-problems. For Carnap, a pseudo-problem is a philosophical question that, on the surface, handles concepts that refer to our world while, in fact, these concepts do not actually denote real and attested objects. In other words, these pseudo-problems concern statements that do not, in any way, have empirical implications. They do not refer to states of affairs and the things they denote cannot be perceived. Consequently, one of Carnap's main aim has been to redefine the purpose and method of philosophy. According to him, philosophy should not aim at producing any knowledge transcending the knowledge of science. In contrast, by analyzing the language and propositions of science, philosophers should define the logical foundations of scientific knowledge. Using symbolic logic, they should explicate the concepts, methods, and justificatory processes that exist in science.\nCarnap believed that the difficulty with traditional philosophy lay in the use of concepts that are not useful for science. For Carnap, the scientific legitimacy of these concepts was doubtful because the sentences containing them do not express facts. Indeed, a logical analysis of those sentences proves that they do not convey the meaning of states of affairs. In other words, these sentences are meaningless. Carnap explains that to be meaningful, a sentence should be factual. It can be so, for one thing, by being based on experience, i.e., by being formulated with words relating to direct observations. For another, a sentence is factual if one can clearly state what the observations are that could confirm or disconfirm that sentence. After all, Carnap presupposes a specific criterion of meaning, namely the Wittgensteinian principle of verifiability. Indeed, he requires, as a precondition of meaningfulness, that all sentences be verifiable, which implies that a sentence is meaningful only if there is a way to verify if it is true or false. To verify a sentence, one needs to expound the empirical conditions and circumstances that would establish the truth of the sentence. As a result, it is clear for Carnap that metaphysical sentences are meaningless. They include concepts like \"god\", \"soul\", and \"the absolute\" that transcend experience and cannot be traced back or connected to direct observations. Because those sentences cannot be verified in any way, Carnap suggests that science, as well as philosophy, should neither consider nor contain them.\nThe logical analysis of language.\nAt that point in his career, Carnap attempted to develop a full theory of the logical structure of scientific language. This theory, exposed in \"Logische Syntax der Sprache\" (1934; translated as \"The Logical Syntax of Language\", 1937) gives the foundations to his idea that scientific language has a specific formal structure and that its signs are governed by the rules of deductive logic. Moreover, the theory of logical syntax expounds a method with which one can talk about a language: it is a formal meta-theory about the pure forms of language. In the end, because Carnap argues that philosophy aims at the logical analysis of the language of science and thus is the logic of science, the theory of the logical syntax can be considered as a definite language and a conceptual framework for philosophy.\nThe logical syntax of language is a formal theory. It is not concerned with the contextualized meaning or the truth-value of sentences. In contrast, it considers the general structure of a given language and explores the different structural relations that connect the elements of that language. Hence, by explaining the different operations that allow specific transformations within the language, the theory is a systematic exposition of the rules that operate within that language. In fact, the basic function of these rules is to provide the principles to safeguard coherence, to avoid contradictions, and to deduce justified conclusions. Carnap sees language as a calculus. This calculus is a systematic arrangement of symbols and relations. The symbols of the language are organized according to the class that they belong to\u2014and it is through their combination that we can form sentences. The relations are different conditions under which a sentence can be said to follow, or to be the consequence, of another sentence. The definitions included in the calculus state the conditions under which a sentence can be considered of a certain type and how those sentences can be transformed. We can see the logical syntax as a method of formal transformation, i.e., a method for calculating and reasoning with symbols.\nFinally, Carnap introduces his well-known \"principle of tolerance.\" This principle suggests that there is no moral in logic. When it comes to using a language, there is no good or bad, fundamentally true or false. In this perspective, the philosopher's task is not to bring authoritative interdicts prohibiting the use of certain concepts. In contrast, philosophers should seek general agreements over the relevance of certain logical devices. According to Carnap, those agreements are possible only through the detailed presentation of the meaning and use of the expressions of a language. In other words, Carnap believes that every logical language is correct only if this language is supported by exact definitions and not by philosophical presumptions. Carnap embraces a formal conventionalism. That implies that formal languages are constructed and that everyone is free to choose the language they find more suited to their purpose. There should not be any controversy over which language is the correct language; what matters is agreeing over which language best suits a particular purpose. Carnap explains that the choice of a language should be guided according to the security it provides against logical inconsistency. Furthermore, practical elements like simplicity and fruitfulness in certain tasks influence the choice of a language. Clearly enough, the principle of tolerance was a sophisticated device introduced by Carnap to dismiss any form of dogmatism in philosophy.\nInductive logic.\nAfter having considered problems in semantics, i.e. the theory of the concepts of meaning and truth (\"Foundations of Logic and Mathematics\", 1939; \"Introduction to Semantics\", 1942; \"Formalization of Logic\", 1943), Carnap turned his attention to the subject of probability and inductive logic. His views on that subject are, for the most part exposed in \"Logical foundations of probability\" (1950) where Carnap aims to give a sound logical interpretation of probability. Carnap thought that, according to certain conditions, the concept of probability had to be interpreted as a purely logical concept. In this view, probability is a basic concept anchored in all inductive inferences, whereby the conclusion of every inference that holds without deductive necessity is said to be more or less likely to be the case. In fact, Carnap claims that the problem of induction is a matter of finding a precise explanation of the logical relation that holds between a hypothesis and the evidence that supports it. An inductive logic is thus based on the idea that probability is a logical relation between two types of statements: the hypothesis (conclusion) and the premises (evidence). Accordingly, a theory of induction should explain how, by pure logical analysis, we can ascertain that certain evidence establishes a degree of confirmation strong enough to confirm a given hypothesis.\nCarnap was convinced that there was a logical as well as an empirical dimension in science. He believed that one had to isolate the experiential elements from the logical elements of a given body of knowledge. Hence, the empirical concept of frequency used in statistics to describe the general features of certain phenomena can be distinguished from the analytical concepts of probability logic that merely describe logical relations between sentences. For Carnap, the statistical and the logical concepts must be investigated separately. Having insisted on this distinction, Carnap defines two concepts of probability. The first one is logical and deals with the degree to which a given hypothesis is confirmed by a piece of evidence. It is the \"degree of confirmation\". The second is empirical and relates to the long-run rate of one observable feature of nature relative to another. It is the \"relative frequency.\" Statements belonging to the second concept are about reality and describe states of affairs. They are empirical and, therefore, must be based on experimental procedures and the observation of relevant facts. On the contrary, statements belonging to the first concept do not say anything about facts. Their meaning can be grasped solely with an analysis of the signs they contain. They are analytical sentences, i.e. true by virtue of their logical meaning. Even though these sentences could refer to states of affairs, their meaning is given by the symbols and relations they contain. In other words, the probability of a conclusion is given by the logical relation it has to the evidence. The evaluation of the degree of confirmation of a hypothesis is thus a problem of meaning analysis.\nClearly, the probability of a statement about relative frequency can be unknown because it depends on the observation of certain phenomena, and one may not possess the information needed to establish the value of that probability. Consequently, the value of that statement can be confirmed only if it is corroborated by facts. In contrast, the probability of a statement about the degree of confirmation could be unknown, in the sense that one may miss the correct logical method to evaluate its exact value. But, such a statement can always receive a certain logical value, given the fact that this value only depends on the meaning of its symbols.\nPrimary source materials.\nThe Rudolf Carnap Papers contain thousands of letters, notes and drafts, and diaries. The majority of his papers were purchased from his daughter, Hanna Carnap-Thost in 1974, by the University of Pittsburgh, with subsequent further accessions. Documents that contain financial, medical, and personal information are restricted. These were written over his entire life and career. Carnap used the mail regularly to discuss philosophical problems with hundreds of others. The most notable were: Herbert Feigl, Carl Gustav Hempel, Felix Kaufmann, Otto Neurath, and Moritz Schlick. Photographs are also part of the collection and were taken throughout his life. Family pictures and photographs of his peers and colleagues are also stored in the collection. Some of the correspondence is considered notable and consist of his student notes, his seminars with Frege (describing the \"Begriffsschrift\" and the logic in mathematics). Carnap's notes from Russell's seminar in Chicago, and notes he took from discussions with Tarski, Heisenberg, Quine, Hempel, G\u00f6del, and Jeffrey are also part of the University of Pittsburgh Library System's Archives and Special Collections. Digitized contents include:\nMuch material is written in an older German shorthand, the Stolze-Schrey system. He employed this writing system extensively beginning in his student days. Some of the content has been digitized and is available through the https://. The University of California also maintains a collection of Rudolf Carnap Papers. Microfilm copies of his papers are maintained by the Philosophical Archives at the University of Konstanz in Germany.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57988", "revid": "50548440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57988", "title": "Falchion", "text": "One-handed, single-edged sword\nA falchion (; Old French: \"fauchon\"; Latin: \"falx\", \"sickle\") is a one-handed, single-edged sword of European origin. Falchions are found in different forms from around the 13th century up to and including the 16th century. In some versions, the falchion looks rather like the seax and later the sabre, and in other versions more like a machete with a crossguard, then a cutlass.\nTypes.\nThe blade designs of falchions varied widely across the continent and over time. They almost always included a single edge with a slight curve on the blade towards the point on the end and most were also affixed with a quilloned crossguard for the hilt in the manner of the contemporary arming swords. Unlike the double-edged swords of Europe, few actual swords of this type have survived to the present day; fewer than a dozen specimens are currently known. A number of weapons similar to the falchion existed in Western Europe, including the Messer, hanger and the backsword. Two basic types of falchion can be identified:\nCleaver falchions.\nOne of the few surviving falchions (the Conyer's falchion) is shaped very much like a large cleaver or machete. This type is also illustrated in art. The type seems to be confined to the 13th and 14th centuries. However apart from the profile they present a very thin blade, often only thick spines, from the point with a slight taper leading near to the edge before dropping into a secondary bevel which brings the blade to a very acute edge while maintaining some durability. Current theories are that they were the anti-cloth armour weapon of the day.\nCusped falchions.\nThe majority of the depictions in art reflect a design similar to that of the \"gro\u00dfes Messer\". The Thorpe Falchion, a surviving example from England's 13th century, was just under in weight. Of its length, are the straight blade which bears a cusped or flare-clipped tip similar to the much later kilij of Turkey. This type of sword continued in use into the 16th century.\nOther falchions.\nIn addition, there are a group of 13th- and early 14th-century weapons sometimes identified with the falchion. These have a falchion-like blade mounted on a wooden shaft long, sometimes ending in a curve like an umbrella. These are seen in numerous illustrations in the mid-13th-century Maciejowski Bible.\nElmslie typology.\nProduced by bladesmith and historian James Elmslie, this typology continuously seeks to systematically classify medieval single edged swords, similar to the way Oakeshott typology addresses double edged swords of the same period. The Elmslie typology covers all types of single edged swords from the period, which encompasses all types of falchion, as well as similar sword types such as falcastro, messers, tessak, storta, early sabres, as well as transitional forms. For more information see Elmslie typology.\nStatus.\nAn unsolved mystery exists as to why there is such a large discrepancy between the frequency of falchions in period art, contrasted with the amazingly few surviving falchions from the medieval period. Currently, there are fewer than 30 confirmed surviving medieval falchions, contrasted with the thousands of straight double edged swords from the same period. Current research by James Elmslie suggests that the overrepresentation in medieval artwork may be a form of artistic short-hand to convey certain meanings, such as indicating who the story enemies are, as falchions are overrepresented in 'villainous' characters, such as biblical enemies, or non-Christian barbarians.\nFalchions are sometimes misunderstood and thought of as being similar to machetes; however, the ancient falchions that have been discovered are very thin and on average, lighter than a double-edged blade. These weapons were therefore not cleaving or chopping weapons similar to the machete, but quick slashing weapons more similar to shamshir or sabres despite their wide blade.\nUnlike Central European messers, and smaller fighting knives such as tesak which could be of very crude construction and at times were popular among the peasantry, surviving Falchions display high levels of craftsmanship, oftentimes with intricately decorated pommels of bronze, and may feature inscribed blades of latten. While some forms of falchions may blur the line between sword and tool (in particular early forms Lombardy), and are depicted being used by common infantry, surviving examples are shown to be handsome weapons of status; the Conyers falchion belonged to a landed family, and the falchion is shown in illustrations of combat between mounted knights. Some later falchions were ornate and used by the nobility; there is an elaborately engraved and gold plated falchion from the 1560s in the Wallace Collection, engraved with the personal coat of arms of Cosimo I de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57989", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57989", "title": "PLUR", "text": "Principles of rave culture\nPeace Love Unity Respect, commonly shortened to PLUR, is a set of principles that is associated with rave culture, originating in the United States. It has been commonly used since the early 1990s when it became commonplace in nightclub and rave flyers and especially on club paraphernalia advertising underground outdoor trance music parties. It has since expanded to the larger rave dance music culture as well.\nPLUR and rave culture.\nPLUR can be interpreted as the essential philosophy of life and ethical guideline for ravers and clubbers, at least insomuch as it relates to interpersonal relationships, with basic directions on how people are expected to behave at a rave gathering or in a dance club. This universalist philosophy underpinning the tribal dance culture which began circling the globe with the rise of the internet, theoretically takes precedence over any chemical or musical aspects of the rave scene. Raves represent a modern ritualistic experience, promoting a strong communal sense, where PLUR is considered an ideology. The four terms, among others \u2013 \"Peace, Love, Freedom, Tolerance, Unity, Harmony, Expression, Responsibility and Respect\" \u2013 are also part of the anonymous \"Raver's Manifesto\" (claimed to be written by Maria Pike in 2001) which has widely been spread among the international rave subculture.\nThe PLUR handshake is used in kandi bracelet trading.\nOrigins.\nPLUR is an aggregation of ideas that were part of the earlier hippie and peace movement (\"peace\", \"love\") and black and hip hop culture (\"respect\"). Specific use of the term dates to the early 1990s rave scene. One of the most influential uses of the term was made by DJ Frankie Bones in June 1993. In response to a fight in the audience of one of his Storm Raves in Brooklyn, Bones took the microphone and proclaimed: \"If you don't start showing some peace, love, and unity, I'll break your faces.\" It is also reported that as early as \"on July 4, 1990, [...] Frankie's brother and Storm Rave collaborator Adam X painted 'Peace Love Unity' on a train car\". The fourth term, \"Respect\" was championed by Laura La Gassa (wife of Brian Behlendorf).\nVariations.\nAnother variation is PLURR - Peace. Love. Unity. Respect. Responsibility.\nSeveral other variations on the same four words, but in a different order (e.g. LURP), have been proposed. However, none of these are commonly used. \nAnother variation is PLUM, with \"M\" standing for \"movement\". Also, the first three elements, \"Peace, Love, Unity\" are used separately. An example for this is the title of DJ Hype's 1996 track \"Peace, Love &amp; Unity\". \nLater incarnations and variations of PLUR can be seen in the adoption of Pronoia and also Ubuntu, with PLUR and Pronoia often being interchangeable terms, depending upon one's company. "}
{"id": "57990", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57990", "title": "Playstation 2", "text": ""}
{"id": "57991", "revid": "45584915", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57991", "title": "Linux penguin", "text": ""}
{"id": "57992", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57992", "title": "Monocoque", "text": "Structural design that supports loads through an object's external skin\nMonocoque ( ), also called structural skin, is a structural system in which loads are supported by an object's external skin, in a manner similar to an egg shell. The word \"monocoque\" is a French term for \"single shell\".\nFirst used for boats, a true monocoque carries both tensile and compressive forces within the skin and can be recognised by the absence of a load-carrying internal frame. Few metal aircraft other than those with milled skins can strictly be regarded as pure monocoques, as they use a metal shell or sheeting reinforced with frames riveted to the skin, but most wooden aircraft are described as monocoques, even though they also incorporate frames.\nBy contrast, a semi-monocoque is a hybrid combining a tensile stressed skin and a compressive structure made up of longerons and ribs or frames. Other semi-monocoques, not to be confused with true monocoques, include vehicle unibodies, which tend to be composites, and inflatable shells or balloon tanks, both of which are pressure stabilised.\nAircraft.\nEarly aircraft were constructed using frames, typically of wood or steel tubing, which could then be covered (or \"skinned\") with fabric such as Irish linen or cotton. The fabric made a minor structural contribution in tension but none in compression and was there for aerodynamic reasons only. By considering the structure as a whole and not just the sum of its parts, monocoque construction integrated the skin and frame into a single load-bearing shell with significant improvements to strength and weight.\nTo make the shell, thin strips of wood were laminated into a three dimensional shape; a technique adopted from boat hull construction. One of the earliest examples was the Deperdussin Monocoque racer in 1912, which used a laminated fuselage made up of three layers of glued poplar veneer, which provided both the external skin and the main load-bearing structure. This also produced a smoother surface and reduced drag so effectively that it was able to win most of the races it was entered into.\nThis style of construction was further developed in Germany by LFG Roland using the patented \"Wickelrumpf\" (wrapped hull) form later licensed by them to Pfalz Flugzeugwerke who used it on several fighter aircraft. Each half of the fuselage shell was formed over a male mold using two layers of plywood strips with fabric wrapping between them. The early plywood used was prone to damage from moisture and delamination.\nWhile all-metal aircraft such as the Junkers J 1 had appeared as early as 1915, these were not monocoques but added a metal skin to an underlying framework.\nThe first metal monocoques were built by Claudius Dornier, while working for Zeppelin-Lindau. He had to overcome a number of problems, not least was the quality of aluminium alloys strong enough to use as structural materials, which frequently formed layers instead of presenting a uniform material. After failed attempts with several large flying boats in which a few components were monocoques, he built the Zeppelin-Lindau V1 to test out a monocoque fuselage. Although it crashed, he learned a lot from its construction. The Dornier-Zeppelin D.I was built in 1918 and although too late for operational service during the war was the first all metal monocoque aircraft to enter production.\nIn parallel to Dornier, Zeppelin also employed Adolf Rohrbach, who built the Zeppelin-Staaken E-4/20, which when it flew in 1920 became the first multi-engined monocoque airliner, before being destroyed under orders of the Inter-Allied Commission. At the end of WWI, the Inter-Allied Technical Commission published details of the last Zeppelin-Lindau flying boat showing its monocoque construction. In the UK, Oswald Short built a number of experimental aircraft with metal monocoque fuselages starting with the 1920 Short Silver Streak in an attempt to convince the air ministry of its superiority over wood. Despite advantages, aluminium alloy monocoques would not become common until the mid 1930s as a result of a number of factors, including design conservatism and production setup costs. Short would eventually prove the merits of the construction method with a series of flying boats, whose metal hulls didn't absorb water as the wooden hulls did, greatly improving performance. In the United States, Northrop was a major pioneer, introducing techniques used by his own company and Douglas with the Northrop Alpha.\nVehicles.\nRace cars.\nIn motor racing, the safety of the driver depends on the car body, which must meet stringent regulations, and only a few cars have been built with monocoque structures, despite their benefit of lower weight. Lotus introduced the design in Formula racing, where it is now the standard, on its 1962 Lotus 25 Formula One race car, which had an aluminum alloy monocoque body-chassis, and McLaren was the first to use carbon-fiber-reinforced polymers to construct the monocoque of the 1981 McLaren MP4/1. In 1990 the Jaguar XJR-15 became the first production car with a carbon-fiber monocoque.\nRoad cars.\nThe term \"monocoque\" is frequently misapplied to unibody cars. Commercial car bodies are almost never true monocoques but instead use the unibody system (also referred to as unitary construction, unitary body\u2013chassis or body\u2013frame integral construction), in which the body of the vehicle, its floor pan, and chassis form a single structure, while the skin adds relatively little strength or stiffness.\nArmoured vehicles.\nSome armoured fighting vehicles use a monocoque structure with a body shell built up from armour plates, rather than attaching them to a frame. This reduces weight for a given amount of armour. Examples include the German TPz Fuchs and RG-33.\nTwo-wheeled vehicles.\nFrench industrialist and engineer Georges Roy attempted in the 1920s to improve on the bicycle-inspired motorcycle frames of the day, which lacked rigidity. This limited their handling and therefore performance. He applied for a patent in 1926, and at the 1929 Paris Automotive Show unveiled his new motorcycle, the Art-Deco styled 1930 Majestic. Its new type of monocoque body solved the problems he had addressed, and along with better rigidity it did double-duty, as frame and bodywork provided some protection from the elements. Strictly considered, it was more of a semi-monocoque, as it used a box-section, pressed-steel frame with twin side rails riveted together via crossmembers, along with floor pans and rear and front bulkheads.\nA Piatti light scooter was produced in the 1950s using a monocoque hollow shell of sheet-steel pressings welded together, into which the engine and transmission were installed from underneath. The machine could be tipped onto its side, resting on the bolt-on footboards for mechanical access.\nA monocoque framed scooter was produced by Yamaha from 1960\u20131962. Model MF-1 was powered by a 50\u00a0cc engine with a three-speed transmission and a fuel tank incorporated into the frame.\nA monocoque-framed motorcycle was developed by Spanish manufacturer Ossa for the 1967 Grand Prix motorcycle racing season. Although the single-cylinder Ossa had less than its rivals, it was lighter and its monocoque frame was much stiffer than conventional motorcycle frames, giving it superior agility on the racetrack. Ossa won four Grands Prix races with the monocoque bike before their rider died after a crash during the 250\u00a0cc event at the 1970 Isle of Man TT, causing the Ossa factory to withdraw from Grand Prix competition.\nNotable designers such as Eric Offenstadt and Dan Hanebrink created unique monocoque designs for racing in the early 1970s. The F750 event at the 1973 Isle of Man TT races was won by Peter Williams on the monocoque-framed John Player Special that he helped to design based on Norton Commando. Honda also experimented with the NR500, a monocoque Grand Prix racing motorcycle in 1979. The bike had other innovative features, including an engine with oval shaped cylinders, and eventually succumbed to the problems associated with attempting to develop too many new technologies at once. In 1987 John Britten developed the Aero-D One, featuring a composite monocoque chassis that weighed only .\nAn aluminium monocoque frame was used for the first time on a mass-produced motorcycle from 2000 on Kawasaki's ZX-12R, their flagship production sportbike aimed at being the fastest production motorcycle. It was described by \"Cycle World\" in 2000 as a \"monocoque backbone ... a single large diameter beam\" and \"Fabricated from a combination of castings and sheet-metal stampings\".\nSingle-piece carbon fiber bicycle frames are sometimes described as monocoques; however as most use components to form a frame structure (even if molded in a single piece), these are frames not monocoques, and the pedal-cycle industry continues to refer to them as framesets.\nBike.\nThe Lotus Type 108, a monocoque carbon-fiber superbike, gained fame when Chris Boardman won the individual pursuit gold medal at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics. Its design was so innovative that it was subsequently restricted by new regulations.\nRailroads.\nThe P40DC, P42DC and P32ACDM all utilize a monocoque shell.\nRockets.\nVarious rockets have used pressure-stabilized monocoque designs, such as Atlas and Falcon 1. The Atlas was very light since a major portion of its structural support was provided by its single-wall steel balloon fuel tanks, which hold their shape while under acceleration by internal pressure. Balloon tanks are not true monocoques but act in the same way as inflatable shells. A balloon tank skin only handles tensile forces while compression is resisted by internal liquid pressure in a way similar to semi-monocoques braced by a solid frame. This becomes obvious when internal pressure is lost and the structure collapses. Monocoque tanks can also be cheaper to manufacture than more traditional orthogrids. Blue Origin's upcoming New Glenn launch vehicle will use monocoque construction on its second stage despite the mass penalty in order to reduce the cost of production. This is especially important when the stage is expendable, as with the New Glenn second stage.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57993", "revid": "50454883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57993", "title": "Tragedy", "text": "Genre of drama based on human suffering\nA tragedy is a genre of drama based on human suffering and, mainly, the terrible or sorrowful events that befall a main character or cast of characters. Traditionally, the intention of tragedy is to invoke an accompanying catharsis, or a \"pain [that] awakens pleasure,\" for the audience. While many cultures have developed forms that provoke this paradoxical response, the term \"tragedy\" often refers to a specific tradition of drama that has played a unique and important role historically in the self-definition of Western civilization. That tradition has been multiple and discontinuous, yet the term has often been used to invoke a powerful effect of cultural identity and historical continuity\u2014\"the Greeks and the Elizabethans, in one cultural form; Hellenes and Christians, in a common activity,\" as Raymond Williams puts it.\nOriginating in the theatre of ancient Greece 2500 years ago, where only a fraction of the works of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides survive, as well as many fragments from other poets, and the later Roman tragedies of Seneca; through its singular articulations in the works of Shakespeare, Lope de Vega, Jean Racine, and Friedrich Schiller to the more recent naturalistic tragedy of Henrik Ibsen and August Strindberg; Nurul Momen's Nemesis' tragic vengeance &amp; Samuel Beckett's modernist meditations on death, loss and suffering; Heiner M\u00fcller postmodernist reworkings of the tragic canon, tragedy has remained an important site of cultural experimentation, negotiation, struggle, and change. A long line of philosophers\u2014which includes Plato, Aristotle, Saint Augustine, Voltaire, Hume, Diderot, Hegel, Schopenhauer, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Freud, Benjamin, Camus, Lacan, and Deleuze\u2014have analysed, speculated upon, and criticised the genre.\nIn the wake of Aristotle's \"Poetics\" (335 BCE), tragedy has been used to make genre distinctions, whether at the scale of poetry in general (where the tragic divides against epic and lyric) or at the scale of the drama (where tragedy is opposed to comedy). In the modern era, tragedy has also been defined against drama, melodrama, the tragicomic, and epic theatre. Drama, in the narrow sense, cuts across the traditional division between comedy and tragedy in an anti- or a-generic deterritorialization from the mid-19th century onwards. Both Bertolt Brecht and Augusto Boal define their epic theatre projects (non-Aristotelian drama and Theatre of the Oppressed, respectively) against models of tragedy. Taxidou, however, reads epic theatre as an incorporation of tragic functions and its treatments of mourning and speculation.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"tragedy\" appears to have been used to describe different phenomena at different times. It derives from Ancient Greek \"goat song\", which comes from \u03c4\u03c1\u03ac\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2 \"tragos\" \"he-goat\" and \u1fa0\u03b4\u03ae \"\u014did\u1e17\" \"singing, ode.\" Scholars suspect this may be traced to a time when a goat was either the prize in a competition of choral dancing or was what a chorus danced around prior to the animal's ritual sacrifice. In another view on the etymology, Athenaeus of Naucratis (2nd\u20133rd century CE) says that the original form of the word was \"trygodia\" from \"trygos\" (grape harvest) and \"ode\" (song), because those events were first introduced during grape harvest.\nWriting in 335 BCE (long after the Golden Age of 5th-century Athenian tragedy), Aristotle provides the earliest surviving explanation for the origin of the dramatic art form in his \"Poetics\", in which he argues that tragedy developed from the improvisations of the leader of choral dithyrambs (hymns sung and danced in praise of Dionysos, the god of wine and fertility):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anyway, arising from an improvisatory beginning (both tragedy and comedy\u2014tragedy from the leaders of the dithyramb, and comedy from the leaders of the phallic processions which even now continue as a custom in many of our cities), [tragedy] grew little by little, as [the poets] developed whatever [new part] of it had appeared; and, passing through many changes, tragedy came to a halt, since it had attained its own nature.\u2014\u200a\nIn the same work, Aristotle attempts to provide a scholastic definition of what tragedy is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tragedy is, then, an enactment of a deed that is important and complete, and of [a certain] magnitude, by means of language enriched [with ornaments], each used separately in the different parts [of the play]: it is enacted, not [merely] recited, and through pity and fear it effects relief (catharsis) to such [and similar] emotions. \u2014\u200a\nThere is some dissent to the dithyrambic origins of tragedy, mostly based on the differences between the shapes of their choruses and styles of dancing. A common descent from pre-Hellenic fertility and burial rites has been suggested. Friedrich Nietzsche discussed the origins of Greek tragedy in his early book \"The Birth of Tragedy\" (1872). Here, he suggests the name originates in the use of a chorus of goat-like satyrs in the original dithyrambs from which the tragic genre developed.\nScott Scullion writes: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is abundant evidence for tragoidia understood as \"song for the prize goat\". The best-known evidence is Horace, Ars poetica 220-24 (\"he who with a tragic song competed for a mere goat\"); the earliest is the Parian Marble, a chronicle inscribed about 264/63 BCE, which records, under a date between 538 and 528 BCE: \"Thespis is the poet ... first produced ... and as prize was established the billy goat\" (FrGHist 239A, epoch 43); the clearest is Eustathius 1769.45: \"They called those competing tragedians, clearly because of the song over the billy goat\"...\nGreek.\nAthenian tragedy\u2014the oldest surviving form of tragedy\u2014is a type of dance-drama that formed an important part of the theatrical culture of the city-state. Having emerged sometime during the 6th century BCE, it flowered during the 5th century BCE (from the end of which it began to spread throughout the Greek world), and continued to be popular until the beginning of the Hellenistic period. No tragedies from the 6th century and only 32 of the more than a thousand that were performed in the 5th century have survived. We have complete texts extant by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. Aeschylus' \"The Persians\" is recognized to be the earliest extant Greek tragedy, and as such it is doubly unique among the extant ancient dramas.\nAthenian tragedies were performed in late March/early April at an annual state religious festival in honor of Dionysus. The presentations took the form of a contest between three playwrights, who presented their works on three successive days. Each playwright offered a tetralogy consisting of three tragedies and a concluding comic piece called a satyr play. The four plays sometimes featured linked stories. Only one complete trilogy of tragedies has survived, the \"Oresteia\" of Aeschylus. The Greek theatre was in the open air, on the side of a hill, and performances of a trilogy and satyr play probably lasted most of the day. Performances were apparently open to all citizens, including women, but evidence is scant. The theatre of Dionysus at Athens probably held around 12,000 people.\nAll of the choral parts were sung (to the accompaniment of an \"aulos\") and some of the actors' answers to the chorus were sung as well. The play as a whole was composed in various verse metres. All actors were male and wore masks. A Greek chorus danced as well as sang, though no one knows exactly what sorts of steps the chorus performed as it sang. Choral songs in tragedy are often divided into three sections: strophe (\"turning, circling\"), antistrophe (\"counter-turning, counter-circling\") and epode (\"after-song\").\nMany ancient Greek tragedians employed the \"ekkykl\u00eama\" as a theatrical device, which was a platform hidden behind the scene that could be rolled out to display the aftermath of some event which had happened out of sight of the audience. This event was frequently a brutal murder of some sort, an act of violence which could not be effectively portrayed visually, but an action of which the other characters must see the effects for it to have meaning and emotional resonance. A prime example of the use of the \"ekkykl\u00eama\" is after the murder of Agamemnon in the first play of Aeschylus' \"Oresteia\", when the king's butchered body is wheeled out in a grand display for all to see. Variations on the \"ekkykl\u00eama\" are used in tragedies and other forms to this day, as writers still find it a useful and often powerful device for showing the consequences of extreme human actions. Another such device was a crane, the mechane, which served to hoist a god or goddess on stage when they were supposed to arrive flying. This device gave origin to the phrase \"deus ex machina\" (\"god out of a machine\"), that is, the surprise intervention of an unforeseen external factor that changes the outcome of an event.\nRoman.\nFollowing the expansion of the Roman Republic (509\u201327 BCE) into several Greek territories between 270 and 240 BCE, Rome encountered Greek tragedy. From the later years of the republic and by means of the Roman Empire (27 BCE-476 CE), theatre spread west across Europe, around the Mediterranean and even reached Britain. While Greek tragedy continued to be performed throughout the Roman period, the year 240 BCE marks the beginning of regular Roman drama. Livius Andronicus began to write Roman tragedies, thus creating some of the first important works of Roman literature. Five years later, Gnaeus Naevius also began to write tragedies (though he was more appreciated for his comedies). No complete early Roman tragedy survives, though it was highly regarded in its day; historians know of three other early tragic playwrights\u2014Quintus Ennius, Marcus Pacuvius and Lucius Accius.\nFrom the time of the empire, the tragedies of two playwrights survive\u2014one is an unknown author, while the other is the Stoic philosopher Seneca. Nine of Seneca's tragedies survive, all of which are \"fabula crepidata\" (tragedies adapted from Greek originals); his \"Phaedra\", for example, was based on Euripides' \"Hippolytus\". Historians do not know who wrote the only extant example of the \"fabula praetexta\" (tragedies based on Roman subjects), \"Octavia\", but in former times it was mistakenly attributed to Seneca due to his appearance as a character in the tragedy.\nSeneca's tragedies rework those of all three of the Athenian tragic playwrights whose work has survived. Probably meant to be recited at elite gatherings, they differ from the Greek versions with their long declamatory, narrative accounts of action, their obtrusive moralizing, and their bombastic rhetoric. They dwell on detailed accounts of horrible deeds and contain long reflective soliloquies. Though the gods rarely appear in these plays, ghosts and witches are abound. Senecan tragedies explore ideas of revenge, the occult, the supernatural, suicide, blood and gore. The Renaissance scholar Julius Caesar Scaliger (1484\u20131558), who knew both Latin and Greek, preferred Seneca to Euripides.\nRenaissance.\nInfluence of Greek and Roman.\nClassical Greek drama was largely forgotten in Western Europe from the Middle Ages to the beginning of the 16th century. Medieval theatre was dominated by mystery plays, morality plays, farces and miracle plays. In Italy, the models for tragedy in the later Middle Ages were Roman, particularly the works of Seneca, interest in which was reawakened by the Paduan Lovato de' Lovati (1241\u20131309). His pupil Albertino Mussato (1261\u20131329), also of Padua, in 1315 wrote the Latin verse tragedy \"Eccerinis\", which uses the story of the tyrant Ezzelino III da Romano to highlight the danger to Padua posed by Cangrande della Scala of Verona. It was the first secular tragedy written since Roman times, and may be considered the first Italian tragedy identifiable as a Renaissance work. The earliest tragedies to employ purely classical themes are the \"Achilles\" written before 1390 by Antonio Loschi of Vicenza (c.1365\u20131441) and the \"Progne\" of the Venetian Gregorio Correr (1409\u20131464) which dates from 1428 to 1429.\nIn 1515 Gian Giorgio Trissino (1478\u20131550) of Vicenza wrote his tragedy \"Sophonisba\" in the vernacular that would later be called Italian. Drawn from Livy's account of Sophonisba, the Carthaginian princess who drank poison to avoid being taken by the Romans, it adheres closely to classical rules. It was soon followed by the \"Oreste\" and \"Rosmunda\" of Trissino's friend, the Florentine Giovanni di Bernardo Rucellai (1475\u20131525). Both were completed by early 1516 and are based on classical Greek models, \"Rosmunda\" on the \"Hecuba\" of Euripides, and \"Oreste\" on the \"Iphigenia in Tauris\" of the same author; like \"Sophonisba\", they are in Italian and in blank (unrhymed) hendecasyllables. Another of the first of all modern tragedies is \"A Castro\", by Portuguese poet and playwright Ant\u00f3nio Ferreira, written around 1550 (but only published in 1587) in polymetric verse (most of it being blank hendecasyllables), dealing with the murder of In\u00eas de Castro, one of the most dramatic episodes in Portuguese history. Although these three Italian plays are often cited, separately or together, as being the first regular tragedies in modern times, as well as the earliest substantial works to be written in blank hendecasyllables, they were apparently preceded by two other works in the vernacular: \"Pamfila\" or \"Filostrato e Panfila\" written in 1498 or 1508 by Antonio Cammelli (Antonio da Pistoia); and a \"Sophonisba\" by Galeotto del Carretto of 1502.\nFrom about 1500 printed copies, in the original languages, of the works of Sophocles, Seneca, and Euripides, as well as comedic writers such as Aristophanes, Terence and Plautus, were available in Europe and the next forty years saw humanists and poets translating and adapting their tragedies. In the 1540s, the European university setting (and especially, from 1553 on, the Jesuit colleges) became host to a Neo-Latin theatre (in Latin) written by scholars. The influence of Seneca was particularly strong in its humanist tragedy. His plays, with their ghosts, lyrical passages and rhetorical oratory, brought a concentration on rhetoric and language over dramatic action to many humanist tragedies.\nThe most important sources for French tragic theatre in the Renaissance were the example of Seneca and the precepts of Horace and Aristotle (and contemporary commentaries by Julius Caesar Scaliger and Lodovico Castelvetro), although plots were taken from classical authors such as Plutarch, Suetonius, etc., from the Bible, from contemporary events and from short story collections (Italian, French and Spanish). The Greek tragic authors (Sophocles and Euripides) would become increasingly important as models by the middle of the 17th century. Important models were also supplied by the Spanish Golden Age playwrights Pedro Calder\u00f3n de la Barca, Tirso de Molina and Lope de Vega, many of whose works were translated and adapted for the French stage.\nBritain.\nBritish tragedy, particularly in the Elizabethan and Jacobean periods, diverged from classical models in both form and theme. While influenced by Senecan drama, British tragedies frequently defied the unities of time, place, and action, favoring a more flexible dramatic structure. This allowed for a deeper exploration of psychological complexity, political instability, and moral ambiguity.\nRather than adhering to neoclassical ideals, British tragedies frequently blended high and low characters and adopted tragicomic tones, contributing to the development of a distinct national tradition. The chaotic structure and social hybridity of many of these plays mirrored the turbulent political and religious transformations of the time.\nThe common forms are the:\nIn English, the most famous and most successful tragedies are those of William Shakespeare and his Elizabethan contemporaries. Shakespeare's tragedies include:\nWilliam Shakespeare expanded the tragedy genre further by integrating elements of comedy, history, and philosophy into his tragedies. His works such as \"King Lear\", \"Hamlet,\" and \"Macbeth\" are noted for their interiority use of soliloquy, and exploration of fate, madness and human agency.\nA contemporary of Shakespeare, Christopher Marlowe, also wrote examples of tragedy in English, notably:\nChristopher Marlowe's \"Doctor Faustus\" merges medieval morality traditions with Renaissance humanism, portraying a tragic protagonist who seeks knowledge and power at the expense of salvation.\nJohn Webster (1580?\u20131635?), also wrote famous plays of the genre:\nDomestic tragedy.\nDomestic tragedies are tragedies in which the tragic protagonists are ordinary middle-class or working-class individuals. This subgenre contrasts with classical and Neoclassical tragedy, in which the protagonists are of kingly or aristocratic rank and their downfall is an affair of state as well as a personal matter.\nThe Ancient Greek theorist Aristotle had argued that tragedy should concern only great individuals with great minds and souls, because their catastrophic downfall would be more emotionally powerful to the audience; only comedy should depict middle-class people. Domestic tragedy breaks with Aristotle's precepts, taking as its subjects merchants or citizens whose lives have less consequence in the wider world.\nThe advent of the domestic tragedy ushered in the first phase shift of the genre focusing less on the Aristotelian definition of the genre and more on the definition of tragedy on the scale of the drama, where tragedy is opposed to comedy i.e. melancholic stories. Although the utilization of key elements such as suffering, hamartia, morality, and spectacle ultimately ties this variety of tragedy to all the rest. This variant of tragedy noticeably had a larger number of stories that featured characters' downfalls being due to circumstances out of their control - a feature first established by the tragedies of Shakespeare - and less due to their own personal flaws.\nThis variant of tragedy has led to the evolution and development of tragedies of the modern era especially those past the mid-1800s such as the works of Arthur Miller, Eugene O'Neill and Henrik Ibsen. This variant of tragedy is especially popular in the modern age due to its characters being more relatable to mass audiences and is the most common form of tragedy adapted into modern day television programs, books, films, theatrical plays, etc. Newly dealt with themes that sprang forth from the Domestic tragedy movement include: wrongful convictions and executions, poverty, starvation, addiction, alcoholism, debt, structural abuse, child abuse, crime, domestic violence, social shunning, depression, and loneliness.\nClassical Domestic tragedies include:\nOpera.\nContemporary with Shakespeare, an entirely different approach to facilitating the rebirth of tragedy was taken in Italy. Jacopo Peri, in the preface to his \"Euridice\" refers to \"the ancient Greeks and Romans (who in the opinion of many sang their staged tragedies throughout in representing them on stage).\" The attempts of Peri and his contemporaries to recreate ancient tragedy gave rise to the new Italian musical genre of opera. In France, tragic operatic works from the time of Lully to about that of Gluck were not called opera, but \"trag\u00e9die en musique\" (\"tragedy in music\") or some similar name; the \"trag\u00e9die en musique\" is regarded as a distinct musical genre. Some later operatic composers have also shared Peri's aims: Richard Wagner's concept of \"Gesamtkunstwerk\" (\"integrated work of art\"), for example, was intended as a return to the ideal of Greek tragedy in which all the arts were blended in service of the drama. Nietzsche, in his \"The Birth of Tragedy\" (1872) was to support Wagner in his claims to be a successor of the ancient dramatists.\nNeo-classical.\nFor much of the 17th century, Pierre Corneille, who made his mark on the world of tragedy with plays like \"M\u00e9d\u00e9e\" (1635) and \"Le Cid\" (1636), was the most successful writer of French tragedies. Corneille's tragedies were strangely un-tragic (his first version of \"Le Cid\" was even listed as a tragicomedy), for they had happy endings. In his theoretical works on theatre, Corneille redefined both comedy and tragedy around the following suppositions:\nCorneille continued to write plays through 1674 (mainly tragedies, but also something he called \"heroic comedies\") and many continued to be successes, although the \"irregularities\" of his theatrical methods were increasingly criticised (notably by Fran\u00e7ois H\u00e9delin, abb\u00e9 d'Aubignac) and the success of Jean Racine from the late 1660s signalled the end of his preeminence.\nJean Racine's tragedies\u2014inspired by Greek myths, Euripides, Sophocles and Seneca\u2014condensed their plot into a tight set of passionate and duty-bound conflicts between a small group of noble characters, and concentrated on these characters' double-binds and the geometry of their unfulfilled desires and hatreds. Racine's poetic skill was in the representation of pathos and amorous passion (like Ph\u00e8dre's love for her stepson) and his impact was such that emotional crisis would be the dominant mode of tragedy to the end of the century. Racine's two late plays (\"Esther\" and \"Athalie\") opened new doors to biblical subject matter and to the use of theatre in the education of young women. Racine also faced criticism for his irregularities: when his play, \"B\u00e9r\u00e9nice\", was criticised for not containing any deaths, Racine disputed the conventional view of tragedy.\nFor more on French tragedy of the 16th and 17th centuries, see French Renaissance literature and French literature of the 17th century.\nLater development.\nTowards the close of the eighteenth century, having studied her predecessors, Joanna Baillie wanted to revolutionise theatre, believing that it could be used more effectively to affect people's lives. To this end she gave a new direction to tragedy, which she defined as 'the unveiling of the human mind under the dominion of those strong and fixed passions, which seemingly unprovoked by outward circumstances, will from small beginnings brood within the breast, till all the better dispositions, all the fair gifts of nature are borne down before them'. \nThis theory, she put into practice in her 'Series of Plays on the Passions' in three volumes (commencing in 1798) and in other dramatic works. Her method was to create a series of scenes and incidents intended to capture the audience's inquisitiveness and 'trace the progress of the passion, pointing out those stages in the approach of the enemy, when he might have been combated most successfully; and where the suffering him to pass may be considered as occasioning all the misery that ensues.'\nBourgeois.\nBourgeois tragedy, known in German as \"B\u00fcrgerliches Trauerspiel,\" emerged in 18th-century Europe as a product of the Enlightenment and the rise of the bourgeoise. This genre of tragedy is distinguished by its focus on ordinary citizens as protagonists, deviating from the classical emphasis on nobility. The first true bourgeois tragedy was English playwright, George Lillo's 1731 play, \"The London Merchant; or, the History of George Barnwell.\" Gotthold Ephraim Lessing's play \"Miss Sara Sampson\", which was first produced in 1755, is said to be the earliest \"B\u00fcrgerliches Trauerspiel\" in Germany.\nModern development.\nIn modernist literature, the definition of tragedy has become less precise. The most fundamental change has been the rejection of Aristotle's dictum that true tragedy can only depict those with power and high status. Arthur Miller's essay \"Tragedy and the Common Man\" (1949) argues that tragedy may also depict ordinary people in domestic surroundings thus defining Domestic tragedies. British playwright Howard Barker has argued strenuously for the rebirth of tragedy in the contemporary theatre, most notably in his volume \"Arguments for a Theatre\". \"You emerge from tragedy equipped against lies. After the musical, you're anybody's fool,\" he insists.\nCritics such as George Steiner have even been prepared to argue that tragedy may no longer exist in comparison with its former manifestations in classical antiquity. In \"The Death of Tragedy\" (1961), Steiner outlined the characteristics of Greek tragedy and the traditions that developed from that period. In the Foreword (1980) to a new edition of his book Steiner concluded that 'the dramas of Shakespeare are not a renascence of or a humanistic variant of the absolute tragic model. They are, rather, a rejection of this model in the light of tragi-comic and \"realistic\" criteria.' In part, this feature of Shakespeare's mind is explained by his bent of mind or imagination which was 'so encompassing, so receptive to the plurality of diverse orders of experience.' When compared to the drama of Greek antiquity and French classicism Shakespeare's forms are 'richer but hybrid'.\nNumerous books and plays continue to be written in the tradition of tragedy to this day examples include \"Froth on the Daydream\", \"The Road\", \"The Fault in Our Stars\", \"Sophie's Choice\", \"Fat City\", \"Rabbit Hole\", \"Requiem for a Dream\", and \"The Handmaid's Tale.\"\nTheories.\nDefining tragedy is no simple matter, and there are many definitions, some of which are incompatible with each other. Oscar Mandel, in \"A Definition of Tragedy\" (1961), contrasted two essentially different means of arriving at a definition. First is what he calls the \"derivative\" way, in which the tragedy is thought to be an expression of an ordering of the world; \"instead of asking what tragedy expresses, the derivative definition tends to ask what expresses itself through tragedy\". The second is the \"substantive\" way of defining tragedy, which starts with the work of art which is assumed to \"contain\" the ordering of the world. Substantive critics \"are interested in the constituent elements of art, rather than its ontological sources\". He recognizes four subclasses: a. \"definition by formal elements\" (for instance the supposed \"three unities\"); b. \"definition by situation\" (where one defines tragedy for instance as \"exhibiting the fall of a good man\"); c. \"definition by ethical direction\" (where the critic is concerned with the meaning, with the \"intellectual and moral effect); and d. \"definition by emotional effect\" (and he cites Aristotle's \"requirement of pity and fear\").\nAristotle.\nAristotle wrote in his work \"Poetics\" that\ntragedy is characterised by seriousness and involves a great person who experiences a reversal of fortune (\"Peripeteia\"). Aristotle's definition can include a change of fortune from bad to good as in the \"Eumenides\", but he says that the change from good to bad as in \"Oedipus Rex\" is preferable because this induces pity and fear within the spectators. Tragedy results in a catharsis (emotional cleansing) or healing for the audience through their experience of these emotions in response to the suffering of the characters in the drama.\nAccording to Aristotle, \"the structure of the best tragedy should not be simple but complex and one that represents incidents arousing fear and pity\u2014for that is peculiar to this form of art.\" This reversal of fortune must be caused by the tragic hero's \"hamartia\", which is often translated as either a character flaw, or as a mistake (since the original Greek etymology traces back to \"hamartanein\", a sporting term that refers to an archer or spear-thrower missing his target). According to Aristotle, \"The misfortune is brought about not by [general] vice or depravity, but by some [particular] error or frailty.\" The reversal is the inevitable but unforeseen result of some action taken by the hero. It is also a misconception that this reversal can be brought about by a higher power (e.g. the law, the gods, fate, or society), but if a character's downfall is brought about by an external cause, Aristotle describes this as a misadventure and not a tragedy.\nIn addition, the tragic hero may achieve some revelation or recognition (anagnorisis\u2014\"knowing again\" or \"knowing back\" or \"knowing throughout\") about human fate, destiny, and the will of the gods. Aristotle terms this sort of recognition \"a change from ignorance to awareness of a bond of love or hate.\"\nIn \"Poetics\", Aristotle gave the following definition in ancient Greek of the word \"tragedy\" (\u03c4\u03c1\u03b1\u03b3\u1ff3\u03b4\u03af\u03b1):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tragedy is an imitation of an action that is admirable, complete (composed of an introduction, a middle part and an ending), and possesses magnitude; in language made pleasurable, each of its species separated in different parts; performed by actors, not through narration; effecting through pity and fear the purification of such emotions.\nCommon usage of tragedy refers to any story with a sad ending, whereas to be an Aristotelian tragedy the story must fit the set of requirements as laid out by \"Poetics\". By this definition social drama cannot be tragic because the hero in it is a victim of circumstance and incidents that depend upon the society in which he lives and not upon the inner compulsions\u2014psychological or religious\u2014which determine his progress towards self-knowledge and death. Exactly what constitutes a \"tragedy\", however, is a frequently debated matter.\nAccording to Aristotle, there are four species of tragedy:\nHegel.\nG.W.F. Hegel, the German philosopher most famous for his dialectical approach to epistemology and history, also applied such a methodology to his theory of tragedy. In his essay \"Hegel's Theory of Tragedy,\" A.C. Bradley first introduced the English-speaking world to Hegel's theory, which Bradley called the \"tragic collision\", and contrasted against the Aristotelian notions of the \"tragic hero\" and his or her \"hamartia\" in subsequent analyses of the Aeschylus' \"Oresteia\" trilogy and of Sophocles' \"Antigone\". Hegel himself, however, in his seminal \"The Phenomenology of Spirit\" argues for a more complicated theory of tragedy, with two complementary branches which, though driven by a single dialectical principle, differentiate Greek tragedy from that which follows Shakespeare. His later lectures formulate such a theory of tragedy as a conflict of ethical forces, represented by characters, in ancient Greek tragedy, but in Shakespearean tragedy the conflict is rendered as one of subject and object, of individual personality which must manifest self-destructive passions because only such passions are strong enough to defend the individual from a hostile and capricious external world:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The heroes of ancient classical tragedy encounter situations in which, if they firmly decide in favor of the one ethical pathos that alone suits their finished character, they must necessarily come into conflict with the equally [\"gleichberechtigt\"] justified ethical power that confronts them. Modern characters, on the other hand, stand in a wealth of more accidental circumstances, within which one could act this way or that, so that the conflict is, though occasioned by external preconditions, still essentially grounded in the character. The new individuals, in their passions, obey their own nature... simply because they are what they are. Greek heroes also act in accordance with individuality, but in ancient tragedy such individuality is necessarily... a self-contained ethical pathos... In modern tragedy, however, the character in its peculiarity decides in accordance with subjective desires... such that congruity of character with outward ethical aim no longer constitutes an essential basis of tragic beauty...\nHegel's comments on a particular play may better elucidate his theory: \"Viewed externally, Hamlet's death may be seen to have been brought about accidentally... but in Hamlet's soul, we understand that death has lurked from the beginning: the sandbank of finitude cannot suffice his sorrow and tenderness, such grief and nausea at all conditions of life... we feel he is a man whom inner disgust has almost consumed well before death comes upon him from outside.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57994", "revid": "35172979", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57994", "title": "Epiphyte", "text": "Surface organism that grows upon another plant but is not nourished by it\nAn epiphyte (from Ancient Greek \"epi-\", meaning 'upon', and \"phut\u00f3n\", meaning 'plant') is a plant or plant-like organism that grows on the surface of another plant or plant-like organism such as kelp. It derives its moisture and nutrients from the air, rain, water (in marine environments) or from debris accumulating around it. The plants on which epiphytes grow are called \"phorophytes\". Epiphytes take part in nutrient cycles and add to both the diversity and biomass of the ecosystem in which they occur, like any other organism. In some cases, a rainforest tree's epiphytes may weigh several tonnes. Epiphytes differ from parasitic plants in that they grow on the host for physical support only, and do not draw nourishment from it. An organism that grows on another organism that is not a plant may be called an epibiont. Epiphytes are usually found in the temperate zone (e.g., many mosses, liverworts, lichens, and algae) or in the tropics (e.g., many ferns, cacti, orchids, and bromeliads). Epiphyte species make good houseplants due to their minimal water and soil requirements. Epiphytes provide a rich and diverse habitat for other organisms including animals, fungi, bacteria, and myxomycetes.\nEpiphyte is one of the subdivisions of the Raunki\u00e6r system.\nThe term \"epiphytic\" derives from el \" epi-\"\u00a0'upon' and \" phyton\"\u00a0'plant'. Epiphytic plants are sometimes called \"air plants\" because they do not root in soil. However, that term is inaccurate, as there are many aquatic species of algae that are epiphytes on other aquatic plants (seaweeds or aquatic angiosperms).\nTerrestrial epiphytes.\n About one-third of all fern species are epiphytes. The third largest group is clubmosses, with 190 species, followed by a handful of species in each of the spikemosses, other ferns, Gnetales, and cycads. Within the Neotropics, there are estimated to be total of 15,500 species of epiphytic vascular plants.\nA monograph on epiphytic plant ecology was written by A. F. W. Schimper (, 1888). Assemblages of large epiphytes occur most abundantly in moist tropical forests, but mosses and lichens occur as epiphytes in almost all biomes. In Europe there are no dedicated epiphytic plants using roots, but rich assemblages of mosses and lichens grow on trees in damp areas (mainly the western coastal fringe), and the common polypody fern grows epiphytically along branches. Rarely, grass, small bushes or small trees may grow in suspended soils up trees (typically in a rot-hole).\nHolo-epiphyte or hemi-epiphyte.\nEpiphytes can generally be categorized into holo-epiphytes or hemi-epiphytes. A holo-epiphyte is a plant that spends its whole life cycle without contact with the ground and a hemi-epiphyte is a plant that spends only half of its life without the ground before the roots can reach or make contact with the ground. Orchids are a common example of holo-epiphytes and strangler figs are an example of hemi-epiphytes. \nPlant nutrient relations.\nEpiphytes are not connected to the soil, and consequently must get nutrients from other sources, such as fog, dew, rain and mist, or from nutrients being released from the ground rooted plants by decomposition or leaching, and dinitrogen fixation. Epiphytic plants attached to their hosts high in the canopy have an advantage over herbs restricted to the ground where there is less light and herbivores may be more active. Epiphytic plants are also important to certain animals that may live in their water reservoirs, such as some types of frogs and arthropods. \nEpiphytes can have a significant effect on the microenvironment of their host, and of ecosystems where they are abundant, as they hold water in the canopy and decrease water input to the soil. Some non-vascular epiphytes such as lichens and mosses are well known for their ability to take up water rapidly. Epiphytes create a significantly cooler and more moist environment in the host plant canopy, potentially greatly reducing water loss by the host through transpiration. \nPlant metabolism.\nCAM metabolism, a water-preserving metabolism present among various plant taxa, is particularly relevant to epiphytic communities. For example, it is estimated that among epiphytic orchids, as many as 50% are likely to use it. Other relevant epiphytic families which display such metabolism are Bromeliacee (e.g. in genera \"Aechmea\" and \"Tillandsia\"), Cactaceae (e.g. in \"Rhipsalis\" and \"Epiphyllum\") and Apocynaceae (e.g. in \"Hoya\" and \"Dischidia\"). \nMarine epiphytes.\nThe ecology of epiphytes in marine environments differs from those in terrestrial ecosystems. Epiphytes in marine systems are species of algae, bacteria, fungi, sponges, bryozoans, ascidians, protozoa, crustaceans, molluscs and any other sessile organism that grows on the surface of a plant, typically seagrasses or algae. Settlement of epiphytic species is influenced by a number of factors including light, temperature, currents, nutrients, and trophic interactions. Algae are the most common group of epiphytes in marine systems. Photosynthetic epiphytes account for a large amount of the photosynthesis in systems in which they occur. This is typically between 20 and 60% of the total primary production of the ecosystem. They are a general group of organisms and are highly diverse, providing food for a great number of fauna. Snail and nudibranch species are two common grazers of epiphytes. Epiphyte species composition and the amount of epiphytes can be indicative of changes in the environment. Recent increases in epiphyte abundance have been linked to excessive nitrogen put into the environment from farm runoff and storm water. High abundance of epiphytes are considered detrimental to the plants that they grow on often causing damage or death, particularly in seagrasses. This is because too many epiphytes can block access to sunlight or nutrients. Epiphytes in marine systems are known to grow quickly with very fast generation times.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57995", "revid": "24013162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57995", "title": "Neal Stephenson/Cryptonomicon", "text": ""}
{"id": "57996", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57996", "title": "Corticosteroid", "text": "Class of steroid hormones\nCorticosteroids are a class of steroid hormones that are produced in the adrenal cortex of vertebrates, as well as the synthetic analogues of these hormones. Two main classes of corticosteroids, glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, are involved in a wide range of physiological processes, including stress response, immune response, and regulation of inflammation, carbohydrate metabolism, protein catabolism, blood electrolyte levels, and behavior.\nSome common naturally occurring steroid hormones are cortisol (C21H30O5), corticosterone (C21H30O4), cortisone (C21H28O5) and aldosterone (C21H28O5) (cortisone and aldosterone are isomers). The main corticosteroids produced by the adrenal cortex are cortisol and aldosterone.\nThe etymology of the \"cortico-\" part of the name refers to the adrenal cortex, which makes these steroid hormones. Thus a corticosteroid is a \"cortex steroid\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedical uses.\nSynthetic pharmaceutical drugs with corticosteroid-like effects are used in a variety of conditions, ranging from hematological neoplasms to brain tumors or skin diseases. Dexamethasone and its derivatives are almost pure glucocorticoids, while prednisone and its derivatives have some mineralocorticoid action in addition to the glucocorticoid effect. Fludrocortisone (Florinef) is a synthetic mineralocorticoid. Hydrocortisone (cortisol) is typically used for replacement therapy, \"e.g.\" for adrenal insufficiency and congenital adrenal hyperplasia.\nMedical conditions treated with systemic corticosteroids:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTopical formulations are also available for the skin, eyes (uveitis), lungs (asthma), nose (rhinitis), and bowels. Corticosteroids are also used supportively to prevent nausea, often in combination with 5-HT3 antagonists (e.g., ondansetron).\nTypical undesired effects of glucocorticoids present quite uniformly as drug-induced Cushing's syndrome. Typical mineralocorticoid side-effects are hypertension (abnormally high blood pressure), steroid induced diabetes mellitus, psychosis, poor sleep, hypokalemia (low potassium levels in the blood), hypernatremia (high sodium levels in the blood) without causing peripheral edema, metabolic alkalosis and connective tissue weakness. Wound healing or ulcer formation may be inhibited by the immunosuppressive effects.\nA variety of steroid medications, from anti-allergy nasal sprays (Nasonex, Flonase) to topical skin creams, to eye drops (Tobradex), to prednisone have been implicated in the development of central serous retinopathy (CSR).\nCorticosteroids have been widely used in treating people with traumatic brain injury. A systematic review identified 20 randomised controlled trials and included 12,303 participants, then compared patients who received corticosteroids with patients who received no treatment. The authors recommended people with traumatic head injury should not be routinely treated with corticosteroids.\nPharmacology.\nCorticosteroids act as agonists of the glucocorticoid receptor and/or the mineralocorticoid receptor.\nIn addition to their corticosteroid activity, some corticosteroids may have some progestogenic activity and may produce sex-related side effects.\nPharmacogenetics.\nAsthma.\nPatients' response to inhaled corticosteroids has some basis in genetic variations. Two genes of interest are CHRH1 (corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1) and TBX21 (transcription factor T-bet). Both genes display some degree of polymorphic variation in humans, which may explain how some patients respond better to inhaled corticosteroid therapy than others. However, not all asthma patients respond to corticosteroids and large sub groups of asthma patients are corticosteroid resistant.\nA study funded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute of children and teens with mild persistent asthma found that using the control inhaler as needed worked the same as daily use in improving asthma control, number of asthma flares, how well the lungs work, and quality of life. Children and teens using the inhaler as needed used about one-fourth the amount of corticosteroid medicine as children and teens using it daily.\nAdverse effects.\nUse of corticosteroids has numerous side-effects, some of which may be severe:\nBiosynthesis.\nThe corticosteroids are synthesized from cholesterol within the adrenal cortex. Most steroidogenic reactions are catalysed by enzymes of the cytochrome P450 family. They are located within the mitochondria and require adrenodoxin as a cofactor (except 21-hydroxylase and 17\u03b1-hydroxylase).\nAldosterone and corticosterone share the first part of their biosynthetic pathway. The last part is mediated either by the aldosterone synthase (for aldosterone) or by the 11\u03b2-hydroxylase (for corticosterone). These enzymes are nearly identical (they share 11\u03b2-hydroxylation and 18-hydroxylation functions), but aldosterone synthase is also able to perform an 18-oxidation. Moreover, aldosterone synthase is found within the zona glomerulosa at the outer edge of the adrenal cortex; 11\u03b2-hydroxylase is found in the zona fasciculata and zona glomerulosa.\nClassification.\nBy chemical structure.\nIn general, corticosteroids are grouped into four classes, based on chemical structure. Allergic reactions to one member of a class typically indicate an intolerance of all members of the class. This is known as the \"Coopman classification\".\nThe highlighted steroids are often used in the screening of allergies to topical steroids.\nGroup A \u2013 Hydrocortisone type.\nHydrocortisone, hydrocortisone acetate, cortisone acetate, tixocortol pivalate, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, and prednisone.\nGroup B \u2013 Acetonides (and related substances).\nAmcinonide, budesonide, desonide, fluocinolone acetonide, fluocinonide, halcinonide, triamcinolone acetonide, and Deflazacort (O-isopropylidene derivative)\nGroup C \u2013 Betamethasone type.\nBeclometasone, betamethasone, dexamethasone, fluocortolone, halometasone, and mometasone.\nGroup D \u2013 Esters.\nGroup D1 \u2013 Halogenated (less labile).\nAlclometasone dipropionate, betamethasone dipropionate, betamethasone valerate, clobetasol propionate, clobetasone butyrate, fluprednidene acetate, and mometasone furoate.\nGroup D2 \u2013 Labile prodrug esters.\nCiclesonide, cortisone acetate, hydrocortisone aceponate, hydrocortisone acetate, hydrocortisone buteprate, hydrocortisone butyrate, hydrocortisone valerate, prednicarbate, and tixocortol pivalate.\nBy route of administration.\nTopical steroids.\nFor use topically on the skin, eye, and mucous membranes.\nTopical corticosteroids are divided in potency classes I to IV in most countries (A to D in Japan). Seven categories are used in the United States to determine the level of potency of any given topical corticosteroid.\nInhaled steroids.\nFor nasal mucosa, sinuses, bronchi, and lungs.\nThis group includes:\nThere also exist certain combination preparations such as Advair Diskus in the United States, containing fluticasone propionate and salmeterol (a long-acting bronchodilator), and Symbicort, containing budesonide and formoterol fumarate dihydrate (another long-acting bronchodilator). They are both approved for use in children over 12 years old.\nOral forms.\nSuch as prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, or dexamethasone.\nSystemic forms.\nAvailable in injectables for intravenous and parenteral routes.\nHistory.\nTadeusz Reichstein, Edward Calvin Kendall, and Philip Showalter Hench were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology and Medicine in 1950 for their work on hormones of the adrenal cortex, which culminated in the isolation of cortisone.\nInitially hailed as a miracle cure and liberally prescribed during the 1950s, steroid treatment brought about adverse events of such a magnitude that the next major category of anti-inflammatory drugs, the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), was so named in order to demarcate from the opprobrium.\nLewis Sarett of Merck &amp; Co. was the first to synthesize cortisone, using a 36-step process that started with deoxycholic acid, which was extracted from ox bile. The low efficiency of converting deoxycholic acid into cortisone led to a cost of US$200 per gram in 1947. Russell Marker, at Syntex, discovered a much cheaper and more convenient starting material, diosgenin from wild Mexican yams. His conversion of diosgenin into progesterone by a four-step process now known as Marker degradation was an important step in mass production of all steroidal hormones, including cortisone and chemicals used in hormonal contraception.\nIn 1952, D.H. Peterson and H.C. Murray of Upjohn developed a process that used \"Rhizopus\" mold to oxidize progesterone into a compound that was readily converted to cortisone. The ability to cheaply synthesize large quantities of cortisone from the diosgenin in yams resulted in a rapid drop in price to US$6 per gram, falling to $0.46 per gram by 1980. Percy Julian's research also aided progress in the field. The exact nature of cortisone's anti-inflammatory action remained a mystery for years after, however, until the leukocyte adhesion cascade and the role of phospholipase A2 in the production of prostaglandins and leukotrienes was fully understood in the early 1980s.\nCorticosteroids were voted Allergen of the Year in 2005 by the American Contact Dermatitis Society.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57997", "revid": "150564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57997", "title": "Adrenocorticotropic hormone", "text": "Pituitary hormone\nproopiomelanocortin derivatives\nAdrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH; also adrenocorticotropin, corticotropin) is a polypeptide tropic hormone produced by and secreted by the anterior pituitary gland. It is also used as a medication and diagnostic agent. ACTH is an important component of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and is often produced in response to biological stress (along with its precursor corticotropin-releasing hormone from the hypothalamus). Its principal effects are increased production and release of cortisol and androgens by the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis, respectively. ACTH is also related to the circadian rhythm in many organisms.\nDeficiency of ACTH is an indicator of secondary adrenal insufficiency (suppressed production of ACTH due to an impairment of the pituitary gland or hypothalamus, cf. hypopituitarism) or tertiary adrenal insufficiency (disease of the hypothalamus, with a decrease in the release of corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH)). Conversely, chronically elevated ACTH levels occur in primary adrenal insufficiency (e.g. Addison's disease) when adrenal gland production of cortisol is chronically deficient. In Cushing's disease, a pituitary tumor leads to excessive production of ACTH, which stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce high levels of cortisol.\nProduction and regulation.\nPOMC, ACTH and \u03b2-lipotropin are secreted from corticotropic cells in the anterior lobe (or adenohypophysis) of the pituitary gland in response to the hormone corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) released by the hypothalamus. The pre-pro-opiomelanocortin (Pre-POMC) is the precursor of POMC, its cleavage forms POMC. ACTH, on the other hand, is produced from the cleavage of POMC. The removal of the signal peptide during translation produces the 241-amino acid polypeptide POMC, which undergoes a series of post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation and glycosylation before it is proteolytically cleaved by endopeptidases to yield various polypeptide fragments with varying physiological activity. These fragments include:\nIn order to regulate the secretion of ACTH, many substances secreted within this axis exhibit slow/intermediate and fast feedback-loop activity. Glucocorticoids secreted from the adrenal cortex work to inhibit CRH secretion by the hypothalamus, which in turn decreases anterior pituitary secretion of ACTH. Glucocorticoids may also inhibit the rates of POMC gene transcription and peptide synthesis. The latter is an example of a slow feedback loop, which works on the order of hours to days, whereas the former works on the order of minutes.\nThe half-life of ACTH in human blood is reported to be between ten and 30 minutes.\nStructure.\nACTH consists of 39 amino acids, the first 13 of which (counting from the N-terminus) may be cleaved to form \u03b1-melanocyte-stimulating hormones (\u03b1-MSH) (this common structure is responsible for excessively tanned skin in Addison's disease). After a short period of time, ACTH is cleaved into \u03b1-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (\u03b1-MSH) and CLIP, a peptide with unknown activity in humans.\nIn the human body, total weight ACTH is .\nFunction.\nACTH stimulates secretion of glucocorticoid steroid hormones from adrenal cortex cells, especially in the zona fasciculata of the adrenal glands. ACTH acts by binding to cell surface ACTH receptors, which are located primarily on adrenocortical cells of the adrenal cortex. The ACTH receptor is a seven-membrane-spanning G protein-coupled receptor. Upon ligand binding, the receptor undergoes conformation changes that stimulate the enzyme adenylyl cyclase, which leads to an increase in intracellular cAMP and subsequent activation of protein kinase A.\nACTH influences steroid hormone secretion by both rapid short-term mechanisms that take place within minutes and slower long-term actions. The rapid actions of ACTH include stimulation of cholesterol delivery to the mitochondria where the P450scc enzyme is located. P450scc catalyzes the first step of steroidogenesis that is cleavage of the side-chain of cholesterol. \nACTH also stimulates lipoprotein uptake into cortical cells. This increases the bioavailability of cholesterol in the cells of the adrenal cortex.\nThe long term actions of ACTH include stimulation of the transcription of the genes coding for steroidogenic enzymes, especially P450scc, steroid 11\u03b2-hydroxylase, and their associated electron transfer proteins. This effect is observed over several hours.\nIn addition to steroidogenic enzymes, ACTH also enhances transcription of mitochondrial genes that encode for subunits of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation systems. These actions are probably necessary to supply the enhanced energy needs of adrenocortical cells stimulated by ACTH.\nACTH receptors outside the adrenal gland.\nAs indicated above, ACTH is a cleavage product of the pro-hormone, proopiomelanocortin (POMC), which also produces other hormones including \u03b1-MSH that stimulates the production of melanin. A family of related receptors mediates the actions of these hormones, the MCR, or melanocortin receptor family. These are mainly not associated with the pituitary-adrenal axis. MC2R is the ACTH receptor. \nWhile it has a crucial function in regulating the adrenal glands, it is also expressed elsewhere in the body, specifically in the osteoblast, which is responsible for making new bone, a continual and highly regulated process in the bodies of air-breathing vertebrates. The functional expression of MC2R on the osteoblast was discovered by Isales et alia in 2005. Since that time, it has been demonstrated that the response of bone forming cells to ACTH includes production of VEGF, as it does in the adrenal. This response might be important in maintaining osteoblast survival under some conditions. If this is physiologically important, it probably functions in conditions with short-period or intermittent ACTH signaling, since with continual exposure of osteoblasts to ACTH, the effect was lost in a few hours.\nHistory.\nWhile working on her dissertation, Evelyn M. Anderson co-discovered ACTH with James Bertram Collip and David Landsborough Thomson and, in a paper published in 1933, explained its function in the body.\nAn active synthetic form of ACTH, consisting of the first 23 amino acids of native ACTH, was first made by Klaus Hofmann at the University of Pittsburgh.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
