{"id": "71095", "revid": "48219523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71095", "title": "Atlantic Canada", "text": "Region of Eastern Canada\nAtlantic Canada, also called the Atlantic provinces (), is the region of Eastern Canada comprising four provinces: New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. As of 2021, the landmass of the four Atlantic provinces was approximately , and had a population of over 2.4 million people. The term \"Atlantic Canada\" was popularized following the admission of Newfoundland as a Canadian province in 1949. The province of Newfoundland and Labrador is not included in the Maritimes, another significant regional term, but \"is\" included in Atlantic Canada.\nHistory.\nThe Atlantic Provinces are the historical territories of the Mi'kmaq, Naskapi, Beothuk and Nunatsiavut peoples. The people of Nunatsiavut are the Labrador Inuit (Labradormiut), who are descended from the Thule people.\nExploration and settlement.\nLeif Erikson and other members of his family began exploring the North American coast in 986 CE. Leif landed in three places, and in the third established a small settlement called Vinland. The location of Vinland is uncertain, but an archaeological site on the northern tip of Newfoundland at L'Anse aux Meadows has been identified as a good candidate. It was a modest Viking settlement and is the oldest confirmed presence of Europeans in North America. The Vikings would make brief excursions to North America for the next 200 years, though further attempts at colonization were thwarted. The site produced the first evidence of pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact of Europeans with the Americas outside of Greenland.\nAcadia, a colony of New France, was established in areas of present-day Atlantic Canada in 1604, under the leadership of Samuel de Champlain and Pierre Dugua, Sieur de Mons. The French would form alliances with many indigenous groups within Atlantic Canada, including the Mi'kmaq of Acadia, who joined the Wabanaki Confederacy, important allies to New France.\nBritish expansion.\nCompetition for control of the island of Newfoundland and its waters contributed to major ongoing conflicts and occasional wars between France and Britain. The first major agreement between the two powers over access to this coastline came with the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713, giving Britain governance over the entire island and establishing the first French Shore, giving France and its migratory fishery almost exclusive access to a substantial stretch of the island's coastline. \nDespite reoccurring wars and conflicts, Britain acquiesced to France's demands for continuing access to this fishery. Between 1755 and 1764 during the Seven Years' War the British forcibly removed thousands of Acadians from Nova Scotia and New Brunswick in an event known as the Great Expulsion or Le Grand D\u00e9rangement. Following the Seven Years War and the Treaty of Paris of 1763, Newfoundland's governor, Admiral Hugh Palliser, consolidated British control by carrying out the first systematic hydrographic charting of the island, including the Bay of Islands and Humber Arm, much of it by the Royal Naval officer James Cook.\nAfter the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1764 some of the Acadians returned and settled in the area that would become New Brunswick. The effect of this migration can still be seen today as the province of New Brunswick is the only officially bilingual province in Canada with over a quarter of residents speaking French at home.\nImmigration: From Loyalists to the Irish.\nAfter the conclusion of the American Revolution with the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1783 many loyalists from the United States settled in the region. This influx of immigrants caused the partition of Nova Scotia creating New Brunswick. Additionally these immigrants changed the culture and character of the region which had historically been French towards more British styled communities. It also marked one of the first large waves of migration to the area that established a predominantly Anglo-Canadian population. Some of the new settlers brought with them Black slaves. Also 3,000 Black loyalists who were slaves during the war and who sided with the British were given freedom and evacuated with other Loyalists from New York to Nova Scotia. Most of the free Blacks settled at Birchtown, the most prominent Black township in North America at the time.\nThe War of 1812 significantly impacted the provinces of Atlantic Canada where they played crucial roles in naval operations, privateering, and as strategic support bases for the British war effort against the United States.\nIn the last half of the 19th century the region's population grew due to the immigration from Ireland due to the great potato famine. Saint John and Halifax, both port cities, particularly received a significant influx of Irish immigrants within the region, with Saint John's quarantine station on Partridge Island being the second-busiest in British North America during the epidemic typhus outbreak.\nCreating \"Atlantic Canada\".\nThe first premier of Newfoundland, Joey Smallwood, coined the term \"Atlantic Canada\" when the Dominion of Newfoundland joined Canada in 1949. He believed that it would have been presumptuous for Newfoundland to assume that it could include itself within the existing term \"Maritime provinces,\" which was used to describe the cultural similarities shared by New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, and Nova Scotia. The other provinces of Atlantic Canada entered Confederation during the 19th century with New Brunswick and Nova Scotia being founding members of the Dominion of Canada in 1867, and later Prince Edward Island joined in 1873.\nGeography.\nAtlantic Canada is characterized by its rugged coastlines, gravel beaches, rugged mountains, and dense forests.\nRegion and nearby area.\nThe area is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the east and south and Quebec to the west. The region shares two international borders one with the United States and its State of Maine and another off the coast of Newfoundland with France and its overseas collectivity of Saint Pierre and Miquelon. The region's maritime environment has influenced the region's climate, culture, and economy. The area encompasses a mix of urban centers like Halifax and St. John's and rural communities that rely on fishing, and tourism.\nCanadian dividing.\nAlthough Quebec has a physical Atlantic coast on the Gulf of St. Lawrence, it is generally not considered an Atlantic Province; instead, it is classified as part of Central Canada, along with Ontario.\nAtlantic and Central Canada together are also known as Eastern Canada. Atlantic Canada includes a section of the Appalachian Mountains known as the Appalachian Uplands. In each Atlantic province, Upland regions have been divided into three highland areas. The mountain range results in coastal regions being fjorded. Some areas contain glaciofluvial deposits.\nEconomy.\nAtlantic Canada's primary industries are natural resource extraction and power generation including fishing, hydroelectricity, wind power, forestry, oil, and mining.\nFishing and the Atlantic Ocean.\nThe Atlantic provinces contribute a large part of Canada's fish production, with many coastal communities primarily dependent on fisheries. Over half of all ocean related jobs in Canada are found in Atlantic Canada with 75% of the ocean economy centered in its provinces. The access point for many of such fisheries being the Gulf of St. Lawrence and the Atlantic continental shelf. Due to the collapse of the Atlantic northwest cod fishery Canada imposed a moratorium of cod fishing in 1992. This affected the region significantly and caused the loss of between 30,000 and 50,000 jobs in the region which was the largest single layoff in Canadian history. The Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency is the official agency responsible for creating economic opportunities within Atlantic Canada.\nPower production.\nLabrador hosts the second largest hydroelectric system in Canada at Churchill Falls where it produces 35,000 GWh of power each year. Elsewhere in the region wind power and hydrogen generation have begun to make a large impact on the energy landscape including exporting energy to Canada and hydrogen overseas.\nResources.\nThe region is host to parts of Canada's eastern boreal forests which were historically used for timber production and boat production.\nNova Scotia has historically been an exporter of gypsum and now produces over 60% of the gypsum in Canada. In the Atlantic provinces, iron, anhydrite, salt, coal, limestone, silica, sand, quartz, marble, slate, sandstone, granite, and peat are also mined.\nSources.\n\"\u00a0This article incorporates https:// by John Douglas Belshaw available under the license.\"\n\"\u00a0This article incorporates https:// by Rainer Baehre available under the license.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71097", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71097", "title": "Smooth newt", "text": "Species of amphibian\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe smooth newt, European newt, northern smooth newt or common newt (Lissotriton vulgaris) is a species of newt. It is widespread in Europe and parts of Asia, and has been introduced into Australia. Individuals are brown with a spotted underside that ranges in colour from orange to white. They reach an average length of ; males are larger than females. The newts' skins are dry and velvety when they are living on land, but become smooth when they migrate into the water to breed. Males develop a more vivid colour pattern and a conspicuous skin seam (crest) on their back when breeding.\nThe smooth newt was originally described by Carl Linnaeus as a lizard, and was then given different genus names before the adoption of its current classification as a member of \"Lissotriton\". There are currently three accepted subspecies of smooth newt. Formerly, there were also four subspecies\u2014all with more restricted ranges\u2014that are now classified as separate species, because they have been found to be distinct genetically as well as in appearance: the Caucasian smooth newt, the Greek smooth newt, Kosswig's smooth newt and Schmidtler's smooth newt. Together with these four species and the Carpathian newt, the smooth newt forms what is known as a species complex: some of the species hybridise with each other.\nFor most of the year, smooth newts live on land, are mostly nocturnal, and hide during the day. They can adapt to a wide range of natural or semi-natural habitats, from forests at field edges to parks and gardens. They feed mainly on invertebrates such as insects and earthworms and are themselves eaten mainly by fish, birds and snakes. Between spring and summer, they breed in ponds or similar bodies of water. Males court females with a ritualised underwater display. Females lay their eggs on water plants, and larvae hatch after 10 to 20 days. The larvae develop for around three months before metamorphosing into terrestrial juveniles, at which point they become known as efts. They reach maturity after two to three years, and the adults live for up to 14 years.\nThe smooth newt is abundant over much of its range and is classified as a species of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). It has been negatively affected by habitat destruction and fragmentation and by the introduction of new species of fish. Like other European amphibians, the smooth newt has now been listed as a protected species by the Berne Convention.\nTaxonomy.\nSwedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus described the smooth newt in 1758 as \"Lacerta vulgaris\", placing it in the same genus as the green lizards.370 It was later re-described under several different species and genus names, including \"Triton\", \"Molge\", \"Salamandra\" and \"Lissotriton\", with in total 48 species synonyms published. Most recently, it was included in the genus \"Triturus\", along with most European newts.221 This genus was found to be polyphyletic, containing several unrelated lineages, and the small-bodied newts, including the smooth newt, were therefore split off as separate genus in 2004 by Garc\u00eda-Par\u00eds and colleagues.233 They used the name \"Lissotriton\", introduced by the English zoologist Thomas Bell in 1839 with the smooth newt as type species132 but then considered a synonym of \"Triturus\". \"Lissotriton\" is a combination of the Greek (), meaning \"smooth\", and the name of Triton, an ancient Greek god of the sea, while the species epithet means \"common\" in Latin.17\nThree subspecies are accepted by Pabijan, Wielstra and colleagues: \"L.\u00a0v. vulgaris\", \"L.\u00a0v. ampelensis\" and \"L.\u00a0v. meridionalis\". These authors, followed by \"Amphibian Species of the World\", recognise four former subspecies from southern Europe and west Asia as separate species, as they are morphologically and genetically distinct: the Greek smooth newt (\"L.\u00a0graecus\"), Kosswig's smooth newt (\"L.\u00a0kosswigi\"), the Caucasian smooth newt (\"L.\u00a0lantzi\") and Schmidtler's smooth newt (\"L.\u00a0schmidtleri\"). The five smooth newt species and the Carpathian newt (\"L.\u00a0montadoni\"), which is their sister species, have collectively been referred to as the \"smooth newt species complex\".\nTo distinguish the smooth newt from its close relatives, the English name \"northern smooth newt\" has been suggested. Other common names that have been used in the literature include: common newt, great water-newt, common water-newt, warty eft, water eft, common smooth newt, small newt, small eft, small evet, and brown eft.\nEvolution.\nMolecular phylogenetic analyses have shown that the smooth newt is distinct from its four close relatives\"\u00a0\"\u2013 the Caucasian, Greek, Kosswig's, and Schmidtler's smooth newt \u2013 which were formerly considered subspecies (see section \"Taxonomy\" above). The relationships within this species complex have not been fully resolved. Within the smooth newt itself, genetic groups do not completely match the currently accepted subspecies (\"ampelensis\", \"meridionalis\", \"vulgaris\"), described based on morphology. The five smooth newt species collectively were estimated to have diverged from the Carpathian newt around four to six million years ago.\nGenetic analyses have also demonstrated ongoing gene flow between the smooth newt and its relatives. Although the Carpathian newt is morphologically clearly different, hybridisation between the two species is frequent;26 it has been shown that smooth newt mitochondrial DNA has introgressed into and completely replaced that of the Carpathian newt populations. Partial introgression also occurred from the smooth newt to the Greek smooth newt. These patterns are likely due to the range expansion and secondary contact of species after the Last Glacial Maximum, which they likely survived in refugia mainly in southern and eastern Europe. The palmate newt (\"Lissotriton helveticus\"), although often occurring in the same habitats, almost never hybridises with the smooth newt.25 Artificial crosses with even more distant species such as the alpine (\"Ichthyosaura alpestris\") and northern crested (\"Triturus cristatus\") newts were successful in laboratory experiments.29\nDescription.\nGeneral characteristics.\nAdult males of the smooth newt reach around head-to-tail length and are thus slightly larger than the females, which reach . The body weight of adults varies between , and decreases during the breeding season. The head is longer than it is wide, with 2\u20133 longitudinal grooves on the top, and the elongated snout is blunt in the male and rounded in the female. The skin is velvety and water-repellent on land but smooth during the aquatic phase; it contains mucus and toxin glands and its upper layer is shed off regularly.80\u201393233\u2013234\nOutside the breeding season, both sexes are yellow-brown, brown or olive-brown. The male has dark, round spots, while the female has smaller spots of the same colour, which sometimes form two or more irregular lines along the back. The male has an orange strip on the tail underside, and the throat and belly in males are orange to white with small dark, rounded spots (these are lighter with smaller spots in the female). Size and colour vary with the environment, and the newts tend to be smaller in northern latitudes.80\u201393233\u2013234 Albinistic and leucistic individuals have been described.94\nThe smooth newt is diploid (i.e. it has two copies of each chromosome), with 24 chromosomes in total.107\nBreeding characteristics.\nDuring the aquatic breeding season, males develop a skin seam or crest, which runs uninterrupted along the back and the tail. It is high at mid-body, but higher along the tail. The tail also has a lower fin, and its end is pointed. The cloaca (the single digestive, urinary and reproductive orifice) of breeding males is swollen, round and dark-coloured. The hindfeet have more or less developed toe flaps, depending on the subspecies. Colours in general are more vivid than during the land phase. The dark spots grow larger, and the crest often has vertical dark and bright bands. There are five to seven longitudinal stripes on the head. The lower edge of the tail is red with a silver-blue flash and black spots. Females only develop low, straight tail fins but no crest or toe flaps, and are more drably coloured.26233\u2013234\nSubspecies differ slightly in male secondary characteristics: \"L.\u00a0v. ampelensis\" has strongly developed toe flaps, its tail tapers into a fine thread (but not a distinct filament), and the body is slightly square in cross-section. \"L.\u00a0v. meridionalis\" also has toe flaps and a pointed tail, its crest is smooth-edged, and its body is square-shaped. In the nominate subspecies, \"L.\u00a0v. vulgaris\", the crest is clearly , toe flaps are only weakly developed and the body is round.234\u2013236\nLarvae.\nThe aquatic larvae are long and yellow-brown with two longitudinal stripes at hatching. They initially have, in addition to their gills, only two balancers at the sides of the head, short appendages for attaching to plants which get resorbed within a few days.237 As in all salamanders, forelegs develop before the hindlegs. The colour becomes a more cryptic, darkly marbled yellow to brown in the growing larvae. Larvae are very slender and similar to the palmate newt. They develop a skin seam from the neck to the pointed tail; the tail is as long as the head and trunk. The larvae grow to , which is also the size of the efts (terrestrial juveniles) just after metamorphosis.188\u2013192\nSimilar species.\nThe smooth newt resembles the other, less widespread \"Lissotriton\" species. It can be confused especially with the closely related \"smooth newt complex\" species (marked with * in the table below) and the more distant palmate newt, which often occurs in the same area.25 Females are especially difficult to tell apart, as distinguishing features are mainly observed in the males at breeding season.19\u201341225\u2013235\nDistribution.\nNative range.\nThe smooth newt has been described as \"the most ubiquitous and widely distributed newt of the Old World\".237 The nominate subspecies, \"L.\u00a0v. vulgaris\", is most widespread and ranges natively from Ireland (where the smooth newt is the only newt species)42 and Great Britain in the west to Siberia and northern Kazakhstan in the east. In the north it reaches central Fennoscandia, and its southern limit is central France, northern Italy, the central Balkans and the dry Eurasian steppe of Ukraine and Russia.234\u201323842\u201344 The subspecies \"L.\u00a0v. ampelensis\" only occurs in the Carpathians of Ukraine and the Danube delta of northern Romania, and \"L.\u00a0v. meridionalis\" in the northern half of Italy, southern Switzerland, Slovenia and Croatia.234\u2013235\nIn the Carpathians, the smooth newt generally prefers lower elevations than the Carpathian newt. In the Balkans, the precise contact zones with the Greek smooth newt and Schmidtler's smooth newt are not yet clear. In central Italy, where the range of the smooth newt subspecies \"L.\u00a0v. meridionalis\" overlaps with that of the Italian newt (\"L.\u00a0italicus\"), it was found that the latter prefers a warmer and drier climate.\nIntroduced range.\nThe nominate subspecies, \"L.\u00a0v. vulgaris\", has been introduced to Australia, which has no native salamander species. The smooth newt was available in the Australian pet trade until 1997, when it was declared a \"controlled pest animal\" because of the risk of introduction. The first record in the wild was made near Melbourne in 2011, and larvae were later found, indicating successful reproduction. Negative impacts on the native fauna are feared, including predation on and competition with native frogs and freshwater invertebrates, toxicity, and disease spread. The smooth newt could spread further in south-eastern Australia, where wide areas have a suitable climate.\nWithin Europe, the subspecies \"L.\u00a0v. meridionalis\" was introduced north of the Alps near Geneva, where it hybridises with the native \"L.\u00a0v. vulgaris\".\nHabitat and ecology.\nMainly a lowland species, the smooth newt is only exceptionally found above .78\u201380 This species shows a wide habitat breadth, as it's able to thrive in a wide array of terrestrial and aquatic environments. On land, it occurs in wooded areas (dense conifer woods are avoided) but also in more open areas such as damp meadows, field edges, parks and gardens. It can also tolerate human disturbance and urban environments. The newts hide under structures such as logs or stones or in small mammal burrows.120\u2013134238 Smooth newts may also climb vegetation, although the exact function of this is not currently known.\nFreshwater breeding sites are typically sun-exposed, free from fish, stagnant, water-filled permanently or for at least three months of the year, close to similar water bodies, and have shallow areas with abundant water plants. They can range from small puddles to larger ponds or shallow parts of lakes. Water quality is less important; pH values from 4 (more acidic) to 9.6 (more alkaline) are tolerated and in Germany, smooth newts have even been found in slightly brackish water.121\u2013129 They often share breeding sites with other amphibians, including other newts; in northern France, ponds with five newt species \u2013 smooth, palmate, alpine, northern crested and marbled (\"T. marmoratus\") newt \u2013 have been described.151\u2013152\nLifecycle and behaviour.\nSmooth newts live on land during most of the year and are mainly nocturnal. They also usually hibernate on land, often in congregations of several newts in winter shelters such as under logs or in burrows (but they can be active during mild weather). The efts turn into mature adults at two to three years, and the newts can reach an age of 6\u201314 years in the wild.238 The newts recognise familiar territory using smell and visual cues, but could not orient themselves in experiments when they were transported far away from the home range.\nReproduction.\nMigration to the breeding sites occurs as soon as February, but in the northern parts of the range and at higher altitudes, it may not start before summer. After entering the water, the breeding characters, especially the male's crest, take a few weeks to develop.238\nMating involves an intricate courtship display: the male attempts to attract a female by swimming in front of her and sniffing her cloaca. He then vibrates his tail against his body, sometimes violently lashing it, thereby fanning pheromones towards her. In the final phase, he moves away from her, the tail quivering. If she is still interested, she will follow him and touch his cloaca with her snout, whereupon he deposits a packet of sperm (a spermatophore). He then guides her over the spermatophore so she picks it up with her cloaca. Males often try to lead females away from displaying competitors.238\u2013240\nEggs are fertilised internally, and progeny of one female usually has multiple fathers. Females tend to mate preferentially with unrelated males, probably to avoid inbreeding depression.\nFemales lay 100\u2013500 eggs, usually folding them into waterplants. The eggs are in diameter ( with jelly capsule) and light brown to greenish or grey in colour. Larvae typically hatch after 10\u201320 days, depending on temperature, and metamorphose into terrestrial efts after around three months.238\u2013240\nPaedomorphism, where adults stay aquatic and retain their gills and skin seams or only resorb them partially, occurs regularly but only in a small proportion of individuals. It does not appear to be determined genetically but favoured by cold water, a low density of individuals and abundant aquatic prey. Wild paedomorphic individuals often metamorphosed when they were transferred into an aquarium.192\u2013193\nDiet, predators and parasites.\nSmooth newts, including the larvae, are unselective carnivores, feeding mainly on diverse invertebrates such as earthworms, snails, slugs, bivalves, spiders, ticks, mites, springtails or insects and insect larvae, or smaller plankton. Cannibalism also occurs, mainly by preying on eggs of its own species. Various predators eat smooth newts, including waterbirds, snakes and frogs, but also larger newts such as the northern crested newt.238\nVarious pathogens and parasites have been found to infect smooth newts, including ranaviruses, a picornavirus, various protozoans,164 trematodes164 (of which \"Parastrigea robusta\" was found to cause the local decline of a population in Germany) and at least 31 species of helminths.\nThreats and conservation.\nThe smooth newt is common over much of its range.237 The IUCN, in 2008, assessed its threat status as Least Concern and found no general decline in populations. This assessment included subspecies now recognised as separate species (see section \"Taxonomy\" above) and needs updating. Despite the overall low concern, the smooth newt is listed in some national red lists, e.g. in Switzerland, the Czech Republic, and the Netherlands.196 Like all amphibians, it is also listed as protected species in the Berne Convention (Appendix III). Disturbance, capture, killing and trade are prohibited in Ireland under the Wildlife Act 1976, and trade in the UK under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981.\nThreats to smooth newts are similar to those affecting other amphibians. They include especially the loss of breeding ponds through destruction or introduction of fish, and the fragmentation of population through roads.196\u2013197 Secondary habitats can help sustain the species, e.g. former gravel pits or quarries left open.204\u2013205 The value of artificial water bodies as habitat can be improved when nearby hiding structures like stones or wood are added on land. Garden ponds are readily colonised if they are sun-exposed, have abundant water plants, no fish, and nearby hiding structures.206\u2013218 Artificial hibernation sites (\"newt hotels\") were readily used in a study in Norway, especially by juveniles.\nTo mark and track individuals and monitor populations, researchers have often amputated phalanges of fingers and toes but these re-grow quickly; a safer and less harmful alternative is recording the individual belly patterns through photography.223\u2013224 Researchers have also developed genetic methods based on microsatellite distribution to assess patterns of genetic diversity.\nCaptivity.\nSmooth newts can be kept in captivity, but must come from a legal source under the applicable legislation given their protected status (see above). They need a land and water phase, with hibernation for two to three months at .210\u2013215 The juveniles remain terrestrial and will only return to water at maturity. Individuals have reached ages of 4\u20138, exceptionally up to 20 years, in captivity.240\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71098", "revid": "50916993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71098", "title": "Palmate newt", "text": "Species of amphibian\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe palmate newt (Lissotriton helveticus) is a species of newt found in Western Europe, from Great Britain to the northern Iberian Peninsula. It is long and olive or brown with some dark spots. The underside is yellow to orange, and the throat, unlike in the similar smooth newt, always unspotted. A dark stripe runs along the head and through the eyes. Breeding males develop a distinct filament on the end of their tail, strongly webbed hind feet, and a low, smooth crest on their back.\nHabitats include forests, marshes, pastures or gardens. While on land, the newts are mainly nocturnal. After emerging from hibernation in spring, they move to stagnant, fish-free water bodies for breeding. After a courtship display, the male deposits a spermatophore that is picked up by the female. Larvae develop over after 1.5\u20133.5 months before metamorphosing into land-dwelling juveniles (efts). Sexual maturity is reached after two to three years, and the newts can reach a total age of up to 12 years in the wild. The species is overall common and has been assessed as Least Concern by the IUCN.\nTaxonomy.\nThe palmate newt was first described scientifically in 1789, by Russian naturalist Grigory Razumovsky. He placed it in the genus of the green lizards and named it \"Lacerta helvetica\", with \"\" referring to the Swiss type locality in the canton of Vaud.111 He also gave \"Lacerta paradoxa\" as alternative name, which is today regarded as a junior synonym.111 Several names published over time, in different genera, are also now treated as synonyms for the palmate newt. Most recently, the species was included in the genus \"Triturus\", along with most European newts.221 This genus however was found to be polyphyletic, containing several unrelated lineages, and the small-bodied newts, including the palmate newt, were therefore split off as separate genus in 2004 by Garc\u00eda-Par\u00eds and colleagues.233 They used the genus name \"Lissotriton\", introduced by the English zoologist Thomas Bell in 1839.132 Two distinct subspecies, \"L. h. alonsoi\" and \"L. h. punctillatus\", were described from the Iberian peninsula, but have not been retained by Raffa\u00eblli and Sparreboom.225\nDescription.\nPalmate newts grow to about total length in males, while females are somewhat larger and can reach . The tail is slightly shorter than the snout\u2013vent distance. The head is longer than wide, with three longitudinal grooves on the snout. Both sexes have an olive or brown base colour, and males and some females have dark spotting on their backs. In females, the spots can sometimes form two irregular lines, and they can have a red stripe running along the back while living on land. In both sexes, a dark stripe runs along the head through the eyes. The underside is yellow or light orange and more whitish on the sides; the belly can have some dark spots, while the throat is always unspotted. While the newts live on land, the skin is dry and velvety, but it becomes smooth when they migrate into water.224\u2013225\nMales can be distinguished from females by the larger and darker-coloured cloaca. During the aquatic breeding season, the cloaca swells, and other sexual differences develop: Males grow a low, smooth skin seam (a crest) on their back, which is higher on the tail. Their tail has a blunt end with a distinct, 4\u20137\u00a0mm long filament. They also have ridges (dorso-lateral ridges) running along their sides, giving them an angular, square shape in cross-section, and their hind feet have well-developed, dark webbing. The lower half of the tail is blue in breeding males and orange in females. Development of the crest, tail filament, ridges, and webbing can be suppressed in the presence of the newts' natural predators. When exposed to predatory goldfish, newts do not express these traits, as large sexual ornaments would make them more conspicuous prey. Females do not develop a crest, tail filament or webbed feet.224\nSometimes confused with the smooth newt (\"Lissotriton vulgaris\") which is found in much of the same area, the palmate newt can be distinguished by its unspotted throat. It also resembles Bosc\u00e1's newt (\"L. boscai\") from the Iberian peninsula, which has only a single groove on the snout and no dark eye strip.222\nDistribution and habitats.\nThe palmate newt occurs in Western Europe, from Great Britain (up to Scotland) to northern Portugal and Spain. In the east, it ranges to the Elbe river in Germany and the Czech Republic and the lower and mid Alps in Switzerland. It is most common from elevation, but can be found from sea level up to (in the Pyrenees).224 Genetic analyses by Recuero and Garc\u00eda-Par\u00eds suggest that the species was confined to the Iberian Peninsula during the Last Glacial Maximum and then expanded its range north of the Pyrenees.\nThey have recently been discovered in South Western Ireland, though it is unclear yet whether they are native or an introduced species.\nCommon over most of its range, the palmate newt is found in a variety of habitats, including forest, marshes and pasture.224\u2013225 It is less abundant in cultivated areas, but can adapt to gardens. For reproduction, the newts accept different types of stagnant water bodies, preferably fish-free; acidic ponds are well tolerated.224\u2013225 The smooth newt occurs over much of the same area, but in France appears to prefer ponds in open land, while the palmate newt prefers forest ponds; hybrids between the two species are rare.\nLifecycle and reproduction.\nThe reproductive period usually extends from February to May, but can start earlier or last longer in the southern range on the Iberian Peninsula, depending on elevation. The newts can use magnetoreception over larger distances and the calls of frogs over shorter distances to find their breeding ponds. Once in the water, they are active during day and night. Breeding involves a ritualised courtship display as in other closely related newts: The male attempts to attract a female by swimming in front of her and sniffing her cloaca. He then vibrates his tail against his body, sometimes lashing it (but less violently than in the smooth newt), thereby fanning pheromones towards her. In the final phase, its a packet of sperm (a spermatophore). He then guides her over the spermatophore so she picks it up with her cloaca.225\nThe females lays 150\u2013440 eggs individually on water plants. These are 1.3\u20131.8\u00a0mm in diameter (2.2\u20133\u00a0mm with capsule) and very similar to those of the smooth newt. Larvae hatch after 8\u201321 days, depending on temperature, at a size of 8\u201314\u00a0mm. The young larvae are yellow\u2013brown, with two black stripes, and have two appendages (balancers) on the sides of the head, which are later resorbed. The colour then becomes more cryptic, and the larvae grow to . As they grow, their characteristics are affected by their environment. Specifically, in response to chemical cues from predatory dragonfly larvae, larval newts develop larger heads and tails, and develop darker tail pigmentation. Additionally, dragonflies were more likely to prey on newts without such changes, which may be because a larger tail size facilitates newt predator escape behavior. They metamorphose into land-dwelling juveniles (efts) after 1.5\u20133.5 months, but some larvae instead overwinter in water. Paedomorphism, where adults keep their gills and stay aquatic, is also known.224\u2013225\nThe young efts live on land until maturity, which is reached in the second or third year. Activity on land occurs mainly during humid nights. The palmate newt usually hibernates on land but sometimes in the water, and in the Iberian peninsula, it is often active year-round. Larvae, efts and adults mainly feed on various invertebrates, but cannibalism also occurs, mainly by larvae preying on eggs. An age of up to 12 years can be reached in the wild.224\u2013225\nThreats and conservation.\nPalmate newt populations are not in decline overall, and the species has been assessed as Least Concern by the IUCN. In France, it is the most common newt species, but it is rare in Belgium and the Netherlands,225 and populations are fragmented on the Iberian Peninsula. It is included in some national and regional red lists. Drainage and pollution of breeding sites, the introduction of fish and crayfish, as well as desertification (in the southern range), have been cited as threats. Like all amphibians, it is listed as protected species in the Berne Convention (Appendix III), and it is legally protected by law in the countries it occurs in.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71100", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71100", "title": "Red-eared slider", "text": "Subspecies of turtle\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe red-eared slider or red-eared terrapin (Trachemys scripta elegans) is a subspecies of the pond slider (\"Trachemys scripta\"), a terrapin belonging to the family Emydidae. Native to the southern United States and extreme northern Mexico, it is popular as a pet across the world, and is the most invasive chelonian. It is the most commonly traded chelonian in the world.\nThe red-eared slider is native to the central and southern United States and northern Mexico, but has become established in other places because of pet releases, and has become invasive in many areas where it outcompetes native species. The red-eared slider is included in the list of the world's 100\u00a0most invasive species.\nEtymology.\nThe red-eared slider gets its name from the small, red stripe around its ears, or where its ears would be, and from its ability to slide quickly off rocks and logs into the water. This species was previously known as Troost's turtle in honor of an American herpetologist Gerard Troost. \"Trachemys scripta troostii\" is now the scientific name for another subspecies, the Cumberland slider.\nTaxonomy.\nThe red-eared slider belongs to the order Testudines, which contains about 250\u00a0chelonian species. It is a subspecies of \"Trachemys scripta\". It was previously classified under the name \"Chrysemys scripta elegans\". \"Trachemys scripta\" contains three subspecies: \"T. s. elegans\" (red-eared slider), \"T. s. scripta\" (yellow-bellied slider), and \"T. s. troostii\" (Cumberland slider).\nDescription.\nThe carapace of this species can reach more than in length, but the typical length ranges from . The females of the species are usually larger than the males. They typically live between 20\u201330\u00a0years, although some individuals can live for more than 40\u00a0years. Their life expectancy is longer when they are kept in captivity. The quality of their living environment has a strong influence on their lifespans and well being.\nThe shell is divided into the upper or dorsal carapace, and the lower, ventral carapace or plastron. The upper carapace consists of the vertebral scutes, which form the central, elevated portion; pleural scutes that are located around the vertebral scutes; and then the marginal scutes around the edge of the carapace. The rear marginal scutes are notched. The scutes are bony keratinous elements. The carapace is oval and flattened (especially in the male) and has a weak keel that is more pronounced in the young. The color of the carapace changes depending on the age of the terrapin. It usually has a dark green background with light and dark, highly variable markings. In young or recently hatched terrapins, it is leaf green and gets slightly darker as a terrapin gets older, until it is a very dark green, and then turns a shade between brown and olive green. The plastron is always a light yellow with dark, paired, irregular markings in the centre of most scutes. The plastron is highly variable in pattern. The head, legs, and tail are green with fine, irregular, yellow lines. The whole shell is covered in these stripes and markings that aid in camouflaging an individual.\nThese terrapins also have a complete skeletal system, with partially webbed feet that help them to swim and that can be withdrawn inside the carapace along with the head and tail. The red stripe on each side of the head distinguishes the red-eared slider from all other North American species and gives this species its name, as the stripe is located behind the eyes, where their (external) ears would be. These stripes may lose their color over time. Color and vibrance of ear stripe can indicate immune health, with bright red having higher immune response than yellow stripes. Some individuals can also have a small mark of the same color on the top of their heads. The red-eared slider does not have a visible outer ear or an external auditory canal; instead, it relies on a middle ear entirely covered by a cartilaginous tympanic disc.\nLike other chelonians, the species is poikilothermic and thus dependent on the temperature of its environment. For this reason, it needs to sunbathe frequently to warm up and maintain body temperature.\nSexual dimorphism.\nSome dimorphism exists between males and females.\nRed-eared slider young look practically identical regardless of their sex, making distinguishing them difficult. One useful method, however, is to inspect the markings under their carapace, which fade as the terrapins age. Distinguishing the sex of adults is much easier, as the shells of mature males are smaller than those of females. Male red-eared sliders reach sexual maturity when their carapaces' diameters measure and females reach maturity when their carapaces measure about . Both males and females reach sexual maturity at 5\u20136\u00a0years old. Males are normally smaller than females, although this parameter is sometimes difficult to apply, as individuals being compared could be of different ages.\nMales have longer claws on their front feet than the females; this helps them to hold onto a female during mating, and is used during courtship displays. The males' tails are thicker and longer. Typically, the cloacal opening of a female is at or under the rear edge of the carapace, while the male's opening occurs beyond the edge of the carapace. The male's plastron is slightly concave, while that of the female is completely flat. The male's concave plastron also helps to stabilize the male on the female's carapace during mating. Older males can sometimes have a dark greyish-olive green melanistic coloration, with very subdued markings. The red stripe on the sides of the head may be difficult to see or be absent. The female's appearance is substantially the same throughout her life.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe red-eared slider originated from the area around the Mississippi River and the Gulf of Mexico, in warm climates in the Southeastern United States. Their native areas range from the southeast of Colorado to Virginia and Florida. In nature, they inhabit areas with a source of still, warm water, such as ponds, lakes, swamps, creeks, streams, or slow-flowing rivers.\nThey live in areas of calm water, where they are able to leave the water easily by climbing onto rocks or tree trunks so they can warm up in the sun. Individuals are often found sunbathing in a group or even on top of each other. They also require abundant aquatic plants, as these are the adults' main food, although they are omnivores. They are, however, carnivorous as juveniles as they require a high protein intake for growth.Turtles in the wild always remain close to water unless they are searching for a new habitat or when females leave the water to lay their eggs.\nInvasive species.\nInvasive red-eared sliders cause negative impacts in the ecosystems they are introduced to because they have certain advantages over the native populations, such as a lower age at maturity, higher fecundity rates, and larger body size, which gives them a competitive advantage at basking and nesting sites, as well as when exploiting food resources. They also transmit diseases and displace the other chelonian species with which they compete for food and breeding space.\nOwing to their popularity as pets, red-eared sliders have been released or escaped into the wild in many parts of the world. This terrapin is considered one of the world's worst invasive species. Today, they can be found on six out of seven continents (everywhere except for Antartica). Feral populations are now found in Bermuda, Canada, Australia, Europe, Great Britain, South Africa, the Caribbean Islands, Israel, Bahrain, the Mariana Islands, Guam, Russia, and south- and far-east Asia. Within Great Britain, red-eared sliders have a wide distribution throughout England, Scotland, and Wales. In Spain, the red-eared slider is in direct competition with \"Mauremys leprosa\" for food and basking spots. The red-eared slider has a certain advantage over \"M. leprosa.\"\nIn Australia, it is illegal for members of the public to import, keep, trade, or release red-eared sliders, as they are regarded as an invasive species \u2013 see below. Their import has also been banned by the European Union as well as specific EU member countries. In 2015, Japan announced it was planning to ban the import of red-eared sliders, and officially established in June 2023. While this bans it and red swamp crayfish from importing, trading and releasing to wild, it is still able to keep it alive at home.\nBehavior.\nRed-eared sliders are almost entirely aquatic, but as they are cold-blooded, they leave the water to sunbathe to regulate their temperature.\nHibernation.\nRed-eared sliders do not hibernate, but actually brumate; while they become less active, they do occasionally rise to the surface for food or air. Brumation can occur to varying degrees. In the wild, red-eared sliders brumate over the winter at the bottoms of ponds or shallow lakes. They generally become inactive in October, when temperatures fall below . During this time, the terrapins enter a state of sopor, during which they do not eat or defecate, they remain nearly motionless, and the frequency of their breathing falls. Individuals usually brumate under water, but they have also been found under banks and rocks, and in hollow stumps. In warmer winter climates, they can become active and come to the surface for basking. When the temperature begins to drop again, however, they quickly return to a brumation state. Sliders generally come up for food in early March to as late as the end of April.\nDuring brumation, \"T.\u00a0s.\u00a0elegans\" can survive anaerobically for weeks, producing ATP from glycolysis. The terrapin's metabolic rate drops dramatically, with heart rate and cardiac output dropping by 80% to minimize energy requirements.\nThe lactic acid produced is buffered by minerals in the shell, preventing acidosis.\nRed-eared sliders kept captive indoors should not brumate.\nReproduction.\nCourtship and mating activities for red-eared sliders usually occur between March and July, and take place under water. During courtship, the male swims around the female and flutters or vibrates the back side of his long claws on and around her face and head, possibly to direct pheromones towards her. The female swims toward the male, and if she is receptive, sinks to the bottom for mating. If the female is not receptive, she may become aggressive towards the male. Courtship can last 45\u00a0minutes, but mating takes only 10\u00a0minutes.\nOn occasion, a male may appear to be courting another male, and when kept in captivity may also show this behaviour towards other household pets. Between male terrapins, it could be a sign of dominance and may preclude a fight. Young terrapins may carry out the courtship dance before they reach sexual maturity at 5\u00a0years of age, but they are unable to mate.After mating, the female spends extra time basking to keep her eggs warm. She may also have a change of diet, eating only certain foods, or not eating as much as she normally would. A female can lay between two and 30\u00a0eggs depending on body size and other factors. One female can lay up to 5\u00a0clutches in the same year, and clutches are usually spaced 12\u201336\u00a0days apart. The time between mating and egg-laying can be days or weeks. The fertilization and laying can also be in conjunction, with eggs immediately laid based on location and nutrients available. The actual egg fertilization takes place during the egg-laying. This process also permits the laying of fertile eggs the following season, as the sperm can remain viable and available in the female's body in the absence of mating. During the last weeks of gestation, the female spends less time in the water and smells and scratches at the ground, indicating she is searching for a suitable place to lay her eggs. The female excavates a hole, using her hind legs, and lays her eggs in it.\nIncubation takes 59\u2013112\u00a0days. Late-season hatchlings may spend the winter in the nest and emerge when the weather warms in the spring. Just prior to hatching, the egg contains 50% terrapin and 50% egg sac. A new hatchling breaks open its egg with its egg tooth, which falls out about an hour after hatching. This egg tooth never grows back. Hatchlings may stay inside their eggshells after hatching for the first day or two. If they are forced to leave the eggshell before they are ready, they will return if possible. When a hatchling decides to leave the shell, it still has a small sac protruding from its plastron. The yolk sac is vital and provides nourishment while visible, and several days later, it will have been absorbed into the terrapin's belly. The sac must be absorbed, and does not fall off. The split must heal on its own before the terrapin is able to swim. The time between the egg hatching and water entry is 21\u00a0days.\nDamage to or inordinate motion of the protruding egg yolk \u2013 enough to allow air into the terrapin's body \u2013 results in death. This is the main reason for marking the top of terrapin eggs if their relocation is required for any reason. An egg turned upside down will eventually terminate the embryo's growth by the sac smothering the embryo. If it manages to reach term, the terrapin will try to flip over with the yolk sac, which would allow air into the body cavity and cause death. The other fatal danger is water getting into the body cavity before the sac is absorbed completely, and while the opening has not completely healed yet.\nThe sex of red-eared sliders is determined by the incubation temperature during critical phases of the embryos' development. This is a phenomenon known as temperature-dependent sex determination. Only males are produced when eggs are incubated at temperatures of , whereas females develop at warmer temperatures. Colder temperatures result in the death of the embryos.\nAs pets, invasive species, and human infection risk.\nRed-eared slider terrapins are the world's most commonly traded reptile, due to their relatively low price, and usually low food price, small size, and easy maintenance. As with other chelonians individuals that survive their first year or two can be expected to live generally around 30 years. They present an infection risk; particularly of \"Salmonella\".\nInfection risks and United States federal regulations on commercial distribution.\nReptiles are asymptomatic (meaning they suffer no adverse side effects) carriers of bacteria of the genus \"Salmonella\". This has given rise to justifiable concerns given the many instances of infection of humans caused by the handling of chelonians, which has led to restrictions in the sale of red-eared sliders in the United States. A 1975 U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulation bans the sale (for general commercial and public use) of both chelonian eggs and chelonians with a carapace length less than . This regulation comes under the Public Health Service Act, and is enforced by the FDA in cooperation with state and local health jurisdictions. The ban was enacted because of the public-health impact of chelonian-associated salmonellosis. Chelonians and chelonian eggs found to be offered for sale in violation of this provision are subject to destruction in accordance with FDA procedures. A fine up to $1,001 and / or imprisonment for up to one year is the penalty for those who refuse to comply with a valid final demand for destruction of such chelonians or their eggs. Many stores and flea markets still sell small chelonians due to an exception in the FDA regulation that allows chelonians under to be sold \"for \"bona fide\" scientific, educational, or exhibition purposes, other than use as pets.\" As with many other animals and inanimate objects, the risk of \"Salmonella\" exposure can be reduced by following basic rules of cleanliness. Small children must be taught to wash their hands immediately after they finish playing with the chelonian, feeding it, or changing its water.\nUS state laws.\nSome states have other laws and regulations regarding possession of red-eared sliders because they can be an invasive species where they are not native and have been introduced through the pet trade. It is illegal in Florida to sell any wild-type red-eared slider, as they interbreed with the local yellow-bellied slider population, \"T. s. scripta\", which is another subspecies of pond sliders, and hybrids typically combine the markings of the two subspecies. However, unusual color varieties such as albino and pastel red-eared sliders, which are derived from captive breeding, are still allowed for sale.\nInvasive status in Australia.\nIn Australia, breeding populations have been found in New South Wales and Queensland, and individual turtles have been found in the wild in Victoria, the Australian Capital Territory, and Western Australia.\nRed-eared slider turtles are considered a significant threat to native turtle species; they mature more quickly, grow larger, produce more offspring, and are more aggressive. Numerous studies indicate that red-eared slider turtles can out-compete native turtles for food and nesting and basking sites. Unlike the general diet of pet red-eared sliders, wild red-eared sliders are usually omnivorous. Because red-eared slider turtles eat plants as well as animals, they could also have a negative impact on a range of native aquatic species, including rare frogs. Also, a significant risk exists that red-eared slider turtles can transfer diseases and parasites to native reptile species. A malaria-like parasite was spread to two wild turtle populations in Lane Cove River, Sydney.\nSocial and economic costs are also likely to be substantial. The Queensland government has invested close to AU$1 million in eradication programs to date. The turtle may also cause significant public-health costs due to the impacts of turtle-associated salmonella on human health. Outbreaks in multiple states and fatalities in children, associated with handling \"Salmonella\"-infected turtles, have been recorded in the US. Salmonella can also spread to humans when turtles contaminate drinking water.\nThe actions by state governments have varied considerably to date, ranging from ongoing eradication efforts by the Queensland government to very little action by the government of New South Wales. Experts have ranked the species as high priority for management in Australia, and are calling for a national prevention and eradication strategy, including a concerted education and compliance program to stop the illegal trade, possession, and release of slider turtles.\nInvasive status in India.\nRed-eared slider turtles are threatening to invade the natural water bodies across northeast India, which are home to 21 out of 29 vulnerable native Indian species of freshwater turtle. Between August\u00a02018 and June\u00a02019, a team of herpetologists from the NGO \"Help Earth\" found red-eared sliders in the Deepor Beel wildlife sanctuary and Ugratara Devalaya temple pond. Further reports have been made from an unnamed stream, feeding into the Tlawng river, on a farm in the Mizoram capital, Aizawl. The Nodal Center for Biological Invasions, part of Forest research institute in Kerala is working on addressing the issue of capturing and removing these turtles from wild and from pet owners.\nIn popular culture.\nWithin the second volume of the \"Tales of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\", the popular comic-book heroes were revealed as specimens of the red-eared slider. The popularity of the Ninja Turtles, coupled with the release of the first live-action film, led to a craze for keeping them as pets in United Kingdom, with subsequent ecological havoc, as turtles were accidentally or deliberately released into the wild.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71107", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71107", "title": "Palm, Inc.", "text": "1992\u20132010 American electronics company\nPalm, Inc., was an American company that specialized in manufacturing personal digital assistants (PDAs) and developing software. Palm designed the PalmPilot, the first PDA successfully marketed worldwide, and was known for the Treo 600, one of the earlier successful smartphones. Palm developed the Palm OS software for PDAs and smartphones released under its line of Palm-branded devices and also licensed to other PDA manufacturers.\nThe company was also responsible for the first versions of webOS, the first multitasking operating system for smartphones, and enyo.js, a framework for HTML5 apps. In July 2010, Palm was purchased by Hewlett-Packard (HP), and in 2011 announced a new range of webOS products. However, after poor sales, HP CEO L\u00e9o Apotheker announced in August 2011 that it would end production and support of Palm and webOS devices, marking the end of the Palm brand after 19 years. In October 2014, HP sold the Palm trademark to a shelf corporation tied to the Chinese electronics firm TCL Corporation.\nHistory.\nPalm, headquartered in Sunnyvale, California, was responsible for numerous products including the Pre and Pixi as well as the Treo and Centro smartphones. Previous product lines include the Pilot 1000, Palm Pilot Pro, Palm III, Palm V, Palm VII, Zire and Tungsten. While their older devices run Palm OS Garnet, four editions of the Treo run Windows Mobile.\nFounding and acquisition.\nPalm Computing, Inc., was founded in 1992 by Jeff Hawkins, who later hired Donna Dubinsky and Ed Colligan, all of whom guided Palm to the invention of Palm Pilot. The company was started to write software for the Zoomer, a consumer PDA manufactured by Casio for Tandy. The Zoomer devices were also distributed by Casio and GRiD, while Palm provided the PIM software. The PEN/GEOS operating system was provided by Geoworks.\nThe Zoomer failed commercially, but Palm continued generating revenue by selling synchronization software for HP devices, and the Graffiti handwriting recognition software for the Apple Newton MessagePad.\nThe company was acquired by U.S. Robotics Corp. in 1995. In June 1997, U.S. Robotics was acquired by 3Com and Palm became a 3Com subsidiary. In June 1998, the founders became unhappy with the direction in which 3Com was taking the company, and left to found Handspring.\nStock offering and split into PalmSource and PalmOne.\n3Com made the Palm subsidiary an independent, publicly traded company on 1 March 2000, and it traded on the NASDAQ under the ticker symbol PALM. Palm Inc had its IPO during the dot-com bubble and in its first day of trading the shares of the new company hit an all-time high of US$95.06. But competition and the end of the tech bubble caused Palm's shares to lose 90% of their value in just over a year. By June 2001 the company's shares were trading at US$6.50, making it the worst performing PDA manufacturer on the NASDAQ index at the time.\nIn January 2002, Palm set up a wholly owned subsidiary to develop and license Palm OS, which was named PalmSource in February. PalmSource was then spun off from Palm as an independent company. In October 2003, the hardware division of the company merged with Handspring, was renamed to palmOne, Inc. and traded under the ticker symbol PLMO. The Palm trademark was held by a jointly owned holding company.\nUnited as a single company.\nIn May 2005, palmOne purchased PalmSource's share in the 'Palm' trademark for US$30\u00a0million. In July 2005, palmOne launched its new name and brand, reverting to Palm, Inc. and trading under the ticker symbol PALM once again.\nIn late 2005, ACCESS, which specializes in mobile and embedded web browser technologies, acquired PalmSource for US$324\u00a0million.\nOn 4 January 2006, Palm released the Palm Treo 700w, the first Windows Mobile-powered Treo, in a partnership with Verizon Wireless and Microsoft.\nIn December 2006, Palm, Inc. paid US$44\u00a0million to ACCESS for an irrevocable license to use and modify the source code for Palm OS Garnet as well as ship Palm OS Garnet in any Palm product without paying royalties; with this arrangement, the Palm company could once again develop both its hardware and software.\nIn June 2007, Palm formed a strategic relationship with the private-equity firm Elevation Partners, who purchased a 25% equity stake of the company for US$325 million \u2013 an investment that came after months of rumours about a possible Palm sale. Palm CEO Ed Colligan acknowledged that \"We were approached by larger parties over the last six months,\" and \"the reality is that we thought this was the best outcome for our business and our investors.\"\nOn 18 December 2008, Palm CEO Ed Colligan announced that the company would no longer develop any new handheld PDAs. Palm announced the webOS operating system and Palm Pre smartphone at the Consumer Electronics Show on 8 January 2009, and released on 6 June 2009 with Sprint. The design team was led by Matias Duarte, Mike Bell, Peter Skillman and Michael Abbott.\nIn early 2009, the hype over WebOS sent Palm's stock from US$3 to a high of about US$18. While reviews of the Palm Pre were positive, launching with only one U.S. carrier (Sprint, which was also a distant third in the market) proved to be a crucial mistake that limited sales, even though it became Sprint's phone. The Pre was often described as Palm's swan song as it was too late to keep the company \u2013 with only $250\u00a0million in cash and short- term investments at the beginning of 2009 \u2013 independent for long. By 2010 the share price of Palm dropped to below US$4.\nAcquisition by HP and demise.\nOn 28 April 2010, Hewlett-Packard announced it would purchase Palm at $5.70 a share for $1.2\u00a0billion in an all-cash deal. The acquisition was completed on 1 July 2010.\nThe Palm global business unit was to be responsible for webOS software development and webOS-based hardware products, from a robust smartphone roadmap to future slate PCs and netbooks.\nIn February 2011, HP unveiled a new line of WebOS products, including the Pre 3, Veer, and TouchPad; however, these products were branded under HP's name and not with the Palm name. In July 2011, as part of a reorganization, WebOS head Jon Rubinstein was demoted from senior vice president to a \"product innovation role\", and replaced by Stephen DeWitt, head of HP's North American consumer PC unit. At the same time, Palm was renamed the \"webOS global business unit\", effectively ending the use of the Palm brand.\nThe launch of the TouchPad was met with extremely poor sales; on 18 August 2011, HP announced that it would immediately end the production and support of all Palm and WebOS devices, and would be \"exploring options to optimize the value of webOS software going forward\", including a potential sale of the division to another company. HP also cancelled the U.S. release for the Pre 3 and Veer, and infamously, held a fire sale on remaining TouchPad stock, lowering prices for the tablet to as low as US$99 (which, however, led to a major spike in demand for the device). The decision, made by HP's CEO at the time L\u00e9o Apotheker, along with its $11.7\u00a0billion acquisition of Autonomy, and threats to spin off HP's consumer business, led to a major decline in HP's market performance, with its shares falling in value by 45.4%.\nFollowing the resignation of Apotheker and his replacement by Meg Whitman, it was announced in December 2011 that an open source version of much of WebOS would be created. Shortly afterward, Jon Rubinstein, along with a number of other senior Palm staff members, began to leave HP. On 15 August 2012, it was revealed that HP had re-organized the remaining WebOS team as a unit known as \"Gram\", made up of the remaining components of Palm. In February 2013, HP announced that it had sold the WebOS team, along with a license to the WebOS source code, documentation, and underlying patents, to LG Electronics. LG planned to primarily use the WebOS platform for its smart TV products, rather than on mobile devices, but did not rule out the possibility.\nTCL ownership, new device.\nOn 30 December 2014, it was reported that in October 2014, HP had sold the Palm trademark and related intellectual properties to Wide Progress Global Limited, a shelf company controlled by Nicolas Zibell\u00a0\u2014 a regional president of TCL Corporation, which markets Android smartphones under the Alcatel brand. At the same time, it was discovered that the former Palm.com redirected to a new site; the site displayed a \"coming soon\" page with the previous orange Palm logo, and the slogan \"Smart move\", which is also the slogan used by Alcatel OneTouch.\nTCL publicly confirmed its acquisition of the Palm brand on 6 January 2015, stating that it planned to \"re-create\" the company with a new team based in Silicon Valley, and incorporate crowdsourcing into its product development.\nOn 15 October 2018, a new Palm companion device was unveiled, which is manufactured by a new Palm-branded startup company from California that is financially backed by TCL and basketball player Stephen Curry. It is an \"ultra-mobile\", Android-based device designed to serve as a smaller, simplified companion to a larger smartphone. The new device was announced as being exclusive to Verizon Wireless, only available as an add-on to an existing or new device plan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71110", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71110", "title": "Laws of science", "text": ""}
{"id": "71119", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71119", "title": "Wigner's friend", "text": "Thought experiment in theoretical quantum physics\nWigner's friend is a thought experiment in theoretical quantum physics, first published by the Hungarian-American physicist Eugene Wigner in 1961, and further developed by David Deutsch in 1985. The scenario involves an indirect observation of a quantum measurement: An observer formula_1 observes another observer formula_2 who performs a quantum measurement on a physical system. The two observers then formulate a statement about the physical system's state after the measurement according to the laws of quantum theory. In the Copenhagen interpretation, the resulting statements of the two observers contradict each other. This reflects a seeming incompatibility of two laws in the Copenhagen interpretation: the deterministic and continuous time evolution of the state of a closed system and the nondeterministic, discontinuous collapse of the state of a system upon measurement. Wigner's friend is therefore directly linked to the measurement problem in quantum mechanics with its famous Schr\u00f6dinger's cat paradox.\nGeneralizations and extensions of Wigner's friend have been proposed. Two such scenarios involving multiple friends have been implemented in a laboratory, using photons to stand in for the friends. However, the use of photons as observers has been criticized by quantum physicist Lev Vaidman of Tel Aviv University as \"ridiculous; the friend has to be macroscopic\". Philosopher of physics Tim Maudlin of New York University says that \"Nobody thinks a photon is an observer\".\nOriginal paradox.\nWigner introduced the thought experiment in a 1961 article \"Remarks on the Mind-Body Question\". He begins by noting that most physicists in the then-recent past had been thoroughgoing materialists who would insist that \"mind\" or \"soul\" are illusory, and that nature is fundamentally deterministic. He argues that quantum physics has changed this situation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All that quantum mechanics purports to provide are probability connections between subsequent impressions (also called \"apperceptions\") of the consciousness, and even though the dividing line between the observer, whose consciousness is being affected, and the observed physical object can be shifted towards the one or the other to a considerable degree, it cannot be eliminated.\nNature of the wave function.\nGoing into more detail, Wigner says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Given any object, all the possible knowledge concerning that object can be given as its wave function. This is a mathematical concept the exact nature of which need not concern us here\u2014it is composed of a (countable) infinity of numbers. If one knows these numbers, one can foresee the behavior of the object as far as it can be foreseen. More precisely, the wave function permits one to foretell with what probabilities the object will make one or another impression on us if we let it interact with us either directly, or indirectly. [...] In fact, the wave function is only a suitable language for describing the body of knowledge\u2014gained by observations\u2014which is relevant for predicting the future behaviour of the system. For this reason, the interactions which may create one or another sensation in us are also called observations, or measurements. One realises that \"all\" the information which the laws of physics provide consists of probability connections between subsequent impressions that a system makes on one if one interacts with it repeatedly, i.e., if one makes repeated measurements on it. The wave function is a convenient summary of that part of the past impressions which remains relevant for the probabilities of receiving the different possible impressions when interacting with the system at later times.\nThe wave function of an object \"exists\" (Wigner's quotation marks) because observers can share it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The information given by the wave function is communicable. If someone else somehow determines the wave function of a system, he can tell me about it and, according to the theory, the probabilities for the possible different impressions (or \"sensations\") will be equally large, no matter whether he or I interact with the system in a given fashion.\nObserving a system causes its wave functions to change indeterministically, because \"the entering of an impression into our consciousness\" implies a revision of \"the probabilities for different impressions which we expect to receive in the future\".\nThe observer observed.\nWigner presents two arguments for the thesis that the mind influences the body, i.e., that a human body can \"deviate from the laws of physics\" as deduced from experimenting upon inanimate objects. The argument that he personally finds less persuasive is the one that has become known as \"Wigner's friend\". In this thought experiment, Wigner posits that his friend is in a laboratory, and Wigner lets the friend perform a quantum measurement on a physical system (this could be a spin system). This system is assumed to be in a superposition of two distinct states, say, state\u00a00 and state\u00a01 (or formula_3 and formula_4 in Dirac notation). When Wigner's friend measures the system in the {0,1}-basis, according to quantum mechanics, they will get one of the two possible outcomes (0 or 1) and the system will collapse into the corresponding state.\nNow Wigner himself models the scenario from outside the laboratory, knowing that inside, his friend will at some point perform the 0/1-measurement on the physical system. According to the linearity of the quantum mechanical equations, Wigner will assign a superposition state to the whole laboratory (i.e. the joint system of the physical system together with the friend): The superposition state of the lab is then a linear combination of \"system is in state 0 \u2013 friend has measured 0\" and \"system is in state 1 \u2013 friend has measured 1\".\nLet Wigner now ask his friend for the result of the measurement. Whichever answer the friend gives (0 or 1), Wigner would then assign the state \"system is in state 0 \u2013 friend has measured 0\" or \"system is in state 1 \u2013 friend has measured 1\" to the laboratory. Therefore, it is only at the time when he learns about his friend's result that the superposition state of the laboratory collapses.\nHowever, unless Wigner is considered in a \"privileged position as ultimate observer\", the friend's point of view must be regarded as equally valid, and this is where an apparent paradox comes into play: From the point of view of the friend, the measurement result was determined long before Wigner had asked about it, and the state of the physical system has already collapsed. When exactly did the collapse occur? Was it when the friend had finished their measurement, or when the information of its result entered Wigner's consciousness? As Wigner says, he could ask his friend, \"What did you feel about the [measurement result] before I asked you?\" The question of what result the friend has seen is surely \"already decided in his mind\", Wigner writes, which implies that the friend\u2013system joint state must already be one of the collapsed options, not a superposition of them. Wigner concludes that the linear time evolution of quantum states according to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation cannot apply when the physical entity involved is a conscious being.\nWigner presents his second argument, which he finds more persuasive, much more briefly:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The second argument to support the existence of an influence of the consciousness on the physical world is based on the observation that we do not know of any phenomenon in which one subject is influenced by another without exerting an influence thereupon. This appears convincing to this writer.\nAs a \"reductio ad absurdum\".\nAccording to physicist Leslie Ballentine, by 1987 Wigner had decided that consciousness does not cause a physical collapse of the wavefunction, although he still believed that his chain of inferences leading up to that conclusion were correct. As Ballentine recounts, Wigner regarded his 1961 argument as a , indicating that the postulates of quantum mechanics need to be revised in some way.\nResponses in different interpretations of quantum mechanics.\nMany-worlds interpretations.\nThe various versions of the many worlds interpretation avoid the need to postulate that consciousness causes collapse \u2013 indeed, that collapse occurs at all.\nHugh Everett III's doctoral thesis \"'Relative state' formulation of quantum mechanics\" serves as the foundation for today's many versions of many-worlds interpretations. In the introductory part of his work, Everett discusses the \"amusing, but \"extremely hypothetical\" drama\" of the Wigner's friend paradox. Note that there is evidence of a drawing of the scenario in an early draft of Everett's thesis. It was therefore Everett who provided the first written discussion of the problem four or five years before it was discussed in \"Remarks on the mind-body question\" by Wigner, of whom it received the name and fame thereafter. However, Everett being a student of Wigner, it is clear that they must have discussed it together at some point.\nIn contrast to his teacher Wigner, who held the consciousness of an observer to be responsible for a collapse, Everett understands the Wigner's friend scenario in a different way: Insisting that quantum states' assignments should be objective and non-perspectival, Everett derives a straightforward logical contradiction when letting formula_2 and formula_1 reason about the laboratory's state of formula_7 together with formula_2. Then, the Wigner's Friend scenario shows to Everett an incompatibility of the collapse postulate for describing measurements with the deterministic evolution of closed systems. In the context of his new theory, Everett claims to solve the Wigner's friend paradox by only allowing a continuous unitary time evolution of the wave function of the universe. However, there is no evidence of any written argument of Everett's on the topic.\nIn many-worlds interpretations, measurements are modelled as interactions between subsystems of the universe and manifest themselves as a branching of the universal state. The different branches account for the different possible measurement outcomes and are seen to exist as subjective experiences of the corresponding observers. In this view, the friend's measurement of the spin results in a branching of the world into two parallel worlds, one, in which the friend has measured the spin to be 1, and another, in which the friend has received the measurement outcome 0. If then Wigner measures at a later time the combined system of friend and spin system, the world again splits into two parallel parts.\nObjective-collapse theories.\nAccording to objective-collapse theories, wave-function collapse occurs when a superposed system reaches a certain objective threshold of size or complexity. Objective-collapse proponents would expect a system as macroscopic as a cat to have collapsed before the box was opened, so the question of observation-of-observers does not arise for them. If the measured system were much simpler (such as a single spin state), then once the observation was made, the system would be expected to collapse, since the larger system of the scientist, equipment, and room would be considered far too complex to become entangled in the superposition.\nRelational quantum mechanics.\nRelational quantum mechanics (RQM) was developed in 1996 by Carlo Rovelli and is one of the more recent interpretations of quantum mechanics. In RQM, any physical system can play the role of an observing system, to which any other system may display \"facts\" about physical variables. This inherent relativity of facts in RQM provides a straightforward \"solution\" to the seemingly paradoxical situation in Wigner's friend scenario: The state that the friend assigns to the spin is a state relative to himself as friend, whereas the state that Wigner assigns to the combined system of friend and spin is a state relative to himself as Wigner. By construction of the theory, these two descriptions do not have to match, because both are correct assignments of states relative to their respective system.\nIf the physical variable that is measured of the spin system is denoted by formula_9, where formula_9 takes the possible outcome values 0 or 1, the above Wigner's friend situation is modelled in the RQM context as follows: formula_2 models the situation as the before-after-transition\nformula_12\nof the state of formula_7 relative to him (here it was assumed that formula_2 received the outcome formula_15 in his measurement of formula_7).\nIn RQM language, the fact formula_15 for the spin of formula_7 actualized itself relative to formula_2 during the interaction of the two systems.\nA different way to model the same situation is again an outside (Wigner's) perspective. From that viewpoint, a measurement by one system (formula_2) of another (formula_7) results in a correlation of the two systems. The state displaying such a correlation is equally valid for modelling the measurement process. However, the system with respect to which this correlated state is valid changes. Assuming that Wigner (formula_1) has the information that the physical variable formula_9 of formula_7 is being measured by formula_2, but not knowing what formula_2 received as result, formula_1 must model the situation as\nformula_28\nwhere formula_29 is considered the state of formula_2 before the measurement, and formula_31 and formula_32 are the states corresponding to formula_2's state when he has measured 1 or 0 respectively. This model is depicting the situation as relative to formula_1, so the assigned states are relative states with respect to the Wigner system. In contrast, there is no value for the formula_9 outcome that actualizes with respect to formula_1, as he is not involved in the measurement.\nIn this sense, two accounts of the same situation (process of the measurement of the physical variable formula_9 on the system formula_7 by formula_2) are accepted within RQM to exist side by side. Only when deciding for a reference system, a statement for the \"correct\" account of the situation can be made.\nQBism and Bayesian interpretations.\nIn the interpretation known as QBism, advocated by N. David Mermin among others, the Wigner's-friend situation does not lead to a paradox, because there is never a uniquely correct wavefunction for any system. Instead, a wavefunction is a statement of personalist Bayesian probabilities, and moreover, the probabilities that wavefunctions encode are probabilities for experiences that are also personal to the agent who experiences them. Jaynes expresses this as follows: \"There is a paradox only if we suppose that a density matrix (i.e. a probability distribution) is something 'physically real' and 'absolute'. But now the dilemma disappears when we recognize the 'relativity principle' for probabilities. A density matrix (or, in classical physics, a probability distribution over coordinates and momenta) represents, not a physical situation, but only a certain \"state of knowledge\" about a range of possible physical situations\". And as von Baeyer puts it, \"Wavefunctions are not tethered to electrons and carried along like haloes hovering over the heads of saints\u2014they are assigned by an agent and depend on the total information available to the agent.\" Consequently, there is nothing wrong in principle with Wigner and his friend assigning different wavefunctions to the same system. A similar position is taken by Brukner, who uses an elaboration of the Wigner's-friend scenario to argue for it.\nDe Broglie\u2013Bohm theory.\nThe De Broglie-Bohm theory, also known as Bohmian mechanics or pilot wave theory, postulates, in addition to the wave function, an actual configuration of particles that exists even when unobserved. This particle configuration evolves in time according to a deterministic law, with the wave function guiding the motion of the particles. The particle configuration determines the actual measurement outcome\u2014e.g., whether Schr\u00f6dinger's cat is dead or alive or whether Wigner's friend has measured 0 or 1\u2014even if the wave function is a superposition. Indeed, according to the De Broglie-Bohm theory, the wave function never collapses on the fundamental level. There is, however, a concept of \"effective collapse\", based on the fact that, in many situations, \"empty branches\" of the wave function, which do not guide the actual particle configuration, can be ignored for all practical purposes.\nThe De Broglie-Bohm theory does not assign any special status to conscious observers. In the Wigner's-friend situation, the first measurement would lead to an effective collapse. But even if Wigner describes the state of his friend as a superposition, there is no contradiction with this friend having observed a definite measurement outcome as described by the particle configuration. Thus, according to the De Broglie\u2013Bohm theory, there is no paradox because the wave function alone is not a complete description of the physical state.\nAn extension of the Wigner's friend experiment.\nIn 2016, Frauchiger and Renner used an elaboration of the Wigner's-friend scenario to argue that quantum theory cannot be used to model physical systems that are themselves agents who use quantum theory. They provide an information-theoretic analysis of two specifically connected pairs of \"Wigner's friend\" experiments, where the human observers are modelled within quantum theory. By then letting the four different agents reason about each other's measurement results (using the laws of quantum mechanics), contradictory statements are derived.\nThe resulting theorem highlights an incompatibility of a number of assumptions that are usually taken for granted when modelling measurements in quantum mechanics.\nIn the title of their published version of September 2018, the authors' interpretation of their result is apparent: Quantum theory as given by the textbook and used in the numerous laboratory experiments to date \"cannot consistently describe the use of itself\" in any given (hypothetical) scenario. The implications of the result are currently subject to many debates among physicists of both theoretical and experimental quantum mechanics. In particular, the various proponents of the different interpretations of quantum mechanics have challenged the validity of the Frauchiger\u2013Renner argument.\nThe experiment was designed using a combination of arguments by Wigner (Wigner's friend), Deutsch and Hardy (see Hardy's paradox). The setup involves a number of macroscopic agents (observers) performing predefined quantum measurements in a given time order. Those agents are assumed to all be aware of the whole experiment and to be able to use quantum theory to make statements about other people's measurement results. The design of the thought experiment is such that the different agents' observations along with their logical conclusions drawn from a quantum-theoretical analysis yields inconsistent statements.\nThe scenario corresponds roughly to two parallel pairs of \"Wigners\" and friends: formula_40 with formula_41 and formula_42 with formula_43. The friends each measure a specific spin system, and each Wigner measures \"his\" friend's laboratory (which includes the friend). The individual agents make logical conclusions that are based on their measurement result, aiming at predictions about other agent's measurements within the protocol. Frauchiger and Renner argue that an inconsistency occurs if three assumptions are taken to be simultaneously valid. Roughly speaking, those assumptions are\nMore precisely, assumption (Q) involves the probability predictions within quantum theory given by the Born rule. This means that an agent is allowed to trust this rule being correct in assigning probabilities to other outcomes conditioned on his own measurement result. It is, however, sufficient for the extended Wigner's friend experiment to assume the validity of the Born rule for probability-1 cases, i.e., if the prediction can be made with certainty.\nAssumption (C) invokes a consistency among different agents' statements in the following manner: The statement \"I know (by the theory) that they know (by the same theory) that x\" is equivalent to \"I know that x\".\nAssumption (S) specifies that once an agent has arrived at a probability-1 assignment of a certain outcome for a given measurement, they could never agree to a different outcome for the same measurement.\nAssumptions (Q) and (S) are used by the agents when reasoning about measurement outcomes of other agents, and assumption (C) comes in when an agent combines other agent's statements with their own. The result is contradictory, and therefore, assumptions (Q), (C) and (S) cannot all be valid, hence the no-go theorem.\nReflection.\nThe meaning and implications of the Frauchiger\u2013Renner thought experiment are highly debated. A number of assumptions taken in the argument are very foundational in content and therefore cannot be given up easily. However, the question remains whether there are \"hidden\" assumptions that do not explicitly appear in the argument. The authors themselves conclude that \"quantum theory cannot be extrapolated to complex systems, at least not in a straightforward manner\". On the other hand, one presentation of the experiment as a quantum circuit models the agents as single qubits and their reasoning as simple conditional operations.\nQBism, relational quantum mechanics and the De Broglie\u2013Bohm theory have been argued to avoid the contradiction suggested by the extended Wigner's-friend scenario of Frauchiger and Renner.\nIn fiction.\nStephen Baxter's novel \"Timelike Infinity\" (1992) discusses a variation of Wigner's friend thought experiment through a refugee group of humans self-named \"The Friends of Wigner\". They believe that an ultimate observer at the end of time may collapse all possible entangled wave-functions generated since the beginning of the universe, hence choosing a reality without oppression."}
{"id": "71124", "revid": "45230466", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71124", "title": "Access Systems Americas", "text": "ACCESS Systems Americas, Inc. (formerly PalmSource) is a subsidiary of ACCESS which develops the Palm OS PDA operating system and its successor, the Access Linux Platform, as well as BeOS. PalmSource was spun off from Palm Computing, Inc.\nPalm OS runs on 38 million devices that have been sold since 1996 from hardware manufacturers including Palm, Inc., Samsung, IBM, Aceeca, AlphaSmart, Fossil, Inc., Garmin, Group Sense PDA (Xplore), Kyocera, PiTech, Sony, and Symbol. PalmSource also develops several programs for the Palm OS, and as of December 2005, PalmGear claims to offer 28,769 software titles of varying genres. Palm OS software programs can also be downloaded from CNET, PalmSource, Handango, and Tucows.\nPalmSource also owns BeOS, which it purchased from Be Inc. in August 2001.\nHistory.\nIn January 2002, Palm, Inc. set up a wholly owned subsidiary to develop and license Palm OS, which was named PalmSource in February. In October 2003, PalmSource was spun off from Palm as an independent company, and Palm renamed itself palmOne. palmOne and PalmSource set up a holding company that owned the Palm trademark.\nIn January 2004, PalmSource announced the successor to classic Palm OS called Palm OS Cobalt. However, it failed to gain support from hardware licensees. That December, PalmSource acquired China MobileSoft, a software company with a mobile Linux offering. As a result, PalmSource announced that they would extend Palm OS to run on top of the Linux architecture.\nIn May 2005, palmOne purchased PalmSource's share of the Palm trademark for US$30 million and two months later renamed itself Palm, Inc. As part of the agreement, palmOne granted certain rights to Palm trademarks to PalmSource and licensees for a four-year transition period. Later that year, ACCESS, which specializes in mobile and embedded web browser technologies, including NetFront, acquired PalmSource for US$324 million. In October 2006, PalmSource announced that it would rename itself to ACCESS, to match its parent company's name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71130", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71130", "title": "Sum of Logic", "text": "1323 textbook on logic by William of Ockham\nThe Summa Logicae (\"Sum of Logic\") is a textbook on logic by William of Ockham. It was written around 1323.\nSystematically, it resembles other works of medieval logic, organised under the basic headings of the Aristotelian Predicables, Categories, terms, propositions, and syllogisms. These headings, though often given in a different order, represent the basic arrangement of scholastic works on logic.\nThis work is important in that it contains the main account of Ockham's nominalism, a position related to the problem of universals.\nBook III. On Syllogisms.\nPart VI. On Fallacies (in 18 chapters).\nPart IV, in eighteen chapters, deals with the different species of fallacy enumerated by Aristotle in Sophistical Refutations (\"De sophisticis elenchis\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71131", "revid": "42342156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71131", "title": "QuarkXPress", "text": "Desktop publishing software\nQuarkXPress is desktop publishing software for creating and editing complex page layouts in a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) environment. It runs on macOS and Windows. It was first released by Quark, Inc. in 1987 and is still owned and published by them.\nThe most recent version, QuarkXPress 2024 (internal version number 20.0.0), introduces two new palettes: Font Manager and Picture Links, and has compatibility with macOS Sonoma, as well as the option to export to IDML format.\nQuarkXPress is used by designers, publishing houses and corporations to produce from printable to multimedia projects. Recent versions have added support for ebooks/flipbooks, Web and mobile apps.\nHistory.\nQuarkXPress was founded by Tim Gill in 1981 with a $2,000 loan from his parents, with the introduction of Fred Ebrahimi as CEO in 1986.\nThe first version of QuarkXPress was released in 1987 for the Macintosh. Five years passed before a Microsoft Windows version (3.1) followed in 1992. In the 1990s, QuarkXPress became widely used by professional page designers, the typesetting industry and printers. In particular, the Mac version of 3.3 (released in 1996) was seen as stable and trouble-free, working seamlessly with Adobe's PostScript fonts as well as with Apple's TrueType fonts. Quark's AppleScript support was a significant factor in both Quark's and AppleScript's success.\nIn 1989, QuarkXPress incorporated an application programming interface called XTensions which allows third-party developers to create custom add-on features to the desktop application. Xtensions, along with Adobe's Photoshop plugins, was one of the first examples of a developer allowing others to create software add-ons for their application.\nAlthough competitors like PageMaker existed, QuarkXPress was so dominant that it had an estimated 95% market share during the 1990s. After QuarkXPress 3.3, QuarkXPress was seen as needing significant improvements and users criticized it for its overly long innovation cycles.\nGill sold his 50% stake in the company in 1999 for a reported $500 million.\nThe release of QuarkXPress version 5 in 2002 led to disappointment from Apple's user base, as QuarkXPress did not support Mac OS X, while Adobe InDesign 2.0\u2014launched in the same week\u2014did. QuarkXPress also lost marketshare due to an increasing price gap between it and InDesign. InDesign CS cost $699, while QuarkXPress 6 cost $945. The later Adobe Creative Suite (2003), which users purchased for access to Photoshop and Illustrator, included InDesign.\nIn response to a shrinking user base, Quark started to lower its pricing levels in 2004. In December 2006, Quark licensed the Windows version of QuarkXPress 5 to be distributed for free on the cover of a UK computer magazine, \"Computer Shopper\", with the idea of enticing consumers to upgrade to later versions.\nHaving arrived late with a Mac OS X version, Quark took a different approach to porting to Intel-native applications on Mac (Universal Binary), and released its Universal Binary version 7 months before Adobe ported InDesign.\nQuarkXPress 9 won Product of the Year in 2011 (MacWorld Awards 2011: Grand Prix Winner).\nFrom 2015 to 2022, QuarkXPress updated on an annual cycle. Since 2023, QuarkXPress releases on a bi-annual basis.\nUse and features.\nThe package provides the basic functionality of font, alignment, spacing, and color, but it also provides its users with professional typesetting options such as kerning, curving text along a line, and ligatures.\nA QuarkXPress document contains text and graphics boxes. The boxes can be reshaped, layered, and given varying levels of transparency and text alignment (\"runaround\"). Both box positioning and graphic or text positioning is allowed within a box with an accuracy of one-thousandth of an inch.\nColor control allows the full-use of printing-press standard Pantone or Hexachrome inks, along with a variety of other color-space options. Draft output can be printed on conventional desktop printers. Process color (CMYK) separation films can be produced for printing-presses. QuarkXPress also offers the ability for composite work-flows, both with PostScript and PDF output.\nQuarkXPress offers layout synchronization, multiple undo/redo functionality, XML and web page (HTML) features, and support for direct PDF import and output. Documents can be verified (\"pre-flight\") before printing. This high-level print preview automatically identifies conflicts and other printing problems. Adobe has a similar feature in InDesign.\nComposition zones feature makes it the only desktop application with multi-user capabilities by allowing multiple users to edit different zones on the same page. Composition Zones pushes collaboration a step further than just simultaneous text/picture (as possible with Quark CopyDesk since 1991), as it allows layout and graphic elements to be edited outside the layout application.\nUser-defined rules, output specs, and layout specs can be used for intelligent templates and enable resource sharing (for example, server-based style sheet definitions).\nVersion 6.5, released at the end of 2004, added enhanced support for the Photoshop format (PSD). The PSD integration and picture manipulation features led to QuarkXPress receiving a number of awards, such as the \"Macworld\" Editor's Choice for 2004.\nVersion 7 added support for OpenType, Unicode, JDF, and also PDF/X-export. QuarkXPress 7 also added unique features, such as native transparency at the color level.\nQuarkXPress 8 introduced a completely new user interface, support for drag and drop, PDF 1.7 import, AI Import and a global file format. Design grids can be assigned to pages and boxes to allow unlimited baseline grids. Hanging characters can be applied and customized by character and amount to hang outside the box. This is the first version to include built-in Adobe Flash authoring. Designers can create Flash content including sound, video, animation and interactivity without programming. In October 2008, QuarkXPress 8 won the MacUser Award for Print Publishing Software of the Year.\nWith version 9 QuarkXPress extended its crossmedia publishing approach and can be used now to also export to eBooks (ePub3 and Blio) and native apps (for the iPad). With App Studio, which is shipped with QuarkXPress, designers can even create and design their own apps. Additionally QuarkXPress 9 offers cascading styles (stylesheets based on text content), callouts (anchored objects that flow with the text based on position rules), create complex ad editable B\u00e9zier paths using a wizard (ShapeMaker), bullets and numbers (with import and export from/to Microsoft Word) and more.\nThe Mac version of QuarkXPress 9 is for Intel processors only, making QuarkXPress 8.5.1 the last choice for PPC-based Macs.\nQuarkXPress 10, was described by Quark as a major re-write of the software on the Mac platform in particular to move it from the older Carbon API to Cocoa. It also included a new, modern graphics engine, Xenon. During the lifecycle of version 10, new features included Retina Display support, PDF pass-through transparency, notes, redlining, increased zoom (8000%) and the ability to create HTML5 animations for inclusion in App Studio tablet and smartphone apps.\nQuarkXPress 2015 was the first version to use a different naming scheme. It was completely 64-bit and added fixed-layout ePub and Kindle export as well as exporting layouts as PDF/X-4. Quark claimed to have added the top 10 of all user-requested features.\nQuarkXPress 2016 included the ability to import and copy and paste from other applications and file formats to native QuarkXPress objects. The release also includes revamped digital capabilities including being able to create HTML5 Publications. Top user requested features include multi-gradient blends and a color picker tool.\nQuarkXPress 2017 continued the new naming scheme and established an annual release cycle. The headline features include non-destructive image editing, various typography enhancements such as text stroking and text shading, responsive HTML5, and unlimited iOS apps for no additional cost (outside of the Apple Developer fees). Other user-requested features included adaptive layout conversion for print, smart quotes, and proportional leading.\nOn March 1, 2018, Quark announced QuarkXPress 2018, stating it would be available on May 16, 2018. The headline features in version 2018 include new OpenType controls, hyphenation strictness, support for color fonts, IDML import (to convert Adobe InDesign documents to QuarkXPress) and the ability to create unlimited Android apps for no additional cost (outside of the Google Play fees).\nOn November 14, 2023,\u00a0 the company released QuarkXPress 2024's, including integration with 1,500 Google fonts, a new Visual Fonts and Picture Links palette, macOS Sonoma compatibility, image format support for WebP, HEIF and HEIC, local image libraries support, IDML export format, GREP support, and enhanced Right-to-Left language capabilities.\nServer version.\nIn the beginning of 2003 Quark released a server version of QuarkXPress, originally called QuarkDDS. Renamed in 2006 to \"QuarkXPress Server\", the product is now primarily sold with Quark Publishing Platform \u2013 the central hub of the company's content automation solutions. QuarkXPress Server is a Java application that takes content components (text, images, video, data, charts, etc.) and assembles them into different formats from PDFs to responsive HTML and Web apps. As the content is assembled into templates using granular content components, the output can be customized for different audiences in terms of the content and the brand. The system relies on XML.\nExtensions and tools.\nQuark Interactive Designer.\nQuark Interactive Designer is an extension and tool for creating Adobe Flash context from QuarkXPress documents. It enables the export QuarkXPress projects in SWF (Flash) file format. This allows documents created for print or web production to also be output as a Flash advertisement. No knowledge of timelines or ActionScript is necessary for this purpose. Since QuarkXPress is natively capable of creating HTML projects, this allows web designers to design and build their HTML and Flash elements and combine them all in a single application. Resulting files can be exported as SWF Flash files or standalone Projector applications for macOS or Windows. Quark Interactive Designer makes use of palette-based actions, similar to those found in PowerPoint, in order to animate text and graphics. It also allows some use of button-triggered behaviors and embedding of QuickTime and Flash Video, and audio files.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71135", "revid": "50697685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71135", "title": "Pink triangle", "text": "Symbol for the LGBTQIA+ community\nA pink triangle is a symbol for the LGBTQ+ community. Initially intended as a badge of shame, it was later reappropriated as a positive symbol of self-identity. It originated in Nazi Germany in the 1930s and 1940s as one of the Nazi concentration camp badges, distinguishing those imprisoned because they had been identified by authorities as gay men. In the 1970s, it was revived as a symbol of protest against homophobia, and has since been adopted by the larger LGBT community as a popular symbol of LGBTQ+ pride and the LGBTQ+ movements and queer liberation movements.\nHistory.\nNazi prisoner identification.\nIn Nazi concentration camps, each prisoner was required to wear a downward-pointing, equilateral triangular cloth badge on their chest, the color of which identified the stated reason for their imprisonment. Early on, prisoners perceived as gay men were variously identified with a green triangle (indicating criminals) or red triangle (political prisoners), the number \"175\" (referring to Paragraph 175, the section of the German penal code criminalizing homosexual activity), or the letter \"A\" (which stood for , literally \"arse fucker\").\nLater, the use of a pink triangle was established for prisoners identified as homosexual men and transgender women. (Lesbian and bisexual women and trans men were not systematically imprisoned; some were classified as \"asocial\", wearing a black triangle.) The pink triangle was also assigned to others considered sexual deviants, including zoophiles and pedophiles in addition to sex offenders. If a prisoner was also identified as Jewish, the triangle was superimposed over a second yellow triangle pointing the opposite way, to resemble the Star of David like the yellow badge identifying other Jews. Prisoners wearing a pink triangle were harshly treated by most other prisoners.\nAfter the camps were liberated at the end of the Second World War, some of the prisoners imprisoned for homosexuality were re-incarcerated by the Allied-established Federal Republic of Germany, as the Nazi laws against homosexuality were not repealed there until 1969. The Nazi amendments to Paragraph 175, which turned homosexuality, previously labeled as a minor offense, into a felony, remained intact in East Germany until 1968. In 2002 the German government issued official pardons to gay men who were convicted by the Nazis.\nRudolf Brazda, one of the last known homosexual concentration camp survivors, died on August 3, 2011, at the age of 98.\nSymbols of LGBTQ+ liberation.\nIn the 1970s, newly active Australian, European and North American queer liberation advocates began to use the pink triangle to raise awareness of its use in Nazi Germany. In 1972, gay concentration camp survivor Heinz Heger's memoir (\"The Men with the Pink Triangle\") brought it to greater public attention. In response, the German gay liberation group issued a call in 1973 for gay men to wear it as a memorial to past victims and to protest continuing discrimination. In the 1975 movie \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\", Dr. Frank N. Furter\u2014a bisexual transvestite\u2014wears a pink triangle badge on one of his outfits. In 1976, Peter Recht, Detlef Stoffel, and Christiane Schmerl made the German documentary (\"Pink Triangle? That was such a long time ago...\"). Publications such as San Francisco's \"Gay Sunshine\" and Toronto's \"The Body Politic\" promoted the pink triangle as a memorial to those who had faced persecution and oppression.\nIn the 1980s, the pink triangle was increasingly used not just as a memorial but as a positive symbol of both self-identity and community identity. It commonly represented both gay and lesbian identity, and was incorporated into the logos of such organizations and businesses. It was also used by individuals, sometimes discreetly or ambiguously as an \"insider\" code unfamiliar to the heterosexual majority. The logo for the 1987 March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights was a silhouette of the US Capitol Dome superimposed over a pink triangle. Additionally, the first South Asian LGBTQ+ identity-based group used the pink triangle for its logo in 1986: the inverted triangle of Trikone\u2019s logo also roughly traces the shape of the Indian subcontinent, a signifier of their identity-based membership.\nThe design of the biangles symbol of bisexuality began with the pink triangle. The biangles symbol was designed by artist Liz Nania as she co-organized a bisexual contingent for the Second National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights in 1987. The addition of a blue triangle to the pink triangle in the biangles symbol contrasts the pink and represents heterosexuality. The two triangles overlap and form lavender, which represents the \"queerness of bisexuality\", referencing the Lavender Menace and 1980s and 1990s associations of lavender with queerness. \nTaking a more militant tone, the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP) was formed by six gay activists in New York City in 1987, and to draw attention to the disease's disproportionate impact on gay and bisexual men, and the apparent role of \"genocidal\" queer-antagonism in slowing progress on medical research, adopted an upward-pointing pink triangle on a black field along with the slogan \"SILENCE = DEATH\" as its logo. Some use the triangle in this orientation as a specific \"reversal\" of its usage by the Nazis. The Pink Panthers Movement in Denver, Colorado, adopted a pink triangle with clawed panther print logo, adapted from the original Pink Panthers Patrol in New York City.\nIn the 1990s, a pink triangle enclosed in a green circle came to be commonly used as a symbol identifying \"safe spaces\" for LGBTQ+ people at work or in school.\nA pink Union Jack, with the blue triangles of the Union Jack changed to pink in reference to the pink triangle symbol, was created by a gay man, David Gwinnutt, to express his \"pride in being gay and British.\"\nUse of the pink triangle symbol is not without criticism. In 1993, historian Klaus M\u00fcller argued that \"the pink triangles of the concentration camps became an international symbol of gay and lesbian pride because so few of us are haunted by concrete memories of those who were forced to wear them.\" In March 2025, US president Donald Trump shared a link to \"The Washington Times\", which showed the downward pointed pink triangle overlaid with a no symbol, in reference to Trump's anti-DEI policies.\nMemorials.\nThe symbol of the pink triangle has been included in numerous public monuments and memorials. In 1980 a jury chose the pink triangle design for the Homomonument in Amsterdam, to memorialize gay and bisexual men killed in the Holocaust (and also victims of anti-gay violence generally). In 1995, after a decade of campaigning for it, a pink triangle plaque was installed at the Dachau Memorial Museum to commemorate the suffering of gay men and lesbians. In 2015 a pink triangle was incorporated into Chicago's Legacy Walk. It is the basis of the design of the Gay and Lesbian Holocaust Memorial in Sydney. In 2001 it inspired both San Francisco's Pink Triangle Park in the Castro and the Pink Triangle on Twin Peaks that is displayed every year during the Pride weekend. It is also the basis for LGBTQ+ memorials in Barcelona, Sitges, and Montevideo, and the burial component of the LGBTQ+ Pink Dolphin Monument in Galveston.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71138", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71138", "title": "Wave function collapse", "text": "Process by which a quantum system takes on a definitive state\nIn various interpretations of quantum mechanics, wave function collapse, also called reduction of the state vector, occurs when a wave function\u2014initially in a superposition of several eigenstates\u2014reduces to a single eigenstate due to interaction with the external world. This interaction is called an \"observation\" and is the essence of a measurement in quantum mechanics, which connects the wave function with classical observables such as position and momentum. Collapse is one of the two processes by which quantum systems evolve in time; the other is the continuous evolution governed by the Schr\u00f6dinger equation.\nIn the Copenhagen interpretation, wave function collapse connects quantum to classical models, with a special role for the observer. By contrast, objective-collapse proposes an origin in physical processes. In the many-worlds interpretation, collapse does not exist; all wave function outcomes occur while quantum decoherence accounts for the appearance of collapse.\nHistorically, Werner Heisenberg was the first to use the idea of wave function reduction to explain quantum measurement.\nMathematical description.\nIn quantum mechanics each measurable physical quantity of a quantum system is called an observable which, for example, could be the position formula_1 and the momentum formula_2 but also energy formula_3, formula_4 components of spin (formula_5), and so on. The observable acts as a linear function on the states of the system; its eigenvectors correspond to the quantum state (i.e. eigenstate) and the eigenvalues to the possible values of the observable. The collection of eigenstates/eigenvalue pairs represent all possible values of the observable. Writing formula_6 for an eigenstate and formula_7 for the corresponding observed value, any arbitrary state of the quantum system can be expressed as a vector using bra\u2013ket notation: \nformula_8\nThe kets formula_9 specify the different available quantum \"alternatives\", i.e., particular quantum states.\nThe wave function is a specific representation of a quantum state. Wave functions can therefore always be expressed as eigenstates of an observable though the converse is not necessarily true.\nCollapse.\nTo account for the experimental result that repeated measurements of a quantum system give the same results, the theory postulates a \"collapse\" or \"reduction of the state vector\" upon observation, abruptly converting an arbitrary state into a single component eigenstate of the observable:\nformula_10\nwhere the arrow represents a measurement of the observable corresponding to the formula_11 basis.\nFor any single event, only one eigenvalue is measured, chosen randomly from among the possible values.\nMeaning of the expansion coefficients.\nThe complex coefficients formula_12 in the expansion of a quantum state in terms of eigenstates formula_9, \nformula_8\ncan be written as an (complex) overlap of the corresponding eigenstate and the quantum state:\nformula_15\nThey are called the probability amplitudes. The square modulus formula_16 is the probability that a measurement of the observable yields the eigenstate formula_17. The sum of the probability over all possible outcomes must be one:\nformula_18\nAs examples, individual counts in a double slit experiment with electrons appear at random locations on the detector; after many counts are summed the distribution shows a wave interference pattern. In a Stern-Gerlach experiment with silver atoms, each particle appears in one of two areas unpredictably, but the final conclusion has equal numbers of events in each area.\nThis statistical aspect of quantum measurements differs fundamentally from classical mechanics. In quantum mechanics the only information we have about a system is its wave function and measurements of its wave function can only give statistical information.\nTerminology.\nThe two terms \"reduction of the state vector\" (or \"state reduction\" for short) and \"wave function collapse\" are used to describe the same concept. A quantum state is a mathematical description of a quantum system; a quantum state vector uses Hilbert space vectors for the description. Reduction of the state vector replaces the full state vector with a single eigenstate of the observable.\nThe term \"wave function\" is typically used for a different mathematical representation of the quantum state, one that uses spatial coordinates also called the \"position representation\". When the wave function representation is used, the \"reduction\" is called \"wave function collapse\".\nThe measurement problem.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation describes quantum systems but does not describe their measurement. Solution to the equations include all possible observable values for measurements, but measurements only result in one definite outcome. This difference is called the measurement problem of quantum mechanics. To predict measurement outcomes from quantum solutions, the orthodox interpretation of quantum theory postulates wave function collapse and uses the Born rule to compute the probable outcomes. Despite the widespread quantitative success of these postulates scientists remain dissatisfied and have sought more detailed physical models. Rather than suspending the Schr\u00f6dinger equation during the process of measurement, the measurement apparatus should be included and governed by the laws of quantum mechanics.\nPhysical approaches to collapse.\nQuantum theory offers no dynamical description of the \"collapse\" of the wave function. Viewed as a statistical theory, no description is expected. As Fuchs and Peres put it, \"collapse is something that happens in our description of the system, not to the system itself\".\nVarious interpretations of quantum mechanics attempt to provide a physical model for collapse. Three treatments of collapse can be found among the common interpretations. The first group includes hidden-variable theories like de Broglie\u2013Bohm theory; here random outcomes only result from unknown values of hidden variables. Results from tests of Bell's theorem shows that these variables would need to be non-local. The second group models measurement as quantum entanglement between the quantum state and the measurement apparatus. This results in a simulation of classical statistics called quantum decoherence. This group includes the many-worlds interpretation and consistent histories models. The third group postulates additional, but as yet undetected, physical basis for the randomness; this group includes for example the objective-collapse interpretations. While models in all groups have contributed to better understanding of quantum theory, no alternative explanation for individual events has emerged as more useful than collapse followed by statistical prediction with the Born rule.\nThe significance ascribed to the wave function varies from interpretation to interpretation and even within an interpretation (such as the Copenhagen interpretation). If the wave function merely encodes an observer's knowledge of the universe, then the wave function collapse corresponds to the receipt of new information. This is somewhat analogous to the situation in classical physics, except that the classical \"wave function\" does not necessarily obey a wave equation. If the wave function is physically real, in some sense and to some extent, then the collapse of the wave function is also seen as a real process, to the same extent.\nQuantum decoherence.\nQuantum decoherence explains why a system interacting with an environment transitions from being a pure state, exhibiting superpositions, to a mixed state, an incoherent combination of classical alternatives. This transition is fundamentally reversible, as the combined state of system and environment is still pure, but for all practical purposes irreversible in the same sense as in the second law of thermodynamics: the environment is a very large and complex quantum system, and it is not feasible to reverse their interaction. Decoherence is thus very important for explaining the classical limit of quantum mechanics, but cannot explain wave function collapse, as all classical alternatives are still present in the mixed state, and wave function collapse selects only one of them.\nThe form of decoherence known as environment-induced superselection proposes that when a quantum system interacts with the environment, the superpositions \"apparently\" reduce to mixtures of classical alternatives. The combined wave function of the system and environment continue to obey the Schr\u00f6dinger equation throughout this \"apparent\" collapse. More importantly, this is not enough to explain \"actual\" wave function collapse, as decoherence does not reduce it to a single eigenstate.\nHistory.\nThe concept of wavefunction collapse was introduced by Werner Heisenberg in his 1927 paper on the uncertainty principle, \"\u00dcber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und Mechanik\", and incorporated into the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics by John von Neumann, in his 1932 treatise \"Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik\". Heisenberg did not try to specify exactly what the collapse of the wavefunction meant. However, he emphasized that it should not be understood as a physical process. Niels Bohr never mentions wave function collapse in his published work, but he repeatedly cautioned that we must give up a \"pictorial representation\". Despite the differences between Bohr and Heisenberg, their views are often grouped together as the \"Copenhagen interpretation\", of which wave function collapse is regarded as a key feature.\nJohn von Neumann's influential 1932 work \"Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\" took a more formal approach, developing an \"ideal\" measurement scheme that postulated that there were two processes of wave function change:\nIn 1957 Hugh Everett III proposed a model of quantum mechanics that dropped von Neumann's first postulate. Everett observed that the measurement apparatus was also a quantum system and its quantum interaction with the system under observation should determine the results. He proposed that the discontinuous change is instead a splitting of a wave function representing the universe. While Everett's approach rekindled interest in foundational quantum mechanics, it left core issues unresolved. Two key issues relate to origin of the observed classical results: what causes quantum systems to appear classical and to resolve with the observed probabilities of the Born rule.\nBeginning in 1970 H. Dieter Zeh sought a detailed quantum decoherence model for the discontinuous change without postulating collapse. Further work by Wojciech H. Zurek in 1980 lead eventually to a large number of papers on many aspects of the concept. Decoherence assumes that every quantum system interacts quantum mechanically with its environment and such interaction is not separable from the system, a concept called an \"open system\". Decoherence has been shown to work very quickly and within a minimal environment, but as yet it has not succeeded in a providing a detailed model replacing the collapse postulate of orthodox quantum mechanics.\nBy explicitly dealing with the interaction of object and measuring instrument, von Neumann described a quantum mechanical measurement scheme consistent with wave function collapse. However, he did not prove the \"necessity\" of such a collapse. Von Neumann's projection postulate was conceived based on experimental evidence available during the 1930s, in particular Compton scattering. Later work refined the notion of measurements into the more easily discussed \"first kind\", that will give the same value when immediately repeated, and the \"second kind\" that give different values when repeated.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71144", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71144", "title": "Philippines/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "71145", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71145", "title": "Ultraviolet light", "text": ""}
{"id": "71151", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71151", "title": "Tonga/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "71152", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71152", "title": "Slovenia/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "71153", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71153", "title": "Star of India (ship)", "text": "Museum ship harbored in San Diego, USA\nStar of India is an iron-hulled sailing ship, built in 1863 in Ramsey, Isle of Man, as the full-rigged ship Euterpe. After a career sailing from Great Britain to India and New Zealand, she was renamed, re-rigged as a barque, and became a salmon hauler on the Alaska to California route. Retired in 1926, she was restored as a seaworthy museum ship in 1962\u20133 and home-ported at the Maritime Museum of San Diego in San Diego, California. She is the oldest ship still sailing regularly and also the oldest iron-hulled merchant ship still afloat. The ship is both a California Historical Landmark and United States National Historic Landmark.\nHistory.\nAs \"Euterpe\".\nNamed after Euterpe, the Greek muse of music, she was a full-rigged ship (a ship that is square-rigged on all three masts), built of iron in 1863 by Gibson, McDonald &amp; Arnold, of Ramsey, Isle of Man, for the Indian jute trade of Wakefield Nash &amp; Company of Liverpool. She was launched on 14 November 1863, and assigned British Registration No.47617 and signal VPJK.\n\"Euterpe's\" career had a rough beginning. She sailed for Calcutta from Liverpool on 9 January 1864, under the command of Captain William John Storry. A collision with an unlit Spanish brig off the coast of Wales carried away the jib-boom and damaged other rigging. The crew became mutinous, refusing to continue, and she returned to Anglesey for repair; 17 of the crew were confined to the Beaumaris Gaol at hard labour. Then, in 1865, \"Euterpe\" was forced to cut away her masts in a gale in the Bay of Bengal off Madras and limped to Trincomalee and Calcutta for repair. Captain Storry died during the return voyage to England and was buried at sea.\nAfter her near-disastrous first two voyages \"Euterpe\" was sold, first in 1871 to David Brown of London for whom she made four more relatively uneventful voyages to India, then again (displaced by steamers after the opening of the Suez Canal) in 1871 to Shaw, Savill and Company of London (which in 1882 became the Shaw, Savill &amp; Albion Line). In late 1871 she began 25 years of carrying passengers and freight in the New Zealand emigrant trade, each voyage going eastward around the world before returning to England. The fastest of her 21 passages to New Zealand took 100 days, the longest 143 days. She also made ports of call in Australia, California, and Chile. A baby was born on one of those trips en route to New Zealand, and was given the middle name Euterpe. Another child, John William Philips Palmer, was born on the 1873 journey to Dunedin, New Zealand, and was partially named after the captain Theo E. Philips (\"Born Lo 42.30 south La 0.30 west at 11 am Feb 21\").\nIn 1897, after 21 round-the-world trips, \"Euterpe\" was sold, first to Hawaiian owners, then in 1899 to the Pacific Colonial Ship Company of San Francisco, California, and from 1898 to 1901 made four voyages between the Pacific Northwest, Australia and Hawaii carrying primarily lumber, coal and sugar. She was registered in the United States on 30 October 1900.\nAs \"Star of India\".\nIn 1901, \"Euterpe\" was sold to the Alaska Packers' Association of San Francisco, who re-rigged her as a barque (converting the square-rigged aftermost mast to fore-and-aft) and in 1902 began carrying fishermen, cannery workers, coal and canning supplies each spring from Oakland, California, to Nushagak in the Bering Sea, returning each autumn with holds full of canned salmon. In 1906, the Association changed her name to be consistent with the rest of their fleet, and she became \"Star of India\". She was laid up in 1923 after 22 Alaskan voyages; by that time, steam ruled the seas.\nIn 1926, \"Star of India\" was sold to the Zoological Society of San Diego to be the centrepiece of a planned museum and aquarium. The Great Depression and World War II caused that plan to be cancelled, and it was not until 1957 that restoration began. Alan Villiers, a windjammer captain and author, came to San Diego on a lecture tour. Seeing \"Star of India\" decaying in the harbor, he publicized the situation and inspired a group of citizens to form the \"Star of India Auxiliary\" in 1959 to support the restoration of the ship. Progress was still slow, but in 1976, \"Star of India\" finally put to sea again. She houses exhibits for the Maritime Museum of San Diego, is kept fully seaworthy, and sails at least once a year. With the many other ships now in the Museum, she hosts frequent tour guide-led school tours for over 6,000 children a year, as well as a Living History Program in which students \"step back in time\" and are immersed in history and teamwork activities during overnight visits.\nThe 1863 \"Star of India\" is the fourth oldest ship afloat in the United States, after the 1797 , 1841 \"Charles W. Morgan\", and the 1854 , and is the oldest ship in the world that still sails regularly. Unlike many preserved or restored vessels, her hull, cabins and equipment are nearly 100% original.\nHome port.\n\"Star of India\" is docked at the Maritime Museum of San Diego, just south of San Diego International Airport, on the west side of North Harbor Drive at approximately Ash Street \u2013 all within the Port of San Diego tidelands. This location is slightly west of downtown San Diego, California. The other ships belonging to the Maritime Museum are always docked to the north of \"Star of India\". Her nearest neighbour \u2013 since 2007 \u2013 is (a.k.a. HMS \"Rose\"), a replica of a British frigate.\nWhen she sails, \"Star of India\" often remains within sight of the coast of San Diego County, and usually returns to her dock within a day. She is sailed by a skilled volunteer crew of Maritime Museum members, who train all year. She has become one of the landmark ships in San Diego's harbor.\nFrom August to September 2009, \"Star of India\" was removed from display to a local drydock facility for a required Coast Guard inspection and various maintenance below the waterline, at a cost of approximately $225,000, and 3\u20134 weeks off display.\nHer most recent voyage was on November 12, 2023.\nAppearances in media.\n\"Star of India\" has appeared in episodes of:\nAt the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con, Ubisoft used the ship to promote their new game \"\" and renamed the ship for 3 days after the in-game ship \"The Jackdaw\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71154", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71154", "title": "Euterpe (muse)", "text": ""}
{"id": "71155", "revid": "136748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71155", "title": "Euterpe (ship)", "text": ""}
{"id": "71156", "revid": "2642856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71156", "title": "Euterpe", "text": "Muse of music (Greek mythology)\nEuterpe (; , from + ) was one of the Muses in Greek mythology, presiding over music. In late Classical times, she was named muse of lyric poetry. She has been called \"Giver of delight\" by ancient poets.\nMythology.\nEuterpe was born as one of the daughters of Mnemosyne, Titan goddess of memory, and fathered by Zeus, god of the gods. Her sisters include Calliope (muse of epic poetry), Clio (muse of history), Melpomene (muse of tragedy), Terpsichore (muse of dancing), Erato (muse of erotic poetry), Thalia (muse of comedy), Polyhymnia (muse of hymns), and Urania (muse of astronomy). Sometimes they are referred to as water nymphs having been born from the four sacred springs on Helicon which flowed from the ground after Pegasus, the winged horse, stamped his hooves on the ground. The mountain spring Cassotis on Mount Parnassus was sacred to Euterpe and the other Muses. It flowed between two high rocks above the city of Delphi, and in ancient times its sacred waters were retained for the use of the Pythia, the priests, priestesses, as well as the oracle of Apollo.\nAlong with her sister Muses, Euterpe was believed to have lived on Mount Olympus where she and her sisters entertained their father and the other Olympian gods with their great artistry. Later on, tradition also placed them on Mount Helicon in Boeotia where there was a major cult center to the goddesses, or on Mount Parnassus where the Castalian spring was a favorite destination for poets and artists.\nSome people believe that she invented the aulos or double-flute, though most mythographers credit Marsyas or Athena with its invention. Some say she also invented other wind instruments. Euterpe is often depicted holding a flute in artistic renditions of her.\nPindar and other sources (the author of the \"Bibliotheca\" and Servius) describe the Thracian king Rhesus, who appears in the \"Iliad\", as son of Euterpe and the river-god Strymon; Homer calls him son of Eioneus.\nFunctions.\nEuterpe's role, alongside her sisters, was to entertain the gods on Mount Olympus. She was said to have sparked the development of liberal and fine arts in Ancient Greece, serving as an inspiration to poets, dramatists, and authors such as Homer.\nTraditionally, musicians would invoke Euterpe to inspire, guide, and assist them in their compositions. Such petitions might take the form of a prayer for divine inspiration from the muse.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71166", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71166", "title": "Jebediah Springfield", "text": ""}
{"id": "71167", "revid": "1233390843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71167", "title": "Frege (surname)", "text": "Frege is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname Frege. "}
{"id": "71170", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71170", "title": "Dominica/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "71174", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71174", "title": "Syria/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "71180", "revid": "41030369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71180", "title": "Muses", "text": "Inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts\nIn ancient Greek religion and mythology, the Muses (, ) were the inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts. They were considered the source of the knowledge embodied in the poetry, lyric songs, and myths that were related orally for centuries in ancient Greek culture.\nThe number and names of the Muses differed by region, but from the Classical period the number of Muses was standardized to nine, and their names were generally given as Calliope, Clio, Polyhymnia, Euterpe, Terpsichore, Erato, Melpomene, Thalia, and Urania.\nIn modern figurative usage, a muse is a person who serves as someone's source of artistic inspiration.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Muses\" () perhaps came from the o-grade of the Proto-Indo-European root (the basic meaning of which is 'put in mind' in verb formations with transitive function and 'have in mind' in those with intransitive function), or from root ('to tower, mountain') since all the most important cult-centres of the Muses were on mountains or hills. R. S. P. Beekes rejects the latter etymology and suggests that a Pre-Greek origin is also possible.\nNumber and names.\nThe earliest known records of the Muses come from Boeotia (Boeotian muses). Some ancient authorities regarded the Muses as of Thracian origin. In Thrace, a tradition of three original Muses persisted.\nIn the first century BC, Diodorus Siculus cited Homer and Hesiod to the contrary, observing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Writers similarly disagree also concerning the number of the Muses; for some say that there are three, and others that there are nine, but the number nine has prevailed since it rests upon the authority of the most distinguished men, such as Homer and Hesiod and others like them.\nDiodorus states (Book I.18) that Osiris first recruited the nine Muses, along with the satyrs, while passing through Aethiopia, before embarking on a tour of all Asia and Europe, teaching the arts of cultivation wherever he went.\nAccording to Hesiod's account (c.\u2009700 BC), generally followed by the writers of antiquity, the Nine Muses were the nine daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne (i.e., \"Memory\" personified), figuring as personifications of knowledge and the arts, especially poetry, literature, dance and music.\nThe Roman scholar Varro (116\u201327 BC) relates that there are only three Muses: one born from the movement of water, another who makes sound by striking the air, and a third who is embodied only in the human voice. They were called Melete or \"Practice\", Mneme or \"Memory\" and Aoide or \"Song\". The \"Quaestiones Convivales\" of Plutarch (46\u2013120 AD) also report three ancient Muses (9.I4.2\u20134).\nHowever, the classical understanding of the Muses tripled their triad and established a set of nine goddesses, who embody the arts and inspire creation with their graces through remembered and improvised song and mime, writing, traditional music, and dance. It was not until Hellenistic times that the following systematic set of functions became associated with them, and even then some variation persisted both in their names and in their attributes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to Pausanias, who wrote in the later second century AD, there were originally three Muses, worshipped on Mount Helicon in Boeotia: Aoide ('song' or 'tune'), Melete ('practice' or 'occasion'), and Mneme ('memory'). Together, these three form the complete picture of the preconditions of poetic art in cult practice.\nIn Delphi too three Muses were worshipped, but with other names: Nete, Mese, and Hypate, which are assigned as the names of the three chords of the ancient musical instrument, the lyre.\nAlternatively, later they were called Cephisso, Apollonis, and Borysthenis - names which characterize them as daughters of Apollo.\nA later tradition recognized a set of four Muses: Thelxino\u00eb, Aoide, Arch\u0113, and Melete, said to be daughters of Zeus and Plusia or of Ouranos. One of the people frequently associated with the Muses was Pierus. By some he was called the father (by a Pimpleian nymph, called Antiope by Cicero) of a total of seven Muses, called (), (), (), (), Achel\u014d\u00eds, (), and ().\nAncient writers often called Boeotia Aonia, and because the Muses often visited Mount Helicon in Boeotia, they were called Aonides and Aoniae Sorores.\nMythology.\nAccording to Hesiod's \"Theogony\" (seventh century BC), they were daughters of Zeus, king of the gods, and Mnemosyne, Titan goddess of memory. Hesiod in Theogony narrates that the Muses brought to people forgetfulness, that is, the forgetfulness of pain and the cessation of obligations.\nFor Alcman and Mimnermus, they were even more primordial, springing from the early deities Ouranos and Gaia. Gaia is Mother Earth, an early mother goddess who was worshipped at Delphi from prehistoric times, long before the site was rededicated to Apollo, possibly indicating a transfer to association with him after that time.\nSometimes the Muses are referred to as water nymphs, associated with the springs of Helicon and with Pieris. It was said that the winged horse Pegasus touched his hooves to the ground on Helicon, causing four sacred springs to burst forth, from which the Muses, also known as pegasides, were born. Athena later tamed the horse and presented him to the Muses (compare the Roman inspiring nymphs of springs, the Camenae, the V\u00f6lva of Norse mythology and also the apsaras in the mythology of classical India).\nClassical writers set Apollo as their leader, ('Apollo Muse-leader'). In one myth, the Muses judged a contest between Apollo and Marsyas. They also gathered the pieces of the dead body of Orpheus, son of Calliope, and buried them in Leivithra. In a later myth, Thamyris challenged them to a singing contest. They won and punished Thamyris by blinding him and robbing him of his singing ability.\nAccording to a myth from Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\"\u2014alluding to the connection of Pieria with the Muses\u2014Pierus, king of Macedon, had nine daughters he named after the nine Muses, believing that their skills were a great match to the Muses. He thus challenged the Muses to a match, resulting in his daughters, the \"Pierides\", being turned into chattering magpies for their presumption.\nPausanias records a tradition of two generations of Muses; the first are the daughters of Ouranos and Gaia, the second of Zeus and Mnemosyne. Another, rarer genealogy is that they are daughters of Harmonia (the daughter of Aphrodite and Ares), which contradicts the myth in which they were dancing at the wedding of Harmonia and Cadmus.\nChildren.\nCalliope had two sons, Ialemus and Orpheus, with Apollo. In another version of the story, the father of Orpheus was Oeagrus, but Apollo adopted him and taught him the skill of lyre while Calliope trained him in singing.\nLinus was said to have been the son of Apollo and one of the Muses, either Calliope or Terpsichore or Urania. Rhesus was the son of Strymon and Calliope or Euterpe.\nThe sirens were the children of Achelous and Melpomene or Terpsichore. Kleopheme was the daughter of Erato and Malos. Hyacinth was the son of Clio, according to an unpopular account.\nHymenaeus was assigned as Apollo's son by one of the muses, either Calliope, or Clio, or Terpsichore, or Urania. Corybantes were the children of Thalia and Apollo.\nAgainst the Sirens.\nIn the sanctuary of Hera in Coroneia was a statue created by Pythodorus of Thebes, depicting Hera holding the sirens. According to the myth, Hera persuaded the sirens to challenge the Muses to a singing contest. After the Muses won, they are said to have plucked the sirens' feathers and used them to make crowns for themselves. According to Stephanus of Byzantium, the sirens, overwhelmed by their loss, cast off their feathers from their shoulders, turned white and then threw themselves into the sea. As a result, the nearby city was named Aptera (\"featherless\") and the nearby islands were called the \"Leukai\" (\"the white ones\"). John Tzetzes recounts that after defeating the sirens, the Muses crowned themselves with the sirens' wings, except for Terpsichore who was their mother, adding that the city of Aptera named after this event. Furthermore, in one of his letters, Julian the Emperor mentions the Muses' victory over the sirens.\nCult.\nThe Muses had several temples and shrines in ancient Greece, their two main cult centres being Mount Helikon in Boiotia, which holds the Valley of the Muses, and Pieria in Macedonia.\nStrabo wrote: \n\"Helikon, not far distant from Parnassos, rivals it both in height and in circuit; for both are rocky and covered with snow, and their circuit comprises no large extent of territory. Here are the temple of the Mousai and Hippukrene and the cave of the Nymphai called the Leibethrides; and from this fact one might infer that those who consecrated Helikon to the Mousai were Thrakians, the same who dedicated Pieris and Leibethron and Pimpleia [in Pieria] to the same goddesses. The Thrakians used to be called Pieres, but, now that they have disappeared, the Macedonians hold these places.\"\nThe cult of the Muses was also commonly connected to that of Apollo.\nEmblems.\nThe following table lists the Classical names and attributes of the standard list of the nine Muses, as well as their various associated symbols:\nSome Greek writers give the names of the nine Muses as Kallichore, Helike, Eunike, Thelxino\u00eb, Terpsichore, Euterpe, Eukelade, Dia, and Enope.\nIn Renaissance and Neoclassical art, the dissemination of emblem books such as Cesare Ripa's \"Iconologia\" (1593 and many further editions) helped standardize the depiction of the Muses in sculpture and painting, so they could be distinguished by certain props. These props, or emblems, became readily identifiable by the viewer, enabling one immediately to recognize the muse and the art with which she had become associated. Here again, Calliope (epic poetry) carries a writing tablet; Clio (history) carries a scroll and books; Euterpe (song and elegiac poetry) carries a double-pipe, the \"aulos\"; Erato (lyric poetry) is often seen with a lyre and a crown of roses; Melpomene (tragedy) is often seen with a tragic mask; Polyhymnia (sacred songs) is often seen with a pensive expression; Terpsichore (chorus dancing and choral song) is often seen dancing and carrying a lyre; Thalia (comedy) is often seen with a comic mask; and Urania (astronomy) carries a pair of compasses and the celestial globe.\nFunctions.\nIn society.\nThe Greek word is a common noun as well as a type of goddess: it literally means 'art' or 'poetry'. According to Pindar, to \"carry a \" is 'to excel in the arts'. The word derives from the Indo-European root , which is also the source of Greek \"Mnemosyne\" and , English \"mind\", \"mental\" and \"monitor\", Sanskrit \"mantra\" and Avestan .\nThe Muses, therefore, were both the embodiments and sponsors of performed metrical speech: (whence the English term \"music\") was just \"one of the arts of the Muses\". Others included science, geography, mathematics, philosophy, and especially art, drama, and inspiration. In the archaic period, before the widespread availability of books (scrolls), this included nearly all of learning. The first Greek book on astronomy, by Thales, took the form of dactylic hexameters, as did many works of pre-Socratic philosophy. Both Plato and the Pythagoreans explicitly included philosophy as a sub-species of . The \"Histories\" of Herodotus, whose primary medium of delivery was public recitation, were divided by Alexandrian editors into nine books, named after the nine Muses.\nFor poet and \"law-giver\" Solon, the Muses were \"the key to the good life\"; since they brought both prosperity and friendship. Solon sought to perpetuate his political reforms by establishing recitations of his poetry\u2014complete with invocations to his practical-minded Muses\u2014by Athenian boys at festivals each year. He believed that the Muses would help inspire people to do their best.\nIn literature.\nAncient authors and some later authors and artists invoke Muses when writing poetry, hymns or epic history. Ancient authors invocations often occur near the beginning of their work. It asks for help or inspiration from the Muses, or simply invites the Muse to sing directly through the author.\nOriginally, the invocation of the Muse was an indication that the speaker was working inside the poetic tradition, according to the established formulas. For example:\nThese things declare to me from the beginning,\nye Muses who dwell in the house of Olympus,\nand tell me which of them first came to be.\n\u2014 Hesiod (c. 700 BCE), \"Theogony\" (Hugh G. Evelyn-White translation, 2015)\nSing to me of the man, Muse, the man of twists and turns\ndriven time and again off course, once he had plundered\nthe hallowed heights of Troy.\n\u2014Homer (c. 700 - 600 BCE), in Book I of \"The Odyssey\" (Robert Fagles translation, 1996)\nO Muse! the causes and the crimes relate;\nWhat goddess was provok'd, and whence her hate;\nFor what offence the Queen of Heav'n began\nTo persecute so brave, so just a man; [...] \n\u2014Virgil (c. 29 - 19 BCE), in Book I of the \"Aeneid\" (John Dryden translation, 1697)\nBesides Homer and Virgil, other famous works that included an invocation of the Muse are the first of the \"carmina\" by Catullus, Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\" and \"Amores\", Dante's \"Inferno\" (Canto II), Chaucer's \"Troilus and Criseyde\" (Book II), Shakespeare's \"Henry V\" (Act 1, Prologue), his 38th sonnet, and Milton's \"Paradise Lost\" (openings of Books 1 and 7).\nIn cults and modern museums.\nWhen Pythagoras arrived at Croton, his first advice to the Crotoniates was to build a shrine to the Muses at the center of the city, to promote civic harmony and learning. Local cults of the Muses often became associated with springs or with fountains. The Muses were sometimes called Aganippides, a name derived from the sacred spring Aganippe at the foot of Mount Helicon, whose waters were believed to grant inspiration. Other fountains, Hippocrene and Pirene, were also important locations associated with the Muses. Some sources occasionally referred to the Muses as \"Corycides\" (or \"Corycian nymphs\") after a cave on Mount Parnassos, called the Corycian Cave. Pausanias referred to the Muses by the surnames \"Ardalides\" or \"Ardaliotides\", because of a sanctuary to them at Troezen said to have been built by the mythical Ardalus.\nThe Muses were venerated especially in Boeotia, in the Valley of the Muses near Helicon, and in Delphi and the Parnassus, where Apollo became known as ('Muse-leader') after the sites were rededicated to his cult.\nOften Muse-worship was associated with the hero-cults of poets: the tombs of Archilochus on Thasos and of Hesiod and Thamyris in Boeotia all played host to festivals in which poetic recitations accompanied sacrifices to the Muses. The Library of Alexandria and its circle of scholars formed around a (i.e., 'museum' or shrine of the Muses) close to the tomb of Alexander the Great. Many Enlightenment figures sought to re-establish a \"Cult of the Muses\" in the 18th century. A famous Masonic lodge in pre-Revolutionary Paris was called Les Neuf Soeurs ('The Nine Sisters', that is, the Nine Muses); Voltaire, Benjamin Franklin, Danton, and other influential Enlightenment figures attended it. As a side-effect of this movement the word \"museum\" (originally, 'cult place of the Muses') came to refer to a place for the public display of knowledge.\nMuseia (\u039c\u03bf\u03cd\u03c3\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1) was a festival dedicated to Muses which was held every fifth year on the lower slopes of Mount Helicon in Boeotia. There was also another festival which was called Museia, which was celebrated in schools.\nPlaces named after the Muses.\nIn New Orleans, Louisiana, there are streets named for all nine. It is commonly held that the local pronunciation of the names has been colorfully anglicized in an unusual manner by the \"Yat\" dialect. The pronunciations are actually in line with the French, Spanish, and Creole roots of the city.\nModern use in the arts.\nThe Muses are explicitly used in modern English to refer to an artistic inspiration, as when one cites one's own artistic muse, and also implicit in words and phrases such as \"amuse\", \"museum\" (Latinised from \u2014a place where the Muses were worshipped), \"music\", and \"musing upon\". In current literature, the influential role that the Muse plays has been extended to the political sphere.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71182", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71182", "title": "Dordrecht", "text": "City and municipality in South Holland, Netherlands\nDordrecht (), historically known in English as Dordt (still colloquially used in Dutch, ) or Dort, is a city and municipality in the Western Netherlands, located in the province of South Holland. It is the province's fifth-largest city after Rotterdam, The Hague, Leiden, and Zoetermeer, with a population of 123,000 (2025).\nThe municipality covers the entire Dordrecht Island, also often called \"Het Eiland van Dordt\" (\"the Island of Dordt\"), bordered by the rivers Oude Maas, Beneden Merwede, Nieuwe Merwede, Hollands Diep, and Dordtsche Kil. Dordrecht is the largest and most important city in the Drechtsteden and is also part of the Randstad, the main conurbation in the Netherlands.\nDordrecht is the oldest city in Holland and has a rich history and culture.\nEtymology.\nThe name Dordrecht comes from \"Thuredriht\" (circa 1120), \"Thuredrecht\" (circa 1200). The name seems to mean 'thoroughfare'; a ship-canal or river through which ships were pulled by rope from one river to another, as here between the Dubbel and the Merwede. Earlier etymologists had assumed that the 'drecht' suffix came from Latin 'trajectum', a ford, but this was rejected in 1996. The Drecht is now supposed to have been derived from \", which means to pull, tow or drag. Inhabitants of Dordrecht are \"Dordtenaren\" (singular: \"Dordtenaar\").\nDordrecht is informally called \"Dordt\" by its inhabitants. In earlier centuries, Dordrecht was a major trading port and was called Dort in English.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe city was formed along the Thure river, in the midst of peat marshes. This river was a branch of the river Dubbel, which is part of the massive Rhine\u2013Meuse\u2013Scheldt delta complex, near the current Bagijnhof. Around 1120 reference to Dordrecht was made by a remark that count Dirk IV of Holland was murdered in 1049 near \"Thuredrech\".\nDordrecht was granted city rights by William I, Count of Holland, in 1220, making it the oldest city in the present province of South Holland. In fact, Geertruidenberg was the first city in the historical county of Holland to receive city rights, but this municipality currently is part of the province of North Brabant.\nIn the 12th and 13th centuries, Dordrecht developed into an important market city because of its strategic location. It traded primarily in wine, wood and cereals. Dordrecht was made even more important when it was given staple right in 1299.\nIn 1253 a Latin school was founded in Dordrecht. It still exists today as the Johan de Witt Gymnasium and is the oldest gymnasium in the Netherlands. From 1600 to 1615 Gerhard Johann Vossius was rector at this school.\nOn 18\u201319 November 1421, the Saint Elisabeth's flood flooded large parts of southern Holland, causing Dordrecht to become an island. It was commonly said that over 10,000 people died in the flood, but recent research indicates that it was probably fewer than 200 people.\nOn 29 June 1457, the city was devastated by a fire which started in Kleine Spuistraat, destroying many buildings, including the Grote Kerk.\nUnion of Dordrecht.\nIn 1572, four years into the Dutch Revolt, representatives of all the cities of Holland, with the exception of Amsterdam, as well as the Watergeuzen, represented by William II de la Marck, gathered in Dordrecht to hold the \"Eerste Vrije Statenvergadering\" (\"First Assembly of the Free States\"), also known as the \"Unie van Dordrecht\" (\"Union of Dordrecht\"). This secret meeting, called by the city of Dordrecht, was a rebellious act since only King Philip II or his stadtholder, at that time the Duke of Alba, were allowed to call a meeting of the States of Holland.\nDuring the meeting, the organization and financing of the rebellion against the Spanish occupation was discussed, Phillip II was unanimously denounced, and William of Orange was chosen as the rightful stadtholder and recognized as the official leader of the revolt. Orange, represented at the meeting by his assistant Philips of Marnix, was promised financial support of his struggle against the Spanish and at his own request, freedom of religion was declared in all of Holland.\nThe gathering is regarded as the first important step towards the free and independent Dutch Republic. Other important gatherings such as the Union of Brussels (1577) and the Union of Utrecht (1579) paved the way for official independence of the Dutch Republic, declared in the Act of Abjuration in 1581.\nThe Union of Dordrecht was held in an Augustinian monastery, nowadays simply called \"het Hof\" (\"the Court\"). The room in which the meeting was held is called \"de Statenzaal\" (\"The Hall of States\") and features a stained glass window in which the coats of arms of the twelve cities that were present at the meeting can be seen.\nSynod of Dordrecht.\nFrom 13 November 1618 to 9 May 1619, an important Dutch Reformed Church assembly took place in Dordrecht, referred to as the Synod of Dordrecht. The synod attempted, and succeeded, to settle the theological differences of opinion between the central tenets of Calvinism, and a new school of thought within the Dutch Reformed Church known as Arminianism, named for its spiritual leader Jacobus Arminius. Arminius' followers were also commonly known as Remonstrants, after the 1610 Five Articles of Remonstrance which outlined their points of dissent from the church's official doctrine. They were opposed by the Contra-Remonstrants, or the Gomarists, who were led by Dutch theologian Franciscus Gomarus.\nDuring the Twelve Years' Truce, this in essence purely theological conflict between different factions of the church had in practice spilled over into politics, dividing society along ideological lines, and threatening the existence of the young republic by repeatedly bringing it to the brink of civil war.\nThe synod was attended by Gomarist Dutch delegates and also by delegates from Reformed churches in Germany, Switzerland, and England. Though it was originally intended that the synod would bring agreement on the doctrine of predestination among all the Reformed churches, in practice this Dutch synod was mainly concerned with problems facing the Dutch Reformed Church.\nThe opening sessions dealt with a new Dutch translation of the Bible, a catechism, and the censorship of books. The synod then called upon representatives of the Remonstrants to express their beliefs. The Remonstrants refused to accept the rules established by the synod and eventually were expelled from the church.\nThe synod then studied the theology of the Remonstrants and declared that it was contrary to Scripture. The Canons of Dort were produced; they discussed in detail in five sections the errors of the Remonstrants that were rejected as well as the doctrines that were affirmed. The doctrines affirmed were that predestination is not conditional on belief; that Christ did not die for all; the total depravity of man; the irresistible grace of God; and the impossibility of falling from grace. These canons of Dort, along with the Belgic Confession and the Heidelberg Catechism, remain the theological basis of the Reformed Churches in the Netherlands.\nFollowing the synod, two hundred Remonstrant ministers were deposed from their office, of which eighty were banished. The political leaders of the Remonstrant movement were arrested and one of them beheaded on May 14, 1619. It was only after the death of Prince Maurice in 1625 that the persecution of the Remonstrants ceased.\nDiminishing economic importance.\nDuring the Eighty Years' War merchants from Dordrecht were involved in taking control and founding sugar cane plantations in the West Indies. At the end of the 17th century this led to a stable sugar refining industry in Dordrecht. This flourished in the 18th century, when Dordrecht had 16 sugar refineries, as opposed 120 in Amsterdam and 40 in Rotterdam. Dordrecht still has a few buildings purposely designed as a sugar refinery, e.g. the imposing Sugar Refinery Stokholm. \nOverall, the economic importance of Dordrecht began to wane in the 18th century, and Rotterdam became the main city in the region.\nThe Patriots movement.\nFrom 1780 to 1787, Dordrecht was home to the Patriots faction which intended to remove the hereditary Stadtholder position held by the House of Orange-Nassau.\nThe Netherlands was after all a republic \"de jure\". Soon after, more cities followed and William V fled from Holland. But his brother-in-law, King Frederick William II of Prussia, came to the aid of William V and on 18 September 1787, Dordrecht capitulated to Prussian troops. The Patriots were defeated and Willem V was restored in his position as Stadtholder.\nIn the Kingdom of the Netherlands (1815\u20132023).\nDuring the French period (1795\u20131813) Dordrecht continued to have a decent sea harbor and, for ocean-going ships, it was easier to reach than Rotterdam harbor. This changed in 1829, when the Voorne Canal was opened. Meanwhile, profits from the trade with the Dutch East Indies probably obscured the fact that Dordrecht was losing the maritime competition with Rotterdam. The end of Dordrecht as a first rate sea harbor came about when the Nieuwe Waterweg became fully usable in 1883. Compared to Dordrecht, Rotterdam sent about four times as much cargo up the Rhine to Germany in 1875. In 1895 this was 30 times as much and in 1910 about 200 times. In absolute numbers cargo from Dordrecht declined by more than 50%.\nIn the early 19th century, Dordrecht was a major center for shipbuilding. It was also a center of the Dutch timber market. As a smaller town, wages were lower than in Amsterdam and Rotterdam. It all made that many shipping lines that sailed to the East Indies for the Netherlands Trading Society (NTS) had their ships built in Dordrecht. Shipbuilders and shipping lines from Dordrecht profited disproportionally from the NTS policies. From about 1850 to 1876, the NTS gradually stopped its protection of Dutch shipping.\nThe traditional (cane) sugar refining industry of Dordrecht would not survive the industrial revolution. However, in 1861 Dordrecht Sugar Factory became operational as second modern beet sugar factory of the Netherlands.\nThroughout the centuries, Dordrecht held a key position in the defense of Holland. It hosted an army division well into the 20th century. During the mobilization of August 1939, infantry and artillery were sent to Dordrecht to defend the island. When the Germans invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940, German paratroopers landed in Dordrecht. After fierce fighting they took the bridges Dordrecht-Moerdijk and Dordrecht-Zwijndrecht. Many buildings in Dordrecht were destroyed. Towards the end of the Second World War, during the winter of 1944\u201345, Dordrecht and its surroundings were in the middle between the opposing armies. The border between occupied and liberated regions ran along the Hollands Diep. Dordrecht was finally liberated by the Canadian Army.\nIn 1970, the municipality Dubbeldam (then ca. 10,000 inhabitants) and the southern part of the municipality of Sliedrecht were incorporated into Dordrecht, making Dordrecht Island one municipality.\nDistricts.\nDordrecht is divided into 27 districts, neighbourhoods and hamlets:\nDemography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2021, around 19,35% of the population of Dordrecht was of non-Western origin. Between 2005 and 2008, this number has not changed. The allochthonous population consists for a large part of young people while the indigenous population has started to age. Over six thousand Turks live in Dordrecht, many of whom are originally from Kayap\u0131nar.\nAccording to the Social Geographical Office of Dordrecht, the population consisted of the following ethnic groups in 2005 and 2008:\nCulture.\nDue to its long and important role in Dutch history, Dordrecht has a rich culture. The medieval city centre is home to over 950 monuments. The city also houses seven historic churches and six museums in a relatively small area and hosts many festivals and events every year.\nMuseums.\nThe following museums are located in Dordrecht:\nEvents and festivals.\nDordrecht hosts around 20 cultural and historical events and festivals each year. The city won the title of \"Best events city of the year\" in 2003 and was nominated for the same title in 2004 and 2005.\n\"Dordt in Stoom\" (literally: Dordt in steam) is the biggest steam event in Europe during which historical steam trains, steam boats etc. can be seen in action. It is organized every other year and attracts a quarter of a million visitors. Attention is also paid to Dordrecht's art and architecture during \"Kunstrondje Dordt\" (literally: Little art circle Dordt) and \"Dordt Monumenteel\" (Dordt Monumental), which attracts around 100,000 visitors every year. \nDordrecht hosts the second largest book market and the largest Christmas market in the Netherlands.\n\"Wantijfestival\" is an out-doors music festival that has been held annually in the second week of June since 1995. It takes place in the Wantij park and attracts around 35,000 people each year. Wantij park also hosts the \"Wantijconcerten\" (Wantij concerts) that are held every Monday night in July and August. Other popular music festivals held in Dordrecht are the \"World Jazz dagen\" (World Jazz days) held annually in August or September, the \"Dancetour\" or \"Boulevard of Dance\", which takes place on Kingsday, \"Big Rivers Festival\", a film, music, poetry and theatre festival held in June, and the Cello festival, held every four years in the weekend of the Ascension.\nRond Uit Dordrecht organises a four-day bicycle festival in early June since 2013.\nFolklore.\nDuring Carnaval, Dordrecht is called \"Ooi- en Ramsgat\" (Ewe's and Ram's hole), and its inhabitants are \"Schapenkoppen\" (Sheepheads). This name originates from an old folk story. Import of meat or cattle was taxed in the 17th century. To avoid having to pay, two men dressed up a sheep they had bought outside the city walls, attempting to disguise it as a man. The sheep was discovered because it bleated as the three men (two men and one sheep) passed through the city wall gate. There is a special monument of a man and his son trying to hold a sheep disguised as a man between them, that refers to this legend. The logo of Dordrecht's professional football club FC Dordrecht includes the head of a ram and its supporters are known to sing \"Wij zijn de Dordtse schapenkoppen\" (we are the Dordtse sheep heads) during matches. There is also a cookie called \"Schapenkop\" (sheep head) which is a speciality of Dordrecht.\nThere are many more legends about Dordrecht. One of them is about Saint Sura, a young woman who planned on building an entire church with only three coins in her purse. She was murdered because of her supposed wealth.\nAnother legend is about the house called \"de Onbeschaamde\" (the Unembarrassed). It is about the three brothers Van Beveren who each wanted to build a house and decided to make a bet on who would dare to place the most risqu\u00e9 statue on their fa\u00e7ade. One of the brothers, Abraham van Beveren, placed a naked little boy on his fa\u00e7ade. However, the house that supposedly won has an empty fa\u00e7ade today because, according to the story, the statue was so risqu\u00e9 that it was removed.\nA well known saying about Dordrecht is \"Hoe dichter bij Dordt, hoe rotter het wordt\" (the closer to Dordrecht, the more rotten it gets). The previous mayor Noorland added to that; \"maar ben je er eenmaal in, dan heb je het prima naar je zin\" (but once you're in it, you're perfectly content). The saying can probably be explained as follows; traffic used to go by water and whoever came close to Dordrecht was obliged, according to staple right, to display their merchandise for a couple of days before being allowed to sail on. This caused loss of time and caused products to become rotten. Another explanation is derived from \"Bommel is rommel, bij Tiel is niet viel en hoe dichter bij Dordt hoe rotter het wordt\" which is supposed to be said by farmers describing the bad quality of the land close to the rivers Maas and Waal, only suitable for harvesting reed.\nNature.\nThe Sliedrechtse Biesbosch, east of Dordrecht, and the Dordtse Biesbosch, south of Dordrecht, together form the Hollandse Biesbosch which is a part of the national park the Biesbosch, one of the largest national parks in the Netherlands and one of the last freshwater tide areas in Europe. The Dordtse Biesbosch has several recreational areas that are used for walking, rowing and swimming.\nThere are also several parks near the city, such as Merwepark and Wantijpark.\nSports.\nThe Riwal Hoogwerkers Stadion is a football stadium and home ground of the local team FC Dordrecht playing in the second national league.\nSportboulevard Dordrecht is an indoor sports complex. It is the venue for international short track speed skating events such as the 2021 World Championship. The complex is home to basketball club DBV Rowic and hosted games of short-lived Dutch Windmills. Sportboulevard is home to ice hockey club Dordrecht Lions.\nDordts.\nDordts is a dialect of Dutch traditionally spoken by the working class of Dordrecht. It is categorized under the Hollandic accents but also has characteristics of Zeelandic and Brabantian.\nTypical features of Dordts are:\nIn the 20th century, Dordts has slowly started to disappear as more and more people have started speaking standard Dutch. The strongest Dordts dialect is nowadays found in the working-class neighborhoods bordering the city centre.\nOther.\nOn 14 November 1992 and again on 12 November 2011, the official arrival of the popular legendary figure Sinterklaas was held in Dordrecht and broadcast on national television.\nEconomy.\nThe current economy of Dordrecht is based on ship building, wood industry, and steel industry. The city has the sixth largest sea port in the Netherlands. One of the largest employers on Dordrecht Island is DuPont de Nemours (Nederland) B.V. It has 9 factories here with a workforce of 900 people.\nIn development are the \"Learning\" and \"Health\" Business Parks. The Learning Park is intended to have of space for educational institutions. In the Health Park, a wide range of health services will be located, with the Dordwijk Campus of the Albert Schweitzer Hospital as focal point. Other services include a blood bank, pharmacy, and mental health clinic.\nNear the Health Park a new Sport Park will be built. A new large sport centre, the equivalent size of 3 soccer fields, is planned complete with gyms, skating rink, and a pool. Next to this Sport Park, a huge outdoor event terrain will be established.\nShopping.\nShopping in the centre of Dordrecht is centred around the Voorstraat, the Sarisgang and the Statenplein (Staten square). The Voorstraat is long, making it the longest shopping street in the Netherlands. Markets are held every Friday and Saturday on the Statenplein and in the Sarisgang and on Tuesday in Dubbeldam.\nGovernment and politics.\nBoard of Mayor and Aldermen.\nIn 2025 the College van Burgemeester en Wethouders ('Board of Mayor and Aldermen') in Dordrecht consisted of the following:\nLocal election.\nThe results of the 2022 municipal election in Dordrecht were as follows.\nPartner cities.\nPartner cities of Dordrecht are:\nPublic transport.\nDordrecht is well connected to the Dutch railroad system, and has several international connections. There are three railway stations; Dordrecht railway station, Zuid railway station and Stadspolders railway station. The train system hosts:\nFour trainlines\nThe four operating trainlines serve three railway stations within the city boundaries (Dordrecht, Dordrecht Zuid, Dordrecht Stadspolders)\nMain connections\n\"See also \"\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71185", "revid": "413489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71185", "title": "Digital sampling", "text": ""}
{"id": "71186", "revid": "178166630", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71186", "title": "Tourism in literature", "text": ""}
{"id": "71187", "revid": "6134466", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71187", "title": "COMMAND.COM", "text": "Default command line for MS-DOS and Windows 9x\n \nCOMMAND.COM is the default command-line interpreter for MS-DOS, Windows 95, Windows 98 and Windows Me. In the case of DOS, it is the default user interface as well. It has an additional role as the usual first program run after boot (init process). As a shell, COMMAND.COM has two distinct modes of operation: interactive mode and batch mode. Internal commands are commands stored directly inside the COMMAND.COM binary; thus, they are always available, but can only be executed directly from the command interpreter.\nDescription.\nCOMMAND.COM's successor on OS/2 and Windows NT systems is cmd.exe, although COMMAND.COM is available in virtual DOS machines on IA-32 versions of those operating systems as well. The COMMAND.COM filename was also used by Disk Control Program (DCP), an MS-DOS derivative by the former East German VEB Robotron.\nCOMMAND.COM is a DOS program. Programs launched from COMMAND.COM are DOS programs that use the DOS API to communicate with the disk operating system. The compatible command processor under FreeDOS is sometimes also called FreeCom.\nOperating modes.\nAs a shell, COMMAND.COM has two distinct modes of operation. The first is interactive mode, in which the user types commands which are then executed immediately. The second is batch mode, which executes a predefined sequence of commands stored as a text file with the .BAT extension.\nInternal commands.\nInternal commands are commands stored directly inside the COMMAND.COM binary. Thus, they are always available but can only be executed directly from the command interpreter.\nAll commands are executed after the key is pressed at the end of the line. COMMAND.COM is not case-sensitive, meaning commands can be typed in any mixture of upper and lower case.\nBatch file commands.\nControl structures are mostly used inside batch files, although they can also be used interactively.\nIF command.\nOn exit, all external commands submit a return code (a value between 0 and 255) to the calling program. Most programs have a certain convention for their return codes (for instance, 0 for a successful execution).\nIf a program was invoked by COMMAND.COM, the internal IF command with its ERRORLEVEL conditional can be used to test on error conditions of the last invoked external program.\nUnder COMMAND.COM, internal commands do not establish a new value.\nVariables.\nBatch files for COMMAND.COM can have four kinds of variables:\nRedirection, piping, and chaining.\nBecause DOS is a single-tasking operating system, piping is achieved by running commands sequentially, redirecting to and from a temporary file. COMMAND.COM makes no provision for redirecting the standard error channel.\n Commands separated by ASCII-20 (\u00b6, invoked by ) are executed in sequence (chaining of commands). In other words, first \"command1\" is executed until termination, then \"command2\". This is an undocumented feature in COMMAND.COM of MS-DOS/PC DOS 5.0 and higher. It is also supported by COMMAND.COM of the Windows NT family as well as by DR-DOS 7.07. All versions of DR-DOS COMMAND.COM already supported a similar internal function utilizing an exclamation mark (!) instead (a feature originally derived from Concurrent DOS and Multiuser DOS) - in the single-user line this feature was only available internally (in built-in startup scripts like \"!DATE!TIME\") and indirectly through DOSKEY's $T parameter to avoid problems with ! as a valid filename character. 4DOS supports a configurable command line separator (4DOS.INI CommandSep= or SETDOS /C), which defaults to ^. COMMAND.COM in newer versions of Windows NT also supports an separator for compatibility with the cmd syntax in OS/2 and the Windows NT family. (cmd does not support the \u00b6 separator.)\nLimitations.\nGenerally, the command line length in interactive mode is limited to 126 characters. In MS-DOS 6.22, the command line length in interactive mode is limited to 127 characters.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[...] all MS-DOS versions prior to Windows 95 [...] used a COM style COMMAND.COM file which has a special signature at the start of the file [...] queried by the MS-DOS BIOS before it loads the shell, but not by the DR-DOS BIOS [...] COMMAND.COM would [...] check that it is running on the \"correct\" DOS version, so if you would load their COMMAND.COM under DR-DOS, you would receive a \"Bad version\" error message and their COMMAND.COM would exit, so DR-DOS would [...] display an error message \"Bad or missing command interpreter\" (if DR-DOS was trying to load the SHELL= command processor after having finished CONFIG.SYS processing). In this case, you could enter the path to a valid DR-DOS COMMAND.COM (C:\\DRDOS\\COMMAND.COM) and everything was fine. Now, things have changed since MS-DOS 7.0 [...] COMMAND.COM has internally become an EXE style file, so there is no magic [...] signature [...] to check [...] thus no way for DR-DOS to rule out an incompatible COMMAND.COM. Further, their COMMAND.COM no longer does any version checks, but [...] does not work under DR-DOS [...] just crashes [...] the PC DOS COMMAND.COM works fine under DR-DOS [...]"}
{"id": "71190", "revid": "26910586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71190", "title": "Speech to the Troops at Tilbury", "text": "1588 speech by Queen Elizabeth I of England\nThe Speech to the Troops at Tilbury was delivered on 9 August Old Style (19 August New Style) 1588 by Queen Elizabeth I of England to the land forces earlier assembled at Tilbury in Essex in preparation for repelling the expected invasion by the Spanish Armada.\nBefore the speech the Armada had been driven from the Strait of Dover in the Battle of Gravelines eleven days earlier, and had by then rounded Scotland on its way home, but troops were still held at ready in case the Spanish army of Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, might yet attempt to invade from Dunkirk; two days later they were discharged. On the day of the speech, the Queen left her bodyguard before Tilbury Fort and went among her subjects with an escort of six men. Lord Ormonde walked ahead with the Sword of State; he was followed by a page leading the Queen's charger and another bearing her silver helmet on a cushion; then came the Queen herself, in white with a silver cuirass and mounted on a grey gelding. She was flanked on horseback by her lieutenant general the Earl of Leicester on the right, and on the left by the Earl of Essex, her Master of the Horse. Sir John Norreys brought up the rear.\nFirst version.\nThe version that is most widely considered to be authentic was found in a letter from Leonel Sharp to the Duke of Buckingham. Sharp had been attached to the Earl of Leicester at Tilbury during the threatened invasion of the Armada and he later became chaplain to Buckingham. Sharp wrote: \"The queen the next morning rode through all the squadrons of her army as armed Pallas attended by noble footmen, Leicester, Essex, and Norris, then lord marshal, and divers other great lords. Where she made an excellent oration to her army, which the next day after her departure, I was commanded to redeliver all the army together, to keep a public fast\". He also claimed: \"No man hath it but myself, and such as I have given it to\". It was published in 1654 in a collection titled \"Cabala, Mysteries of State\". (pp.372-374) A late sixteenth- or early seventeenth-century copy of this speech (with minor variants to the published version) exists in the Harleian Collection of the British Library.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMy loving people.\nWe have been persuaded by some that are careful of our safety, to take heed how we commit our selves to armed multitudes, for fear of treachery; but I assure you I do not desire to live to distrust my faithful and loving people. Let tyrants fear. I have always so behaved myself that, under God, I have placed my chiefest strength and safeguard in the loyal hearts and good-will of my subjects; and therefore I am come amongst you, as you see, at this time, not for my recreation and disport, but being resolved, in the midst and heat of the battle, to live and die amongst you all; to lay down for my God, and for my kingdom, and my people, my honour and my blood, even in the dust.\nI know I have the body but of a weak, feeble woman; but I have the heart and stomach of a king, and of a king of England too, and think foul scorn that Parma or Spain, or any prince of Europe, should dare to invade the borders of my realm; to which rather than any dishonour shall grow by me, I myself will take up arms, I myself will be your general, judge, and rewarder of every one of your virtues in the field.\nI know already, for your forwardness you have deserved rewards and crowns; and we do assure you on a word of a prince, they shall be duly paid. In the mean time, my lieutenant general shall be in my stead, than whom never prince commanded a more noble or worthy subject; not doubting but by your obedience to my general, by your concord in the camp, and your valour in the field, we shall shortly have a famous victory over these enemies of my God, of my kingdom, and of my people.\nAuthenticity.\nThe speech's veracity was accepted by the historian J. E. Neale in an article, 'The Sayings of Queen Elizabeth': \"I see no serious reason for rejecting the speech. ... some of the phrases have every appearance of being the Queen's, and the whole tone of the speech is surely very much in keeping even with the few Elizabethan quotations that I have had room for in this article. ... I have little doubt that Sharp's version is a copy, at two or three removes, of a speech actually written by Elizabeth herself\". The speech has been accepted as genuine by the historians Mandell Creighton, Garrett Mattingly, Patrick Collinson (\"...there is no reason to doubt its authenticity\"), Wallace T. MacCaffrey, Lady Anne Somerset, Antonia Fraser, Alison Weir, Christopher Haigh, Simon Schama, David Starkey and Robert Hutchinson.\nJanet M. Green of Kent State University in an article for the \"Sixteenth Century Journal\" in 1997 states that \"substantial evidence exists for believing the Tilbury oration is genuine, which falls into three categories: First, internal rhetorical characteristics link this oration very strongly to Elizabeth's others. Second, there is considerable contemporary evidence that she delivered a speech at Tilbury whose phrases, often remarked, were like those of the speech we have... The internal evidence of the Tilbury oration provides the best argument for Elizabeth's authorship\".\nDavid Loades has written: \"Whether she used these words, we do not know, although they have an authentic, theatrical ring\".\nHowever, there are some historians who question its authenticity, such as Miller Christy, in 1919. Also sceptical were Felix Barker and Susan Frye.\nPhysical appearance at Tilbury.\nElizabeth's physical appearance was vital to the historical event and just at least as important as the actual speech. Dozens of descriptions of Elizabeth on that day exist, with slightly differing details. Similarities between descriptions indicate that she at least wore a plumed helmet and a steel cuirass over a white velvet gown. She held a gold and silver truncheon, or baton, in her hand as she rode atop a white steed. As quoted in J. E. Neale's \"Elizabeth\", her demeanour was \"full of princely resolution and more than feminine courage\" and that \"she passed like some Amazonian empress through all her army\". That striking image is reminiscent of several literary and mythological figures. One of those is Pallas Athena, the Greek goddess of war, who was often classically portrayed as wearing a helmet and armour. Another figure that Elizabeth represented during this speech was Britomart, originally a Greek nymph and more recently the allegorical heroine in Edmund Spenser's epic \"The Faerie Queene\". The etymology of the name \"Britomart\" seems to suggest British military power. Spenser deliberately wrote the character to represent Queen Elizabeth I and so in essence, they are the same. Her subjects would have been familiar with both Athena and Britomart, and Elizabeth's adoption of their personas would have been fairly recognisable. Besides representing the figures, by wearing armour, Elizabeth implied that she was ready to fight for and alongside her people. However, as Garrett Mattingly put it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2026an objective observer would have seen no more than a battered, rather scraggy spinster in her middle fifties perched on a fat white horse, her teeth black, her red wig slightly askew, dangling a toy sword and wearing an absurd little piece of parade armor like something out of a theatrical property box.\nSpeech.\nAfter she had made her rounds through the troops, Elizabeth delivered her speech to them. Leonel Sharp's version is accepted as the speech that she gave, and it best captures her rhetorical strategies as opposed to the versions of William Leigh and James Aske. In the past, Elizabeth had defied gender expectations by refusing to marry or produce heirs, instead opting to rule alone, with God and England as her soul mates. Elizabeth practically claims that she is both King and Queen of England in the most famous line of the address, \"I have the body of a weak, feeble woman; but I have the heart and stomach of a king, and of a King of England too.\" At the same time that she claims the power, she acknowledges her physical weakness and condescends to the level of soldiers and subjects to whom she lovingly refers in the speech.\nElizabeth calls upon God in the speech and asserts confidence in her own faith and the salvation of herself and her people, thereby placing Spain and the Pope as the ones in the wrong, calling them \"tyrants\" and \"enemies\" of both Elizabeth and England.\nIf the speech is accepted as the true speech given at Tilbury, it is worth noting that Elizabeth wrote it herself. As a writer, she wrote many of her own speeches, as well as poems.\nSecond version.\nAnother version of the speech was recorded in 1612 by William Leigh. His version reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Come on now, my companions at arms, and fellow soldiers, in the field, now for the Lord, for your Queen, and for the Kingdom. For what are these proud Philistines, that they should revile the host of the living God? I have been your Prince in peace, so will I be in war; neither will I bid you go and fight, but come and let us fight the battle of the Lord. The enemy perhaps may challenge my sex for that I am a woman, so may I likewise charge their mould for that they are but men, whose breath is in their nostrils, and if God do not charge England with the sins of England, little do I fear their force\u2026 Si deus nobiscum quis contra nos? (if God is with us, who can be against us?)\nThird version.\nIn \"Elizabetha Triumphans\", published in 1588, James Aske provides a version of the speech, reworked in verse:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSummary.\nA summary of the speech appears in Lewes Lewkenor's \"The Estate of English Fugitives\" written in 1595, which mentions the Spanish Armada.\nLewkenor says,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I cannot here omit to speak a word or two, as well of the worthiness; and loyalty of those honourable gentlemen of her majesties court, who upon the approach of the Spanish fleet, presented, not only their persons and lives for the defence of her majesty, but also a great portion and yearly revenue of their lands; as also of her majesties great benignity and gracious answer, telling them, that she accounted herself rich enough in that she possessed such subjects, assuring them, that for her part, she would spend the last penny of her treasures for their defence, rather than she would be burthenous unto them. O happy people in such a princess, and happy princess in such a people!\nIn popular culture.\nReports of the queen's visit to Tilbury circulated rapidly in the popular media of the day. On 10 August, one day after the speech, a broadside ballad describing the events was registered by the printer John Wolfe in the Stationer's Register of London. The ballad, written by Thomas Deloney, one of the most popular poets of the day, corresponds fairly closely to John Aske's description of the events in \"Elizabetha Triumphans\". A second ballad on the same subject, likewise printed by Wolfe, also survives.\nParts of the speech were quoted in the television series \"Elizabeth R\" (1971), \"The Virgin Queen\" (2005) and \"Elizabeth I\" (2005), as well at the films \"Fire Over England\" (1937) and \"\" (2007).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71197", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71197", "title": "Dahlia 'Dahlstar Sunset Pink'", "text": ""}
{"id": "71204", "revid": "47321274", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71204", "title": "Domenico Maria Novara da Ferrara", "text": "Italian scientist (1454\u20131504)\nDomenico Maria Novara (1454\u20131504) was an Italian scientist.\nLife.\nBorn in Ferrara, for 21 years he was professor of astronomy at the University of Bologna, and in 1500 he also lectured in mathematics at Rome. He was notable as a Platonist astronomer, and in 1496 he taught Nicolaus Copernicus astronomy. He was also an astrologer.\nAt Bologna, Novara was assisted by Copernicus, with whom he observed a lunar occultation of Aldebaran. Copernicus later used this observation to disprove Ptolemy's model of lunar distance.\nCopernicus had started out as Novara's student and then became his assistant and co-worker. Novara in turn declared that his teacher had been the famous astronomer Regiomontanus, who was once a pupil of Georg Purbach. Novara was initially educated at the University of Florence, at the time a major center of Neoplatonism. He studied there under Luca Pacioli, a friend of Leonardo da Vinci.\nNovara's writings are largely lost, except for a few astrological almanacs written for the university. But Copernicus's De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (published in 1543, long after Novara's death) records that on 9 March 1497 Novara witnessed Copernicus first observation. Both men were described as \"free minds and free souls,\" and Novara believed that his findings would have shaken Ptolemy's \"unshakable\" geocentric system.\nNovara died in 1504 in Bologna."}
{"id": "71205", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71205", "title": "List of notorious dictators", "text": ""}
{"id": "71208", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71208", "title": "Come out", "text": ""}
{"id": "71223", "revid": "1201040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71223", "title": "Inflectional language", "text": ""}
{"id": "71228", "revid": "7513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71228", "title": "Non-indoeuropean roots of Germanic", "text": ""}
{"id": "71232", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71232", "title": "Star of India", "text": "The Star of India may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "71234", "revid": "31910433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71234", "title": "Orange (colour)", "text": "Colour located between red and yellow\nOrange is the colour between yellow and red on the spectrum of visible light. The human eyes perceive orange when observing light with a dominant wavelength between roughly 585 and 620 nanometres. In traditional colour theory, it is a secondary colour of pigments, produced by mixing yellow and red. In the RGB colour model, it is a tertiary colour. It is named after the fruit of the same name.\nThe orange colour of many fruits and vegetables, such as carrots, pumpkins, sweet potatoes, and oranges, comes from carotenes, a type of photosynthetic pigment. These pigments convert the light energy that the plants absorb from the Sun into chemical energy for the plants' growth. Similarly, the hues of autumn leaves are from the same pigment after chlorophyll is removed.\nIn Europe and the United States, surveys show that orange is the colour most associated with amusement, the unconventional, extroversion, warmth, fire, energy, activity, danger, taste and aroma, the autumn and Allhallowtide seasons, as well as having long been the national colour of the Netherlands and the House of Orange. It also serves as the political colour of the Christian democracy political ideology and most Christian democratic political parties. In Asia, it is an important symbolic colour in Buddhism and Hinduism.\nEtymology.\nIn English, the colour orange is named after the appearance of the ripe orange fruit. The word comes from the , from the old term for the fruit, . The French word, in turn, comes from the Italian , based on Arabic (), borrowed from Persian (), derived from Sanskrit (), which in turn derives from a Dravidian root word (compare / \"/\" which refers to bitter orange in Tamil and Malayalam). The earliest known recorded use of \"orange\" as a colour name in English was in 1502, in a description of clothing purchased for Margaret Tudor. Another early recorded use was in 1512, in a will now filed with the Public Record Office. By the 17th century, the fruit and its colour were familiar enough that 'orange-coloured' shifted in use to 'orange' as an adjective. The place name \"Orange\" has a separate etymology and is not related to that of the colour.\nBefore this word was introduced to the English-speaking world, \"saffron\" already existed in the English language. \"Crog\" also referred to the saffron colour, so that orange was also referred to as (\"yellow-red\") for reddish orange, or (\"yellow-saffron\") for yellowish orange. Alternatively, orange things were sometimes described as red (which then had a broader meaning) such as red deer, red hair, the Red Planet and robin redbreast. When orange was infrequently used in heraldry, it was referred to as \"tawny\" or \"brusk\".\nHistory and art.\nIn ancient Egypt, and ancient India, artists used an orange colour on some of their items. In Egypt, a mineral pigment called realgar was used for tomb paintings, as well as for other purposes. Orange carnelians were significantly used during the Indus Valley Civilisation which was, in turn, obtained by the people of Kutch, Gujarat, India. The colour was also used later by medieval artists for the colouring of manuscripts. Pigments were also made in ancient times from a mineral known as orpiment. Orpiment was an important item of trade in the Roman Empire and was used as a medicine in ancient China although it contains arsenic and is highly toxic. It was also used as a fly poison and to poison arrows. Because of its yellow-orange colour, it was also a favourite with alchemists who were searching for a way to make gold, both in China and in the West.\nBefore the late 15th century, the colour orange existed in Europe, but without the name; it was simply called yellow-red. Portuguese merchants brought the first orange trees to Europe from Asia in the late 15th and early 16th century, along with the Sanskrit word , which gradually became part of several European languages: in Spanish, in Portuguese, and \"orange\" in English &amp; French. In mid-16th century England, the colour referred to as 'orange' was a reddish-brown, matching the deteriorated appearance of the fruit after a long journey from where it was grown in Portugal or Spain. Improvements in transportation and the introduction of an orange grove in Surrey allowed the fresh fruit to become more familiar in England, and the colour referred to as \"orange\" shifted in the 17th century toward its modern understanding.\nHouse of Orange.\nThe House of Orange-Nassau was one of the most influential royal houses in Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries. It originated in 1163 in the tiny Principality of Orange, a feudal state of north of Avignon in southern France. The Principality of Orange took its name not from the fruit, but from a Roman-Celtic settlement on the site which was founded in 36 or 35 BC and was named after the Celtic water god Arausio; however, the name may have been slightly altered, and the town associated with the colour, because it was on the route by which quantities of oranges were brought from southern ports such as Marseille to northern France.\nThe family of the Prince of Orange eventually adopted the name and the colour orange in the 1570s. The colour came to be associated with Protestantism, due to participation by the House of Orange on the Protestant side in the French Wars of Religion. One member of the house, William I of Orange, organised the Eighty Years' War comprising resistance against Spain, a war that lasted eighty years, until the Netherlands won its independence. The House's arguably most prominent member, William III of Orange, became King of England in 1689, after the downfall of the Catholic James II in the Glorious Revolution.\nDue to William III, orange became an important political colour in Britain and Europe. William was a Protestant, and as such, he defended the Protestant minority of Ireland against the majority Roman Catholic population. As a result, the Protestants of Ireland were known as Orangemen. Orange eventually became one of the colours of the Irish flag, symbolising the Protestant heritage. His orange-white-and-blue rebel flag became the forerunner of The Netherlands' modern flag.\nWhen the Dutch settlers living in the Cape Colony (now part of South Africa) migrated into the Southern African heartlands in the 19th century, they founded what they called the Orange Free State. In the United States, the flag of New York City has an orange stripe, to remember the Dutch colonists who founded the city. William of Orange is also remembered as the founder of the College of William &amp; Mary, and Nassau County, New York is named after the House of Orange-Nassau.\n18th and 19th century.\nIn the 18th century, orange was sometimes used to depict the robes of Pomona, the goddess of fruitful abundance; her name came from the , the Latin word for fruit. Oranges themselves became more common in northern Europe, thanks to the 17th-century invention of the heated greenhouse, a building type which became known as an orangerie. The French artist Jean-Honor\u00e9 Fragonard depicted an allegorical figure of inspiration dressed in orange.\nIn 1797 a French scientist Louis Vauquelin discovered the mineral crocoite, or lead chromate, which led in 1809 to the invention of the synthetic pigment chrome orange. Other synthetic pigments, cobalt red, cobalt yellow, and cobalt orange, the last made from cadmium sulphide plus cadmium selenide, soon followed. These new pigments, plus the invention of the metal paint tube in 1841, made it possible for artists to paint outdoors and to capture the colours of natural light.\nIn Britain, orange became highly popular with the Pre-Raphaelites and with history painters. The flowing red-orange hair of Elizabeth Siddal, a prolific model and the wife of painter Dante Gabriel Rossetti, became a symbol of the Pre-Raphaelite movement. Lord Leighton, the president of the Royal Academy, produced \"Flaming June\", a painting of a sleeping young woman in a bright orange dress, which won wide acclaim. Albert Joseph Moore painted festive scenes of Romans wearing orange cloaks brighter than any of the Romans ever likely wore. In the United States, Winslow Homer brightened his palette with vivid oranges.\nIn France, painters took orange in an entirely different direction. In 1872 Claude Monet painted \"Impression, Sunrise\", a tiny orange sun and some orange light reflected on the clouds and water in the centre of a hazy blue landscape. This painting gave its name to the Impressionist movement.\nOrange became an important colour for all the Impressionist painters. They all had studied the recent books on colour theory, and they know that orange placed next to azure blue made both colours much brighter. Auguste Renoir painted boats with stripes of chrome orange paint straight from the tube. Paul C\u00e9zanne did not use orange pigment, but produced his own oranges with touches of yellow, red and ochre against a blue background. Toulouse-Lautrec often used oranges in the skirts of dancers and gowns of Parisiennes in the cafes and clubs he portrayed. For him, it was the colour of festivity and amusement.\nThe Post-Impressionists went even further with orange. Paul Gauguin used oranges as backgrounds, for clothing and skin colour, to fill his pictures with light and exoticism. But no other painter used orange so often and dramatically as Vincent van Gogh. who had shared a house with Gauguin in Arles for a time. For Van Gogh orange and yellow were the pure sunlight of Provence. He produced his own oranges with mixtures of yellow, ochre and red, and placed them next to slashes of sienna red and bottle green, and below a sky of turbulent blue and violet. He put an orange moon and stars in a cobalt blue sky. He wrote to his brother Theo of searching for oppositions of blue with orange, of red with green, of yellow with violet, searching for broken colours and neutral colours to harmonise the brutality of extremes, trying to make the colours intense, and not a harmony of greys.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nIn the 20th and 21st centuries, the colour orange had highly varied associations, both positive and negative.\nThe high visibility of orange made it a popular colour for certain kinds of clothing and equipment. During World War II, US Navy pilots in the Pacific began to wear orange inflatable life jackets, which could be spotted by search and rescue planes. After the war, these jackets became common on both civilian and naval vessels of all sizes, and on aircraft flown over water. Orange is also widely worn (to avoid being hit) by workers on highways and by cyclists.\nA herbicide called Agent Orange was widely sprayed from aircraft by the Royal Air Force during the Malayan Emergency and the US Air Force during the Vietnam War to remove the forest and jungle cover beneath which enemy combatants were believed to be hiding, and to expose their supply routes. The chemical was not actually orange, but took its name from the colour of the steel drums in which it was stored. Agent Orange was toxic, and was later linked to birth defects and other health problems.\nOrange also had and continues to have a political dimension. Orange serves as the colour of Christian democratic political ideology, which is based on Catholic social teaching and Neo-Calvinist theology; Christian democratic political parties came to prominence in Europe and the Americas after World War II.\nIn Ukraine in November\u2013December 2004, it became the colour of the Orange Revolution, a popular movement which carried activist and reformer Viktor Yushchenko into the presidency. In parts of the world, especially Northern Ireland, the colour is associated with the Orange Order, a Protestant fraternal organisation and relatedly, Orangemen, marches and other social and political activities, with the colour orange being associated with Protestantism similar to the Netherlands.\nScience.\nOptics.\nIn optics, orange is the colour seen by the eye when looking at light with a wavelength between approximately 585\u2013620nm. It has a hue of 30\u00b0 in HSV colour space. Isaac Newton's \"Opticks\" distinguished between pure orange light and mixtures of red and yellow light by noting that mixtures could be separated using a prism.\nIn the traditional colour wheel used by painters, orange is the range of colours between red and yellow, and painters can obtain orange simply by mixing red and yellow in various proportions; however these colours are never as vivid as a pure orange pigment. In the RGB colour model (the system used to display colours on a television or computer screen), orange is generated by combining high intensity red light with a lower intensity green light, with the blue light turned off entirely. Orange is a tertiary colour which is numerically halfway between gamma-compressed red and yellow, as can be seen in the .\nRegarding painting, blue is the complementary colour to orange. As many painters of the 19th century discovered, blue and orange reinforce each other. The painter Vincent van Gogh wrote to his brother Theo that in his paintings, he was trying to reveal \"the oppositions of blue with orange, of red with green, of yellow with violet... trying to make the colours intense and not a harmony of grey\". In another letter he wrote simply, \"There is no orange without blue.\" Van Gogh, Pierre-Auguste Renoir and many other Impressionist and Post-Impressionist painters frequently placed orange against azure or cobalt blue, to make both colours appear brighter.\nThe actual complement of orange is azure \u2013 a colour that is one quarter of the way between blue and green on the colour spectrum. The actual complementary colour of true blue is yellow. Orange pigments are largely in the ochre or cadmium families, and absorb mostly greenish-blue light.\nPigments and dyes.\nOther orange pigments include:\nOrange natural objects.\nThe orange colour of carrots, pumpkins, sweet potatoes, oranges, and many other fruits and vegetables comes from carotenes, a type of photosynthetic pigment. These pigments convert the light energy that the plants absorb from the sun into chemical energy for the plants' growth. The carotenes themselves take their name from the carrot. Autumn leaves also get their orange colour from carotenes. When the weather turns cold and production of green chlorophyll stops, the orange colour remains.\nBefore the 18th century, carrots from Asia were usually purple, while those in Europe were either white or red. Dutch farmers bred a variety that was orange; according to some sources, as a tribute to the stadtholder of Holland and Zeeland, William of Orange. The long orange Dutch carrot, first described in 1721, is the ancestor of the orange horn carrot, one of the most common types found in supermarkets today. It takes its name from the town of Hoorn, in the Netherlands.\nFlowers.\nOrange is traditionally associated with the autumn season, with the harvest and autumn leaves. The flowers, like orange fruits and vegetables and autumn leaves, get their colour from the photosynthetic pigments called carotenes.\nFoods.\nOrange is a very common colour of fruits, vegetables, spices, and other foods in many different cultures. As a result, orange is the colour most often associated in western culture with taste and aroma. Orange foods include peaches, apricots, mangoes, carrots, shrimp, salmon roe, and many other foods. Orange colour is provided by spices such as paprika, saffron and curry powder. In the United States, with Halloween on 31 October, and in North America with Thanksgiving in October (Canada) and November (US) orange is associated with the harvest colour, and also is the colour of the carved pumpkins, or jack-o-lanterns, used to celebrate the holiday.\nFood colourings.\nPeople associate certain colours with certain flavours, and the colour of food can influence the perceived flavour in anything from candy to wine. Since orange is popularly associated with good flavour, many companies add orange food colouring to improve the appearance of their packaged foods. Orange pigments and dyes, synthetic or natural, are added to many orange sodas and juices, cheeses (particularly cheddar cheese, Gloucester cheese, and American cheese); snack foods, butter and margarine; breakfast cereals, ice cream, yoghurt, jam and candy. It is also often added to children's medicine, and to chicken feed to make the egg yolks more orange.\nThe United States Government and the European Union certify a small number of synthetic chemical colourings to be used in food. These are usually aromatic hydrocarbons, or azo dyes, made from petroleum. The most common ones are:\nBecause many consumers are worried about possible health consequences of synthetic dyes, some companies are beginning to use natural food colours. Since these food colours are natural, they do not require any certification from the Food and Drug Administration. The most popular natural food colours are:\nCulture, associations and symbolism.\nConfucianism.\nIn Confucianism, the religion and philosophy of ancient China, orange was the colour of transformation. In China and India, the colour took its name not from the orange fruit, but from saffron, the finest and most expensive dye in Asia. According to Confucianism, existence was governed by the interaction of the male active principle, the \"yang\", and the female passive principle, the \"yin\". Yellow was the colour of perfection and nobility; red was the colour of happiness and power. Yellow and red were compared to light and fire, spirituality and sensuality, seemingly opposite but really complementary. Out of the interaction between the two came orange, the colour of transformation.\nHinduism and Buddhism.\nA wide variety of colours, ranging from a slightly orange yellow to a deep orange red, all simply called saffron, are closely associated with Hinduism and Buddhism, and are commonly worn by monks and holy men across Asia.\nIn Hinduism, the divinity Krishna is commonly portrayed dressed in yellow or yellow orange. Yellow and saffron are also the colours worn by sadhu, or wandering pious men in India.\nIn Buddhism, orange (or more precisely saffron) was the colour of illumination, the highest state of perfection. The saffron colours of robes to be worn by monks were defined by the Buddhist texts. The robe and its colour is a sign of renunciation of the outside world and commitment to the order. The candidate monk, with his master, first appears before the monks of the monastery in his own clothes, with his new robe under his arm and asks to enter the order. He then takes his vows, puts on the robes, and with his begging bowl, goes out to the world. Thereafter, he spends his mornings begging and his afternoons in contemplation and study, either in a forest, garden, or in the monastery.\nAccording to Buddhist scriptures and commentaries, the robe dye is allowed to be obtained from six kinds of substances: roots and tubers, plants, bark, leaves, flowers and fruits. The robes should also be boiled in water for a long time to get the correctly sober colour. Saffron and ochre, usually made with dye from the curcuma longa plant or the heartwood of the jackfruit tree, are the most common colours. The so-called forest monks usually wear ochre robes and city monks saffron, though this is not an official rule.\nThe colour of robes also varies somewhat among the different \"vehicles\" (schools) of Buddhism, and by country, depending on their doctrines and the dyes available. The monks of the strict Vajrayana, or Tantric Buddhism, practised in Tibet, wear the most colourful robes of saffron and red. The monks of Mahayana Buddhism, practised mainly in Japan, China and Korea, wear lighter yellow or saffron, often with white or black. Monks of Theravada Buddhism, practised in Southeast Asia, usually wear ochre or saffron colour. Monks of the forest tradition in Thailand and other parts of Southeast Asia wear robes of a brownish ochre, dyed from the wood of the jackfruit tree.\nColour of amusement.\nIn Europe and America orange and yellow are the colours most associated with amusement, frivolity and entertainment. In this regard, orange is the exact opposite of its complementary colour, blue, the colour of calm and reflection. Mythological paintings traditionally showed Bacchus (known in Greek mythology as Dionysus), the god of wine, ritual madness and ecstasy, dressed in orange. Clowns have long worn orange wigs. Toulouse-Lautrec used a palette of yellow, black and orange in his posters of Paris cafes and theatres, and Henri Matisse used an orange, yellow and red palette in his painting, the \"Joy of Living\".\nColour of visibility and warning.\nOrange is the colour most easily seen in dim light or against the water, making it, particularly the shade known as safety orange, the colour of choice for life rafts, life jackets or buoys. Highway temporary signs about construction or detours in the United States are orange, because of its visibility and its association with danger.\nIt is worn by people wanting to be seen, including highway workers and lifeguards. Prisoners are also sometimes dressed in orange clothing to make them easier to see during an escape. Lifeguards on the beaches of Los Angeles County, both real and in television series, wear orange swimsuits to make them stand out. Orange astronaut suits have the highest visibility in space, or against blue sea. An aircraft's two types of \"black box\", or flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder, are actually bright orange, so they can be found more easily. In some cars, connectors related to safety systems, such as the airbag, may be coloured orange.\nThe Golden Gate Bridge at the entrance of San Francisco Bay is painted international orange to make it more visible in the fog. Next to red, it is the colour most popular for extroverts, and as a symbol of activity.\nOrange is sometimes used, like red and yellow, as a colour warning of possible danger or calling for caution. A skull against an orange background means a toxic substance or poison.\nIn the colour system devised by the US Department of Homeland Security to measure the threat of terrorist attack, an orange level is second only to a red level. The US Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices specifies orange for use in temporary and construction signage.\nContemporary political and social movements.\nBecause of its symbolic meaning as the orange colour of activity, orange is often used as the colour of political and social movements.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMilitary.\nIn the United States Army, orange has traditionally been associated with the dragoons, the mounted infantry units which eventually became the US Cavalry. The 1st Cavalry Regiment was founded in 1833 as the United States Dragoons. The modern coat of arms of the 1st Cavalry features the colour orange and orange-yellow shade called dragoon yellow, the colours of the early US dragoon regiments.\nThe US Signal Corps, founded at the beginning of the American Civil War, adopted orange and white as its official colours in 1872. Orange was adopted because it was the colour of a signal fire, historically used at night while smoke was used during the day, to communicate with distant army units.\nPrior to and during the Napoleonic Wars a pale shade of orange known as \"aurore\" (\"dawn\") was adopted as the facing colour of several cavalry regiments in the French army. The colour resembled that of the early rising sun.\nIn German Army, military police (\"Feldj\u00e4ger\") uses orange as corps colour (\"waffenfarbe\").\nIn the Royal Netherlands Air Force, aircraft may have a roundel with an orange dot in the middle, surrounded by three circular sectors in red, white, and blue.\nIn the Indonesian Air Force, the Air force infantry and special forces corps known as Paskhas uses orange as their beret colour.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71236", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71236", "title": "Orange (telecommunications)", "text": ""}
{"id": "71244", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71244", "title": "20000 Leagues Under the Sea (novel)", "text": ""}
{"id": "71246", "revid": "23105605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71246", "title": "Lewis chessmen", "text": "Group of 12th-century chess pieces\nThe Lewis chessmen ( ) or Uig chessmen, named after the island or the bay where they were found, are a group of distinctive 12th-century chess pieces, along with other game pieces, most of which are carved from walrus ivory. Discovered in 1831 on the Isle of Lewis in the Outer Hebrides of Scotland, they may constitute some of the few complete, surviving medieval chess sets, although it is not clear if a single complete period-accurate set can be assembled from the pieces. When found, the hoard contained 94\u00a0objects: 78\u00a0chess pieces, 14\u00a0tablemen (pieces for backgammon or similar games) and one belt buckle. Today, 82\u00a0pieces are owned and usually exhibited by the British Museum in London, and the remaining\u00a011 are at the National Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh; at least one chess piece is owned privately.\nA newly identified piece, a \"warder\", the equivalent of a rook, was sold for \u00a3735,000 in July 2019. Four other major pieces, and many pawns, remain missing from the chess sets.\nOrigin and discovery.\nThe Lewis chessmen were probably made between 1150 and 1200 AD. They are commonly believed to have been made in Trondheim, Norway, though some scholars have alternatively suggested Icelandic or local Hebridean manufacture. They are usually thought to have been brought to Lewis as part of a merchant's wares.\nThe chessmen were discovered in 1831. Most accounts have said they were found at Uig Bay on the west coast of Lewis, but Caldwell et al. of National Museums Scotland consider that Mealista, which is also in the parish of Uig and some further south down the coast, is a more likely place for the hoard to have been discovered. Their discovery was initially credited to an unnamed local peasant; the name of the discoverer is first recorded in 1863 as Malcolm MacLeod from the nearby township of Pennydonald.\nThe hoard was divided and sold in the 19th\u00a0century; the British Museum holds 82\u00a0pieces, and the National Museum of Scotland has 11\u00a0pieces, and the recently rediscovered piece is owned privately.\nAt the British Museum, F. Madden, Assistant Keeper of Manuscripts, persuaded the trustees to purchase for 80\u00a0guineas (\u00a384) the 82\u00a0pieces which he had been misled into believing was the entire hoard. Madden was a palaeographer, a scholar of early vernacular literature, but he was especially intrigued by these artifacts because he was a chess enthusiast. Madden immediately began writing a research paper about the collection; the paper remains informative today.\nWhen the chessmen were uncovered in 1831, 1\u00a0knight and 4\u00a0warders were missing from the four sets. In June\u00a02019 a warder piece, which had previously gone unrecognised for at least 55\u00a0years, emerged in Edinburgh, and was purchased at a Sotheby's auction for \u00a3735,000 the following month, by an undisclosed buyer.\nDescription.\nAlmost all of the pieces in the collection are carved from walrus ivory, with a few made instead from whale teeth. The 79\u00a0chess pieces consist of 8\u00a0kings, 8\u00a0queens, 16\u00a0bishops, 15\u00a0knights, 13\u00a0warders (rooks) and 19\u00a0pawns. The heights of the pawns range from 3.5 to 5.8\u00a0cm ( to while the other pieces are between 7 and 10.2\u00a0cm ( and 4\u00a0in). Although there are 19\u00a0pawns (a complete set requires 16), they have the greatest range of sizes of all the pieces, which has suggested that the 79\u00a0chess pieces might belong to at least five sets; however Caldwell et al. note that the creators of the Lewis chess sets may never have intended the sets to be as uniform as modern audiences with access to sets mass produced in factories expect.\nAll the pieces in the back rank are sculptures of human figures. The knights are mounted on rather diminutive horses and are shown holding spears and shields. The rooks are standing soldiers or \"warders\" holding shields and swords; four of the rooks are shown as wild-eyed berserkers biting their shields with battle fury. The kings are depicted sitting on thrones, wearing crowns, and holding swords. The queens also sit on thrones and wear crowns; they have their right hands on their faces. Seven of the bishops are seated, nine are standing; each holds a crozier and some also have books.\nAll the pawns are smaller, geometric shapes \u2013 cylinders and \"tombstones\" \u2013 perhaps intended to resemble boundary markers. The combination of abstract pawns with figurative pieces is unique among medieval chess sets; it is possible therefore that the Lewis \"pawns\" were not part of the same sets as the other pieces.\nSome pieces bore traces of red stain when found (which has since vanished), possibly indicating that red and white were used to distinguish the two sides, rather than the black and white generally used in modern chess. A study of the pieces in the National Museums Scotland collection found traces of mercury on the surface of the pieces; the authors suggested that this was due to the use of the red pigment cinnabar.\nScholars have observed that, to the modern eye, the figural pieces, with their bulging eyes and glum expressions, have a distinctly comic character. This is especially true of one rook (\"warder\u00a04\" in Madden's numbering) with a worried, sideways glance and the berserker rooks biting their shields, which have been called \"irresistibly comic to a modern audience\". It is believed, however, that the comic or sad expressions were not intended or perceived as such by the makers, who instead saw strength, ferocity, or in the case of the queens who hold their heads with a hand and seemingly pensive expression, \"contemplation, repose, and possibly wisdom\".\nMoreover, a recent article has examined how one of the king pieces projected a racialised representation of the archetypal chess king. Chess pieces envisioned human bodies which were constantly re-imagined and re-interpreted in the medieval period, and the Lewis chess king is fittingly characterised by a beard, hairstyle, and facial features that would not stand out in twelfth-century Norway, the supposed origin point of the set.\nExhibition and ownership.\nThey were exhibited by Ryrie at a meeting of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, on 11\u00a0April 1831. The chessmen were soon after split up, with 10 being purchased by C.K. Sharpe and the others (67\u00a0chessmen and 14\u00a0tablemen) purchased on behalf of the British Museum in London.\nC.K. Sharpe later found another bishop to take his collection up to 11. After Sharpe's death, his pieces were sold to Baron Londesborough. In 1888, they were again sold, but this time the purchaser was the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, who donated the pieces to the Royal Scottish Museum in Edinburgh. The 11\u00a0are now on display in the National Museum of Scotland.\nOf the pieces given to the British Museum, most can be found in Room\u00a040, with the registration numbers M&amp;ME\u00a01831, 11\u20131.78\u2013159. Others have been lent to Scottish museums and temporary exhibitions.\nA range of wooden or plastic replicas are popular items in the Museum shops.\nThe chessmen were number\u00a05 in the list of British archaeological finds selected by experts at the British Museum for a 2003 BBC documentary. They were one of the items featured in the 2010 Radio\u00a04 historical series \"A History of the World in 100 Objects\".\nAn exhibition entitled \"The Lewis Chessmen: Unmasked\" included chess pieces from both the National Museum of Scotland and British Museum collections, along with other relevant objects. It opened in Edinburgh on 21\u00a0May 2010 and proceeded to Aberdeen, Shetland, and the Museum nan Eilean in Stornoway, opening there on 15\u00a0April 2011.\nAn exhibition entitled \"The Game of Kings: Medieval Ivory Chessmen from the Isle of Lewis\" at The Cloisters in New York City included 34\u00a0of the chess pieces, all on loan from the British Museum. The exhibit lasted through 22\u00a0April 2012.\nOn 3\u00a0April 2013, \u00a31.8\u00a0million from the European Regional Development Fund was granted to transform Lews Castle, Isle of Lewis, into a museum for the Western Isles. Around \u00a314\u00a0million in total was allocated for restoring and converting the property, which had been shuttered for nearly 25\u00a0years. The Museum nan Eilean, located on the castle grounds, features a display of six Lewis chessmen on loan from the British Museum.\nThe Edinburgh warder piece was displayed at the Neue Galerie New York in 2023 as part of a special exhibit.\nDispute over location.\nIn late 2007, a dispute arose as to where the main resting place of the pieces should be. There were calls from Scottish National Party politicians in the Western Isles (notably Councillor Annie Macdonald, Alasdair Allan MSP and Angus MacNeil MP) for the return of the pieces to the place they were found. Linda Fabiani, Scottish Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture, stated that \"it is unacceptable that only 11\u00a0Lewis chessmen rest at the National Museum of Scotland while the other\u00a067 (as well as the 14\u00a0tablemen) remain in the British Museum in London.\"\nRichard Oram, Professor of Medieval and Environmental History at the University of Stirling, agreed, arguing that there was no reason for there to be more than \"a sample\" of the collection in London. These views were dismissed by Margaret Hodge, the then UK Minister of State in the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, writing \"It's a lot of nonsense, isn't it?\", noting that the law protects purchases and drawing comparisons to major artworks in Europe housed in major cities, with replicas often available \"in situ\" where tourism is sufficient. The historical society in Uig, \"Comann Eachdraidh \u00d9ig\", which operates its museum near the find site, features detailed information about the chessmen and Norse occupation in Lewis. It has published that it cannot claim to own the pieces and would allow the normal museum market to determine whether more originals should rest in Edinburgh. It welcomes short-term loans.\nIn October\u00a02009, 24 of the pieces from London and 6 from Edinburgh began a 16\u00a0month tour of Scotland, partly funded by the Scottish Government, whose Minister for Culture and External Affairs, Mike Russell, stated that the Government and the British Museum had \"agreed to disagree\" on their eventual fate. Bonnie Greer, the museum's deputy chairman, said that she \"absolutely\" believed the main collection should remain in London.\nNeil MacGregor, who at the time of the debate was director of the British Museum, was reported to say that it was Norway who was entitled to ask for them back, not Scotland. M. Bunting writes that:\n \"the British Museum has picked its way carefully and 6 of the figures were loaned long-term to Lewis's new museum in 2015\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71249", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71249", "title": "Europa Island/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "71250", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71250", "title": "Antarctica/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "71251", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71251", "title": "Maldives/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "71254", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71254", "title": "Broad jump", "text": ""}
{"id": "71262", "revid": "50880228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71262", "title": "Great Leap Forward", "text": "1958\u20131962 Chinese socioeconomic campaign\nThe Great Leap Forward was an industrialization campaign within China from 1958 to 1962, led by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). CCP Chairman Mao Zedong launched the campaign to transform the country from an agrarian society into an industrialized society through the formation of people's communes. The Great Leap Forward is estimated to have led to between 15 and 55 million deaths in mainland China during the 1959\u20131961 Great Chinese Famine it caused, making it the largest or second-largest famine in human history.\nThe Great Leap Forward stemmed from multiple factors, including \"the purge of intellectuals, the surge of less-educated radicals, the need to find new ways to generate domestic capital, rising enthusiasm about the potential results mass mobilization might produce, and reaction against the sociopolitical results of the Soviet Union's development strategy.\" Mao ambitiously sought an increase in rural grain production and an increase in industrial activity. Mao was dismissive of technical experts and basic economic principles, which meant that industrialization of the countryside would solely be dependent on the peasants. Grain quotas were introduced with the idea of having peasants provide grains for themselves and support urban areas. Output from the industrial activities such as steel was also supposed to be used for urban growth. Local officials were fearful of the Anti-Right Deviation Struggle and they competed to fulfill or over-fulfill quotas which were based on Mao's exaggerated claims, collecting non-existent \"surpluses\" and leaving farmers to starve to death. Higher officials did not dare to report the economic disaster which was being caused by these policies, and national officials, blaming bad weather for the decline in food output, took little or no action.\nThe major changes which occurred in the lives of rural Chinese people included the incremental introduction of mandatory agricultural collectivization. Private farming was prohibited, and those people who engaged in it were persecuted and labeled counter-revolutionaries. Restrictions on rural people were enforced with public struggle sessions and social pressure, and forced labor was also exacted on people. Rural industrialization, while officially a priority of the campaign, saw \"its development\u00a0... aborted by the mistakes of the Great Leap Forward\". Economist Dwight Perkins argues that \"enormous amounts of investment only produced modest increases in production or none at all.\u00a0... In short, the Great Leap [Forward] was a very expensive disaster\".\nThe CCP studied the damage that was done at various conferences from 1960 to 1962, especially at the Seven Thousand Cadres Conference in 1962, during which Mao Zedong ceded day-to-day leadership to pragmatic moderates like Chinese President Liu Shaoqi and Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping. Acknowledging responsibilities for the Great Leap Forward, Mao did not retreat from his policies; instead, he blamed problems on bad implementation and \"rightists\" who opposed him. He initiated the Socialist Education Movement in 1963 and the Cultural Revolution in 1966 in order to remove opposition and re-consolidate his power. In addition, dozens of dams constructed in Zhumadian, Henan, during the Great Leap Forward collapsed in 1975 (under the influence of Typhoon Nina) and resulted in the 1975 Banqiao Dam failure, with estimates of its death toll ranging from tens of thousands to 240,000.\nBackground.\nThe core goal of the Great Leap Forward was to increase industrial and agricultural outputs by using mass mobilization to raise labor inputs and therefore overcome China's lack of material, technological and monetary inputs.233 The Great Leap Forward also sought to address imbalances between rural China and urban China existed in the prerevolutionary period and continued into the 1950s.97\nClassical Marxist theory hypothesized a relatively linear progression of development and a worldwide revolution beginning with the most developed countries. At the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the country was one of the poorest in the world. The Great Leap Forward attempted to defy the conventional understanding of the time required for economic development. Through rapid industrialization, it aimed to close the gap between China's developmental stage and its political aspirations. In March 1955, at a national conference of the Party, Mao declared that China \"would catch up with and surpass the most powerful capitalist countries in several dozen years\", and in October, Mao announced that he would complete the building of a socialist state in 15 years.\nIn the late 1950s, China's socio-political landscape experienced significant rural reforms and the aftermath of previous policies aimed at collectivization rather than individualism. Before the Great Leap Forward, the Chinese government initiated land reforms that redistributed land from landlords to peasants, but these reforms still needed to attain the expected agricultural productivity. The early 1950s saw the establishment of agricultural cooperatives, yet these changes brought mixed outcomes. However, the push towards rapid industrialization and the establishment of people's communes in rural areas were central to the Great Leap Forward, reflecting the government's belief that collectivization and large-scale projects would boost agricultural and industrial outputs. The communes were meant to centralize farming and labor, supposedly leading to increased efficiency and output; still, in reality, and practice, these measures often disrupted traditional farming practices and led to decreased productivity. Dali Yang stated, \"The initial stages of collectivization brought chaos and inefficiency, with agricultural productivity often declining\".\nBy the time of the Great Leap Forward, increased Sino-Soviet tensions meant that China could not depend on Soviet technological assistance. Mao emphasized China's self-reliance in technology and industry and discouraged reliance on foreign technology.233\nAgricultural collectives and other social changes.\nBefore 1949, peasants had farmed their own small pockets of land and observed traditional practices\u2014festivals, banquets, and paying homage to ancestors. It was realized that Mao's policy of using a state monopoly on agriculture to finance industrialization would be unpopular with the peasants. Therefore, it was proposed that the peasants should be brought under Party control by the establishment of agricultural collectives which would also facilitate the sharing of tools and draft animals.\nThis policy was gradually pushed through between 1949 and 1958 in response to immediate policy needs, first by establishing \"mutual aid teams\" of 5\u201315 households, then in 1953 \"elementary agricultural cooperatives\" of 20\u201340 households, then from 1956 in \"higher co-operatives\" of 100\u2013300 families. From 1954 onward peasants were encouraged to form and join collective-farming associations, which would supposedly increase their efficiency without robbing them of their own land or restricting their livelihoods.\nBy 1958, private ownership was abolished and all households were forced into state-operated communes. Mao demanded that the communes increase grain production to feed the cities and to earn foreign exchange through exports. China must follow a different path to socialism than the Soviet Union, Mao told delegates, by allowing its peasants to participate in economic modernisation and making more use of their labour.\nApart from progressive taxation on each household's harvest, the state introduced a system of compulsory state purchases of grain at fixed prices to build up stockpiles for famine-relief and meet the terms of its trade agreements with the Soviet Union. Together, taxation and compulsory purchases accounted for 30% of the harvest by 1957, leaving very little surplus. Rationing was also introduced in the cities to curb 'wasteful consumption' and encourage savings (which were deposited in state-owned banks and thus became available for investment), and although food could be purchased from state-owned retailers the market price was higher than that for which it had been purchased. This too was done in the name of discouraging excessive consumption.\nBesides these economic changes, the CCP implemented major social changes in the countryside including the banishing of all religious and mystic institutions and ceremonies, replacing them with political meetings and propaganda sessions. Attempts were made to enhance rural education and the status of women (allowing them to initiate divorce if they desired) and ending foot-binding, child marriage and opium addiction. The old system of internal passports (the \"\") was introduced in 1956, preventing inter-county travel without appropriate authorization. Highest priority was given to the urban proletariat for whom a welfare state was created.\nThe first phase of collectivization resulted in modest improvements in output. Famine along the mid-Yangzi was averted in 1956 through the timely allocation of food-aid, but in 1957 the Party's response was to increase the proportion of the harvest collected by the state to insure against further disasters. Moderates within the Party, including Zhou Enlai, argued for a reversal of collectivization on the grounds that claiming the bulk of the harvest for the state had made the people's food-security dependent upon the constant, efficient, and transparent functioning of the government.\nHundred Flowers Campaign and Anti-Rightist Campaign.\nIn 1957, Mao responded to the tensions which existed in the Party by launching the Hundred Flowers Campaign as a way to promote free speech and criticism. Some scholars have retroactively concluded that this campaign was a ploy designed to allow critics of the regime, primarily intellectuals but also low ranking members of the party who were critical of the agricultural policies, to identify themselves.\nBy the time of the completion of the first 5 Year Economic Plan in 1957, Mao had come to believe that the path to socialism that had been followed by the Soviet Union was not appropriate for China. He was critical of Khrushchev's reversal of Stalinist policies and he was also alarmed by the uprisings that had taken place in East Germany, Poland and Hungary, and the perception that the USSR was seeking \"peaceful coexistence\" with the Western powers. Mao had become convinced that China should follow its own path to communism. According to Jonathan Mirsky, a historian and a journalist who specialized in Chinese affairs, China's isolation from most of the rest of the world, along with the Korean War, had accelerated Mao's attacks on his perceived domestic enemies. It led him to accelerate his designs to develop an economy where the regime would get maximum benefit from rural taxation.\nThe Anti-Rightist Campaign started on 8 June 1957. The main goal was to purge \"rightists\" from the CCP and China altogether. It was believed that approximately 5 percent of the population was still \"rightists\" (Political conservatives sabotaging the revolution).\nRash advance movement and anti-rash advance movement.\nIn the early years of the New China, due to the lack of experience in financial and economic work, it was a common practice to include the fiscal surplus of the previous year in the budget of the current year. Because of the low level of budgeting in the fiscal sector and inaccurate estimates of economic development, revenues and expenditures were underestimated. However, no problems arose because the government usually managed to end the fiscal year with a surplus. In 1953, when China entered the first five-year plan period, the Chinese economy had improved and the Ministry of Finance still decided to include the fiscal surplus of the previous fiscal year as credit funds in the 1953 budget revenue to cover the current year's expenditures. As a result, budget expenditures were expanded and so was the size of the budget. At that time, only the Soviet expert Kutuzov warned the Chinese fiscal authorities not to use the fiscal surplus of the previous year, however, it was not heeded by the Ministry of Finance. In that year, the gross industrial and agricultural output grew by 21.3%, while the capital construction budget increased by 50% compared to the previous year, which led to an imbalance between production and demand. Such was the \"small rash advance\" () at the start of the first five-year plan period. The issue had caused widespread social controversy. This marked one of the first times people questioned Mao's authority. The faction of Li Xiannian, Chen Yun and others did not think it was appropriate to continue this practice, but they also had opponents. Li Xiannian finally decided to hold a collective meeting to discuss the issue, and after listening to the views of all parties, he decided to abolish the practice.\nNevertheless, the controversy over the use of the fiscal surplus persisted, which brought another reckless \"rash advance\" to China's economic development in 1956. At that time, China lacked consideration in three areas: capital construction, employee wages, and agricultural loans. This made the central treasury \"tight\" again. This drew the attention of Zhou Enlai, Li Xiannian, and others. At a state meeting held on 5 June 1956, proposals were made to curb impetuousness and rash advances, revise the 1956 national economic plan, and cut capital construction investment. Such was the anti-\"rash advance\" movement.\nThe excess of the first five-year plan gave the nation great confidence, and at the Second Plenary Session of the 8th Central Committee, \"go all out, aim high, and build socialism with greater, faster, better, and more economical results\" () was adopted as the \"General Line for Socialist Construction\" in China. In 1955, Mao had already expressed his belief that socialist construction should achieve \"greater, faster, better, and more economical\" results. These led to the re-emergence of \"rash advances\", which further led to the reintroduction of policies and tendencies that had previously been overturned. Those who opposed Mao's policies were accused of not upholding the tenets of the \"class struggle\" under the people's cult of Mao.\nInitial phase and resistance.\nInitial goals.\nRegarding agriculture, the Chinese government recognized the country's dilemma of feeding its rapidly growing population without the means to make significant capital improvements in agriculture. Viewing human labor as an underutilized factor of production, the government intensified the mobilization of masses of people to increase labor inputs in agriculture.\nIn November 1957, party leaders of communist countries gathered in Moscow to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the October Revolution. Soviet Communist Party First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev proposed not only to catch up with but exceed the United States in industrial output in the next 15 years through peaceful competition. Mao Zedong was so inspired by the slogan that China put forward its own one: to catch up with and surpass the United Kingdom in 15 years. As with its approach to agriculture, the Chinese government attempted to compensate for its inability to invest in industry with mass mobilizations to increase human labor inputs.\nDuring the Great Leap Forward, architectural projects were managed according to the strategy of the Three Simultaneities, a process that involved designing, preparing materials, and building at the same time.69\nThe initial projects of the Great Leap Forward were accelerating the construction of waterworks on the North China Plain during the 1957-1958 winter and next the development of people's communes and crude forms of rural industrialization. Some Great Leap Projects had lots of long-term value to China's economy and continued to benefit China after The Great Leap Forward ended. Some of the projects included bridges, railroads, canals and reservoirs. However, some of these projects were completed quickly, resulting in errors and delays that did more harm than good.\nThe Great Leap Forward partially socialized reproductive labor though collective housework, childcare, and the collective canteens which included free or partially free food distribution.97\nLushan Conference and the Anti-Right Deviation Struggle.\nThe initial impact of the Great Leap Forward was discussed at the Lushan Conference in July\u2013August 1959. Although many of the more moderate leaders had reservations about the new policy, the only senior leader to speak out openly was Marshal Peng Dehuai. Mao responded to Peng's criticism of the Great Leap by dismissing Peng from his post as the Minister of National Defense, denouncing Peng (who came from a poor peasant family) and his supporters as \"bourgeois\", subsequently launching a nationwide campaign against \"rightist opportunism\" known as the \"Anti-Right Deviation Struggle\". Peng was replaced by Lin Biao, who began a systematic purge of Peng's supporters from the military. In total, over 3 million CCP members were purged or penalized during the campaign.\nOrganizational and operational factors.\nThe Great Leap Forward campaign began during the period of the Second Five Year Plan which was scheduled to run from 1958 to 1963, though the campaign itself was discontinued by 1961. Mao unveiled the Great Leap Forward at a meeting in January 1958 in Nanjing.\nThe Great Leap Forward was grounded in a logical theory of economic development and represented an unambiguous social invention. The central idea behind the Great Leap was that China should \"walk on two legs\", by rapidly developing both heavy and light industry, urban and rural areas, and large and small scale labor. The hope was to industrialize by making use of the massive supply of cheap labor and avoid having to import heavy machinery. The government also sought to avoid both social stratification and technical bottlenecks involved in the Soviet model of development, but sought political rather than technical solutions to do so. Distrusting technical experts, Mao and the party sought to replicate the strategies used in its 1930s regrouping in Yan'an following the Long March: \"mass mobilization, social leveling, attacks on bureaucratism, [and] disdain for material obstacles\". In the absence of material development inputs, Mao sought to increase development through voluntarism and organizational advantages brought about by socialism. Mao advocated that a further round of collectivization modeled on the USSR's Third Period was necessary in the countryside where the existing collectives would be merged into huge people's communes., Since the country side was significantly poorer than the cities and the people were hands on workers. (https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/430804).\nPeople's communes.\nAn experimental commune was established at Chayashan in Henan in April 1958. Here for the first time, private plots were entirely abolished and communal kitchens were introduced. At the Politburo meetings in August 1958, it was decided that these people's communes would become the new form of economic and political organization throughout rural China. By the end of the year, approximately 25,000 communes had been set up, with an average of 5,000 households each. The communes were relatively self-sufficient co-operatives where wages and money were replaced by work points.\nThe commune system was aimed at maximizing production for provisioning the cities and constructing offices, factories, schools, and social insurance systems for urban-dwelling workers, cadres, and officials. Citizens in rural areas who criticized the system were labeled \"dangerous\". Later on, as more and more families linked together to form people's communes, peasants started to lose individual identities, since families were from vastly different communities with different cultural views, political views, family structures, and financial backgrounds, which created conflict regarding the means and modes of production. Some wealthier families who refused to join a people's commune might be labeled as rightists. Escape was also difficult or impossible, and those who attempted were subjected to \"party-orchestrated public struggle\", which further jeopardized their survival. Besides agriculture, communes also incorporated some light industry and construction projects. Harvests did increase in 1958. However this was because of exceptional weather, not, which a lot of officials mistook, as the result of hard work of the peasants (collectivization lowered the efficiency of labour and increased overconsumption), causing officials to raise the projected quota. This led to famine in the countryside since they were required to reach set harvest goals, leaving not enough food for themselves.\nIndustrialization.\nMao saw grain and steel production as the key pillars of economic development. He forecast that within 15 years of the start of the Great Leap, China's industrial output would surpass that of the UK. In the August 1958 Politburo meetings, it was decided that steel production would be set to double within the year, most of the increase coming through backyard steel furnaces. Major investments in larger state enterprises were made: 1,587, 1,361 and 1,815 medium and large-scale state projects were started in 1958, 1959 and 1960 respectively, more in each year than in the first Five Year Plan.\nMillions of Chinese became state workers as a consequence of this industrial investment: in 1958, 21 million were added to non-agricultural state payrolls, and total state employment reached a peak of 50.44 million in 1960, more than doubling the 1957 level; the urban population swelled by 31.24 million people. These new workers placed major stress on China's food-rationing system, which led to increased and unsustainable demands on rural food production. Those between the ages of sixteen and thirty were considered ideal candidates for the militia. Peasants were working long hours, all year round, even contributed their own cooking utensils to be melted as a source of production.\nThe consequences of the Great Leap Forward were devastating, leading to one of the most severe famines in human history. The policies that diverted labor from agriculture to industrial projects, such as backyard steel furnaces, resulted in a catastrophic drop in agricultural output; consequently, food shortages became widespread. According to demographic studies, the famine caused an estimated 15 to 45 million deaths, with rural areas being the hardest hit. Ashton et al. (1984) highlight: \"During the period 1958-62, about 30 million premature deaths occurred in China: deaths that occurred earlier than they would have on the basis of mortality trends for more normal years.\"\nDuring this rapid expansion, coordination suffered and material shortages were frequent, resulting in \"a huge rise in the wage bill, largely for construction workers, but no corresponding increase in manufactured goods\". Facing a massive deficit, the government cut industrial investment from CN\u00a5 to CN\u00a5 from 1960 to 1962 (an 82% decrease; the 1957 level was CN\u00a5). Partly due to misreporting, or corruption at every level of the government where they would over-report harvest and steel production, by the time people realized, it was too late to correct statistics without angering Mao.\nBackyard furnaces.\nThe Great Leap Forward sought to revive folk technologies, including in the area of steel production. China's steel industry faced a shortage of imported iron and calls to increase production of \"native iron\" had begun in 1956. Efforts to improve steel production were a major focus of the Great Leap Forward.234 By mid-1958, the Chinese state began promoting indigenous metallurgical methods and the proliferation of \"folk furnaces\". This was an effort to increase steel production without increased investment costs.233\nAlthough the 1958 national mobilization effort to produce steel reached its target of 10.7 million tons, more than 3 million of it was unusable.69\nCrop production experiments.\nOn the communes, a number of radical and controversial agricultural innovations were promoted at the behest of Mao. Many of these innovations were based on the ideas of now-discredited Soviet agronomist Trofim Lysenko and his followers. The policies included close cropping, whereby seeds were sown far more densely than normal on the incorrect assumption that seeds of the same class would not compete with each other. Yang provides data on the failure of close planting techniques, which reduced yields in Anhui from 400 jin per mu to less than 200 jin per mu due to overcrowded plants competing for nutrients and sunlight.\" Deep plowing was encouraged on the mistaken belief that this would yield plants with extra large root systems. Moderately productive land was left unplanted based on the belief that concentrating manure and effort on the most fertile land would lead to large productivity gains per-acre. Altogether, these untested innovations generally led to decreases in grain production rather than increases.\nMeanwhile, local leaders were pressured into falsely reporting ever-higher grain production figures to their political superiors. Participants at political meetings remembered production figures being inflated up to 10 times their actual production amounts as the race to please superiors and win plaudits\u2014like the chance to meet Mao himself\u2014intensified. The state was later able to force many production groups to sell more grain than they could spare based on these false production figures.\nTreatment of villagers.\nThe ban on private holdings severely disrupted peasant life at its most basic level. Villagers were unable to secure enough food to go on living because they were deprived by the commune system of their traditional means of being able to rent, sell, or use their land as collateral for loans. In one village, once the commune was operational, the Party boss and his colleagues \"swung into manic action, herding villagers into the fields to sleep and to work intolerable hours, and forcing them to walk, starving, to distant additional projects\".\nEdward Friedman, political scientist, Paul Pickowicz, historian, and Mark Selden, sociologist, wrote about the dynamic of interaction between the Party and villagers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Beyond attack, beyond question, was the systemic and structured dynamic of the socialist state that intimidated and impoverished millions of patriotic and loyal villagers.\nThe authors present a similar picture to Thaxton in depicting the party's destruction of the traditions of Chinese villagers. Traditionally prized local customs were deemed signs of feudalism to be extinguished. \"Among them were funerals, weddings, local markets, and festivals. The Party thus destroyed much that gave meaning to Chinese lives. These private bonds were social glue. To mourn and to celebrate is to be human. To share joy, grief, and pain is humanizing.\" Failure to participate in the CCP's political campaigns\u2014though the aims of such campaigns were often conflicting\u2014\"could result in detention, torture, death, and the suffering of entire families\".\nPublic struggle sessions were often used to intimidate the peasants into obeying local officials; they increased the death rate of the famine in several ways. \"In the first case, blows to the body caused internal injuries that, in combination with physical emaciation and acute hunger, could induce death.\" In one case, after a peasant stole two cabbages from the common fields, the thief was publicly criticized for half a day. He collapsed, fell ill, and never recovered. Others were sent to labor camps.\nAbout 7% of those who died during the Great Leap Forward were tortured to death or summarily killed. Benjamin Valentino notes that \"communist officials sometimes tortured and killed those accused of failing to meet their grain quota\".\nHowever, J. G. Mahoney has said that \"there is too much diversity and dynamism in the country for one work to capture\u00a0... rural China as if it were one place.\" Mahoney describes an elderly man in rural Shanxi who recalls Mao fondly, saying \"Before Mao we sometimes ate leaves, after liberation we did not.\" Regardless, Mahoney points out that Da Fo villagers recall the Great Leap Forward as a period of famine and death, and among those who survived in Da Fo were precisely those who could digest leaves.\nDirect consequences.\nThe failure of agricultural policies, the movement of farmers from agricultural to industrial work, and weather conditions suppressed the food supply. The shortage of supply clashed with an explosion in demand, leading to millions of deaths from severe famine. The economy, which had improved since the end of the civil war, was devastated, and in response to the severe conditions, there was resistance among the populace.\nThe effects on the upper levels of government in response to the disaster were complex, with Mao purging the Minister of National Defense Peng Dehuai in 1959, the temporary promotion of Lin Biao, Liu Shaoqi, and Deng Xiaoping, and Mao losing some power and prestige following the Great Leap Forward, during the Seven Thousand Cadres Conference in 1962, which led him to launch the Cultural Revolution in 1966.\nFamine.\nDespite the harmful agricultural innovations, the weather was very favorable in 1958 and the harvest was also good. However, the amount of labor which was diverted to steel production and construction projects meant that much of the harvest was left to rot because it was not collected in some areas. This problem was exacerbated by a devastating swarm of locusts, which was caused when their natural predators were killed as part of the Four Pests Campaign.\nAlthough actual harvests were reduced, local officials, under tremendous pressure to report record harvests to central authorities in response to the innovations, competed with each other to announce increasingly exaggerated results. These results were used as the basis for determining the amount of grain which would be taken by the State, supplied to the towns and cities and exported. This barely left enough grain for the peasants, and in some areas, starvation set in. A 1959 drought and flooding from the Yellow River in the same year also contributed to the famine.\nDuring 1958\u20131960 China continued to be a substantial net exporter of grain, despite the widespread famine which was being experienced in the countryside, as Mao sought to maintain face and convince the outside world of the success of his plans. Foreign aid was refused. When the Japanese foreign minister told his Chinese counterpart Chen Yi about an offer of 100,000 tonnes of wheat which was going to be shipped away from public view, he was rebuffed.\nJohn F. Kennedy was also aware that the Chinese were exporting food to Africa and Cuba during the famine. He said during the news conference on 23 May 1962, \"Well, there has been no indication of any expression of interest or desire by the Chinese Communists to receive any food from us, as I have said at the beginning, and we would certainly have to have some idea as to whether the food was needed and under what conditions it might be distributed. Up to the present, we have had no such indication.\" But Kennedy said that the US provided food for about half a million refugees in British Hong Kong.\nWith dramatically reduced yields, even urban areas received greatly reduced rations; however, mass starvation was largely confined to the countryside, where, as a result of drastically inflated production statistics, very little grain was left for the peasants to eat. Food shortages were bad throughout the country, but the provinces which had adopted Mao's reforms with the most vigor, such as Anhui, Gansu and Henan, tended to suffer disproportionately. Sichuan, one of China's most populous provinces, known in China as \"Heaven's Granary\" because of its fertility, is thought to have suffered the highest number of deaths from starvation due to the vigor with which provincial leader Li Jingquan undertook Mao's reforms. There are widespread oral reports, though little official documentation, of cannibalism being practiced in various forms as a result of the famine. Author Yan Lianke also claims that, while growing up in Henan during the Great Leap Forward, he was taught to \"recognize the most edible kinds of bark and clay by his mother. When all of the trees had been stripped and there was no more clay, he learned that lumps of coal could appease the devil in his stomach, at least for a little while.\"\nThe agricultural policies of the Great Leap Forward and the associated famine continued until January 1961, when, at the Ninth Plenum of the 8th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, the restoration of agricultural production through a reversal of the Great Leap policies was started. Grain exports were stopped, and imports from Canada and Australia reduced the impact of the food shortages, at least in the coastal cities.\nDeaths by famine.\nThe exact number of deaths by famine is difficult to determine, and estimates range from 15 million to 55 million people. Because of the uncertainties which are involved in estimating the number of deaths which were caused by the failure of the Great Leap Forward and the ensuing famine and because of the uncertainties which are involved in estimating the numbers of deaths which were caused by other famines, it is difficult to compare the severity of different famines. If an estimate of 30 million deaths is accepted, the failure of the Great Leap Forward caused the deadliest famine in the history of China, and it also caused the deadliest famine in human history. This extremely high loss of human lives was partially caused by China's large population. To put things into absolute and relative numerical perspective: in the Great Irish Famine, approximately 1 million people out of a total population of 8 million people died, or 12.5% of Ireland's entire population. If approximately 23 million people out of a total population of 650 million people died during the Great Chinese Famine, the percentage would be 3.5%. Hence, the famine during the Great Leap Forward had the highest absolute death toll, though not the highest relative (percentage) one.\nThe Great Leap Forward reversed the downward trend in mortality that had occurred since 1950, though even during the Leap, mortality may not have reached pre-1949 levels. Famine deaths and the reduction in number of births caused the population of China to drop in 1960 and 1961. This was only the third time in 600 years that the population of China had decreased. Mao suggested, in a discussion with Field Marshal Montgomery in Autumn 1961, that \"unnatural deaths\" exceeded 5 million in 1960\u20131961, according to a declassified CIA report. After the Great Leap Forward, mortality rates decreased to below pre-Leap levels and the downward trend begun in 1950 continued.\nThe severity of the famine varied from region to region. By correlating the increases in the death rates of different provinces, Peng Xizhe found that Gansu, Sichuan, Guizhou, Hunan, Guangxi, and Anhui were the hardest-hit regions, while Heilongjiang, Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, Tianjin, and Shanghai experienced the lowest increases in death rates during the Great Leap Forward (there was no data for Tibet). In some areas, people resorted to eating tree bark and dirt, and in some places cannibalism as a result of starvation. Peng also noted that the increase in death rates in urban areas was about half the increase in death rates in rural areas. According to Chinese government reports in the \"Fuyang Party History Research Office\", between 1959 and 1961, 2.4 million people from Fuyang died from the famine.\nLong-term impact.\nThe long-term impact of the Great Leap Forward extended beyond immediate famine and loss of life. The policies and their disastrous outcomes led to significant changes in Chinese society and governance. In rural areas, the effects on education and women's labor roles were profound. The collapse of agricultural production systems and the communal structure led to a reevaluation of economic strategies in subsequent decades. Rural education suffered due to the upheaval, and while women were initially mobilized into the workforce, the ensuing chaos often negated these advances. Dali Yang explains, \"The Great Leap Forward's failure necessitated significant policy shifts, leading to a more pragmatic approach in China's economic reforms.\"\nMethods of estimating the death toll and methods of identifying the sources of the error.\nSome outlier estimates include 11 million by Utsa Patnaik, an Indian Marxist economist, 3.66 million by Chinese mathematician Sun Jingxian () and 2.6\u20134 million by Chinese historian and political economist Yang Songlin ().\nThe number of famine deaths during the Great Leap Forward has been estimated with different methods. Banister, Coale, and Ashton et al. compare age cohorts from the 1953, 1964, and 1982 censuses, yearly birth and death records, and results of the 1982 1:1000 fertility survey. From these they calculate excess deaths above a death rate interpolated between pre- and post-Leap death rates. All involve corrections for perceived errors inherent in the different data sets. Peng uses reported deaths from the vital statistics of 14 provinces, adjusts 10% for under reporting, and expands the result to cover all of China assuming similar mortality rates in the other provinces. He uses 1956/57 death rates as the baseline death rate rather than an interpolation between pre- and post-GLF death rates.\nHouser, Sands, and Xiao in their 2005 research study using \"provincial-level demographic panel data and a Bayesian empirical approach in an effort to distinguish the relative importance of weather and national policy on China's great demographic disaster\" conclude that \"in aggregate, from 1959 to 1961 China suffered about 14.8 million excess deaths. Of those, about 69% (or 10.3 million) seem attributable to effects stemming from national policies.\"\nCao uses information from \"local annals\" to determine for each locality the expected population increase from normal births and deaths, the population increase due to migration, and the loss of population between 1958 and 1961. He then adds the three figures to determine the number of excess deaths during the period 1959\u20131961. Chang and Halliday use death rates determined by \"Chinese demographers\" for the years 1957\u20131963, subtract the average of the pre-and post-Leap death rates (1957, 1962, and 1963) from the death rates of each of the years 1958\u20131961, and multiply each yearly excess death rate by the year's population to determine excess deaths.\nChen Yizi, a top adviser to CCP General Secretary Zhao Ziyang and former head of the Institute for Economic Structural Reform, concluded 43 million died in the famine after conducting a county-by-county review of deaths in five provinces and performing extrapolation. Chen was part of a large investigation group led by the Institute for Economic Structural Reform which \"visited every province and examined internal Party documents and records\".\nBecker, Rummel, Dik\u00f6tter, and Yang each compare several earlier estimates. Becker considers Banister's estimate of 30 million excess deaths to be \"the most reliable estimate we have\". Rummel initially took Coale's 27 million as a \"most likely figure\", then accepted the later estimate of 38 million by Chang and Halliday after it was published. Dik\u00f6tter judged Chen's estimate of 43 to 46 million to be \"in all likelihood a reliable estimate\". He also claimed that at least 2.5 million of these deaths were caused by beatings, tortures, or summary executions. On the other hand, Daniel Vukovich asserts that this claim is coming from a problematic and unverified reference, because Chen simply threw that number as an \"estimate\" during an interview and because Chen hasn't published any scholarly work on the subject. Yang takes Cao's, Wang Weizhi's, and Jin Hui's estimates ranging from 32.5 to 35 million excess deaths for the period 1959\u20131961, adds his own estimates for 1958 (0.42 million) and 1962 (2.23 million) \"based on official figures reported by the provinces\" to get 35 to 37 million, and chooses 36 million as a number that \"approaches the reality but is still too low\".\nEstimates contain several sources of error. National census data was not accurate and even the total population of China at the time was not known to within 50 to 100 million people. The statistical reporting system had been taken over by party cadre from statisticians in 1957, making political considerations more important than accuracy and resulting in a complete breakdown in the statistical reporting system. Population figures were routinely inflated at the local level, often in order to obtain increased rations of goods. During the Cultural Revolution, a great deal of the material in the State Statistical Bureau was burned.\nAccording to Jasper Becker, under-reporting of deaths was also a problem. The death registration system, which was inadequate before the famine, was completely overwhelmed by the large number of deaths during the famine. In addition, he claims that many deaths went unreported so that family members of the deceased could continue to draw the deceased's food ration and that counting the number of children who both were born and died between the 1953 and 1964 censuses is problematic. However, Ashton, et al. believe that because the reported number of births during the GLF seems accurate, the reported number of deaths should be accurate as well. Massive internal migration made both population counts and registering deaths problematic, though Yang believes the degree of unofficial internal migration was small and Cao's estimate takes internal migration into account.\nCoale's, Banister's, Ashton et al.'s, and Peng's figures all include adjustments for demographic reporting errors, though Dik\u00f6tter, in his book \"Mao's Great Famine\", argues that their results, as well as Chang and Halliday's, Yang's, and Cao's, are still underestimates. The System Reform Institute's (Chen's) estimate has not been published and therefore it cannot be verified.\nCauses of the famine and responsibility for it.\nThe policies of the Great Leap Forward, the failure of the government to respond quickly and effectively to famine conditions, as well as Mao's insistence on maintaining high grain export quotas in the face of clear evidence of poor crop output were responsible for the famine. There is disagreement over how much, if at all, weather conditions contributed to the famine.\nSignificant amounts of agricultural labor had been transferred for steel production, resulting in a shortage of agricultural workers. Approximately 10% of crops could not be harvested as a result.\nYang Jisheng, a former CCP member and former reporter for the official Chinese news agency \"Xinhua\", puts the blame squarely on Maoist policies and the political system of totalitarianism, such as diverting agricultural workers to steel production instead of growing crops, and exporting grain at the same time. During the course of his research, Yang uncovered that some 22 million tons of grain was held in public granaries at the height of the famine, reports of starvation went up the bureaucracy only to be ignored by top officials, and the authorities ordered that statistics be destroyed in regions where population decline became evident. Using Henan as an example, Yang documents that inflated reports claimed production of 1200 jin per mu, while the actual production was closer to 600 jin per mu, resulting in excessive grain requisitions and local starvation, nearly 6% of the population passed away. In the later book, Yang states, \"36 million Chinese starved to death in the years between 1958 and 1962, while 40 million others failed to be born, which means that \"China's total population loss during the Great Famine then comes to 76 million.\"\nEconomist Steven Rosefielde argues that Yang's account \"shows that Mao's slaughter was caused in considerable part by terror-starvation; that is, voluntary manslaughter (and perhaps murder) rather than innocuous famine.\" Yang claims that local party officials were indifferent to the large number of people dying around them, as their primary concern was the delivery of grain, which Mao wanted to use to pay back debts to the USSR totaling 1.973\u00a0billion yuan. In Xinyang, people died of starvation at the doors of grain warehouses. Mao refused to open the state granaries as he dismissed reports of food shortages and accused the \"rightists\" and the \"kulaks\" of conspiring to hide grain.\nFrom his research into records and talks with experts at the meteorological bureau, Yang concludes that the weather during the Great Leap Forward was not unusual compared to other periods and was not a factor. Yang also believes that the Sino-Soviet split was not a factor because it did not happen until 1960, when the famine was well under way.\nMao's efforts to cool the Leap in late 1958 met resistance within the Party and when Mao proposed a scaling down of steel targets, \"many people just wouldn't change and wouldn't accept it\". Thus, according to historian Tao Kai, the Leap \"wasn't the problem of a single person, but that many people had ideological problems\". Tao also pointed out that \"everyone was together\" on the Anti-Rightist Campaign and only a minority didn't approve of the Great Leap's policies or put forth different opinions. The actions of the party under Mao in the face of widespread famine are reminiscent of Soviet policy nearly three decades earlier during the Soviet famine of 1932-33. At that time, the USSR exported grain for international propaganda purposes despite millions dying of starvation across southern areas of the Soviet Union.\nBenjamin Valentino writes that like in the USSR during the famine of 1932\u201333, peasants were confined to their starving villages by a system of household registration, and the worst effects of the famine were directed against enemies of the regime. Those labeled as \"black elements\" (religious leaders, rightists, rich peasants, etc.) in any previous campaign were given the lowest priority in the allocation of food, and therefore died in the greatest numbers. Drawing from Jasper Becker's book Hungry Ghosts, genocide scholar Adam Jones states that \"no group suffered more than the Tibetans\" from 1959 to 1962.\nAshton, et al. write that policies leading to food shortages, natural disasters, and a slow response to initial indications of food shortages were to blame for the famine. Policies leading to food shortages included the implementation of the commune system and an emphasis on non-agricultural activities such as backyard steel production. Natural disasters included drought, flood, typhoon, plant disease, and insect pest. The slow response was in part due to a lack of objective reporting on the agricultural situation, including a \"nearly complete breakdown in the agricultural reporting system\".\nThis was partly caused by strong incentives for officials to over-report crop yields. According to Frank Dik\u00f6tter, local officials frequently reported production figures 30-40% higher than the actual output to meet the central government's ambitious targets. The unwillingness of the Central Government to seek international aid was a major factor; China's net grain exports in 1959 and 1960 would have been enough to feed 16 million people 2000 calories per day. Ashton, et al. conclude that \"It would not be inaccurate to say that 30 million people died prematurely as a result of errors of internal policy and flawed international relations.\"\nMobo Gao suggested that the Great Leap Forward's terrible effects came not from malignant intent on the part of the Chinese leadership at the time, but instead related to the structural nature of its rule, and the vastness of China as a country. Gao says \"the terrible lesson learnt is that China is so huge and when it is uniformly ruled, follies or wrong policies will have grave implications of tremendous magnitude\".\nIn the official \"Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People's Republic of China\" passed in 1981, the Chinese Communist Party called the purge of the so-called anti-Party clique of Peng Dehuai and others as \"entirely wrong\" and cut short the process of the rectification of \"Left\" errors. The 1981 Resolution also states that, \"it was mainly due to the errors of the Great Leap Forward and of the struggle against 'Right opportunism' together with a succession of natural calamities and the perfidious scrapping of contracts by the Soviet Government that our economy encountered serious difficulties between 1959 and 1961, which caused serious losses to our country and people.\"\nDeaths by violence.\nNot all deaths during the Great Leap were from starvation. In accounts documented by Yang Jisheng, people were beaten or killed for rebelling against the government, reporting the real harvest numbers, for sounding alarm, for refusing to hand over what little food they had left, for trying to flee the famine area, for begging for food or as little as stealing scraps or angering officials.\nIn the book \"Tombstone\", a cycle of starvation and violence was documented during the Great Leap Forward.\nOther impacts.\nFailures of the food supply.\nIn agrarian policy, the failures of the food supply during the Great Leap were met by a gradual de-collectivization over the course of the 1960s that foreshadowed the further measures taken under Deng Xiaoping. Political scientist Meredith Jung-En Woo argues: \"Unquestionably the regime failed to respond in time to save the lives of millions of peasants, but when it did respond, it ultimately transformed the livelihoods of several hundred million peasants (modestly in the early 1960s, but permanently after Deng Xiaoping's reforms subsequent to 1978).\"\nDespite the risks to their careers, some CCP members openly laid blame for the disaster at the feet of the Party leadership and took it as proof that China must rely more on education, acquiring technical expertise and applying bourgeois methods in developing the economy. Liu Shaoqi made a speech at the Seven Thousand Cadres Conference in 1962, stating that \"[the] economic disaster was 30% fault of nature, 70% human error.\"\nA 2017 paper by economists found \"strong evidence that the unrealistic yield targets led to excessive death tolls from 1959 to 1961, and further analysis shows that yield targets induced the inflation of grain output figures and excessive procurement. We also find that Mao's radical policy caused serious deterioration in human capital accumulation and slower economic development in the policy-affected regions decades after the death of Mao.\"\nA dramatic decline in grain output continued for several years, involving in 1960\u201361 a drop in output of more than 25 percent. Causes of this drop are found in both natural disaster and government policy.\nIndustrialization.\nOverall, the Great Leap Forward failed to rapidly industrialize China as intended; however, there was significant capital construction (especially in iron, steel, mining and textile enterprises) that ultimately contributed greatly to China's later industrialization. The Great Leap Forward period also marked the initiation of China's rapid growth in tractor and fertilizer production.\nThe successful construction of the Daqing oil field despite harsh weather conditions and supply limitations became a model held up by the Party as an example during subsequent industrialization campaigns. During its 1960 construction, Oil Minister Yu Qiuli mobilized workers through ideological motivation instead of material incentives, focusing enthusiasm, energy, and resources to complete a rapid industrialization project. The project also delivered critical economic benefits because without the production of the Daqing oil field, crude oil would have been severely limited after the Soviet Union cut off supplies as a result of the Sino-Soviet split.\nLarge-scale irrigation projects begun during the late 1950s as part of the Great Leap Forward continued to grow rapidly until the late 1970s.\nDuring the Great Leap Forward, control of state-owned enterprises was largely decentralized, with control being transferred to local governments from the central government.231 This process of decentralization also significantly increased the power of local Party organizations.238\nWomen's labor advancement.\nThe Great Leap Forward's focus on total workforce mobilization resulted in opportunities for women's labor advancement. Increasing collectivization of labor brought more opportunities for women to \"leave the home\", thereby increasing their economic and personal independence. The number of women in state institutions and state-owned enterprises more than tripled during the period 1957 to 1960.\nAs women became increasingly needed to work in agriculture and industry, and encouraged by policy to do so, the phenomenon of Iron Women arose. Women did traditionally male work in both fields and factories, including major movements of women into management positions. Women competed for high productivity, and those who distinguished themselves came to be called Iron Women. Slogans such as \"There is no difference between men and women in this new age,\" and \"We can do anything, and anything we do, we can do it well,\" became popular.\nNeighborhood production teams established during this period offered women labor that allowed them to leave the home without leaving the neighborhood community. This mode of labor provided urban women with the right to work while still preserving existing forms of household social life.\nEducation.\nDuring the Great Leap Forward, the number of universities in China increased to 1,289 by 1960 and nationwide enrollment more than doubled to 962,000 in 1960. This was a wave of \"great leap forward\" in higher education. Many of the newly established universities, however, were affiliated with people's communes and were directly transformed from local middle schools. For example, in Xushui County, Hebei, every commune built one university of its own and local middle school teachers were promoted to professors; for another example, in Suiping County, Henan, a new university was established with 10 departments and 529 students, where some \"professors\" were actually teachers from local elementary school. According to official sources:\nSome comrades expressed the fear that the movement would be a mockery of school education ...With regard to the development of higher education, some comrades, hearing that peasants have set up their own universities in the countryside, would ridicule the idea, believing that a university without a staff of qualified professors and students who have graduated from senior middle schools cannot be called a university.\nEducational reforms during the Great Leap Forward sought to increase student and staff participation in the administration process, to favor students from worker, peasant, or soldier backgrounds in admissions, and to increase the role of the CCP and of politics in schools. Beginning in 1961, universities rolled back these policy initiatives, and increase meritocratic university policies instead of egalitarian ones.\nResistance.\nThere were various forms of resistance to the consequences of the Great Leap Forward. Several provinces saw armed rebellion, though these rebellions never posed a serious threat to the Central Government. Rebellions are documented to have occurred in Henan, Shandong, Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan, Fujian, Yunnan, and Tibet. In Henan, Shandong, Qinghai, Gansu, and Sichuan, these rebellions lasted more than a year, with the Spirit Soldier rebellion of 1959 being one of the few larger-scale uprisings. There was also occasional violence against cadre members. Raids on granaries, arson and other vandalism, train robberies, and raids on neighboring villages and counties were common.\nAccording to Ralph Thaxton, professor of politics at Brandeis University, villagers turned against the CCP during and after the Great Leap, seeing it as autocratic, brutal, corrupt, and mean-spirited. According to Thaxton, the CCP's policies included plunder, forced labor, and starvation, which led villagers \"to think about their relationship with the Communist Party in ways that do not bode well for the continuity of socialist rule.\"\nOften, villagers composed doggerel to show their defiance to the regime, and \"perhaps, to remain sane\". During the Great Leap, one jingle ran: \"Flatter shamelessly\u2014eat delicacies... Don't flatter\u2014starve to death for sure.\"\nImpact on the government.\nOfficials were prosecuted for exaggerating production figures, although punishments varied. In one case, a provincial party secretary was dismissed and prohibited from holding higher office. A number of county-level officials were publicly tried and executed.\nMao stepped down as State Chairman of the PRC on 27 April 1959, but remained CCP Chairman. Liu Shaoqi (the new PRC Chairman) and reformist Deng Xiaoping (CCP General Secretary) were left in charge to change policy to bring economic recovery. Mao's Great Leap Forward policy was openly criticized at the Lushan party conference by one person. Criticism from Minister of National Defense Peng Dehuai, who, discovered that people from his home province starved to death caused him to write a letter to Mao to ask for the policies to be adapted. After the Lushan showdown, Mao replaced Peng with Lin Biao and Peng was sent off into obscurity.\nHowever, by 1962, it was clear that the party had changed away from the extremist ideology that led to the Great Leap. During 1962, the party held a number of conferences and rehabilitated most of the deposed comrades who had criticized Mao in the aftermath of the Great Leap. The event was again discussed, with much self-criticism, and the contemporary government called it a \"serious [loss] to our country and people\" and blamed the cult of personality of Mao.\nAt the Lushan conference of 1959, Peng Dehuai, one of the great marshals of the Chinese civil war against the nationalists, was a strong supporter of the Leap. But the discovery that people from his own home area were starving to death prompted him to write to Mao to ask for the policies to be adapted. Mao was furious, reading the letter out in public and demanding that his colleagues in the leadership line up either behind him or Peng. Almost to a man, they supported Mao, with his security chief Kang Sheng declaring of the letter: \"I make bold to suggest that this cannot be handled with lenience.\"\nIn particular, at the \"Seven Thousand Cadres Conference\" in January\u2013February 1962, Mao made a self-criticism and re-affirmed his commitment to democratic centralism. In the years that followed, Mao mostly abstained from the operations of government, making policy largely the domain of Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping. Maoist ideology took a back seat in the CCP, until Mao launched the Cultural Revolution in 1966 which marked his political comeback.\nFollowing the failures of the Great Leap Forward, Chinese leadership slowed the pace of industrialization, focusing more on the development of China's already more developed coastal areas and the production of consumer goods. Thus, during the preliminary formulation of the Third Five Year Plan (which had been delayed due to the economic turmoil), Liu stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the past, the infrastructure battlefront was too long. There were too many projects. Demands were too high and rushed. Designs were done badly, and projects were hurriedly begun ... We only paid attention to increasing output and ignored quality. We set targets too highly. We must always remember these painful learning experiences.\nDuring the discussion of the Third Five Year Plan, Mao made similar statements about the Great Leap Forward having \"extended the infrastructure battlefront too long\", acknowledging that it was \"best to do less and well\".\nThe failures of the Great Leap Forward also informed the government's approach to the Third Front construction campaign which followed a few years later and which built basic industry and national defense industry in China's interior. Rather than adopting the Great Leap Forward's approach of locally developed projects, the mass mobilizations of the Third Front were centrally planned.\nIn addition, according to historian Philipp Brigham, the failures of the Great Leap Forward significantly contributed to the Cultural Revolution, which is another pivotal event in modern Chinese politics that happened later in Chairman Mao's regime. Specifically, he posits that one of the main objectives of the Cultural Revolution was to extricate Chairman Mao and the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party from the responsibility for the Great Leap Forward. According to Brigham's explanation, Chairman Mao and the central committee tried to incite through the Cultural Revolution that the Great Leap Forward had failed despite the right direction from above due to inadequate leadership of the local cadres.\nEcological impact.\nThe Great Leap Forward resulted in ecological impacts through deforestation that resulted, as well as the expansion of agriculture into areas ill-suited for it.\nHealth impacts.\nThere is evidence that survivors of the famine suffered sustained negative effects to their long-term health and economic outcomes. Those in early childhood during the famine were impacted the most, and it has been estimated that the 1959 birth cohort would have otherwise grown three centimeters taller in adulthood.\nCohorts born during the famine showed higher infant and early life mortality, but exhibit a \"mortality crossover\" pattern, with mortality rates leveling off or even dropping relative to non-famine cohorts beyond a certain point. This could be explained by the combined effects of initial debilitation, in which malnutrition and hardship increase early deaths, and selection for robustness among famine survivors resulting in fewer later deaths.\nCultural impact.\nConsistent with the Great Leap Forward in agriculture and industry, authorities promoted the New Folksong Movement and the Peasant Painting Movement, from which hundreds of thousands of new artists emerged. Through the New Folksong Movement, millions of new folk songs and poems were written and collected. As part of the Peasant Painting Movement, peasant artists decorated village walls with Great Leap Forward-themed murals.\nThe Great Leap Forward also prompted a wave of the New \"Guohua\" Campaign in which the state commissioned landscape artists to paint new production projects; select paintings of the campaign were taught in schools, published widely as propaganda posters, exhibited in museums, and used as the backdrops of state events.\nOn 9 March 1958, the Ministry of Culture held a meeting to introduce a Great Leap Forward in cinema. During the Great Leap Forward, the film industry rapidly expanded, with documentary films being the genre that experienced the greatest growth. The total number of film-screening venues, including both urban cinemas and mobile projection units which traveled through rural China, radically increased.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. \nBibliography and further reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71265", "revid": "38759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71265", "title": "Senecio", "text": "Genus of flowering plants\nSenecio is a genus of flowering plants in the daisy family (Asteraceae) that includes groundsels and some ragworts. Variously circumscribed taxonomically, the genus \"Senecio\" is one of the largest genera of flowering plants. \"Plants of the World Online\" currently accepts 1482 species.\nDescription.\nMorphology.\nThe flower heads are often rayed (though the type species \"Senecio vulgaris\" does not have ray florets), with the heads borne in branched clusters, and usually completely yellow, but green, purple, white and blue flowers are known as well.\nIn its current circumscription, the genus contains species that are annual or perennial herbs, shrubs, small trees, aquatics or climbers.\nChemistry.\nPyrrolizidine alkaloids are found in all \"Senecio\" species. These alkaloids serve as a natural biocides to deter or even kill animals that would eat them. Livestock generally do not find them palatable. \"Senecio\" species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species that have developed tolerance for these alkaloids.\nTaxonomy.\nThe traditional circumscription of \"Senecio\" is artificial, being polyphyletic, even in its new circumscription which is based on genetic data. Despite the separation of many species into other genera, the genus still contains c.\u20091,250 species and is one of the largest genera of flowering plants.\nAs no morphological synapomorphies are known to determine which species belong to the genus or not, no exact species number is known. The genus has an almost worldwide distribution and evolved in the mid- to late Miocene.\nPhylogeny.\nAs of 2007, many genera and the whole tribe were in need of revision. Many species currently placed in the genus need to be transferred to other or new genera, and others have been retransferred to \"Senecio\". In its new delimitation the genus is still not monophyletic.\nThe following genera are currently accepted by Plants of the World Online, and contain species that are or have been included within \"Senecio\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe scientific name \"Senecio\" derives from the latin 'senex' which means \"old man\".\nSelected species.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormerly in \"Senecio\" (partial list)\nDistribution.\nThe genus \"Senecio\" is distributed almost worldwide. It is one of the few genera occurring in all five regions with a Mediterranean climate. Furthermore, species are found in mountainous regions, including tropical alpine-like areas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71267", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71267", "title": "Jacobaea vulgaris", "text": "Species of flowering plant in the daisy family\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJacobaea vulgaris, synonym Senecio jacobaea, is a very common wild flower in the family Asteraceae that is native to northern Eurasia, usually in dry, open places, and has also been widely distributed as a weed elsewhere.\nCommon names include ragwort, common ragwort, stinking willie, tansy ragwort, benweed, St. James-wort, stinking nanny/ninny/willy, staggerwort, dog standard, cankerwort, stammerwort. In the western United States it is generally known as tansy ragwort, or tansy, though its resemblance to the true tansy is superficial.\nIn some countries it is an invasive species and regarded as a noxious weed. In the UK, where it is native, it is often unwanted because of its toxic effect for cattle and horses, but it is also valued for its nectar production which feeds insect pollinators and its ecological importance is thus considered significant.\nDescription.\nThe plant is generally considered to be biennial but it has the tendency to exhibit perennial properties under certain cultural conditions (such as when subjected to repeated grazing or mowing). The stems are erect, straight, have no or few hairs, and reach a height of . The leaves are pinnately lobed and the end lobe is blunt. The many names that include the word \"stinking\" (and Mare's Fart) arise because of the unpleasant smell of the leaves. The hermaphrodite flower heads are diameter, and are borne in dense, flat-topped clusters; the florets are bright yellow. It has a long flowering period lasting from June to November (in the Northern Hemisphere).\nPollination is by a wide range of bees, flies and moths and butterflies. Over a season, one plant may produce 2,000 to 2,500 yellow flowers in 20- to 60-headed, flat-topped corymbs. The achenes have dandelion-like groups of prickly hairs called pappuses, which help seed dispersal by the wind. The number of seeds produced may be as large as 75,000 to 120,000, although in its native range in Eurasia very few of these would grow into new plants and research has shown that most seeds do not travel a great distance from the parent plant.\nTaxonomy.\nTwo subspecies are accepted:\nDistribution.\nRagwort is native to the Eurasian continent. In Europe it is widely spread, from Scandinavia to the Mediterranean. In Great Britain and Ireland, where it is native, it is listed as a noxious weed.\nRagwort is abundant in waste land, waysides and grazing pastures. Its natural habitat is sand dunes, but it is commonly found along road sides, railways and in light, low fertility soil.\nIt has been introduced in many other regions, and is listed as a weed in many. These include: \nEcological importance.\nAlthough the plant is often unwanted by landowners because of its toxic effect for cattle and horses, and because it is considered a weed by many, it provides a great deal of nectar for pollinators. It was rated in the top 10 for most nectar production (nectar per unit cover per year) in a UK plants survey conducted by the AgriLand project which is supported by the UK Insect Pollinators Initiative. It also was the top producer of nectar sugar in another study in Britain, with a production per floral unit of (2921 \u00b1 448\u00a0\u03bcg).\nIn the United Kingdom, where the plant is native, ragwort provides a home and food source to at least 77 insect species. Thirty of these species of invertebrate use ragwort exclusively as their food source and there are another 22 species where ragwort forms a significant part of their diet.\nEnglish Nature identifies a further 117 species that use ragwort as a nectar source whilst travelling between feeding and breeding sites, or between metapopulations. These consist mainly of solitary bees, hoverflies, moths, and butterflies such as the small copper butterfly (\"Lycaena phlaeas\"). Pollen is collected by solitary bees.\nBesides the fact that ragwort is very attractive to such a vast array of insects, some of these are very rare indeed. Of the 30 species that specifically feed on ragwort alone, seven are officially deemed nationally scarce. A further three species are on the IUCN Red List. In short, ragwort is an exclusive food source for ten rare or threatened insect species, including the cinnabar moth (\"Tyria jacobaeae\"), the picture winged fly (\"Campiglossa malaris\"), the scarce clouded knot horn moth (\"Homoeosoma nimbella\"), and the Sussex emerald moth (\"Thalera fimbrialis\"). The Sussex Emerald has been labelled a Priority Species in the United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan. A priority species is one which is \"scarce, threatened and declining\". The remainder of the ten threatened species include three species of leaf beetle, another picture-winged fly, and three micro moths. All of these species are Nationally Scarce B, with one leaf beetle categorised as Nationally Scarce A.\nThe most common of those species that are totally reliant on ragwort for their survival is the cinnabar moth. The cinnabar is a United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan Species, its status described as \"common and widespread, but rapidly declining\".\nPoisonous effects.\nRagwort contains many different alkaloids, making it poisonous to many animals. http://. Alkaloids which have been found in the plant confirmed by the WHO report EHC 80 are jacobine, jaconine, jacozine, otosenine, retrorsine, seneciphylline, senecionine, and senkirkine (p.\u00a0322 Appendix II). There is a strong variation between plants from the same location in distribution between the possible alkaloids and even the absolute amount of alkaloids varies drastically.\nRagwort is of particular concern to people who keep horses and cattle. In areas of the world where ragwort is a native plant, such as Britain and continental Europe, documented cases of proven poisoning are rare. Horses and cattle normally recognize and do not eat fresh ragwort due to its taste. However, they may still consume it if there is not enough other food. Further, if ragwort is included in hay or silage, livestock will not be able to recognize it, and it will moreover contaminate the entire batch. The result, if sufficient quantity is consumed, can be irreversible cirrhosis of the liver of a form identified as megalocytosis where cells are abnormally enlarged. Signs that a horse has been poisoned include yellow mucous membranes, depression, and lack of coordination.\nThere is no definitive test for the poisoning however, since megalocytosis is not a change in the liver which is specific to ragwort poisoning. It is also seen in poisoning by other alkylating agents, such as nitrosamines and aflatoxins. Aflatoxins are a common contaminant formed in feedstuffs by moulds. Research in the United Kingdom has produced results showing megalocytosis, which may be due to various causes, to be a relatively uncommon cause of liver disease in horses.\nThe alkaloid does not actually accumulate in the liver but a breakdown product can damage DNA and progressively kills cells. About 3--7% of the body weight is sometimes claimed as deadly for horses, but an example in the scientific literature exists of a horse surviving being fed over 20% of its body weight. The effect of low doses is lessened by the destruction of the original alkaloids by the action of bacteria in the digestive tract before they reach the bloodstream. There is no known antidote or cure to poisoning, but examples are known from the scientific literature of horses making a full recovery once consumption has been stopped.\nThe alkaloids can be absorbed in small quantities through the skin but studies have shown that the absorption is very much less than by ingestion. Also they are in the N-oxide form which only becomes toxic after conversion inside the digestive tract and they will be excreted harmlessly.\nSome sensitive individuals can suffer from an allergic reaction because ragwort, like many members of the family Compositae, contains sesquiterpene lactones which can cause compositae dermatitis. These are different from the pyrrolizidine alkaloids which are responsible for the toxic effects.\nHoney collected from ragwort has been found to contain small quantities of jacoline, jacobine, jacozine, senecionine, and seneciphylline, but the quantities have been judged as too minute to be of concern.\nControl.\nAs indicated above, common ragwort has become a problem in several areas in which it has been introduced, and various methods are employed to help prevent its spread.\nIn many Australian states ragwort has been declared a noxious weed, and landholders are required to remove it from their property by law. In the island state of Tasmania, ragwort is responsible for more than half of the total costs of that state's control of invasive species. The species has been calculated as the 8th most expensive invasive species in terms of cost to Australian farmers, at over A$ over 60 years.\nIt is also legislated as a noxious weed in New Zealand, where farmers sometimes bring in helicopters to spray their farms if the ragwort is too widespread.\nLegislation.\nIreland.\nIn Ireland, the Noxious Weeds (Thistle, Ragwort, and Dock) Order 1937, issued under the Noxious Weeds Act 1936, declares ragwort as a noxious weed, requiring landowners to control its growth.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, common ragwort (\"Senecio jacobaea\") is one of the five plants named as an \"injurious weed\" under the provisions of the Weeds Act 1959. The word \"injurious\" in this context indicates that it could be harmful to agriculture, not that it is dangerous to animals, as all the other \"injurious weeds\" listed are non-toxic. Under the terms of this Act, a land occupier can be required by the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to prevent the spread of the plant. However, the growth of the plant is not made illegal by the Act and there is no statutory obligation for control placed upon landowners in general.\nThe Ragwort Control Act 2003 provides for a code of practice, which the government states is guidance, on ragwort and does not place any further legal responsibilities on landowners to control the plant.\nBiological control.\nRagwort is a food plant for the larvae of \"Cochylis atricapitana\", \"Phycitodes maritima\", and \"Phycitodes saxicolais\". Ragwort is best known as the food of caterpillars of the cinnabar moth \"Tyria jacobaeae\". They absorb alkaloids from the plant and become distasteful to predators, a fact advertised by the black and yellow warning colours. The red and black, day-flying adult moth is also distasteful to many potential predators. The moth is used as a control for ragwort in countries in which it has been introduced and become a problem, like New Zealand and the western United States. As both larvae and adults are distinctly colored and marked, identification of cinnabars is easy outside of their natural range, and grounds and range keepers can quickly recognize them. In both countries, the tansy ragwort flea beetle (\"Longitarsus jacobaeae\") has been introduced to combat the plant. Another beetle, \"Longitarsus ganglbaueri\", also feeds on ragwort, but will feed on other plants as well, making it an unsuitable biological control. Another biological control agent introduced in the western United States is the ragwort seed fly, although it is not considered very effective at controlling ragwort. The biological control of ragwort was already used in the 1930s.\nOther usage.\nIn ancient Greece and Rome a supposed aphrodisiac was made from the plant; it was called satyrion.\nThe leaves can be used to obtain a good green dye, although it fades. The flowers can be used to produce a dye that is yellow when the fabric is mordanted with alum. Brown and orange dyes are also reported.\nLiterature, poetry and mythology.\nThe Greek physician Pedanius Dioscorides (c. 40\u201390 CE) recommended the herb. The two \"fathers\" of herbalism, Gerard and Culpeper, also recommended the herb. Culpeper was an astrological botanist and thought the plant was \"under the command of Dame Venus, and [it] cleanses, digests, and discusses.\"\nThe poet John Clare had a more positive opinion of the plant, as revealed in this poem of 1831:\nRagwort thou humble flower with tattered leaves\nI love to see thee come and litter gold...\nThy waste of shining blossoms richly shields\nThe sun tanned sward in splendid hues that burn\nSo bright and glaring that the very light\nOf the rich sunshine doth to paleness turn\nAnd seems but very shadows in thy sight.\nThe ragwort, under its Manx name \"Cushag\", is the national flower of the Isle of Man According to one story King Orry chose as his emblem the cushag flower, as its twelve petals represent one of the isles of the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles: the Isle of Man, Arran, Bute, Islay, Jura, Mull, Iona, Eigg, Rum, Skye, Raasay, and the Outer Hebrides. The ragwort, in fact, usually has thirteen petals. The Manx poet Josephine Kermode (1852\u20131937) wrote the following poem about the \"Cushag\":\nNow, the Cushag, we know,\nMust never grow,\nWhere the farmer's work is done.\nBut along the rills,\nIn the heart of the hills,\nThe Cushag may shine like the sun.\nWhere the golden flowers,\nHave fairy powers,\nTo gladden our hearts with their grace.\nAnd in Vannin Veg Veen,\nIn the valleys green,\nThe Cushags have still a place.\nDonald Macalastair of Druim-a-ghinnir on the Isle of Arran told a story of the fairies journeying to Ireland. The ragwort was their transport and every one of them picked a plant, sat astride and arrived in Ireland in an instant.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71268", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71268", "title": "Astrochemistry", "text": "Study of molecules in the Universe and their reactions\nAstrochemistry is the study of the abundance and reactions of molecules in the universe, and their interaction with radiation. The discipline is an overlap of astronomy and chemistry. The word \"astrochemistry\" may be applied to both the Solar System and the interstellar medium. The study of the abundance of elements and isotope ratios in Solar System objects, such as meteorites, is also called cosmochemistry, while the study of interstellar atoms and molecules and their interaction with radiation is sometimes called molecular astrophysics. The formation, atomic and chemical composition, evolution and fate of molecular gas clouds is of special interest, because it is from these clouds that solar systems form.\nHistory.\nAs an offshoot of the disciplines of astronomy and chemistry, the history of astrochemistry is founded upon the shared history of the two fields. The development of advanced observational and experimental spectroscopy has allowed for the detection of an ever-increasing array of molecules within solar systems and the surrounding interstellar medium. In turn, the increasing number of chemicals discovered by advancements in spectroscopy and other technologies have increased the size and scale of the chemical space available for astrochemical study.\nHistory of spectroscopy.\nObservations of solar spectra as performed by Athanasius Kircher (1646), Jan Marek Marci (1648), Robert Boyle (1664), and Francesco Maria Grimaldi (1665) all predated Newton's 1666 work which established the spectral nature of light and resulted in the first spectroscope. Spectroscopy was first used as an astronomical technique in 1802 with the experiments of William Hyde Wollaston, who built a spectrometer to observe the spectral lines present within solar radiation. These spectral lines were later quantified through the work of Joseph von Fraunhofer.\nSpectroscopy was first used to distinguish between different materials after the release of Charles Wheatstone's 1835 report that the sparks given off by different metals have distinct emission spectra. This observation was later built upon by L\u00e9on Foucault, who demonstrated in 1849 that identical absorption and emission lines result from the same material at different temperatures. An equivalent statement was independently postulated by Anders Jonas \u00c5ngstr\u00f6m in his 1853 work \"Optiska Unders\u00f6kningar,\" where it was theorized that luminous gases emit rays of light at the same frequencies as light which they may absorb.\nThis spectroscopic data began to take upon theoretical importance with Johann Balmer's observation that the spectral lines exhibited by samples of hydrogen followed a simple empirical relationship which came to be known as the Balmer Series. This series, a special case of the more general Rydberg Formula developed by Johannes Rydberg in 1888, was created to describe the spectral lines observed for hydrogen. Rydberg's work expanded upon this formula by allowing for the calculation of spectral lines for multiple different chemical elements. The theoretical importance granted to these spectroscopic results was greatly expanded upon the development of quantum mechanics, as the theory allowed for these results to be compared to atomic and molecular emission spectra which had been calculated \"a priori\".\nHistory of astrochemistry.\nWhile radio astronomy was developed in the 1930s, it was not until 1937 that any substantial evidence arose for the conclusive identification of an interstellar \"molecule\" \u2013 up until this point, the only chemical species known to exist in interstellar space were atomic. These findings were confirmed in 1940, when McKellar \"et al\". identified and attributed spectroscopic lines in an as-of-then unidentified radio observation to CH and CN molecules in interstellar space. In the thirty years afterwards, a small selection of other molecules were discovered in interstellar space: the most important being OH, discovered in 1963 and significant as a source of interstellar oxygen, and H2CO (formaldehyde), discovered in 1969 and significant for being the first observed organic, polyatomic molecule in interstellar space\nThe discovery of interstellar formaldehyde \u2013 and later, other molecules with potential biological significance, such as water or carbon monoxide \u2013 is seen by some as strong supporting evidence for abiogenetic theories of life: specifically, theories which hold that the basic molecular components of life came from extraterrestrial sources. This has prompted a still ongoing search for interstellar molecules which are either of direct biological importance \u2013 such as interstellar glycine, discovered in a comet within the Solar System in 2009 \u2013 or which exhibit biologically relevant properties like chirality \u2013 an example of which (propylene oxide) was discovered in 2016 \u2013 alongside more basic astrochemical research.\nSpectroscopy.\nOne particularly important experimental tool in astrochemistry is spectroscopy through the use of telescopes to measure the absorption and emission of light from molecules and atoms in various environments. By comparing astronomical observations with laboratory measurements, astrochemists can infer the elemental abundances, chemical composition, and temperatures of stars and interstellar clouds. This is possible because ions, atoms, and molecules have characteristic spectra: that is, the absorption and emission of certain wavelengths (colors) of light, often not visible to the human eye. However, these measurements have limitations, with various types of radiation (radio, infrared, visible, ultraviolet etc.) able to detect only certain types of species, depending on the chemical properties of the molecules. Interstellar formaldehyde was the first organic molecule detected in the interstellar medium.\nPerhaps the most powerful technique for detection of individual chemical species is radio astronomy, which has resulted in the detection of over a hundred interstellar species, including radicals and ions, and organic (i.e. carbon-based) compounds, such as alcohols, acids, aldehydes, and ketones. One of the most abundant interstellar molecules, and among the easiest to detect with radio waves (due to its strong electric dipole moment), is CO (carbon monoxide). In fact, CO is such a common interstellar molecule that it is used to map out molecular regions. The radio observation of perhaps greatest human interest is the claim of interstellar glycine, the simplest amino acid, but with considerable accompanying controversy. One of the reasons why this detection was controversial is that although radio (and some other methods like rotational spectroscopy) are good for the identification of simple species with large dipole moments, they are less sensitive to more complex molecules, even something relatively small like amino acids.\nMoreover, such methods are completely blind to molecules that have no dipole. For example, by far the most common molecule in the universe is H2 (hydrogen gas, or chemically better said dihydrogen), but it does not have a dipole moment, so it is invisible to radio telescopes. Moreover, such methods cannot detect species that are not in the gas-phase. Since dense molecular clouds are very cold (), most molecules in them (other than dihydrogen) are frozen, i.e. solid. Instead, dihydrogen and these other molecules are detected using other wavelengths of light. Dihydrogen is easily detected in the ultraviolet (UV) and visible ranges from its absorption and emission of light (the hydrogen line). Moreover, most organic compounds absorb and emit light in the infrared (IR) so, for example, the detection of methane in the atmosphere of Mars was achieved using an IR ground-based telescope, NASA's 3-meter Infrared Telescope Facility atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii. NASA's researchers use airborne IR telescope SOFIA and space telescope Spitzer for their observations, researches and scientific operations. Somewhat related to the recent detection of methane in the atmosphere of Mars. Christopher Oze, of the University of Canterbury in New Zealand and his colleagues reported, in June 2012, that measuring the ratio of dihydrogen and methane levels on Mars may help determine the likelihood of life on Mars. According to the scientists, \"...low H2/CH4 ratios (less than approximately 40) indicate that life is likely present and active.\" Other scientists have recently reported methods of detecting dihydrogen and methane in extraterrestrial atmospheres.\nInfrared astronomy has also revealed that the interstellar medium contains a suite of complex gas-phase carbon compounds called polyaromatic hydrocarbons, often abbreviated PAHs or PACs. These molecules, composed primarily of fused rings of carbon (either neutral or in an ionized state), are said to be the most common class of carbon compound in the Galaxy. They are also the most common class of carbon molecule in meteorites and in cometary and asteroidal dust (cosmic dust). These compounds, as well as the amino acids, nucleobases, and many other compounds in meteorites, carry deuterium and isotopes of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen that are very rare on Earth, attesting to their extraterrestrial origin. The PAHs are thought to form in hot circumstellar environments (around dying, carbon-rich red giant stars).\nInfrared astronomy has also been used to assess the composition of solid materials in the interstellar medium, including silicates, kerogen-like carbon-rich solids, and ices. This is because unlike visible light, which is scattered or absorbed by solid particles, the IR radiation can pass through the microscopic interstellar particles, but in the process there are absorptions at certain wavelengths that are characteristic of the composition of the grains. As above with radio astronomy, there are certain limitations, e.g. N2 is difficult to detect by either IR or radio astronomy.\nSuch IR observations have determined that in dense clouds (where there are enough particles to attenuate the destructive UV radiation) thin ice layers coat the microscopic particles, permitting some low-temperature chemistry to occur. Since dihydrogen is by far the most abundant molecule in the universe, the initial chemistry of these ices is determined by the chemistry of the hydrogen. If the hydrogen is atomic, then the H atoms react with available O, C and N atoms, producing \"reduced\" species like H2O, CH4, and NH3. However, if the hydrogen is molecular and thus not reactive, this permits the heavier atoms to react or remain bonded together, producing CO, CO2, CN, etc. These mixed-molecular ices are exposed to ultraviolet radiation and cosmic rays, which results in complex radiation-driven chemistry. Lab experiments on the photochemistry of simple interstellar ices have produced amino acids. The similarity between interstellar and cometary ices (as well as comparisons of gas phase compounds) have been invoked as indicators of a connection between interstellar and cometary chemistry. This is somewhat supported by the results of the analysis of the organics from the comet samples returned by the Stardust mission but the minerals also indicated a surprising contribution from high-temperature chemistry in the solar nebula.\nResearch.\nResearch is progressing on the way in which interstellar and circumstellar molecules form and interact, e.g. by including non-trivial quantum mechanical phenomena for synthesis pathways on interstellar particles. This research could have a profound impact on our understanding of the suite of molecules that were present in the molecular cloud when the Solar System formed, which contributed to the rich carbon chemistry of comets and asteroids and hence the meteorites and interstellar dust particles which fall to the Earth by the ton every day.\nThe sparseness of interstellar and interplanetary space results in some unusual chemistry, since symmetry-forbidden reactions cannot occur except on the longest of timescales. For this reason, molecules and molecular ions which are unstable on Earth can be highly \nabundant in space, for example the H3+ ion.\nAstrochemistry overlaps with astrophysics and nuclear physics in characterizing the nuclear reactions which occur in stars, as well as the structure of stellar interiors. If a star develops a largely convective envelope, dredge-up events can occur, bringing the products of nuclear burning to the surface. If the star is experiencing significant mass loss, the expelled material may contain molecules whose rotational and vibrational spectral transitions can be observed with radio and infrared telescopes. An interesting example of this is the set of carbon stars with silicate and water-ice outer envelopes. Molecular spectroscopy allows us to see these stars transitioning from an original composition in which oxygen was more abundant than carbon, to a carbon star phase where the carbon produced by helium burning is brought to the surface by deep convection, and dramatically changes the molecular content of the stellar wind.\nIn October 2011, scientists reported that cosmic dust contains organic matter (\"amorphous organic solids with a mixed aromatic-aliphatic structure\") that could be created naturally, and rapidly, by stars.\nOn August 29, 2012, and in a world first, astronomers at Copenhagen University reported the detection of a specific sugar molecule, glycolaldehyde, in a distant star system. The molecule was found around the protostellar binary \"IRAS 16293-2422\", which is located 400 light years from Earth. Glycolaldehyde is needed to form ribonucleic acid, or RNA, which is similar in function to DNA. This finding suggests that complex organic molecules may form in stellar systems prior to the formation of planets, eventually arriving on young planets early in their formation.\nIn September, 2012, NASA scientists reported that polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), subjected to interstellar medium (ISM) conditions, are transformed, through hydrogenation, oxygenation and hydroxylation, to more complex organics \u2013 \"a step along the path toward amino acids and nucleotides, the raw materials of proteins and DNA, respectively\". Further, as a result of these transformations, the PAHs lose their spectroscopic signature which could be one of the reasons \"for the lack of PAH detection in interstellar ice grains, particularly the outer regions of cold, dense clouds or the upper molecular layers of protoplanetary disks.\"\nIn February 2014, NASA announced the creation of an improved spectral database for tracking polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in the universe. According to scientists, more than 20% of the carbon in the universe may be associated with PAHs, possible starting materials for the formation of life. PAHs seem to have been formed shortly after the Big Bang, are widespread throughout the universe, and are associated with new stars and exoplanets.\nOn August 11, 2014, astronomers released studies, using the Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA) for the first time, that detailed the distribution of HCN, HNC, H2CO, and dust inside the comae of comets C/2012 F6 (Lemmon) and C/2012 S1 (ISON).\nFor the study of the recourses of chemical elements and molecules in the universe is developed the mathematical model of the molecules composition distribution in the interstellar environment on thermodynamic potentials by professor M.Yu. Dolomatov using methods of the probability theory, the mathematical and physical statistics and the equilibrium thermodynamics. Based on this model are estimated the resources of life-related molecules, amino acids and the nitrogenous bases in the interstellar medium. The possibility of the oil hydrocarbons molecules formation is shown. The given calculations confirm Sokolov's and Hoyl's hypotheses about the possibility of the oil hydrocarbons formation in Space. Results are confirmed by data of astrophysical supervision and space researches.\nIn July 2015, scientists reported that upon the first touchdown of the \"Philae\" lander on comet 67/P's surface, measurements by the COSAC and Ptolemy instruments revealed sixteen organic compounds, four of which were seen for the first time on a comet, including acetamide, acetone, methyl isocyanate and propionaldehyde.\nIn December 2023, astronomers reported the first time discovery, in the plumes of Enceladus, moon of the planet Saturn, of hydrogen cyanide, a possible chemical essential for life as we know it, as well as other organic molecules, some of which are yet to be better identified and understood. According to the researchers, \"these [newly discovered] compounds could potentially support extant microbial communities or drive complex organic synthesis leading to the origin of life.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71277", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71277", "title": "Gabon/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "71278", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71278", "title": "Backus-Naur Form", "text": ""}
{"id": "71279", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71279", "title": "Mali/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "71280", "revid": "3206409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71280", "title": "Mary of Guise", "text": "Queen of Scotland from 1538 to 1542\nMary of Guise (; 22 November 1515 \u2013 11 June 1560), also called Mary of Lorraine, was Queen of Scotland from 1538 until 1542, as the second wife of King James V. She was a French noblewoman of the House of Guise, a cadet branch of the House of Lorraine and one of the most powerful families in France. As the mother of Mary, Queen of Scots, she was a key figure in the political and religious upheaval that marked mid-16th-century Scotland, ruling the kingdom as queen regent on behalf of her daughter from 1554 until her death in 1560. \nThe eldest of the twelve children born to Claude, Duke of Guise, and Antoinette of Bourbon, in 1534 Mary was married to Louis II d'Orl\u00e9ans, Duke of Longueville, the Grand Chamberlain of France. The marriage was arranged by King Francis I of France, but proved shortlived. The Duke of Longueville died in 1537, and the widower kings of England and Scotland, Henry VIII and James V, both sought the Duchess of Longueville's hand. After much persuasion from Francis I and James V, who wrote a personal letter pleading for her hand and counsel, Mary eventually relented and agreed to marry the King of Scots. Following the new queen's arrival in Scotland, James and Mary were married in person in June 1538 at St Andrews Cathedral. Mary was crowned queen at Holyrood Abbey on 22 February 1540, and the marriage produced three children in quick succession: James, Duke of Rothesay; Robert, Duke of Albany; and Mary. Both sons died in April 1541, just 14 hours apart, and when James V himself died in December 1542, his only surviving heir, Mary, became Queen of Scots at the age of six days old.\nJames V's death thrust Mary of Guise into the political arena as mother of the infant Queen of Scots, with the government of Scotland entrusted to James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran, as regent during the early years of the minority and the Rough Wooing. With the Treaty of Haddington in 1548, the child queen Mary was betrothed to Francis, the Dauphin of France, and was sent to be brought up in France under the protection of King Henry II. Mary of Guise replaced Arran as regent in 1554, and her regency was dominated by her determination to protect and advance the dynastic interests of her daughter, maintain the Franco-Scottish alliance, and reassert the power of the Scottish crown. Throughout her regency, Mary displayed tolerance towards the religious reform movement, and implemented a policy of accommodation towards her Protestant subjects, though she was ultimately unable to prevent the Scottish Reformation.\nEarly life.\nMary was born at Bar-le-Duc, Lorraine, the eldest daughter of Claude, Duke of Guise, head of the House of Guise, and his wife Antoinette of Bourbon, herself the daughter of Francis, Count of Vendome, and Marie de Luxembourg. Among her 11 siblings were Francis, Duke of Guise; Claude, Duke of Aumale; Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine; and Louis I, Cardinal of Guise.\nWhen Mary was five, she was godmother to her younger sister Louise. Not long afterward, she joined her grandmother Philippa of Guelders in the convent of the Poor Clares at Pont-\u00e0-Mousson. Mary grew to be exceptionally tall by the standards of her time and reached a height of . Her mother mentioned that she suffered from bad colds. When she was about 14 her uncle Antoine, Duke of Lorraine, and aunt Ren\u00e9e of Bourbon visited her. Impressed by their niece's qualities and stature, they took her away from the convent and prepared her for life at the French court. In 1531, Mary made her first appearance and debut at the wedding of Francis I and Eleanor of Austria. She established a friendship with the king's daughters Madeleine (whom she would later succeed as Queen of Scots) and Margaret.\nDuchess of Longueville.\nOn 4 August 1534, at the age of 18, she became Duchess of Longueville by marrying Louis II d'Orl\u00e9ans, Duke of Longueville, the Grand Chamberlain of France, at the Louvre Palace. Their union turned out to be happy, but brief. On 30 October 1535, Mary gave birth to her first son, Francis, but on 9 June 1537, Louis died at Rouen and left her a pregnant widow at the age of 21. For the rest of her life, Mary kept the last letter from her \"bon mari et ami\" (her good husband and friend) Louis, which mentioned his illness and explained his absence at Rouen. It can still be seen at the National Library of Scotland. On 4 August 1537, Mary gave birth to their second son, who was named Louis after his deceased father. Louis died very young, but Francis wrote letters to his mother in Scotland. On 22 March 1545 he sent a piece of string to show how tall he was, and on 2 July 1546 he sent her his portrait.\nMarriage negotiations.\nLater, in 1537, Mary became the focus of marriage negotiations with James V of Scotland, who had lost his first wife, Madeleine of Valois, to tuberculosis, and wanted a second French bride to further the interests of the Franco-Scottish alliance against England. According to a 17th-century writer, William Drummond of Hawthornden, James V had noticed the attractions of Mary when he went to France to meet Madeleine and Mary of Bourbon, and she was next in his affections. It is known that Mary had attended the wedding of James and Madeleine.\nHenry VIII of England, whose third wife Jane Seymour had just died, also asked for Mary's hand in an attempt to frustrate James's plan. In December 1537, Henry VIII told Castillon, the French ambassador in London, that he was big in person and had need of a big wife. Allegedly, Mary refused the offer by saying: \"I may be a big woman, but I have a very little neck\", a reference to Anne Boleyn, who had joked before her death that the executioner would find killing her easy because she had \"a little neck\".\nKing Francis I of France accepted James's proposal over Henry's and conveyed his wishes to Mary's father. Francis had a marriage contract prepared that offered James a dowry as large as if Mary had been born a princess of France. Mary's mother found the contract \"marvellously strange\", because the king had included Mary's son's inheritance in the dowry. Mary received the news with shock and alarm, as she did not wish to leave family and country, especially as she had just lost her first husband and her younger son. Reportedly, her father tried to delay matters, apparently until James, perhaps sensing her reluctance, wrote to her, appealing for her advice and support. However, the authenticity of this letter, which was first produced in 1935, has been questioned.\nDavid Beaton (who was made a cardinal in 1538) travelled to France for the marriage negotiations. He wrote to James V from Lyon on 22 October 1537 that Mary was \"stark (strong), well complexioned, and fit to travel\". Beaton wrote that the Duke of Guise was \"marvellous desirous of the expedition and hasty end of the matter\", and had already consulted with his brother, the Duke of Lorraine, and Mary herself, who was with her mother in Champagne waiting for the resolution of the negotiations. The marriage contract was finalized in January 1538, with James V receiving a dowry of 150,000 livres. As was customary, if the king died first, Mary would retain for her lifetime her jointure houses of Falkland Palace, Stirling Castle, Dingwall Castle and Threave Castle, along with the rentals of the earldoms of Fife, Strathearn, Ross and Orkney, and the lordships of Galloway, Ardmannoch and the Isles.\nFinally, Mary accepted the offer and made hurried plans for departure. The proxy wedding of James V and Mary of Guise was held on 9 May 1538 in the Sainte Chapelle at the Ch\u00e2teau de Ch\u00e2teaudun. Some 2,000 Scottish lords and barons came from Scotland aboard a fleet of ships under Lord Maxwell to attend. Lord Maxwell brought a diamond ring and stood as proxy for James V at the wedding ceremony on 9 May 1538.\nQueen of Scots.\nLord Maxwell, and the other lords and barons who had come to France, travelled back to Scotland with Mary of Guise, who sailed from Le Havre on 10 June 1538, leaving behind her three-year-old son, Francis, Duke of Longueville. She landed in Scotland 6 days later at Crail in Fife. She came in a fleet of three French galleys commanded by Jacques de Fountaines, Sieur de Mormoulins. She was formally received by the king at St Andrews a few days later amid pageants and plays performed in her honour. James and Mary were married in person at St Andrews Cathedral on 18 June 1538. James's mother Margaret Tudor wrote to her brother Henry VIII in July, \"I trust she will prove a wise Princess. I have been much in her company, and she bears herself very honourably to me, with very good entertaining.\"\nCelebrations seem to have included a tournament and a new costume was bought for the Queen's fool. In August, Mary went into the Highlands with James on a hunting trip to Glen Finglas, with six ladies-in-waiting. She soon returned to Stirling Castle, leaving James to hunt. In September James went south to hunt at Cramalt and Mary remained at Linlithgow Palace. Wild boar were sent to stock the park at Falkland from Elbeuf near Rouen, and Mary of Guise's younger brother Ren\u00e9 II de Lorraine, Marquis d'Elbeuf later became an enthusiast for boar hunt with dogs and toiles, known as \"le vautrait\".\nThe chronicle known as the \"Diurnal of Occurrents\" mentions her ceremonial royal entry to Edinburgh on Saint Margaret's Day (16 November). The Duchess of Guise sent her masons, including Nicolas Roy, miners and an armourer. Mary had a French painter, Pierre Quesnel, to decorate her palaces. Her household included a dwarf and a fool who were both dressed in green. In December 1538, the court was at Falkland Palace, and her ladies in waiting were given gowns of purple or black velvet, with white taffeta, red damask, or black satin skirts. Her serving women got gowns of Paris black and French brown cloth. \nOn 24 August 1539 Mary and James V made a pilgrimage to the Isle of May in the Forth. They took three ships, the \"Unicorn\", the \"Little Unicorn\" and the \"Mary Willoughby\". It was believed that a visit to the shrine of St Adrian could help a woman become pregnant, and Mary of Guise made a note of her pilgrimages in Scotland.\nShe was crowned queen at Holyrood Abbey on 22 February 1540. Preparations for her coronation had begun in October 1539 when the jeweller John Mosman made a new crown from Scottish gold and her silver sceptre was gilded. Payments made for the ceremony include the hanging of tapestries; carrying church furnishings from the Palace chapel into the Abbey; the attendance of eleven chaplains; boards for stages in the Abbey; and messengers sent to summon the ladies of the kingdom. A salute of 30 guns was fired from David's Tower in Edinburgh Castle, and there were fireworks devised by James and made by his royal gunners.\nJames and Mary had two sons: James, Duke of Rothesay (born 22 May 1540 at St Andrews), and Robert, Duke of Albany (born and baptised on 12 April 1541); however, they died 14 hours apart on 21 and 20 April, respectively, in 1541, when James was nearly one year old and Robert was nine days old. Mary's mother Antoinette of Bourbon wrote that the couple was still young and should hope for more children. She thought a change of wet nurse and over-feeding contributed. The third and last child of the union was a daughter Mary, who was born on 8 December 1542. James died six days later, making the infant Mary queen of Scotland and the youngest ever monarch in Great Britain.\nArran's regency.\nFollowing James V's death in 1542, the government of Scotland was first entrusted to James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran, as regent. Henry VIII of England wished the infant Mary to marry his son, Prince Edward. This led to internal conflicts in Scotland between those who favoured the marriage and those who preferred the alliance with France and led to an English invasion, the so-called Rough Wooing. Guise told English diplomat Ralph Sadler that Regent Arran was a \"simple man\" and she could easily find out his \"whole intent\".\nAt first Mary of Guise stayed at Linlithgow Palace. Sadler visited her on 22 March 1543 to see the infant Mary for the first time. Guise showed him the infant out of her swaddling, to show the child was healthy, because Arran had spread rumours the child was sickly. Sadler wrote that the infant was \"as goodly a child I have seen, and like to live\". Guise reminded him of Regent Arran's plans to have his son James Hamilton marry Princess Elizabeth. Guise tried to get Sadler to intercede with Regent Arran to release her ally Cardinal Beaton from imprisonment, alleging his political expertise could be employed to mutual benefit.\nIn April 1543, Arran heard a rumour that Henry VIII now wished to make Mary of Guise his sixth wife. He confronted Mary with this and she prevaricated, learning from him (as she had already guessed) that he told everything to Sadler. She then sent her confidant Lord Fleming to Sadler to report the conversation. In turn, Sadler relayed to Henry VIII his account of \"every man's tale whereby your grace may perceive the perplexed state of affairs in Scotland.\"\nIn July 1543, after a standoff near Linlithgow, she moved with the infant Mary to Stirling Castle. When Ralph Sadler spoke to her again in August, Guise assured him the English marriage would go ahead when Mary was ten years old. In the meantime Mary was safe at Stirling; Guise said she was glad to be at Stirling, and \"much she praised there about the house.\"\nIt soon became clear to Henry VIII that Mary and Edward would not be married, despite Scottish promises and the Treaty of Greenwich, and at the end of 1543 he launched the war now called the Rough Wooing, hoping to turn the situation around. Arran spent Christmas with Mary of Guise at Stirling where they played cards. In 1544 she spearheaded an unsuccessful attempt to replace Arran as regent, After a convention of nobility at Stirling in June suggested she should be regent, Guise was subsequently appointed to a council to advise Arran.\nAt Haddington.\nAfter a Scottish defeat at the Battle of Pinkie in September 1547, French military aid weakened English resolve and increased the power base of Mary of Guise, who remained in Scotland. Equipped with a newly painted spear for her royal standard, Mary came to view the progress of the siege of Haddington in July 1548. On 9 July her party came in range of the English guns and sixteen of her entourage were killed around her. Following this terrifying incident, Mary gave one of her gunners at Haddington, Andro Straitoun, a reward of a month's wages, \u00a34 Scots.\nBy the resolution of the Scottish Parliament made at Haddington Abbey on 7 July, the child Mary was sent to France in August 1548 to be raised with her husband-to-be, the dauphin Francis, son of Henry II of France. Guise first planned to sail with Mary from Dumbarton as far as Whithorn where she would make pilgrimage. Instead, she returned for a council meeting in Edinburgh.\nConclusion of the war.\nAt this time, the dedication of the Scottish book, \"The Complaynt of Scotland\", recalled Mary of Guise's descent from Godfrey de Bouillon and claimed her courage and virtue exceeded those of the ancient heroines Tomyris, Semiramis and Penthesilea.\nAfter negotiating on Christmas Day 1549 at Stirling Castle for more French guns for the siege of Broughty Castle, she showed more prudence by watching the successful assault on Wednesday 6 February 1550 from a vantage point across the Tay. Paul de Thermes led the French troops, 240 were injured and 50 killed. The garrison surrendered six days later at midnight. Mary of Guise was triumphant, writing that \"the English had left nothing behind but the plague.\"\nThe peace process began and Scotland was included in the Treaty of Boulogne of 24 March 1550. As part of the treaty, Mary's brother Claude, Marquis de Mayenne, was one of six French hostages sent to England. After their father died on 12 April 1550, Claude was allowed to come to Scotland with a passport from Edward VI dated 11 May. Claude wrote from Edinburgh on 18 May that he would survey the fortifications of the realm. After the Treaty was signed, Mary of Guise was able to travel to France to see her family. She asked Henry II of France to make arrangements, and on 23 July he wrote to Edward VI of England for her passport and safe conduct.\nTravels in France and England.\nMary left Scotland on 6 September 1550 and arrived at Dieppe in time to participate in a festival with the French court at Rouen with her daughter on 1 October 1550. At Rouen, Mary and the Queen of Scots rode in procession behind soldiers carrying banners depicting Scottish fortresses recently defended and recovered by the French. She brought with her a large retinue of Scottish gentlemen, including the earls of Huntly, Cassillis, Sutherland, Marischal and Wigtown, plus lords Home and Maxwell, and the bishops of Caithness and Galloway. Historians have analysed the Scottish retinue as a team-building exercise for Mary.\nOver the winter she stayed with the French court at Blois, then spent the summer with Henry II visiting Tours, Angers and Nantes. She bought fabrics and clothes from Robert Fichepain and Ren\u00e9 Tardif. At Amboise in April, Mary was sickened by news of a plot to poison the young queen of Scots. A Scottish would-be poisoner, Robert Stewart, discovered in London was delivered to the French in May. Throughout her time in France, Mary was anxious to gain the best settlement for her daughter's marriage to the dauphin and financial support for herself in Scotland. At Tours in May, a cynical English observer, John Mason, who scanned the Scottish retinue for signs of dissent, reported, \"the Dowager of Scotland maketh all this court weary of her, such an importunate beggar is she for herself. The king would fain be rid of her. The trucking is about money matters\".\nWhile accompanying her to Dieppe on her return, her son Francis died at Amiens on 22 September 1551. In October 1551, she met Edward VI in England. Mary landed at Portsmouth and was given, by the King, an escort of gentlemen to accompany her to London. She stayed her first night at Southwick Priory. On her way to London she stopped at Warblington, Cowdray, Hampton Court, where she was entertained by the Marquess and Marchioness of Northampton, and Fulham Palace. At his meeting with Mary at Whitehall Palace, Edward gave her a diamond ring and two horses with trappings of russet gold tinsel. The ring, \"sett with a fayer table diamount\", had belonged to Catherine Parr. The Princess Mary Tudor declined to attend her visit, though the Princess Elizabeth was present, and according to John Aylmer, unlike the other women at Edward's court she did not try to emulate the novel French \"frounsed, curled and double-curled\" hairstyles of Guise's Scottish retinue.\nOn her way north to Scotland Ralph Sadler conveyed her through Hertfordshire, and she stopped at Robert Chester's house at Royston Priory and the house of the Dowager Duchess of Suffolk at Grimsthorpe Castle near Stamford. Arran summoned some of the barons of East Lothian to meet her at Berwick, and the gentlemen of Selkirk, Jedburgh and Duns, Scottish Borders, Peebles and Lauder, Haddington, Dunbar and North Berwick were summoned to meet her at Our Lady Kirk of Steill on 24 November 1551. Six cart loads of breech-loading cannon chambers were brought from the armoury at Leith up to Edinburgh Castle to fire salutes on her return.\nResidences in Leith.\nMary resided in other palaces and castles in Scotland, apart from Holyrood and Edinburgh Castle, and lodged in at least two houses on Edinburgh's High Street. She also had two houses, in Leith, Edinburgh's port, where a garrison of French troops were stationed. According to tradition, one house was near the Shore at the Paunch Market, afterwards called Queen Street in her honour. This residence housed Oliver Cromwell in 1651 and was demolished in 1849. Additionally, she had a residence in Quality Street Wynd on Rotten Row (now called Water Street). Her coat of arms carved in stone was recovered from this site and is now inside South Leith Parish Church.\nRegent of Scotland.\nIn December 1552, Mary of Austria, Queen of Hungary, sister of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, pointed out to Mary that her diplomatic complaints had no force and must come from Arran. Furthermore, she was dissatisfied by Mary's evident friendship with France. Mary's power was increasing. In May 1553, the imperial ambassador in London, Jean Scheyfve, heard she had challenged Arran's regency and proposed James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray, her illegitimate step-son, as a replacement. From August 1553, she wrote to the French ambassador in London, Antoine de Noailles, using cipher code.\nMary herself became regent on 12 April 1554 at a meeting of Parliament. Henri Cleutin is said to have placed the crown on her head, although the nature of any ceremony is uncertain. Celebrations included a play written by William Lauder and a procession called the \"Convoy of the Moors\" on 10 June. Edinburgh's burgh council gave her two silver gilt cups bought from the merchants Alexander Park and Oglier Coqueil. The eleven-year-old Queen Mary sent her congratulations to \"la Royne, ma mere\" (\"the Queen, my mother\") from the Ch\u00e2teau de Meudon at Easter, where she was staying with her grandmother and her uncle, the Cardinal of Lorraine.\nIn many affairs, Mary of Guise consulted her brothers in France\u2014the Cardinal of Lorraine, and Francis, Duke of Guise, both of whom held government positions in France\u2014so that Scotland and France worked as allies in dealing with other nations. Henry II's representative in Scotland from 1546 to 1560 was an ambassador resident, Henri Cleutin, who had been effectively in charge of Scotland during her trip to France. During her regency (1554\u20131560), Frenchmen were put in charge of the treasury and the Great Seal, while the French ambassador sometimes attended the Privy Council. Yves de Rubay was Master of Requests and Keeper of the Seals and Bartholomew de Villemore was Comptroller and Receiver-General of Revenue. Although Cleutin seems to have been universally popular, the resentment of the Scottish nobility at these appointments fuelled the coming crisis.\nMary quickly began to deal effectively with Scottish affairs. In July 1554, she travelled to Jedburgh to hold a Justice Ayre for a fortnight, hoping to quell the longstanding feud between the Scott and Kerr border clans. She was escorted by armed horsemen commanded by Cleutin. In the autumn she paid for a ship, troops and a cannon to help the Earl of Sutherland arrest Iye du Mackay, Lord Reay, who had caused mischief in Sutherland. With much less success the Earls of Huntly and Argyll were despatched to pass with fire and sword to Moidart and Lewis. Huntly's failure led to his imprisonment. During another progress in 1556 she visited Inverness, Ross, Elgin, Banff and Aberdeen.\nOne measure made by Parliament in June 1555 was ineffective and caused problems and resentment. The offices of Deacon of the Crafts in burgh councils was abolished. This may have pleased influential merchants. Mary of Guise went to Perth to meet dissenters who disputed the right of craftsmen to be elected to the burgh council. Subsequently, the legislation was repealed. Scotland's burgh craft incorporations rewarded Guise for this reverse in policy by agreeing to contribute to a tax used for defence, including the fortification of Inchkeith. Some contributions were paid directly to the master of works, William MacDowall. Mary of Guise employed an Italian military engineer from Siena, Lorenzo Pomarelli, during the six years of her regency.\nDomestic efforts were hampered by the outbreak of international conflict in January 1557 and war with England. An apparent set-back to Guise's command occurred in October, when she went south to Hume Castle and sent an army towards England. Instructed to cross the border and attack Wark Castle, the Scottish lords held their own council at Eckford and returned home. Efforts to make peace between England and Scotland were helped by Christophe d'Assonleville, a diplomat sent to England and Scotland by Philip II of Spain who was joint ruler of England at that time (husband of Queen Mary Tudor). The Scottish armed presence on the border was reduced in the first months of 1558.\nConflict with Protestants.\nMary's regency was threatened, however, by the growing influence of the Scottish Protestants. To an extent she had tolerated the growing number of Protestant preachers. She needed to win support for her pro-French policies, and they could expect no alternative support from England at a time when Mary Tudor ruled. The marriage of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, to the dauphin of France on 24 April 1558 was quickly followed by Mary Tudor's death and the succession to the throne of England by Elizabeth on 17 November 1558. Mary Stuart's claim and rights of succession to the English throne depended in part on the Papal view of Elizabeth's legitimacy. If Henry II of France was to pursue Mary's claim with the Pope, as part of an ambitious plan that Scotland and England would succumb to French domination, he needed Scotland to be a secure Catholic country. Some modern historians such as Pamela E. Ritchie believe that the change to Guise's policy was not dramatic, but both Catholic and Protestant would perceive and react to the tense political situation. As the Scottish Reformation crisis was developing, Henry II died on 10 July 1559, and Mary Stuart became Queen Consort of France. In France, Mary and Francis II began to publicly display the arms of England in their blazon. This too was a motivation for English intervention in Scottish affairs.\nIn 1557, a group of Scottish lords who became known as the \"Lords of the Congregation\" drew up a covenant to \"maintain, set forth, and establish the most blessed Word of God and his Congregation\". This was followed by outbreaks of iconoclasm in 1558/59. At the same time, plans were being drawn up for a Reformed programme of parish worship and preaching, as local communities sought out Protestant ministers. In 1558, the Regent summoned the Protestant preachers to answer for their teaching, but backed down when lairds from the west country threatened to revolt.\nThe accession of the Protestant Elizabeth I in England in 1558 stirred the hopes and fears of Scottish Protestants. Elizabeth came to secretly support the Lords of the Congregation. In January 1559, the anonymous \"Beggars' Summons\" threatened friars with eviction in favour of beggars. This was calculated to appeal to the passions of the populace of towns who appeared to have particular complaints against friars. Fearing disorder and now determined by circumstance to show less tolerance, the Regent summoned the reformed preachers to appear before her at Stirling on 10 May. Insurrection followed. The men of Angus assembled in Dundee to accompany the preachers to Stirling, and on 4 May they were joined by John Knox, who had recently arrived from France. Stirred by Knox's sermons in Perth and Dundee, the mob sacked religious houses (including the tomb of James I in Perth). In response, the Regent marched on Perth, but was forced to withdraw and negotiate when another reformed contingent arrived from the west at Cupar Muir.\nAmong the Regent's ambassadors were the Earl of Argyll and Lord James Stewart, Earl of Moray, both professed Protestants. When the Regent stationed French mercenaries in Perth, both abandoned her and joined the Lords of the Congregation at St Andrews, where they were also joined by John Knox. Even Edinburgh soon fell to them in July, as Mary retreated to Dunbar. The Congregation Lords made a truce with Guise and signed the Articles of Leith at Leith Links on 25 July 1559 which promised religious tolerance, then withdrew to Stirling.\nIn September, the previous regent, the 2nd Earl of Arran, with the safe return of his son, accepted the leadership of the Lords of the Congregation and established a provisional government. However, Mary of Guise was reinforced by professional French troops. Some of these troops established themselves at Kinghorn in Fife, and after they destroyed Hallyards Castle, the house of William Kirkcaldy of Grange, Mary (according to Knox) declared, \"Where is now John Knox's God? My God is now stronger than his, yea, even in Fife.\" In November, the rebels were driven back to Stirling.\nFighting continued in Fife. Mary of Guise, troubled by illness, contemplated resigning the Regency, and returning to France. Ren\u00e9 II de Lorraine, Marquis d'Elbeuf was appointed to rule as a French \"viceroy\" in her stead. His mission was abandoned, but more French troops arrived in Scotland. All seemed lost for the Protestant side until an English fleet arrived in the Firth of Forth in January 1560, which caused the French to retreat to Leith, the port of Edinburgh which Mary of Guise had re-fortified.\nThe Lords of the Congregation began negotiations with England. John Knox was excluded, as his published tract \"The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstrous Regiment of Women\", although it aimed at Mary I of England, rendered him unacceptable to the newly crowned Elizabeth I. The Treaty of Berwick, signed in February, agreed that England would act jointly with the Protestant Lords to expel the French. Elizabeth I, sent an English land army into Scotland to join their Scottish allies in besieging the French at Leith. As the fighting continued, the English ambassador in France Nicholas Throckmorton praised Guise for having the \"hart of a man of warre\" and the English bishop John Jewel described her as \"a woman with a man's courage\".\nDeath.\nAfter an English assault on Leith was repulsed with heavy losses, some of the leaders of the Lords of the Congregation came to Edinburgh Castle on 12 May 1560 and had dinner with Mary and the keeper of the castle, Lord Erskine. They discussed a plan that had been previously discussed, in which Mary would have travelled to France and met Elizabeth in England, and her brother would have been made viceroy in Scotland. The Lords again complained about Frenchmen being appointed to Scottish government posts. Negotiations to end the siege of Leith and demolish new fortifications at Dunbar Castle continued. The talks ended when permission was refused for the French commanders in Leith to come to the castle to discuss the proposals with Mary.\nWhile continuing to fortify Edinburgh Castle, Mary became seriously ill, and over the course of the next eight days her mind began to wander; on some days she could not even speak. On 8 June she made her will. She died of dropsy on 11 June 1560.\nShe lay in state in the castle for a time, wrapped in cerecloth and covered with a white sheet, on a bed hung with black satin, attended by her ladies-in-waiting. Her body was then wrapped in lead and rested in a coffin on a bier in St Margaret's Chapel in Edinburgh Castle for several months. The chapel was hung with black cloth with a white taffeta cross above the body. On 18 March 1561, it was secretly carried from the castle at midnight and shipped to France. Mary, Queen of Scots attended her funeral at F\u00e9camp in July 1561. Mary of Guise was interred at the church of Saint-Pierre-les-Dames, Reims, where Mary's sister Ren\u00e9e was abbess. A marble tomb was erected with a bronze statue of Mary, in royal robes, holding a sceptre and the rod of justice in one hand. The tomb was destroyed during the French revolution. Of Mary's five children, only her daughter Mary survived her.\nIn modern times, there has been speculation that Mary was assassinated (by poisoning), either by order of Queen Elizabeth I of England or possibly by others protecting the Queen's interests without any direct order from the Queen. However, no evidence supports such allegations, and there was an autopsy the day after she died. Mary's death was evidently from natural causes, since she herself complained she had become lame from the swelling of her legs in April and diagnosed herself as having dropsy. The swelling was confirmed by her enemy, John Knox, who wrote that in May, \"began hir bellie and lothsome leggis to swell.\" Even in the political climate of the 16th century, in which some royal deaths were suspected to have been murders, none of Mary's contemporaries saw signs of \"foul play\" in her death.\nThe Regent's death made way for the Treaty of Edinburgh, in which France and England agreed they would each withdraw their troops from Scotland. Although the French commissioners were unwilling to make a treaty with the insurgent Lords of the Congregation, they offered the Scots certain concessions from King Francis and Queen Mary, including the right to summon a parliament according to use and custom. The effect of the treaty was to leave power in the hands of the pro-English Protestants.\nHousehold.\nAmongst records of her expenses and household there is a list of 27 gentlewomen or ladies-in-waiting. The names (modernised) of the \"\"dames\" or married women include; Lady Arran (Barbara Hamilton), Lady Cassillis (senior), Lady Erskine, Lady Elphinston, Lady Livingston and Coullombe (senior). The unmarried \"demoiselles\"\" were Margaret Hume, Margery Livingston (who later married James Ogilvie of Cardell), Jean Elphinston, Jean Murray, Annabell Murray, Margaret Stewart (who married James Ogilvie of Balfour), Anne Scot, Margery Kirkcaldy, Coullombe, Barbara Sandilands, Barbara Kennedy (who married John Bellenden), Cassillis, Crespy, Crespanville, with the wife of the secretary John Bruce, Elizabeth Murray the wife of Alexander Durham, the daughter of Lady Livingston, and two female fools. When Margaret Hume was married in October 1555, Guise bought her a length of crimson velvet to be a gown.\nA record of food at court, the 1549 \"Bread Book\", mentions a \"mistress of the maidens\", an equivalent to the English mother of the maids. The household included a female fool or jester, called Serat, who wore a red-and-yellow gown with a green skirt. Jane, or Jean, a dwarf, wore a light-purple velvet. The treasurer's accounts do not include detail of Guise's wardrobe expenses during her Regency (1554\u20131560), but in November 1557 she directed the burgh council of Edinburgh to exempt Archibald Dewar from taxes. He seems to have been of her tailors. Her French tailor Nicholas du Moncel and her embroiderer Henri Le Moyne later joined the service of Mary, Queen of Scots.\nLegacy.\nApart from her bitter enemy John Knox, the leader of the Scottish Reformation, views by historians have generally been favourable. Marshall says that \"her biographers, Strickland in the nineteenth century, McKerlie and Marshall in the twentieth, [have] been unanimous in praising her intelligence and fortitude\" as have most other scholars. In evaluating her life, historian Rosalind K. Marshall says:Sacrificing her own comfort, interests, and ultimately her life, Mary of Guise had fought a long, desperate, and, in the end, hopeless struggle to preserve Scotland as a pro-French, Roman Catholic nation for her daughter...Charming, highly intelligent, and hard-working, with a diplomatic manner and an ability to fight on regardless of hostility, disappointment, and ill health, Mary was never merely a pawn of the French king.\nArchival sources.\nA manuscript journal of the siege of Leith, attributed to Jacques de La Brosse, and copies of Mary of Guise's correspondence with the French ambassador Michel de Seure are held by the Archives des affaires \u00e9trang\u00e8res, Paris, (Angleterre 15). This material, and an archive of letters known as the Balcarres Papers, held by the National Library of Scotland, possibly represent the papers of one of the secretaries of Mary of Guise, Pierre de Grantrie or Grandrye. The National Records of Scotland holds some state correspondence and exchequer material.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71281", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71281", "title": "Index of refraction", "text": ""}
{"id": "71283", "revid": "15964126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71283", "title": "Regiomontan", "text": ""}
{"id": "71287", "revid": "39544904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71287", "title": "EBNF", "text": ""}
{"id": "71289", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71289", "title": "Extended Backus\u2013Naur form", "text": "Family of metasyntax notations\nIn computer science, extended Backus\u2013Naur form (EBNF) is a family of metasyntax notations, any of which can be used to express a context-free grammar. EBNF is used to make a formal description of a formal language such as a computer programming language. They are extensions of the basic Backus\u2013Naur form (BNF) metasyntax notation. The earliest EBNF was developed by Niklaus Wirth, incorporating some of the concepts (with a different syntax and notation) from Wirth syntax notation. Today, many variants of EBNF are in use. The International Organization for Standardization adopted an EBNF Standard, ISO/IEC 14977, in 1996. According to Zaytsev, however, this standard \"only ended up adding yet another three dialects to the chaos\" and, after noting its lack of success, also notes that the ISO EBNF is not even used in all ISO standards.\nThis article uses EBNF as specified by the ISO for examples applying to all EBNFs. Other EBNF variants use somewhat different syntactic conventions.\nBasics.\nEBNF is a code that expresses the syntax of a formal language. An EBNF consists of terminal symbols and non-terminal production rules which are the restrictions governing how terminal symbols can be combined into a valid sequence. Examples of terminal symbols include alphanumeric characters, punctuation marks, and whitespace characters.\nThe EBNF defines production rules where sequences of symbols are respectively assigned to a nonterminal:\ndigit excluding zero = \"1\" | \"2\" | \"3\" | \"4\" | \"5\" | \"6\" | \"7\" | \"8\" | \"9\" ;\ndigit = \"0\" | digit excluding zero ;\nThis production rule defines the nonterminal \"digit\" which is on the left side of the assignment. The vertical bar represents an alternative and the terminal symbols are enclosed with quotation marks followed by a semicolon as terminating character. Hence a \"digit\" is a \"0\" or a \"digit excluding zero\" that can be \"1\" or \"2\" or \"3\" and so forth until \"9\".\nA production rule can also include a sequence of terminals or nonterminals, each separated by a comma:\ntwelve = \"1\", \"2\" ;\ntwo hundred one = \"2\", \"0\", \"1\" ;\nthree hundred twelve = \"3\", twelve ;\ntwelve thousand two hundred one = twelve, two hundred one ;\nExpressions that may be omitted or repeated can be represented through curly braces { ... }:\npositive integer = digit excluding zero, { digit } ;\nIn this case, the strings \"1\", \"2\", ..., \"10\", ..., \"10000\", ... are correct expressions. To represent this, everything that is set within the curly braces may be repeated arbitrarily often, including not at all.\nAn option can be represented through squared brackets [ ... ]. That is, everything that is set within the square brackets may be present just once, or not at all:\ninteger = \"0\" | [ \"-\" ], positive integer ;\nTherefore, an integer is a zero (\"0\") or a positive integer that may be preceded by an optional minus sign.\nEBNF also provides, among other things, the syntax to describe repetitions (of a specified number of times), to exclude some part of a production, and to insert comments in an EBNF grammar.\nTable of symbols.\nThe following represents a proposed ISO/IEC 14977 standard, by R. S. Scowen, page 7, tables 1 and 2.\nExamples.\nSyntax diagram.\n tright\" style=\"width:282px;\"&gt;\nOne possible EBNF syntax diagram\nEBNF.\nEven EBNF can be described using EBNF. Consider below grammar (using conventions such as \"-\" to indicate set disjunction, \"+\" to indicate one or more matches, and \"?\" for optionality):\nletter = \"A\" | \"B\" | \"C\" | \"D\" | \"E\" | \"F\" | \"G\"\n | \"H\" | \"I\" | \"J\" | \"K\" | \"L\" | \"M\" | \"N\"\n | \"O\" | \"P\" | \"Q\" | \"R\" | \"S\" | \"T\" | \"U\"\n | \"V\" | \"W\" | \"X\" | \"Y\" | \"Z\" | \"a\" | \"b\"\n | \"c\" | \"d\" | \"e\" | \"f\" | \"g\" | \"h\" | \"i\"\n | \"j\" | \"k\" | \"l\" | \"m\" | \"n\" | \"o\" | \"p\"\n | \"q\" | \"r\" | \"s\" | \"t\" | \"u\" | \"v\" | \"w\"\n | \"x\" | \"y\" | \"z\" ;\ndigit = \"0\" | \"1\" | \"2\" | \"3\" | \"4\" | \"5\" | \"6\" | \"7\" | \"8\" | \"9\" ;\nsymbol = \"[\" | \"]\" | \"{\" | \"}\" | \"(\" | \")\" | \"&lt;\" | \"&gt;\"\n | \"+\" | \"*\" | \"?\" | \"\\n\" | \"\\t\" | \"\\r\" | \"\\f\" | \"\\b\" ;\ncharacter = letter | digit | symbol | \"_\" | \" \" ;\nidentifier = letter , { letter | digit | \"_\" } ;\nS = { \" \" | \"\\n\" | \"\\t\" | \"\\r\" | \"\\f\" | \"\\b\" } ;\nterminal = \"'\" , character - \"'\" , { character - \"'\" } , \"'\"\n | '\"' , character - '\"' , { character - '\"' } , '\"' ;\nterminator = \";\" | \".\" ;\nterm = \"(\" , S , rhs , S , \")\"\n | \"[\" , S , rhs , S , \"]\"\n | \"{\" , S , rhs , S , \"}\"\n | terminal\n | identifier ;\nfactor = term , S , \"?\"\n | term , S , \"*\"\n | term , S , \"+\"\n | term , S , \"-\" , S , term\n | term , S ;\nconcatenation = ( S , factor , S , \",\" ? ) + ;\nalternation = ( S , concatenation , S , \"|\" ? ) + ;\nrhs = alternation ;\nlhs = identifier ;\nrule = lhs , S , \"=\" , S , rhs , S , terminator ;\ngrammar = ( S , rule , S ) * ;\nPascal.\nA Pascal-like programming language that allows only assignments can be defined in EBNF as follows:\n (* a simple program syntax in EBNF - Wikipedia *)\n program = 'PROGRAM', white space, identifier, white space, \n 'BEGIN', white space, \n { assignment, \";\", white space },\n 'END.' ;\n identifier = alphabetic character, { alphabetic character | digit } ;\n number = [ \"-\" ], digit, { digit } ;\n string = '\"' , { all characters - '\"' }, '\"' ;\n assignment = identifier , \":=\" , ( number | identifier | string ) ;\n alphabetic character = \"A\" | \"B\" | \"C\" | \"D\" | \"E\" | \"F\" | \"G\"\n | \"H\" | \"I\" | \"J\" | \"K\" | \"L\" | \"M\" | \"N\"\n | \"O\" | \"P\" | \"Q\" | \"R\" | \"S\" | \"T\" | \"U\"\n | \"V\" | \"W\" | \"X\" | \"Y\" | \"Z\" ;\n digit = \"0\" | \"1\" | \"2\" | \"3\" | \"4\" | \"5\" | \"6\" | \"7\" | \"8\" | \"9\" ;\n white space = ? white space characters ? ;\n all characters = ? all visible characters ? ;\nFor example, a syntactically correct program then could be:\n PROGRAM DEMO1\n BEGIN\n A:=3;\n B:=45;\n H:=-100023;\n C:=A;\n D123:=B34A;\n BABOON:=GIRAFFE;\n TEXT:=\"Hello world!\";\n END.\nThe language can easily be extended with control flows, arithmetical expressions, and Input/Output instructions. Then a small, usable programming language would be developed.\nAdvantages over BNF.\nAny grammar defined in EBNF can also be represented in BNF, though representations in the latter are generally lengthier. E.g., options and repetitions cannot be directly expressed in BNF and require the use of an intermediate rule or alternative production defined to be either nothing or the optional production for option, or either the repeated production of itself, recursively, for repetition. The same constructs can still be used in EBNF.\nThe BNF uses the symbols (codice_1, codice_2, codice_3, codice_4) for itself, but does not include quotes around terminal strings. This prevents these characters from being used in the languages, and requires a special symbol for the empty string. In EBNF, terminals are strictly enclosed within quotation marks (codice_5...codice_5 or codice_7...codice_7). The angle brackets (codice_1...codice_2) for nonterminals can be omitted.\nBNF syntax can only represent a rule in one line, whereas in EBNF a terminating character, the semicolon character codice_11 marks the end of a rule.\nFurthermore, EBNF includes mechanisms for enhancements, defining the number of repetitions, excluding alternatives, comments, etc.\nConventions.\nAs examples, the following syntax rules illustrate the facilities for expressing repetition:\naa = \"A\";\nbb = 3 * aa, \"B\";\ncc = 3 * [aa], \"C\";\ndd = {aa}, \"D\";\nee = aa, {aa}, \"E\";\nff = 3 * aa, 3 * [aa], \"F\";\ngg = {3 * aa}, \"G\";\nhh = (aa | bb | cc), \"H\";\nTerminal strings defined by these rules are as follows:\n aa: A\n bb: AAAB\n cc: C AC AAC AAAC\n dd: D AD AAD AAAD AAAAD etc.\n ee: AE AAE AAAE AAAAE AAAAAE etc.\n ff: AAAF AAAAF AAAAAF AAAAAAF\n gg: G AAAG AAAAAAG etc.\n hh: AH AAABH CH ACH AACH AAACH\nExtensibility.\nAccording to the ISO 14977 standard EBNF is meant to be extensible, and two facilities are mentioned. The first is part of EBNF grammar, the special sequence, which is arbitrary text enclosed with question marks. The interpretation of the text inside a special sequence is beyond the scope of the EBNF standard. For example, the space character could be defined by the following rule:\n space = ? ASCII character 32 ?;\nThe second facility for extension is using the fact that parentheses in EBNF cannot be placed next to identifiers (they must be concatenated with them). The following is valid EBNF:\n something = foo, ( bar );\nThe following is \"not\" valid EBNF:\n something = foo ( bar );\nTherefore, an extension of EBNF could use that notation. For example, in a Lisp grammar, function application could be defined by the following rule:\n function application = list( symbol, { expression } );\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71290", "revid": "39761822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71290", "title": "England, England", "text": "1998 novel by Julian Barnes\nEngland, England is a satirical postmodern novel by Julian Barnes, published and shortlisted for the Booker Prize in 1998. While researchers have also pointed out the novel's characteristic dystopian and farcical elements, Barnes himself described the novel as a \"semi-farce\".\n\"England, England\" broaches the idea of replicating England in a theme park on the Isle of Wight. It calls into question ideas of national identity, invented traditions, the creations of myths and the authenticity of history and memory.\nPlot summary.\n\"England, England\" is divided into three parts entitled \"England\", \"England, England\" and \"Anglia\". The first part focuses on the protagonist Martha Cochrane and her childhood memories. Growing up in the surrounding of the English countryside, her peaceful childhood is disrupted when her father leaves the family. Martha's memories of her father are closely related to playing a Counties of England jigsaw puzzle with him.\nThe second part, \"England, England\", is set in the near future. Martha is now in her forties and is employed by the entrepreneur Sir Jack Pitman for a megalomaniacal project: Sir Jack aims to turn the Isle of Wight into a gigantic theme park which contains everything that people, especially tourists, consider to be quintessentially English, selected according to what Sir Jack himself approves of. The theme park \u2212 called \"England, England\" \u2212 thus becomes a replica of England's best known historical buildings, figures and sites. Popular English tourist attractions and icons of \"Englishness\" are crammed together to be easily accessible without having to travel the whole of \"real\" England.\nWhile working on the set-up of the project, Martha starts an affair with one of her colleagues, Paul Harrison. They discover Sir Jack's adult baby fetish and blackmail him with incriminating evidence when Sir Jack wants to dismiss Martha. She thus becomes CEO of the Island project, which turns out to be a highly popular tourist attraction. As a consequence of the huge success, \"England, England\" becomes an independent state and part of the European Union, while the real, \"Old England\" suffers a severe decline and increasingly falls into international irrelevance. After a major scandal in the theme park, however, Martha is eventually expelled from the island.\nThe third part of the novel, \"Anglia\", renamed \"Albion\" in later editions, is set decades later and depicts Martha who has returned to a village in Old England after many years of wandering abroad. The original nation has regressed into a vastly de-populated, agrarian and pre-industrial state without any international political influence, while \"England, England\" continues to prosper.\nThemes.\nBeyond the basic twin plots surrounding Pitman and Cochrane, \"England, England\" is a novel of ideas \u2013 mainly ideas that correspond to the criticism of society voiced by French philosophers of the second half of the 20th century. The seminal work in this respect is Jean Baudrillard's (b. 1929) \"L'\u00e9change symbolique et la mort\" (1976), in which Baudrillard claims that in the course of the 20th century reality has been superseded by \"simulacra\", by representations of the original which \u2013 in a world where technology has developed the means to replicate each and everything, including works of art (cf. Walter Benjamin's 1936 essay \"Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Reproduzierbarkeit\") and humans (by means of cloning) \u2013 acquire an independent and increasingly higher status than the original: because they are safer, easier to handle, more cost-effective, ubiquitous and thus more easily accessible, renewable, and predictable. (Cf. \"postmodernism\" and also US sociologist George Ritzer's \"McDonaldization\" thesis of the 1990s, in particular his discussion of tourism).\nThis is exactly the purpose of Pitman's final project: he wants his island to epitomise everything that is truly English. As a fervent patriot, he wants to put England in a nutshell for all the world to see and to cash in on England at the same time: he does not mind that the real thing takes a turn for the worse and eventually deteriorates.\nThe two strands of action \u2013 Martha Cochrane's rise to fame and her subsequent downfall on the one hand and the launching of the project and its continuing success on the other \u2013 are intertwined when Martha applies for a job as Special Consultant in Pitman's personal staff, which she gets. Martha has acquired all the professional skills necessary to succeed in our post-industrialist society, yet she has retained from her childhood at least some of her emotional and sentimental inclinations. Although she has become scheming, calculating and ruthless in her professional life, she is still able, at times, to listen to her heart \u2013 especially in her relationship with Paul Harrison, the \"Ideas Catcher\". This ability of hers also helps her cope with old age back in rural Anglia.\nBy having his characters uninhibitedly subvert all of England's long-standing customs and traditions, Barnes inadvertently also collects, registers and critically assesses these myths. For the sake of simplification, however, in the novel old English folklore, customs and legends, but also historical facts, are altered to fit the overall purpose of the Project. As the whole island is supposed to be fit for family consumption, history has to be rewritten and bowdlerised (to pay lip service to political correctness and avoid sexual harassment actions). As they are paying high prices, mainly in advance, the visitors to the island are supposed never to be faced with anything incomprehensible or illogical because that would spoil the fun for them and could even give rise to complaints.\nThe majority of attractions of England, England enjoy great popularity. For example, tourists are fascinated by the artificially recreated London \"pea soup\" fog or by a re-enactment of the Battle of Britain. Visitors also like watching the King, nicknamed \"Kingy-Thingy\" by his wife, who is still a Windsor; but after the death of Elizabeth II the strict line of succession has been abandoned. Both the King and his Queen enjoy having affairs with other people, and their escapades are regularly exposed by the tabloid papers. Pitman persuades the King to move permanently to the Isle of Wight, where his only duty is to appear regularly on the balcony of a half-size replica (but with double glazing) of Buckingham Palace for the paying visitors to see. Special script-writers have been hired for him and Queen\nDenise for the rare instances where they are allowed to say something.\nHowever, because the actors sooner or later over-identify with their roles, some of the other attractions go terribly wrong. Robin Hood and his band actually start hunting their own food in the Island's heritage parks and old-English farmyards; the smugglers really start smuggling (cf. Adam Smith's approval of smuggling); and the \"Samuel Johnson Dining Experience\" turns out to be a flop because Doctor Johnson is regularly rude to the guests who dine at his table.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71291", "revid": "1588193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71291", "title": "PLI", "text": "PLI or pli may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "71293", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71293", "title": "William Jevons", "text": ""}
{"id": "71299", "revid": "38444762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71299", "title": "Porfirio D\u00edaz", "text": "Dictator of Mexico from 1876 to 1911\nJos\u00e9 de la Cruz Porfirio D\u00edaz Mori (; ; 15 September 1830 \u2013 2 July 1915) was a Mexican general and politician who was the dictator of Mexico from 1876 until his overthrow in 1911, seizing power in a military coup. He served on three separate occasions as President of Mexico, a total of over 30 years, this period is known as the Porfiriato and has been called a \"de facto\" dictatorship. D\u00edaz\u2019s time in office is the longest of any Mexican ruler.\nD\u00edaz was born to a Oaxacan family of modest means. He initially studied to become a priest but eventually switched his studies to law, and among his mentors was the future President of Mexico, Benito Ju\u00e1rez. D\u00edaz increasingly became active in Liberal Party politics fighting with the Liberals to overthrow Santa Anna in the Plan of Ayutla, and also fighting on their side against the Conservative Party in the Reform War.\nDuring the second French intervention in Mexico, D\u00edaz fought in the Battle of Puebla in 1862, which temporarily repulsed the invaders, but was captured when the French besieged the city with reinforcements a year later. He escaped captivity and made his way to Oaxaca City, becoming political and military commander over all of Southern Mexico, and successfully resisting French efforts to advance upon the region, until Oaxaca City fell before a French siege in 1865. D\u00edaz once more escaped captivity seven months later and rejoined the army of the Mexican Republic as the Second Mexican Empire disintegrated in the wake of the French departure. As Emperor Maximilian made a last stand in Quer\u00e9taro, D\u00edaz was in command of the forces that took back Mexico City in June 1867.\nDuring the era of the Restored Republic, he subsequently revolted against presidents Benito Ju\u00e1rez and Sebasti\u00e1n Lerdo de Tejada on the principle of no re-election. D\u00edaz succeeded in seizing power, ousting Lerdo in a coup in 1876, with the help of his political supporters, and was elected in 1877. In 1880, he stepped down and his political ally Manuel Gonz\u00e1lez was elected president, serving from 1880 to 1884. In 1884, D\u00edaz abandoned the idea of no re-election and held office continuously until 1911.\nA controversial figure in Mexican history, D\u00edaz's regime ended political instability and achieved growth after decades of economic stagnation. He and his allies comprised a group of technocrats known as \"cient\u00edficos\" (\"scientists\"), whose economic policies benefited a circle of allies and foreign investors, helping \"hacendados\" consolidate large estates, often through violent means and legal abuse. These policies grew increasingly unpopular, resulting in civil repression and regional conflicts, as well as strikes and uprisings from labor and the peasantry, groups that did not share in Mexico's growth.\nDespite public statements in 1908 favoring a return to democracy and not running again for office, D\u00edaz reversed himself and ran in the 1910 election. D\u00edaz, then 80 years old, failed to institutionalize presidential succession, triggering a political crisis between the \"cient\u00edficos\" and the followers of General Bernardo Reyes, allied with the military and peripheral regions of Mexico. After D\u00edaz declared himself the winner for an eighth term, his electoral opponent, wealthy estate owner Francisco I. Madero, issued the Plan of San Luis Potos\u00ed calling for armed rebellion against D\u00edaz, leading to the outbreak of the Mexican Revolution. In May 1911, after the Federal Army suffered several defeats against the forces supporting Madero, D\u00edaz resigned in the Treaty of Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez and went into exile in Paris, where he died four years later.\nEarly years.\nPorfirio D\u00edaz was the sixth of seven children, baptized on 15 September 1830, in Oaxaca, Mexico, but his exact date of birth is unknown. 15 September is an important date in Mexican history, the eve of Miguel Hidalgo's Grito de Dolores, which triggered the Mexican War of Independence in 1810. After D\u00edaz became president, it would become customary to commemorate the \"Grito de Dolores\" on the eve of its anniversary.\nD\u00edaz's father, Jos\u00e9 Faustino D\u00edaz Orozco, was a Criollo (a Mexican of predominantly Spanish ancestry). Jos\u00e9 D\u00edaz was an illiterate \"dependiente\", or workman employed by a firm of merchants. In 1808, he had married Mar\u00eda Petrona Cecilia Mori Cort\u00e9s, whose mother was Mixtec, and whose father could trace his ancestry from Asturias.\nEventually, Jose de la Cruz had saved enough to start planting agave, and he opened a wayside inn in Oaxaca City to sell the products of his business. Jose de la Cruz died in 1833 of cholera when D\u00edaz was only three years old. Petrona Mori began to manage the inn while raising her multiple children.\nEducation.\nThe young D\u00edaz was sent to primary school at the age of 6 and at one point was apprenticed to a carpenter. In 1845, at the age of fifteen, D\u00edaz entered the \"Colegio Seminario Conciliar de Oaxaca\", to study for the priesthood, sponsored by his godfather, Jos\u00e9 Agust\u00edn Dom\u00ednguez, canon of and eventually Bishop of Oaxaca.\nIn 1846, the Mexican-American War broke out, and D\u00edaz joined a Oaxacan military battalion. He practiced drills and attended lectures on tactics and strategy at the Institute of Arts and Sciences, but he never saw combat by the time the war ended in 1848.\nBy 1849, D\u00edaz decided that he did not have a vocation to the priesthood and over the objections of his family decided to switch his studies to law. He gained the friendship of Don Marcos P\u00e9rez and Indigenous judge and professor of law at the Institute of Arts and Sciences through which D\u00edaz also came to know his future colleague and president of Mexico, Benito Ju\u00e1rez who was at that time Governor of Oaxaca. D\u00edaz passed his first examination in civil and canon law in 1853, at the age of 23.\nPlan of Ayutla.\nIn that same year however, a Conservative Party coup overthrew the Liberal government of Mariano Arista and raised Santa Anna for what would turn out to be his final dictatorship. Many prominent Liberals were expelled from the country, including Benito Ju\u00e1rez who found refuge in New Orleans. Don Marcos P\u00e9rez was arrested, but D\u00edaz was able to communicate with him in prison with the help of D\u00edaz's brother F\u00e9lix.\nIn March 1854 the Plan of Ayutla broke out against Santa Anna led by the Liberal caudillo Juan \u00c1lvarez. After openly expressing support for \u00c1lvarez, D\u00edaz was forced to flee Oaxaca and joined up with the Liberal partisan, Francisco Herrera. Authorities managed to attack and disperse Herrera's troops, and D\u00edaz once more had to flee, but the Ayutla movement was increasingly growing in strength. When the Liberals captured the city of Oaxaca, D\u00edaz was made subprefect of Ixtlan. As sub-prefect D\u00edaz helped in an ill-fated effort to put down a barracks revolt in Oaxaca, but the Ayutla movement ultimately triumphed by August 1855, when Santa Anna resigned, subsequently fleeing the nation.\nReform War.\nJuan \u00c1lvarez was elected president in October 1855 and his administration inaugurated what would come to be known as La Reforma an unprecedented attempt to pass through progressive constitutional reforms for Mexico culminating in the promulgation of the Constitution of 1857. Conservative Party resistance ended up triggering the outbreak of the Reform War in late 1857, at the same time when D\u00edaz's old mentor, Benito Juarez became president. The Conservatives set up their rival government in opposition to Juarez and the Liberals.\nD\u00edaz at this time was still in Oaxaca. He had previously accepted a commission as captain in the National Guard in December 1856. As the Reform War broke out, he maintained his command in Ixtlan, until the Conservative General Marcelino Cobos defeated the Liberal forces in Oaxaca in January 1858 D\u00edaz was shot in the leg and would not recover for four months.\nD\u00edaz rejoined the war and was present when Cobos was defeated in Xalapa in February 1858. Diaz was subsequently named Governor and Military Commandant of the district of Tehuantepec. He was given command over 150 men and tasked with raising funds and receiving arms imported from the United States. D\u00edaz chose the coast town of Juchit\u00e1n de Zaragoza as his headquarters and exercised his command for two years. For winning repeated victories against the Conservatives he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel.\nAt the beginning of 1860, D\u00edaz went to the aid of the Liberal general Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda D\u00edaz Ordaz in defending Oaxaca City against Cobos. The latter fell upon D\u00edaz at Mitla on 20 January and defeated him, but Cobos retreated as Ordaz arrived with reinforcements, only for Ordaz to lose his life in the effort. His command over the forces of Oaxaca was passed down to Crist\u00f3bal Salinas. D\u00edaz's old mentor Marcos Perez fell into a quarrel with Salinas over his strategy, and D\u00edaz failed to mediate. Juarez replaced Salinas with Vicente Rosas Landa, but the Liberals in Oaxaca were defeated at the hands of Cobos in November 1859. D\u00edaz and Salinas found refuge in the mountains of Ixtlan.\nWhile the fortune of the Liberals appeared to be at a low ebb at Oaxaca, the Conservatives as a whole at this point, were losing the war throughout the entire country, rapidly being drained of funds and resources. This helped D\u00edaz and Salinas take back Oaxaca City by August 1860. D\u00edaz was promoted to colonel and transferred from the National Guard to the regular army. He was present at the decisive Battle of Calpulalpan, which decisively ended the war in favor of the Liberals.\nThe victorious President Juarez reentered the capital in January 1861. D\u00edaz also joined the national congress as a deputy from Ocotlan. The Conservative government had ceased to operate and its president, Miguel Miramon had fled the nation, but Conservative guerillas were still active in the countryside. In June 1861, the Conservative General Leonardo M\u00e1rquez made a raid upon the capital and D\u00edaz left his congressional seat to join and Jes\u00fas Gonz\u00e1lez Ortega in once more defending the city. At Xalatlaco, D\u00edaz without waiting for orders fell upon the forces of Marquez and won a notable victory. The Conservative forces were scattered and fled into the hills.\nSecond French Intervention in Mexico.\nBattle of Puebla.\nAt the opening of the Second French Intervention, in which France would attempt to overthrow the Mexican Republic and replace it with a client monarchy, D\u00edaz had advanced to the rank of general and was in command of an infantry brigade. He was present at the first engagement of the war when he lost three-fourths of his men after the French attacked his brigade in the state of Veracruz. He retreated and joined up with the forces of Ignacio Zaragoza to continue harassing the enemy in the vicinity of Orizaba. D\u00edaz and Zaragoza were forced to retreat before ending up in the city of Puebla by 3 May.\nOn the morning of 5 May, D\u00edaz was in command of the \"Oaxaca battalion\", guarding one of the roads leading into Puebla. Commander of the French forces, Charles de Lorencez ordered his troops to ascend a hill overlooking the town for a direct attack upon the forts of Loreto and Guadalupe. The ascent failed, and the French were repulsed by attacks of Mexican cavalry and infantry. During the battle, D\u00edaz was not present at the hill but rather on the plains to the right of the Mexican front, where he repulsed another French attack, causing a large number of casualties to the enemy. General D\u00edaz pursued the French on their retreat to the Hacienda San Jose Renteria until recalled by Zaragoza.\nThe French attributed their defeat at Puebla to a lack of Conservative Party support. The Mexican monarchist expatriates who had given the idea of a Mexican monarchy to Napoleon III had also been working independently of any Mexican authority or political party. When the French invaders arrived in Mexico they found the Conservatives reluctant to help the French in establishing a monarchy and proclaiming their loyalty to the type of centralist republic they had once established in Mexico. However, the Conservatives were increasingly won over to collaborate with the French as a means of receiving the military aid that would return them to power. D\u00edaz would once again have to fight many of the men he once faced in the Reform War such as Leonardo M\u00e1rquez and the ex-Conservative president Miguel Miramon. Eventually, Porfirio D\u00edaz as well would be personally asked to join the French, an offer which he would refuse.\nSecond Battle of Puebla.\nThe French loss at the Battle of Puebla delayed the French march into the interior of Mexico by a year while Lorencez awaited reinforcements from France. Meanwhile, D\u00edaz had been made military governor of the Veracruz district. Soon after the Battle of Puebla, General Zaragoza died of typhus and was replaced in his command by Jes\u00fas Gonz\u00e1lez Ortega.\nA second French siege of Puebla was this time led by \u00c9lie Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Forey with 26,000 men, against the 20,000 troops commanded by Ortega. The Mexican defenders would hold out for two months from 16 March to 17 May in 1863, until they ran out of provisions. Against the advice of D\u00edaz who suggested an offense, Ortega simply maintained a policy of defense, until the city was stormed.\nAs street fighting broke out at the beginning of April, D\u00edaz was in command of the most exposed quarter of the city made up of seventeen blocks, and he made his headquarters at the strongest point of the district which was a large building known as the \"meson de San Marcos\". As D\u00edaz planned his defenses, the French advanced with artillery and cannonballs began to crash through the building.\nAs French zouaves poured through the breaches, they were repulsed every time, and by the evening D\u00edaz had regained complete control over his headquarters. Similar scenes occurred throughout the city and by April 25, Forey was contemplating suspending military operations until larger siege guns could arrive. Despite the ongoing stalemate, the French were reassured by the knowledge that the Mexicans were running out of food and supplies.\nFirst escape.\nD\u00edaz, among other officers, managed to escape before even arriving in Veracruz. D\u00edaz then headed for Mexico City to report to President Benito Ju\u00e1rez. The president prepared to depart Mexico City and commissioned D\u00edaz to raise troops for the military district of Queretaro.\nAfter capturing Mexico City in June 1863, Dubois de Saligny, Napoleon's representative, appointed the members of a Mexican puppet government tasked with ratifying French intentions of establishing a monarchy. On 8 July 1863, this so-called \"Assembly of Notables\" resolved to change the nation into a monarchy, inviting Napoleon's candidate, Maximilian of Habsburg, to become Emperor of Mexico.\nIn August, Forey and Saligny were recalled to France, and command over the French administration and the military of the conquered Mexican territories fell upon Marshal Bazaine, already present with the expedition, who officially assumed his post on 1 October 1862.\nBy October 1863 D\u00edaz was placed in charge of the Eastern division of the Mexican military with command over 3000 men. General D\u00edaz proceeded to sweep through the states of Queretaro, Michoacan, and Mexico, into Guerrero, proceeding to capture the rich silver-bearing town of Taxco on 29 October. D\u00edaz then proceeded south toward Oaxaca recruiting more men on the way until his forces had swelled to 8000 troops. The state of Oaxaca would be his main base of operations for the rest of the war.\nCommander of the South.\nPorfirio D\u00edaz was now not only the military but also the political commander over all unoccupied territories south of Veracruz. As the French made encroachments, forces under the command of D\u00edaz managed in the Battle of San Juan Bautista to back the capital of Tabasco, in February 1864. D\u00edaz's hold was consolidated enough that he began making excursions into Veracruz, and Minatitl\u00e1n was taken by 28 March 1864.\nMeanwhile, French control over central Mexico was rapidly expanding, and by March 1864 President Ju\u00e1rez had fled to Monterrey. Even as the northern military situation was dire, D\u00edaz still maintained a solid hold over Guerrero, Oaxaca, Tabasco, and Chiapas. Meanwhile, Emperor Maximilian and his wife Charlotte, now Empress of Mexico finally arrived in Mexico City on 12 June 1864.\nBy December 1864, forces under D\u00edaz had taken back the port of Acapulco. The French still struggled to make any inroads south against the forces commanded by D\u00edaz and his lieutenant, the elderly Liberal caudillo, and former president of Mexico, Juan \u00c1lvarez. By the end of the year, the French were making scouting expeditions and building roads to make further attempts south.\nFinally, in early 1865, a French expedition against D\u00edaz's base of operations in Oaxaca City set out under General Courtois d\u2019Hurbal by way of Yanhuitlan. D\u00edaz evacuated Oaxaca City and began to build barricades while commanding 6000 troops for the defense of the city. It was such an important republican stronghold, that Bazaine himself assumed command of the operation in person.\nBy February 1865, the French had surrounded the city with siege materials and 7000 troops. An assault was scheduled for 9 February. Due to mass desertions which left him outnumbered ten to one, D\u00edaz chose not to fight, instead surrendering unconditionally. D\u00edaz and his officers were taken prisoner and sent to Puebla.\nSecond escape.\nAfter being kept seven months in Puebla, D\u00edaz managed to escape from French confinement yet again and returned to Oaxaca. When news of this reached Paris, former commander of the French Intervention, Forey who had once fought against D\u00edaz at Puebla, criticized Bazaine for not having had D\u00edaz shot immediately upon capturing him.\nThroughout late 1865, as the French were still unable to secure the entire country, Napoleon III was led to the conclusion that France had gotten involved in a military quagmire. At the opening of the French Chambers in January 1866, he announced his intention of withdrawing French troops from Mexico. The French considered Emperor Maximilian to be doomed due to a lack of popular support and began to pressure him to abdicate.\nFrench authorities considered forming an alternative Liberal government, more accommodating, and less humiliating to French interests than Ju\u00e1rez, and D\u00edaz was proposed but ultimately rejected as a candidate to lead such a government due to his loyalty to Ju\u00e1rez. The alternative government scheme never materialized, Maximilian refused to abdicate, and the French left him in Mexico to his fate, the last French troops departing by March 1867.\nFall of the Second Mexican Empire.\nWhen D\u00edaz returned to Oaxaca in late 1865, he found his army of the South dispersed, and enemy forces controlling the Oaxacan coast along with Tehuantepec. By Spring, 1866, D\u00edaz had gained some victories, aided by local uprisings. He began to focus on cutting off communications between Oaxaca City and Veracruz D\u00edaz won the Battle of Miahuatl\u00e1n on 3 October, and then advanced upon Oaxaca City which surrendered by 1 November 1866. Most of southern Mexico except for certain areas of Yucatan were now back in the hands of the Mexican Republic.\nD\u00edaz now concentrated his forces in northern Oaxaca, Vera Cruz, Mexico, and Puebla for future operations. On 9 March 1867, D\u00edaz began the Third Battle of Puebla, subjecting the city to an attack much like the one he had once defended it from, taking the city by 2 April. D\u00edaz spared the troops, but ordered the execution of the officers, taunting them by saying that \u201ceven though they had not lived like men, they could die like men\u201d.\nAll that remained of the Empire were Quer\u00e9taro City, where Maximilian and his leading generals were present, Mexico City, and Veracruz, the latter two which had, through D\u00edaz\u2019 capture of Puebla, been cut off from communications with each other. Leonardo M\u00e1rquez had been sent from Queretaro to relieve the siege of Puebla, but he was too late. D\u00edaz pursued M\u00e1rquez and a skirmish ensued on 8 April, but M\u00e1rquez got away and made it back to Mexico City\nSiege of Mexico City.\nD\u00edaz now focused on taking back Mexico City and succeeded in seizing Chapultepec Castle, Maximilian's former residence, from its remaining imperial defenders, subsequently making it his headquarters. D\u00edaz now had Mexico City surrounded with 28,000 troops yet being concerned with preventing damage to the capital he did not attack, and a seventy-day standoff ensued. Meanwhile, the Siege of Quer\u00e9taro against Emperor Maximilian's headquarters was ongoing and ultimately ended by May 14 in a Liberal victory.\nEven after Maximilian had been captured, Leonardo M\u00e1rquez was stalling for time at Mexico City, but hope for the imperialists was running out. M\u00e1rquez' officer General O\u2019Horan went to meet D\u00edaz without authorization and offered to surrender the city, warning D\u00edaz that M\u00e1rquez was about the escape, but D\u00edaz rejected the offer. On 20 June, the day after Maximilian had been executed, D\u00edaz ordered a barrage of artillery against the positions of the enemy, and his observers suddenly began to notice white flags of surrender. The remaining imperialist officers were arrested and it was discovered that M\u00e1rquez had disappeared the day before. Upon occupying the city D\u00edaz ordered his military bakers to begin supplying the city's starving population with food. He placed the city under martial law to prevent looting but also began a house-by-house search for any remaining imperialist officers. M\u00e1rquez would never be found and he successfully escaped the country to find refuge in Cuba.\nD\u00edaz rebels against the government.\nPlan de la Noria.\nD\u00edaz declared himself a candidate for presidential elections scheduled for August 1867 Meanwhile, President Juarez proposed certain amendments to the constitution, and opponents of them began to coalesce around Diaz's campaign. Ju\u00e1rez subsequently won the presidential election and began a new term scheduled to end on 30 November 1871.\nJu\u00e1rez controversially once more declared his candidacy for the 1871 elections which he won again against D\u00edaz. Supporters of D\u00edaz accused the government of engaging in election fraud, refused to recognize Ju\u00e1rez as the legitimate president, and prepared to take up arms. The subsequent insurrection would come to be known as the Plan de la Noria from the eponymous Oaxacan town in which the revolution was proclaimed on 8 November 1871.\nSupporting revolts flared up across the country, but Ju\u00e1rez sustained himself against them until dying in office on 18 July 1872, the presidency passing on to the legal successor Sebastian Lerdo de Tejada.\nPresident Lerdo offered an amnesty to the rebels in July 1872, an offer which many commanders subsequently took. D\u00edaz himself refused it, and on 1 August, sent a letter to the president urging a modification of the amnesty terms and urging an extension for upcoming presidential elections in October ostensibly to allow rebellious regions to fully participate. The president was unyielding but so was D\u00edaz, who urged Lerdo, in a later communication to also initiate constitutional reforms to prohibit presidential reelection.\nAs more rebel commanders yielded and the October elections came and went with Lerdo winning an overwhelming majority of votes, D\u00edaz realized that his case was hopeless and finally submitted unconditionally before the amnesty in late October.\nPlan of Tuxtepec.\nD\u00edaz was eventually restored to official military rank in 1874 but retired to private life, and subsequently moved to the United States in December 1875, settling in Brownsville, Texas, across the border from Matamoros.\nIn early 1876, President Lerdo doomed his already unpopular presidency by announcing his plans for re-election scheduled for June of that year. On 15 January 1876, the Plan of Tuxtepec was proclaimed in Tuxtepec, Oaxaca. Porfirio D\u00edaz was invited to assume leadership of the revolution.\nAs support for the Tuxtepec Plan rapidly spread throughout the country, D\u00edaz returned to the country on March 22. At the town of Palo Blanco, he published a revised version of the Tuxtepec Plan. The plan was a miscellaneous set of critiques against the Lerdo Administration focusing on the claim that the president's domination of the electoral process rendered free suffrage null. D\u00edaz was declared the military leader of the revolution and Lerdo was declared deposed along with all governors who would not accede to the Tuxtepec Plan. The interim executive was first offered to the president of the supreme court and legal successor to the president Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Iglesias, but he rejected any role in the plan as a violation of the constitution. The revolutionaries now recognized D\u00edaz as president. This uprising was virtually the last of its kind in the nineteenth century and put an end to the era of \"pronunciamientos\". From 1821 to 1876, more than 1,500 pronunciamientos had taken place all over Mexico, calling for or supporting a revolt, usually against the national government. The practice faded away thereafter. \nAs federalist forces under Mariano Escobedo approached D\u00edaz, the latter was forced to take flight, intending to rejoin the revolution in his familiar base of Oaxaca. He crossed back into the United States, disguised himself as a Cuban doctor, and boarded a steamer bound for Veracruz. He was detected by military officers on board as the ship approached Veracruz. Although the ship was four miles from the coast, D\u00edaz jumped overboard and attempted to swim ashore, but officers sent a boat after him and he was returned to the ship. The ship's purser Alexander Coney a fellow Mason was sympathetic to D\u00edaz and helped him escape again from which he hastened to Oaxaca, arriving by July.\nOn 15 November, as D\u00edaz approached Mexico City from Oaxaca his troops clashed at Tecoac with those of the federalist . The outcome of the hours-long battle hung in the balance, but D\u00edaz routed the Federalist troops after reinforcements arrived. Mexico City now lay open to D\u00edaz's forces, and President Lerdo de Tejada, realizing his cause was lost, evacuated the capital with military and civilian supporters, intending to flee the country.\nAfter the elections of July, a rival revolt known as the Plan of Salamanca had flared up under Iglesias, alleging that Lerdo's election had been fraudulent and that he was now the legitimate president of Mexico until legal elections could be held. Iglesias began to correspond with D\u00edaz, hoping to unite their movements, but no agreement could be reached, even after the flight of Lerdo.\nD\u00edaz entered Mexico City on 29 November and finally ascended to the presidency. He organized his cabinet but now focused on crushing the movement of Iglesias and set out for the latter's base in Guanajuato with 10,000 men.\nIglesias began to experience mass defections in both political and military support and after a series of failed negotiations with D\u00edaz in December, decided upon giving up and departing the country. The victorious D\u00edaz reentered the capital on 12 February 1877.\nBecoming president and first term, 1876\u20131880.\nD\u00edaz did not take formal control of the presidency until the beginning of 1877, putting in General Juan N. M\u00e9ndez as provisional president, followed by new presidential elections in 1877 that gave D\u00edaz the presidency. Ironically, one of his government's first amendments to the liberal 1857 constitution was to prevent re-election.\nAlthough the new election gave some air of legitimacy to D\u00edaz's government, the United States did not recognize the regime. It was not clear that D\u00edaz would continue to prevail against supporters of ousted President Lerdo, who continued to challenge D\u00edaz's regime by insurrections, which ultimately failed. While D\u00edaz\u2019 revolts were against extreme power centralization, once in power D\u00edaz strengthened the central state further, so much so that the probability of a coup or a factional rebellion like his decreased markedly thereafter. In addition, cross-border Apache attacks with raids on one side and sanctuary on the other were a sticking point. Mexico needed to meet several conditions before the U.S. would consider recognizing D\u00edaz's government, including payment of a debt to the U.S. and restraining the cross-border Apache raids. The U.S. emissary to Mexico, John W. Foster, had the duty to protect the interests of the U.S. first and foremost. Lerdo's government had entered into negotiations with the U.S. over claims that each had against the other in previous conflicts. A joint U.S.-Mexico Claims Commission was established in 1868, in the wake of the fall of the French Empire. When D\u00edaz seized power from Lerdo's government, he inherited Lerdo's negotiated settlement with the U.S. As Mexican historian Daniel Cos\u00edo Villegas put it, \"He Who Wins Pays.\" D\u00edaz secured recognition by paying $300,000 to settle claims by the U.S. In 1878, the U.S. government recognized the D\u00edaz regime, and former U.S. president and Civil War hero Ulysses S. Grant visited Mexico. \"See also: Lerdista Uprising of 1878\"\nDuring his first term in office, D\u00edaz developed a pragmatic and personalist approach to solving political conflicts. Although a political liberal who had stood with radical liberals in Oaxaca (\"rojos\"), he was not a liberal ideologue, preferring pragmatic approaches towards political issues. He was explicit about his pragmatism. He maintained control through generous patronage of political allies. In his first term, members of his political alliance were discontented that they had not sufficiently benefited from political and financial rewards. In general, he sought conciliation, but force could be an option. \"'Five fingers or five bullets,' as he was fond of saying.\" Although he was an authoritarian ruler, he maintained the structure of elections, so that there was the fa\u00e7ade of liberal democracy. His administration became famous for the suppression of civil society and public revolts. One of the catchphrases of his later terms in office was the choice between \"pan o palo\", (\"bread or the bludgeon\")\u2014that is, \"benevolence or repression\". D\u00edaz saw his task in his term as president to create internal order so that economic development could be possible. He also included in his coalition a middle-class contingent from small townships that contested vestigial oligarchies, further consolidating the power of the national state over governors and peripheral elites. As a military hero and astute politician, D\u00edaz's eventual successful establishment of that peace (\"Paz Porfiriana\") became \"one of [D\u00edaz's] principal achievements, and it became the main justification for successive re-elections after 1884.\"\nD\u00edaz and his advisers' pragmatism about the United States became the policy of \"defensive modernization\", which attempted to make the best of Mexico's weak position against its northern neighbor. Attributed to D\u00edaz was the phrase \"so far from God, so close to the United States.\" D\u00edaz's advisers Mat\u00edas Romero, Ju\u00e1rez's emissary to the U.S., and , a minister in Ju\u00e1rez's government, advised a policy of \"peaceful invasion\" of U.S. capital to Mexico, with the expectation that it would then be \"naturalized\" in Mexico. In their view, such an arrangement would \"provide 'all possible advantages of annexation without ...its inconveniences'.\" D\u00edaz was won over to that viewpoint, which promoted Mexican economic development and gave the U.S. an outlet for its capital and allowed for its influence in Mexico. By 1880, Mexico was forging a new relationship with the U.S. as D\u00edaz's term of office was ending.\nGonz\u00e1lez presidency, 1880\u20131884.\nD\u00edaz stepped down from the presidency, with his ally, General Manuel Gonz\u00e1lez, one of the trustworthy members of his political network (\"camarilla\"), elected president in a fully constitutional manner. This four-year period, often characterized as the \"Gonz\u00e1lez Interregnum\", is sometimes seen as D\u00edaz placing a puppet in the presidency, but Gonz\u00e1lez ruled in his own right and was viewed as a legitimate president free of the taint of coming to power by coup. During this period, D\u00edaz briefly served as governor of his home state of Oaxaca. He also devoted time to his personal life, highlighted by his marriage to Carmen Romero Rubio, the devout 17-year-old daughter of Manuel Romero Rubio, a supporter of Lerdo. The couple honeymooned in the U.S., going to the World Cotton Centennial in New Orleans, then St. Louis, Washington, D.C., and New York. Accompanying them on their travels was Mat\u00edas Romero and his U.S.-born wife. This working honeymoon allowed D\u00edaz to forge personal connections with politicians and powerful businessmen with Romero's friends, including former U.S. President Ulysses S. Grant. Romero then publicized the growing amity between the two countries and the safety of Mexico for U.S. investors.\nPresident Gonz\u00e1lez was making room in his government for political networks not originally part of D\u00edaz's coalition, some of whom had been loyalists to Lerdo, including , whose grandson Francisco would challenge D\u00edaz for the presidency in 1910. Important legislation changing rights to land and subsoil rights, and encouraging immigration and colonization by U.S. nationals was passed during the Gonz\u00e1lez presidency. The administration also extended lucrative railway concessions to U.S. investors. Despite those developments, the Gonz\u00e1lez administration met financial and political difficulties, with the later period bringing the government to bankruptcy and popular opposition. D\u00edaz's father-in-law Manuel Romero Rubio linked these issues to personal corruption by Gonz\u00e1lez. Despite D\u00edaz's previous protestations of \"no re-election\", he ran for a second term in the 1884 elections.\nDuring this period the Mexican underground political newspapers spread the new ironic slogan for the Porfirian Times, based on the slogan \"\"Sufragio Efectivo, No Reelecci\u00f3n\" (Effective suffrage, no re-election) and changed it to its opposite, \"Sufragio Efectivo No, Reelecci\u00f3n\"\" (Effective suffrage \u2013 No. Re-election!). D\u00edaz had the constitution amended, first to allow two terms in office, and then to remove all restrictions on re-election. With these changes in place, D\u00edaz was re-elected four more times by implausibly high margins, and on some occasions claimed to have won with either unanimous or near-unanimous support.\nOver the next twenty-six years as president, D\u00edaz created a systematic and methodical regime with a staunch military mindset. His first goal was to establish peace throughout Mexico. According to John A. Crow, D\u00edaz \"set out to establish a good strong \"Paz Porfiriana\", or Porfirian peace, of such scope and firmness that it would redeem the country in the eyes of the world for its sixty-five years of revolution and anarchy\" since independence. His second goal was outlined in his motto \u2013 \"little of politics and plenty of administration\", meaning the replacement of open political conflict by a well-functioning government apparatus. During this time, Mexico underwent its most profound economic, political, and social transformation since the advent of independence in 1821.\nAdministration, 1884\u20131896.\nTo secure his power, D\u00edaz engaged in various forms of co-optation and coercion. He constantly balanced between the private desires of different interest groups and playing off one interest against another. Following the Gonz\u00e1lez presidency, D\u00edaz abandoned favoring his political group (\"camarilla\") that brought him to power in 1876 in the Plan of Tuxtepec and selected ministers and other high officials from other factions. Those included those loyal to Ju\u00e1rez (Mat\u00edas Romero) and Lerdo (Manuel Romero Rubio). Manuel Dubl\u00e1n was one of the few loyalists from the Plan of Tuxtepec that D\u00edaz retained as a cabinet minister. As money flowed to the Mexican treasury from foreign investments, D\u00edaz could buy off his loyalists from Tuxtepec. An important group supporting the regime were foreign investors, especially from the U.S. and Great Britain, as well as Germany and France. D\u00edaz himself met with investors, binding him with this group in a personal rather than institutional fashion. The close cooperation between these foreign elements and the D\u00edaz regime was a key nationalist issue in the Mexican Revolution.\nTo satisfy any competing domestic forces, such as mestizos and Indigenous leaders, D\u00edaz gave them political positions or made them intermediates for foreign interests. He acted similarly to rural elites by not interfering with their wealth and haciendas. The urban middle classes in Mexico City were often in opposition to the government, but with the country's economic prosperity and the expansion of the government, they had job opportunities in federal employment.\nCovering both pro- and anti-clerical elements, D\u00edaz was both the head of the Freemasons in Mexico and an important advisor to the Catholic bishops. D\u00edaz proved to be a different kind of liberal than those of the past. He neither assaulted the Church nor protected it. With the influx of foreign investment and investors, Protestant missionaries arrived in Mexico, especially in Mexico's north, and Protestants became an opposition force during the Mexican Revolution.\nAlthough there was factionalism in the ruling group and some regions, D\u00edaz suppressed the formation of opposition parties. D\u00edaz dissolved all local authorities and all aspects of federalism that once existed. Not long after he became president, the governors of all federal states in Mexico answered directly to him. Those who held high positions of power, such as members of the legislature, were almost entirely his closest and most loyal friends. Congress was a rubber stamp for his policy plans and they were compliant in amending the 1857 Constitution to allow his re-election and extension of the presidential term. In his quest for political control, D\u00edaz suppressed the press and controlled the court system. D\u00edaz could intervene in political matters that threatened political stability, such as in the conflict in the northern Mexican state of Coahuila, placing Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Garza Galan in the governorship, undercutting wealthy estate owner Evaristo Madero, grandfather of Francisco I. Madero, who would challenge D\u00edaz in the 1910 election. In another case, D\u00edaz placed General Bernardo Reyes in the governorship of the state of Nuevo Le\u00f3n, displacing existing political elites.\nA key supporter of D\u00edaz was former Lerdista Manuel Romero Rubio. According to historian Friedrich Katz, \"Romero Rubio was in many respects the architect of the Porfirian state.\" The relationship between the two was cemented when D\u00edaz married Romero Rubio's young daughter, Carmen. Romero Rubio and his supporters did not oppose the amendment to the Constitution to allow D\u00edaz's initial re-election and then indefinite re-election. One of Romero Rubio's prot\u00e9g\u00e9s was Jos\u00e9 Yves Limantour, who became the main financial adviser to the regime, stabilizing the country's public finances. Limantour's political network was dubbed the Cient\u00edficos, \"the scientists\", for their approach to governance. They sought reforms, such as decreasing corruption and increasing uniform application of laws. D\u00edaz opposed any significant reform and continued to appoint governors and legislators and control the judiciary.\nD\u00edaz and the military.\nD\u00edaz had not trained as a soldier, but made his career in the military during a tumultuous era of the U.S. invasion of Mexico, the age of General Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna, the Reform War, and the Second French Intervention. A study of his presidential cabinets found that 83% of cabinet members old enough had fought in one or more of those conflicts. The tradition of post-independence Mexico of the military intervening and dominance over civilian politicians continued under D\u00edaz. A closer study shows that over time prominent military figures increasingly played a much smaller role in his government. Civilian politicians loyal to him rather than his military comrades in arms came to dominate his cabinet. His regime was not a military dictatorship but rather had strong civilian allies. His replacement of military advisors for civilians signaled that it was civilians who held power in the political arena.\nIn office, D\u00edaz was able to bring provincial military strongmen under the control of the central government, a process that took fifteen years. He provided opportunities for graft for military men he could not successfully confront on the battlefield. Ample salaries helped maintain the loyalty of others. Dangerous military leaders could be sent on foreign missions to study military training in Europe as well as nonmilitary issues, and thereby keep them out of Mexico. Officers who retired could receive half the salary of their highest rank. He created military zones that were not contiguous with state boundaries and rotated the commanders regularly, preventing them from becoming entrenched in any one zone, then extended the practice to lower-ranking officers. \"D\u00edaz destroyed provincial militarism and developed in its stead a national army that sustained the central government.\"\nA potential opposition force was the Mexican Federal Army. Troops were often men forced into military service and poorly paid. D\u00edaz increased the size of the military budget and began modernizing the institution along the lines of European militaries, including the establishment in 1897 of separate military academies to train army and naval officers. High-rank officers were brought into government service. D\u00edaz expanded the crack police force, the \"Rurales\", who were under the control of the president. D\u00edaz knew that he needed to suppress banditry; he expanded the \"Rurales\", although it guarded chiefly only transport routes to major cities. D\u00edaz thus worked to enhance his control over the military and the police. By the time of the outbreak of the Mexican Revolution in 1910, the Federal Army had an aging leadership, and disgruntled troops, and they were unable to control the revolutionary forces in active multiple locations.\nRelations with the Catholic Church.\nUnlike other Mexican liberals, D\u00edaz was not anti-clerical, which became a political advantage when D\u00edaz came to power. He won over conservatives, including the Catholic Church as an institution and social conservatives supporting it.\nRadical liberalism was anti-clerical, seeing the privileges of the Church as challenging the idea of equality before the law and individual, rather than corporate identity. They considered the economic power of the Catholic Church a detriment to modernization and development. The Church as a major corporate landowner and \"de facto\" banking institution shaped investments to conservative landed estates more than industry, infrastructure building, or exports. In power after the ouster of Santa Anna, liberals implemented legal measures to curtail the power of the Church. The Ju\u00e1rez Law abolished special privileges (\"fueros\") of ecclesiastics and the military, and the Lerdo law mandated disentailment of the property of corporations, specifically the Church and indigenous communities. The liberal constitution of 1857 removed the privileged position of the Catholic Church and opened the way to religious tolerance, considering religious expression as freedom of speech. Catholic priests were ineligible for elective office but could vote. Conservatives fought back in the Reform War, under the banner of \"religi\u00f3n y fueros\" (religion and privileges), but were defeated in 1861. Following the fall of the Second Empire in 1867, liberal president Benito Ju\u00e1rez and his successor Sebasti\u00e1n Lerdo de Tejada began implementing the anti-clerical measures of the constitution. Lerdo went further, extending the laws of the Reform to formalize the separation of Church and State; civil marriage as the only valid manner for State recognition; prohibitions of religious corporations to acquire real estate; elimination of religious elements from legal oaths; and the elimination of monastic vows as legally binding. Further prohibitions on the Church in 1874 included the exclusion of religion in public institutions; restriction of religious acts to church precincts; banning of religious garb in public except within churches; and prohibition of the ringing of church bells except to summon parishioners.\nD\u00edaz was a political pragmatist, seeing that the religious question re-opened political discord in Mexico. When he rebelled against Lerdo, D\u00edaz had at least the tacit and perhaps even the explicit support of the Catholic Church. When he came to power in 1877, D\u00edaz left the anti-clerical laws in place, but no longer enforced them as state policy, leaving that to individual Mexican states. This led to the re-emergence of the Church in many areas but in others a less full role. The Church flouted the Reform prohibitions against wearing clerical garb, there were open-air processions and Masses, and religious orders existed. The Church also recovered its property, sometimes through intermediaries, and tithes were again collected. The church regained its role in education, with the complicity of the D\u00edaz regime which did not invest in public education. The Church also regained its role in running charitable institutions. Despite the increasingly visible role of the Catholic Church during the Porfiriato, the Vatican was unsuccessful in getting the reinstatement of a formal relationship between the papacy and Mexico, and the constitutional limitations of the Church as an institution remained as law.\nThis \"modus vivendi\" between D\u00edaz and the Church had pragmatic and positive consequences. D\u00edaz did not publicly renounce liberal anti-clericalism, meaning that the Constitution of 1857 remained in place, but he did not enforce its anti-clerical measures. Conflict could reignite, but it was to the advantage of both the Church and the D\u00edaz government for this arrangement to continue. If the Church did counter D\u00edaz, he had the constitutional means to rein in its power. The Church regained considerable economic power, with conservative intermediaries holding lands for it. The Church remained important in education and charitable institutions. Other important symbols of the normalization of religion in late 19th century Mexico included: the return of the Jesuits (expelled by the Bourbon Charles III in 1767); the crowning of the Virgin of Guadalupe as \"Queen of Mexico\"; and the support of Mexican bishops for D\u00edaz's work as a peacemaker. When the Mexican Revolution broke out in 1910, the Catholic Church was a staunch supporter of the D\u00edaz regime.\nEconomic liberalization under D\u00edaz.\nD\u00edaz sought to attract foreign investment to Mexico to aid the development of mining, agriculture, industry, and infrastructure. Political stability and the revision of laws, some dating to the colonial era, created a legal structure and an atmosphere where entrepreneurs felt secure in investing capital in Mexico. Railways, financed by foreign capital, transformed areas that were remote from markets into productive regions. The government mandate to survey land meant that secure title was established for investors. The process often obliterated claims of local communities that could not prove title or extinguished traditional usage of forests and other areas not under cultivation. The private survey companies bid for contracts from the Mexican government, with the companies acquiring one-third of the land measured, often prime land that was along proposed railway routes. Companies usually sold that land, often to foreigners who pursued large-scale cultivation of crops for export. Crops included coffee, rubber, henequen (for twine used in binding wheat), sugar, wheat, and vegetable production. Land only suitable for pasturage was enclosed with barbed wire, extinguishing traditional communal grazing of cattle, and premium cattle were imported. Owners of large, landed estates (\"haciendas\") often took the opportunity to sell to foreign investors as well. The result by the turn of the twentieth century was the transfer of a vast amount of Mexican land in all parts of the country into foreign hands, either individuals or land companies. Along the northern border with the U.S., American investors were prominent, but they owned land along both coasts, across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and central Mexico. Rural communities and small-scale farmers lost their holdings and were forced to be agricultural wage laborers or pursue or move. Conditions on haciendas were often harsh. Landlessness caused rural discontent and a major cause of peasant participation in the Mexican Revolution, seeking a reversal of the concentration of land ownership through land reform.\nFor elites, \"it was the golden age of Mexican economics, 3.2 dollars per peso.\" Following his personal interview with D\u00edaz, James Creelman relates in his 1908 Pearson magazine article that \"conditions for investment in Mexico are fairer and quite as reliable as in the most highly developed European countries\" such as France, Great Britain, and Germany. For some Mexicans, there was no money, and the doors were thrown open to those who had.\" Economic progress varied drastically from region to region. The north was defined by mining and ranching while the central valley became the home of large-scale farms for wheat and grain and large industrial centers.\nOne component of economic growth involved stimulating foreign investment in the Mexican mining sector. Through tax waivers and other incentives, investment and growth were effectively realized. The secluded southern Baja California region benefited from the establishment of an economic zone with the founding of the town of Santa Rosal\u00eda and the prosperous development of the El Boleo copper mine. This came about when D\u00edaz granted a French mining company a 70-year tax waiver in return for its substantial investment in the project. Similarly, the city of Guanajuato realized substantial foreign investment in local silver mining ventures. The city subsequently experienced a period of prosperity, symbolized by the construction of numerous landmark buildings, most notably, the magnificent Ju\u00e1rez Theatre. By 1900 over 90% of the communal land of the Central Plateau had been sold off or expropriated, forcing 9.5\u00a0million peasants off the land and into the service of big landowners.\nBecause D\u00edaz had created such an effective centralized government, he was able to concentrate decision-making and maintain control over the economic instability. This instability arose largely as a result of the dispossession of hundreds of thousands of peasants of their land. Communal indigenous landholdings were privatized, subdivided, and sold. The Porfiriato thus generated a stark contrast between rapid economic growth and sudden, severe impoverishment of the rural masses, a situation that was to explode in the Mexican Revolution of 1910.\nDuring 1883\u20131894, laws were passed to give fewer and fewer people large amounts of land, which was taken away from people by bribing local judges to declare it vacant or unoccupied (\"terrenos bald\u00edos\"). A friend of D\u00edaz obtained 12 million acres of land in Baja California by bribing local judges. Those who opposed . The manufacture of cheap alcohol increased prompting the number of bars in Mexico City to rise from 51 in 1864 to 1,400 in 1900. This caused the rate of death from alcoholism and alcohol-related accidents to rise to levels higher than anywhere else in the world.\nOne location affected by Diaz's new laws and the privatization of communal indigenous lands was the town of Papantla. This was a town that had become famous for growing a majority of the vanilla that heavily benefited Mexico's economy. Many of the local Totonac revolted after they were phased out the condue\u00f1azgo, a type of land distribution where individuals could co-own land and buy shares of property and its profits. The new land privatization efforts stripped shareholders of ownership, causing violence and rebellions against Mexican elites. Some Totonac peoples made efforts to legally regain their land, sending many formal dissents to the government. Diaz intervened numerous times stating, \"I have been informed...that the subdivision of Papantla's lands is a very difficult thing, and that it is provoking much irritation.\" These laws ultimately ended traditional views of communal landownership and restructured the social hierarchy in the region.\nCracks in the political system.\nD\u00edaz has been characterized as a \"republican monarch and his regime a synthesis of pragmatic [colonial-era] Bourbon methods and Liberal republican ideals... As much by longevity as by design, D\u00edaz came to embody the nation.\" D\u00edaz did not plan well for the transition to a regime other than his own. As D\u00edaz aged and continued to be re-elected, the question of presidential succession became more urgent. Political aspirants within his regime envisioned succeeding to the presidency and opponents began organizing in anticipation of D\u00edaz's exit.\nIn 1898, the D\u00edaz regime faced several important issues, with the death of Mat\u00edas Romero, D\u00edaz's long-time political adviser who had made great efforts to strengthen Mexico's ties with the U.S. since the Ju\u00e1rez regime, and a major shift in U.S. foreign policy toward imperialism with its success in the Spanish\u2013American War. Romero's death created new dynamics amongst the three political groups that D\u00edaz both relied upon and manipulated. Romero's faction had strongly supported U.S. investment in Mexico, and was largely pro-American, but with Romero's death, his faction declined in power. The other two factions were Jos\u00e9 Yves Limantour's Cient\u00edficos and Bernardo Reyes's followers, the Reyistas. Limantour pursued a policy of offsetting U.S. influence by favoring European investment, especially British banking houses and entrepreneurs, such as Weetman Pearson. U.S. investment in Mexico remained robust and even grew, but the economic climate was more hostile to their interests and their support for the regime declined.\nThe U.S. had asserted that it had the preeminent role in the Western hemisphere, with U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt modifying the Monroe Doctrine via the Roosevelt Corollary, which declared that the U.S. could intervene in other countries' political affairs if the U.S. determined they were not well run. D\u00edaz pushed back against this policy, saying that the security of the hemisphere was a collective enterprise of all its nations. There was a meeting of American states, in the second Pan-American Conference, which met in Mexico City from 22 October 1901 \u2013 31 January 1902, and the U.S. backed off from its hard-line policy of interventionism, at least for the moment regarding Mexico.\nIn domestic politics, Bernardo Reyes became increasingly powerful, and D\u00edaz appointed him Minister of War. The Mexican Federal Army was becoming increasingly ineffective. With wars being waged against the Yaqui in northwest Mexico and the Maya, Reyes requested and received increased funding to augment the number of men at arms. \nThere was some open opposition to D\u00edaz's regime, with eccentric lawyer Nicol\u00e1s Z\u00fa\u00f1iga y Miranda running against D\u00edaz. Z\u00fa\u00f1iga lost every election but always claimed fraud and considered himself to be the legitimately elected president, but he did not mount a serious challenge to the regime. More importantly, as the 1910 election approached and D\u00edaz stated he would not run for re-election, Limantour and Reyes vied against each other for favor.\nOn 17 February 1908, in an interview with the U.S. journalist James Creelman of \"Pearson's Magazine\", D\u00edaz stated that Mexico was ready for democracy and elections and that he would retire and allow other candidates to compete for the presidency. Without hesitation, several opposition and pro-government groups united to find suitable candidates who would represent them in the upcoming presidential elections. Many liberals formed clubs supporting Bernardo Reyes, then the governor of Nuevo Le\u00f3n, as a candidate. Even though Reyes never formally announced his candidacy, D\u00edaz continued to perceive him as a threat and sent him on a mission to Europe, so that he was not in the country for the elections.\nIn 1909, D\u00edaz and William Howard Taft, the then president of the United States, planned a summit in El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, Chihuahua, Mexico, a historic first meeting between a U.S. president and a Mexican president and also the first time an American president would cross the border into Mexico. D\u00edaz requested the meeting to show U.S. support for his planned seventh run as president, and Taft agreed to protect the several billion dollars of American capital then invested in Mexico. After nearly 30 years with D\u00edaz in power, U.S. businesses controlled \"nearly 90 percent of Mexico's mineral resources, its national railroad, its oil industry and, increasingly, its land.\" Both sides agreed that the disputed Chamizal strip connecting El Paso to Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez would be considered neutral territory with no flags present during the summit, but the meeting focused attention on this territory and resulted in assassination threats and other serious security concerns. The Texas Rangers, 4,000 U.S. and Mexican troops, U.S. Secret Service agents, FBI agents, and U.S. marshals were all called in to provide security. An additional 250-man private security detail led by Frederick Russell Burnham, the celebrated scout, was hired by John Hays Hammond, a close friend of Taft from Yale and a former candidate for U.S. vice president in 1908 who, along with his business partner Burnham, held considerable mining interests in Mexico. On 16 October, the day of the summit, Burnham and Private C.R. Moore, a Texas Ranger, discovered a man holding a concealed palm pistol standing at the El Paso Chamber of Commerce building along the procession route. Burnham and Moore captured and disarmed the assassin within only a few feet of D\u00edaz and Taft.\n1910 Centennial of Independence.\nThe year 1910 was important in Mexico's history\u2014the centennial of the revolt by Miguel Hidalgo, seen as the beginning of the Mexican War of independence. On the cover of the official program for the centennial, three figures are shown: Hidalgo, father of independence; Benito Ju\u00e1rez, with the label \"Lex\" (law); and Porfirio D\u00edaz, with the label \"Pax\" (peace). Also on the cover are the emblem of Mexico and the cap of liberty. D\u00edaz inaugurated the monument to Independence with its golden angel during the September centennial celebrations. Although D\u00edaz and Ju\u00e1rez had been political rivals after the French Intervention, D\u00edaz had done much to promote the legacy of his dead rival and had a large monument to Ju\u00e1rez built by the Alameda Park, which D\u00edaz inaugurated during the centennial. A work published in 1910 details the day-by-day events of the September festivities.\n1910 election and ousting.\nAs groups began to settle on their presidential candidate, D\u00edaz decided that he was not going to retire but rather allow Francisco I. Madero, an elite but democratically leaning reformer, to run against him. Although Madero, a landowner, was very similar to D\u00edaz in his ideology, he hoped for other elites in Mexico to rule alongside the president. Ultimately, however, D\u00edaz did not approve of Madero and had him jailed during the 1910 election.\nThe election went ahead. Madero had gathered much popular support, but when the government announced the official results, D\u00edaz was proclaimed to have been re-elected almost unanimously, with Madero said to have attained a minuscule number of votes. This case of massive electoral fraud aroused widespread anger throughout the Mexican citizenry. Madero called for revolt against D\u00edaz in the Plan of San Luis Potos\u00ed, and the violence to oust D\u00edaz is now seen as the first phase of the Mexican Revolution. Rebellions in many different places stretched the Federal Army's and the Rurales's ability to suppress them all, revealing the regime's weakness. D\u00edaz was forced to resign from office on 25 May 1911 and left the country for Spain six days later, on 31 May 1911.\nLater days in exile and death.\nD\u00edaz kept his brother's son F\u00e9lix D\u00edaz away from political or military power. He did, however, allow his nephew to enrich himself. It was only after D\u00edaz went into exile in 1911 that his nephew became prominent in politics, as the embodiment of the old regime. Even so, D\u00edaz's assessment of his nephew proved astute since F\u00e9lix never successfully led troops or garnered sustained support, and was forced into exile several times.\nOn 2 July 1915, D\u00edaz died in exile in Paris, France. He was buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse. His other children died as infants or young children. His widow Carmen and his son were allowed to return to Mexico.\nPersonal life.\nD\u00edaz came from a devoutly Catholic family; his relative, Jos\u00e9 Agust\u00edn Dom\u00ednguez y Diaz, was bishop of Oaxaca. D\u00edaz had trained for the priesthood, and it seemed likely that was his career path. Oaxaca was a center of liberalism, and the founding of the Institute of Arts and Sciences, a secular institution, helped foster professional training for Oaxacan liberals, including Benito Ju\u00e1rez and Porfirio D\u00edaz. When D\u00edaz abandoned his ecclesiastical career for one in the military, his powerful uncle disowned him.\nIn D\u00edaz's personal life, it is clear that religion still mattered and that fierce anti-clericalism could have a high price. In 1870, his brother F\u00e9lix, a fellow liberal, who was then governor of Oaxaca, had rigorously applied the anti-clerical laws of the Reform. In the rebellious and supposedly idolatrous town of Juchit\u00e1n in Tehuantepec, F\u00e9lix D\u00edaz had \"roped the image of the patron saint of Juchit\u00e1n \u2026 to his horse and dragged it away, returning the saint days later with its feet cut off\". When F\u00e9lix had to flee Oaxaca City in 1871 following Porfirio's failed coup against Ju\u00e1rez, F\u00e9lix ended up in Juchit\u00e1n, where the villagers killed him, doing to his body even worse than he did to their saint. Having lost a brother to the fury of religious peasants, D\u00edaz had a cautionary tale about the dangers of enforcing anti-clericalism. Even so, it is clear that D\u00edaz wanted to remain in good standing with the Church.\nD\u00edaz married his niece Delfina Ortega D\u00edaz (1845\u20131880), the daughter of his sister, Manuela Josefa D\u00edaz Mori (1824\u20131856). D\u00edaz and she would have seven children, with Delfina dying due to complications of her seventh delivery. Following her death, he wrote a private letter to Church officials renouncing the Laws of the Reform, which allowed his wife to be buried with Catholic rites in sacred ground.\nD\u00edaz had a relationship with a soldadera, Rafaela Qui\u00f1ones, during the war of the French Intervention, which resulted in the birth of Amada D\u00edaz (1867\u20131962), whom he recognized. Amada went to live in D\u00edaz's home with his wife Delfina. Amada married Ignacio de la Torre y Mier, but the couple had no children. De la Torre was said to have been present at the 1901 Dance of the Forty-One, a gathering of gay men and cross-dressers that was raided by police. The report that de la Torre was there was neither confirmed nor denied, but the dance was a huge scandal at the time, satirized by caricaturist Jos\u00e9 Guadalupe Posada.\nD\u00edaz remarried in 1881, to Carmen Romero Rubio, the pious 17-year-old daughter of his most important advisor, Manuel Romero Rubio. Oaxaca cleric Father Eulogio Gillow y Zavala gave his blessing. Gillow was later appointed archbishop of Oaxaca. Do\u00f1a Carmen is credited with bringing D\u00edaz into closer reconciliation with the Church, but D\u00edaz was already inclined in that direction. The marriage produced no children, but D\u00edaz's surviving children lived with the couple until adulthood.\nIn 1938, the 430-piece collection of arms of the late General Porfirio D\u00edaz was donated to the Royal Military College of Canada in Kingston, Ontario.\nAlthough D\u00edaz is criticized on many grounds, he did not create a family dynasty. His only son to survive to adulthood, Porfirio D\u00edaz Ortega, known as \"Porfirito\", trained to be an officer at the military academy. He graduated as a military engineer and never served in combat. He and his family went into European exile after D\u00edaz's resignation. They were allowed to return to Mexico during the amnesty of L\u00e1zaro C\u00e1rdenas.\nLegacy.\nThe legacy of D\u00edaz has undergone revision since the 1990s. In D\u00edaz's lifetime before his ouster, there was adulatory literature, which has been named \"Porfirismo\". He maintained an international reputation as the statesman that had finally brought stability to Mexico.\nThe vast literature that characterizes him as a tyrant and dictator has its origins in the late period of D\u00edaz's rule and has continued to shape D\u00edaz's historical image. In recent years, however, there has been an effort to rehabilitate D\u00edaz's figure, most prominently by television personality and historian Enrique Krauze, in what has been termed \"Neo-Porfirismo\". As Mexico pursued a neoliberal path under President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the policies of D\u00edaz that opened Mexico up to foreign investment fit with the turn of the Institutional Revolutionary Party toward privatization of state companies and market-oriented reforms. D\u00edaz was characterized as a far more benign figure for these revisionists.\nD\u00edaz is usually credited with the saying, \"\u00a1Pobre M\u00e9xico! \u00a1Tan lejos de Dios y tan cerca de los Estados Unidos!\" (\"Poor Mexico, so far from God and so close to the United States!\").\nPartly due to D\u00edaz's lengthy tenure, the current Mexican constitution limits a president to a single six-year term with no possibility of re-election, even if it is nonconsecutive. Additionally, no one who holds the post, even on a caretaker basis, is allowed to run or serve again. This provision is so entrenched that it remained in place even after legislators were allowed to run for a second consecutive term.\nThere have been several attempts to return D\u00edaz's remains to Mexico since the 1920s. The most recent movement started in 2014 in Oaxaca by the \"Comisi\u00f3n Especial de los Festejos del Centenario Luctuoso de Porfirio D\u00edaz Mori\", which is headed by Francisco Jim\u00e9nez. According to some, the fact that D\u00edaz's remains have not been returned to Mexico \"symbolizes the failure of the post-Revolutionary state to come to terms with the legacy of the D\u00edaz regime.\"\nHonors.\nList of notable foreign awards awarded to President D\u00edaz:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPorfiriato.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71301", "revid": "45390579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71301", "title": "Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es", "text": "Avenue in Paris, France\nThe Avenue des Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es (, ; ) is an avenue in the 8th arrondissement of Paris, France. The avenue is long and wide, running between the Place de la Concorde in the east and the Place Charles de Gaulle in the west, where the Arc de Triomphe is located. It is known for its theatres, caf\u00e9s, and luxury shops; as the finish of the Tour de France cycling race; and for its annual Bastille Day military parade. \nThe name is French for the Elysian Fields, the place for dead heroes in Greek mythology. It has been described as the \"most beautiful avenue in the whole world\".\nDescription.\nThe avenue runs for through the 8th arrondissement in northwestern Paris, from the Place de la Concorde in the east, with the Obelisk of Luxor, to the Place Charles de Gaulle (formerly the \"Place de l'\u00c9toile\") in the west, location of the Arc de Triomphe. The Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es forms part of the \"Axe historique\".\nThe lower part of the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es, from the Place de la Concorde to the Rond-Point, runs through the Jardin des Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es, a park which contains the Grand Palais, the , the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Marigny, and several restaurants, gardens, and monuments. The \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace on the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honor\u00e9\u2014official residence of the president of the French Republic\u2014borders the park, but is not on the Avenue itself. The Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es ends at the Arc de Triomphe, built to honor the victories of Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte.\nHistory.\nUntil the reign of Louis XIV, the land where the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es runs today was largely occupied by fields and kitchen gardens. The Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es and its gardens were originally laid out in 1667 by Andr\u00e9 Le N\u00f4tre as an extension of the Tuileries Garden, the gardens of the Tuileries Palace, which had been built in 1564, and which Le N\u00f4tre had rebuilt in his own formal style for Louis XIV in 1664. Le N\u00f4tre planned a wide promenade between the palace and the modern Rond Point, lined with two rows of elm trees on either side, and flowerbeds in the symmetrical style of the French formal garden. The new boulevard was called the \"Grand Cours\", or \"Grand Promenade\". It did not take the name of Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es until 1709.\nIn 1710 the avenue was extended beyond the Rond-Point as far as the modern Place Charles de Gaulle. In 1765 the garden was remade in the Le N\u00f4tre style by Abel Fran\u00e7ois Poisson, the marquis de Marigny, brother of the Madame de Pompadour and Director-General of the King's Buildings. Marigny extended the avenue again in 1774 as far as the modern Porte Maillot.\nFollowing the French Revolution, two equestrian statues, made in 1745 by Nicolas and Guillaume Coustou, were transferred from the former royal palace at Marly and placed at the beginning of the boulevard and park. After the downfall of Napoleon and the restoration of the French monarchy, the trees had to be replanted, because the occupation armies of the Russians, British, and Prussians during the Hundred Days had camped in the park and used the trees for firewood.\nThe avenue from the Rond-Point to the \u00c9toile was built up during the Empire. The major monument of the Boulevard, the Arc de Triomphe, had been commissioned by Napoleon after his victory at the Battle of Austerlitz, but it was not finished when he fell from power in 1815. The monument remained unfinished until 1833\u20131836, when it was completed by King Louis Philippe. The Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es itself became city property in 1828, and footpaths, fountains, and, later, gas lighting were added.\nIn 1834, under King Louis Philippe I, the architect Mariano Ruiz de Chavez was commissioned to redesign the Place de la Concorde and the gardens of the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. He kept the formal gardens and flowerbeds essentially intact, but turned the garden into a sort of outdoor amusement park, with summer garden caf\u00e9s, such as the Caf\u00e9 des Ambassadeurs and the Alcazar d'\u00c9t\u00e9; two restaurants, the Ledoyen and the restaurant de l'Horloge; a theater, the Lacaze; the Panorama, built in 1839, where large historical paintings were displayed; and the cirque d'et\u00e9 (1841), a large hall for popular theater, musical, and circus performances. He also placed several ornamental fountains around the park, of which three are still in place.\nIn 1846, Prince Louis-Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte, the future Napoleon III, Emperor of the French, lived for a brief period in lodgings just off Lord Street, Southport. It is claimed the street is the inspiration behind the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. Between 1854 and 1870, Napol\u00e9on III orchestrated the reconstruction of the French capital. The medieval centre of the city was demolished and replaced with broad tree-lined boulevards, covered walkways and arcades.\nIn 1855, Emperor Napoleon III selected the park at the beginning of the avenue as the site of the first great international exposition to be held in Paris, the . The park was the location of the Palace of Industry, a giant exhibit hall which covered thirty thousand square meters, where the Grand Palais is today. In 1858, following the Exposition, the Emperor's prefect of the Seine, Georges-Eug\u00e8ne Haussmann, had the gardens transformed from a formal French garden into a picturesque English style garden, based on a small town called Southport, with groves of trees, flowerbeds, and winding paths. The rows of elm trees, which were in poor health, were replaced by rows of chestnut trees.\nBy the late 19th century, the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es had become a fashionable avenue; the trees on either side had grown enough to form rectangular groves (\"cabinets de verdure\"). The gardens of the town houses of the nobility built along the Faubourg Saint-Honor\u00e9 backed onto the formal gardens. The grandest of the private mansions near the Avenue was the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace, a private residence of the nobility which during the Third French Republic became the official residence of the presidents of France.\nThe park served again as an exposition site during the Universal Exposition of 1900; it became the home of the Grand Palais and . It also became the home of a new panorama theater, designed by Gabriel Davioud, the chief architect of Napoleon III, in 1858. The modern theater Marigny was built by Charles Garnier, architect of the Paris Opera, in 1883.\nThroughout its history, the avenue has been the site of military parades; the most famous were the victory parades of German troops in 1871 and again in 1940 celebrating the Fall of France on 14 July 1940, and the three most joyous were the parades celebrating the Allied victory in the First World War in 1919, and the parades of Free French and American forces after the liberation of the city, respectively, the French 2nd Armored Division on 25 August 1944, and the US 28th Infantry Division on 29 August 1944.\nBusiness and retail stores on the avenue.\nIn 1860, the merchants joined to form the \"Syndicat d'Initiative et de D\u00e9fense des Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es\", an association to promote commerce along the avenue. In 1980, the group changed its name to the \"Comit\u00e9 des Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es\" and to \"Comit\u00e9 Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es\" in 2008. It is the oldest standing committee in Paris. The committee has always dedicated itself to seeking public projects to enhance the avenue's unique atmosphere, and to lobby the authorities for extended business hours and to organizing special events. Today, the committee, in coordination with other professional organisations, may review with the Parisian administration the addition to the avenue of new businesses whose floor area would exceed 1000 square meters.\nThe arrival of global chain stores in recent years has strikingly changed its character, and in a first effort to stem these changes, the City of Paris (which has called this trend \"banalisation\") initially decided in 2007 to prohibit the Swedish clothing chain H&amp;M from opening a store on the avenue; however, a large H&amp;M store opened two years later at 88 Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. In 2008, American clothing chain Abercrombie &amp; Fitch was given permission to open a store.\nThe Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es has various mid-size shopping malls, including: \u00c9lys\u00e9es 26 (26), Galeries Lafayette (60) with MAC Cosmetics and Lancel among other stores, Galerie du Claridge (74), Galerie des Arcades (76-78) with Tissot, Paul &amp; Shark, and Starbucks among other stores, and Galerie des Champs (84) with H\u00e4agen-Dazs among other stores.\nThe list of fashion stores include Maje (35), Foot Locker (36), Lululemon (38), Salomon (42), Calvin Klein (44), Levi's (44), Lacoste (50), J. M. Weston (55), Chanel (60), Max Mara (66), Canada Goose (71-73), Zara (74-92), Longchamp (77), Nike (79), Adidas (88), Sandro (91), The Kooples (93), Louis Vuitton (101), Hugo Boss (115), Massimo Dutti (116), Petit Bateau (116), JD Sports (118), Moncler (119), Yves Saint Laurent (123), and Dior (127). \nThe list of perfume stores include Lanc\u00f4me (52), Guerlain (68), Sephora (70), and Yves Rocher (102). \nThe list of jewelry stores include Tiffany &amp; Co. (62), Rolex (71), IWC Schaffhausen (73), Omega (93), Swatch (104), TAG Heuer (104), Bulgari (136), Pandora (142), Swarovski (146), Montblanc (152) and Cartier (154).\nThe list of variety stores include Miniso (104).\nThe list of electronics stores include Apple (114).\nThe list of car show-rooms include Renault (53).\nEvents.\nEvery year on Bastille Day on 14 July, the largest military parade in Europe passes down the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es, reviewed by the president of the Republic.\nEvery year during Advent, Christmastide, and Epiphany, the 'Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es' Committee contributes for the holidays seasons lighting of the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. This generally occurs from late November until early January.\nFrom 1975 to 2023, the last stage of the Tour de France cycling race has finished on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. The subsequent awards ceremony also takes place directly on the avenue.\nIn 1995, terror attacks by Algerian militants took place in France; one attack took place at the Arc de Triomphe on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es, wounding 17.\nHuge gatherings occasionally take place on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in celebration of popular events, such as New Year's Eve, or when France won the FIFA World Cup in 1998 and 2018. The Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es has occasionally been the site of large political protest meetings.\nOn 20 April 2017, a police officer was shot dead on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es by an extremist and two other officers were injured. They were all sitting in a parked police van, when the attacker pulled up in front of the van. The attacker tried to shoot civilians (including a tourist) and was immediately shot dead by other police on the spot. The shooting happened two days before the first round of voting in the 2017 French presidential election.\nOn 19 June 2017, a suspected terrorist drove a munitions-laden car into a police vehicle on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. The attacker was then shot dead.\nOn 16 March 2019, Gilets Jaunes protests on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es erupted into violence. A portion of the 10,000 protesters in the city, about 1,500 people, looted and/or set on fire some 80 shops, restaurants, a bank, and newspaper kiosks along the avenue.\nPublic transport.\nParis M\u00e9tro Line 1 runs under the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. Several stations are located along it; stations from west to east are: Charles de Gaulle \u2013 \u00c9toile at the street's west end at Arc de Triomphe, George V by the H\u00f4tel George-V, Franklin D. Roosevelt at the rond-point des Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es, Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es \u2013 Clemenceau at place Clemenceau and Concorde at the southern end of the avenue, where the Place de la Concorde is located.\nProblems and redesign.\nThe Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es has encountered rising problems with air pollution from the estimated 3,000 vehicles per hour which drive through its eight lanes. It is more polluted than the P\u00e9riph\u00e9rique ring road which encircles the city, with nitrogen dioxide levels twice as high as the recommended limit set by the World Health Organization. Since 2016, the avenue has been closed to motor traffic on the first Sunday of every month, in an effort to cut pollution in the city. A 2019 article in \"The Guardian\" stated that the avenue \"has more and more visitors and big name businesses battle to be on it, but to French people it's looking worn out.\" It has also become mainly a tourist attraction, which Parisians largely avoid. According to the architect Philippe Chiambaretta, 72% of the 100,000 pedestrians who visited the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es each day in 2019 were tourists and another 22% worked there.\nAt the beginning of 2021, the Mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, announced that the city would transform the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es into an \"extraordinary garden\" which will reduce the space for auto traffic by half, add more pedestrian space, and create \"tunnels of trees\" for improved air quality. A walkway will connect over 200 acres of green space stretching between the Arc de Triomphe, the Place de la Concorde, and the Tuileries Gardens. The city intends to adopt the plans formulated by the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es Committee, which has been campaigning for a redesign of the avenue since 2018 and which held a public consultation as to what the redesign should include. The plans are meant to make the avenue more \"ecological, desirable and inclusive,\" and will cost an estimated \u20ac250 million. It will include a redesign of the Place de la Concorde as well. The work did not begin in earnest until after the 2024 Summer Olympics held in Paris; the goal is to complete the project by 2030.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71305", "revid": "72247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71305", "title": "Zyklon B", "text": "Pesticide notorious for its use during the Holocaust\nZyklon B (; translated Cyclone B) was the trade name of a cyanide-based pesticide invented in Germany in the early 1920s. It consists of hydrogen cyanide (prussic acid), as well as a cautionary eye irritant and one of several adsorbents such as diatomaceous earth. The product is notorious for its use by Nazi Germany during the Holocaust to murder approximately 1.1\u00a0million people in gas chambers installed at Auschwitz-Birkenau, Majdanek, and other extermination camps.\nHydrogen cyanide, a poisonous gas that interferes with cellular respiration, was first used as a pesticide in California in the 1880s. Research at Degesch of Germany led to the development of Zyklon (later known as Zyklon A), a pesticide that released hydrogen cyanide upon exposure to water and heat. It was banned after World War I, because some of its components were used in German chemical weapons. Degussa purchased Degesch in 1922. Their team of chemists, which included Walter Heerdt and Bruno Tesch, devised a method of packaging hydrogen cyanide in sealed canisters along with a cautionary eye irritant and one of several adsorbents such as diatomaceous earth. The new product was also named Zyklon, but it became known as Zyklon B to distinguish it from the earlier version. Uses included delousing clothing and fumigating ships, warehouses, and trains.\nThe Nazis started using Zyklon B in extermination camps in early 1942 to murder prisoners during the Holocaust. Tesch and his deputy executive, Karl Weinbacher, were executed in 1946 for knowingly selling the product to the SS for use on humans. Hydrogen cyanide is now rarely used as a pesticide but still has industrial applications. Firms in several countries continue to produce Zyklon B under alternative brand names, including Detia-Degesch, the successor to Degesch.\nMode of action.\nHydrogen cyanide is a poisonous gas that interferes with cellular respiration. Cyanide poisoning prevents the cell from producing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by binding to one of the proteins involved in the electron transport chain. This protein, cytochrome c oxidase, contains several subunits and has ligands containing iron groups. The cyanide component of Zyklon B can bind at one of these iron groups, heme a3, forming a more stabilized compound through metal-to-ligand pi bonding. As a result of the formation of this new iron\u2013cyanide complex, the electrons that would situate themselves on the heme a3 group can no longer do so. Instead, these electrons destabilize the compound; thus, the heme group no longer accepts them. Consequently, electron transport is halted, and cells can no longer produce the energy needed to synthesize ATP. Death occurs in a human being weighing within two minutes of inhaling 70\u00a0mg of hydrogen cyanide.\nHistory.\nHydrogen cyanide, discovered in the late 18th century, was used in the 1880s for the fumigation of citrus trees in California. Its use spread to other countries for the fumigation of silos, goods wagons, ships, and mills. Its light weight and rapid dispersal meant its application had to take place under tents or in enclosed areas. Research by Fritz Haber of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry led to the founding in 1919 of Deutsche Gesellschaft f\u00fcr Sch\u00e4dlingsbek\u00e4mpfung mbH (Degesch), a state-controlled consortium formed to investigate military use of the chemical. Chemists at Degesch added a cautionary eye irritant to a less volatile cyanide compound, which reacted with water in the presence of heat to become hydrogen cyanide. The new product was marketed as the pesticide Zyklon (cyclone). As a similar formula had been used as a weapon during World War I, Zyklon was soon banned.\nDeutsche Gold- und Silber-Scheideanstalt (German Gold and Silver Refinery; Degussa) became the sole owner of Degesch in 1922. There, beginning in 1922, Walter Heerdt, Bruno Tesch, and others worked on packaging hydrogen cyanide in sealed canisters along with a cautionary eye irritant and adsorbent stabilizers such as diatomaceous earth. The new product was also labeled as Zyklon, but it became known as Zyklon B to distinguish it from the earlier version. Heerdt was named the inventor of Zyklon B in the Degesch patent application (number DE 438818) dated 20 June 1922. The Deutsches Patent- und Markenamt awarded the patent on 27 December 1926. Beginning in the 1920s, Zyklon B was used at U.S. Customs facilities along the Mexican border to fumigate the clothing of border crossers.\nCorporate structure and marketing.\nIn 1930, Degussa ceded 42.5 percent ownership of Degesch to IG Farben and 15 percent to Th. Goldschmidt AG, in exchange for the right to market pesticide products of those two companies through Degesch. Degussa retained managerial control.\nWhile Degesch owned the rights to the brand name Zyklon and the patent on the packaging system, the chemical formula was owned by Degussa. Schlempe GmbH, which was 52 percent owned by Degussa, owned the rights to a process to extract hydrogen cyanide from waste products of sugar beet processing. This process was performed under license by two companies, Dessauer Werke and Kaliwerke Kolin, who also combined the resulting hydrogen cyanide with a stabilizer from IG Farben and a cautionary agent from Schering AG to form the final product, which was packaged using equipment, labels, and canisters provided by Degesch. The finished goods were sent to Degesch, who forwarded the product to two companies that acted as distributors: Heerdt-Linger GmbH (Heli) of Frankfurt and Tesch &amp; Stabenow (Testa) of Hamburg. Their territory was split along the Elbe river, with Heli handling clients to the west and south, and Testa those to the east. Degesch owned 51 percent of the shares of Heli, and until 1942 owned 55 percent of Testa.\nBefore World War II, Degesch derived most of its Zyklon B profits from overseas sales, particularly in the United States, where it was produced under license by Roessler &amp; Hasslacher before 1931 and by American Cyanamid from 1931 to 1943. From 1929, the United States Public Health Service used Zyklon B to fumigate freight trains and clothes of Mexican immigrants entering the United States. Uses in Germany included delousing clothing (often using a portable sealed chamber invented by Degesch in the 1930s) and fumigating ships, warehouses, and trains. By 1943, sales of Zyklon B accounted for 65 percent of Degesch's sales revenue and 70 percent of its gross profits.\nUse in the Holocaust.\nIn early 1942, the Nazis began using Zyklon B as the preferred killing tool in extermination camps during the Holocaust. They used it to murder roughly 1.1\u00a0million people in gas chambers at Auschwitz-Birkenau, Majdanek, and elsewhere. Zyklon B was preferred because it was assumed to be a \"humane\" killing method, with the Nazis priding themselves as \"civilized killers\". Most of the victims were Jews, and by far the majority of murders using this method took place at Auschwitz. Distributor Heli supplied Zyklon B to Mauthausen, Dachau, and Buchenwald, and Testa supplied it to Auschwitz and Majdanek; camps also occasionally bought it directly from the manufacturers. Some 56 tonnes of the 729 tonnes sold in Germany in 1942\u201344 were sold to concentration camps, amounting to about 8 percent of domestic sales. Auschwitz received 23.8 tonnes, of which 6 tonnes were used for fumigation. The remainder was used in the gas chambers or lost to spoilage (the product had a stated shelf life of only three months). Testa conducted fumigations for the \"Wehrmacht\" and supplied them with Zyklon B. They also offered courses to the SS in the safe handling and use of the material for fumigation purposes. In April 1941, the German agriculture and interior ministries designated the SS as an authorized applier of the chemical, which meant they were able to use it without any further training or governmental oversight.\nRudolf H\u00f6ss, commandant of Auschwitz, said that the use of Zyklon-B to murder prisoners came about on the initiative of one of his subordinates, SS-\"Hauptsturmf\u00fchrer\" (captain) Karl Fritzsch, who had used it to murder some Russian POWs in late August 1941 in the basement of Block 11 in the main camp. They repeated the experiment on more Russian POWs in September, with H\u00f6ss watching. Block 11 proved unsuitable, as the basement was difficult to air out afterwards and the crematorium (Crematorium I, which operated until July 1942) was some distance away. The site of the murders was moved to Crematorium I, where more than 700 victims could be murdered at once. By the middle of 1942, the operation was moved to Auschwitz II\u2013Birkenau, a nearby satellite camp that had been under construction since October 1941.\nThe first gas chamber at Auschwitz II\u2013Birkenau was the \"red house\" (called Bunker 1 by SS staff), a brick cottage converted to a gassing facility by tearing out the inside and bricking up the windows. It was operational by March 1942. A second brick cottage, called the \"white house\" or Bunker 2, was converted some weeks later. According to H\u00f6ss, Bunker 1 held 800 victims and Bunker 2 held 1,200 victims. These structures were in use for mass murder until early 1943. At that point, the Nazis decided to greatly increase the gassing capacity of Birkenau. Crematorium II was originally designed as a mortuary with morgues in the basement and ground-level incinerators; they converted it into a killing factory by installing gas-tight doors, vents for the Zyklon B to be dropped into the chamber, and ventilation equipment to remove the gas afterwards. Crematorium III was built using the same design. Crematoria IV and V, designed from the beginning as gas chambers, were also constructed that spring. By June 1943, all four crematoria were operational. Most of the victims were murdered using these four structures.\nThe Nazis began shipping large numbers of Jews from all over Europe to Auschwitz in the middle of 1942. Those who were not selected for work crews were immediately gassed. Those selected to die generally comprised about three-quarters of the total and included almost all children, women with small children, all the elderly, and all those who appeared on brief and superficial inspection by an SS doctor not to be completely fit. The victims were told that they were to undergo delousing and a shower. They were stripped of their belongings and herded into the gas chamber.\nA special SS bureau known as the Hygienic Institute delivered the Zyklon B to the crematoria by ambulance. The actual delivery of the gas to the victims was always handled by the SS, on the order of the supervising SS doctor. After the doors were shut, SS men dropped Zyklon B pellets through vents in the roof or holes in the side of the chamber. The victims were dead within 20 minutes. Johann Kremer, an SS doctor who oversaw gassings, testified that the \"shouting and screaming of the victims could be heard through the opening and it was clear that they fought for their lives\".\n\"Sonderkommandos\" (special work crews forced to work at the gas chambers) wearing gas masks then dragged the bodies from the chamber. The victims' glasses, artificial limbs, jewelry, and hair were removed, and any dental work was extracted so the gold could be melted down. If the gas chamber was crowded, which they typically were, the corpses were found half-squatting, their skin discolored pink with red and green spots, with some foaming at the mouth or bleeding from their ears. The corpses were burned in the nearby incinerators, and the ashes were buried, thrown in the river, or used as fertilizer. With the Soviet Red Army approaching through Poland, the last mass gassing at Auschwitz took place on 30 October 1944. In November 1944, \"Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS\" Heinrich Himmler, head of the SS, ordered gassing operations to cease throughout Nazi Germany.\nLegacy.\nAfter World War II ended in 1945, Bruno Tesch and Karl Weinbacher of Tesch &amp; Stabenow were tried in a British military court and executed for knowingly providing Zyklon B to the SS for use on humans. Gerhard Peters, who served as principal operating officer of Degesch and Heli and also held posts in the Nazi government, served two years and eight months in prison as an accessory before being released due to amendments to the penal code.\nUse of hydrogen cyanide as a pesticide or cleaner has been banned or restricted in some countries. Most hydrogen cyanide is used in industrial processes, made by companies in Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, and the US. Degesch resumed production of Zyklon B after the war. It was still produced as of 2008. Degussa sold Degesch to Detia-Freyberg GmbH in 1986. The company is now called Detia-Degesch. Degussa and one of its subsidiaries controversially supplied materials for Berlin's Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe, which was completed in 2004. Up until around 2015, a fumigation product similar to Zyklon B was in production by Lu\u010debn\u00ed z\u00e1vody Draslovka of the Czech Republic, under the trade name Uragan D2. \"Uragan\" means \"hurricane\" or \"cyclone\" in Czech.\nSubsequent use of the word \"Zyklon\" in trade names has prompted angry reactions in English-speaking countries. The name \"Zyklon\" on portable roller coasters made since 1965 by Pinfari provoked protests among Jewish groups in the U.S. in 1993 and 1999. In 2002, British sportswear and football equipment supplier Umbro issued an apology and stopped using the name \"Zyklon\", which had appeared since 1999 on the box for one of its trainers, after receiving complaints from the Simon Wiesenthal Center and the Beth Shalom Holocaust Centre. Also in 2002, Siemens withdrew its application for an American trademark of the word \"Zyklon\", which their subsidiary BSH Bosch und Siemens Hausger\u00e4te had proposed to use for a new line of home appliances in the United States. (The firm was already using the name in Germany for one of their vacuum cleaners.) Protests were lodged by the Simon Wiesenthal Center after the trademark application was reported to BBC News Online by one of their readers. French company IPC's product names used \"Cyclone\" for degreasers and suffix \"B\" for biodegradable: \"Cyclone B\" was renamed (\"green cap\") in 2013 after protests from Jewish groups. A rabbi said the name was \"horrible ignorance at best, and a Guinness record in evil and cynicism if the company did know the history of the name of its product.\"\nHolocaust deniers claim that Zyklon B gas was not used in the gas chambers, relying for evidence on the discredited research of Fred A. Leuchter, who found low levels of Prussian blue in samples of the gas chamber walls and ceilings. Leuchter attributed its presence to the general delousing of the buildings. Leuchter's negative control, a sample of gasket material taken from a different camp building, had no cyanide residue. In 1999, James Roth, the chemist who had analyzed Leuchter's samples, stated that the test was flawed because the material that was sent for testing included large chunks, and the chemical would only be within 10 microns of the surface. The surface that had been exposed to the chemical was not identified, and the large size of the specimens meant that any chemical present was diluted by an undeterminable amount. In 1994, the Institute for Forensic Research in Krak\u00f3w re-examined Leuchter's claim, stating that formation of Prussian blue by exposure of bricks to cyanide is not a highly probable reaction. Using microdiffusion techniques, they tested 22 samples from the gas chambers and delousing chambers (as positive controls) and living quarters (as negative controls). They found cyanide residue in both the delousing chambers and the gas chambers, but none in the living quarters.\nReferences.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71307", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71307", "title": "Me and a Gun", "text": "1991 single by Tori Amos\n\"Me and a Gun\" is a song by American singer-songwriter and musician Tori Amos. It was released as the first single from her debut studio album \"Little Earthquakes\" and is her debut single under the name Tori Amos. It was released on October 21, 1991 by Atlantic Records in North America and EastWest Records in the UK.\nBackground.\nThe song is three minutes and 44 seconds long. Amos wrote the song about being raped in Los Angeles when she was 21. After she performed at a bar, a patron asked her if he could have a ride home. She obliged, and he raped her at knifepoint. Years later, in London, she saw the film \"Thelma &amp; Louise\" and was stirred.\nAmos discussed the attack in a 1994 interview:\n\"I'll never talk about it at this level again but let me ask you. Why have I survived that kind of night, when other women didn't?\nHow am I alive to tell you this tale when he was ready to slice me up? In the song I say it was 'Me and a Gun' but it wasn't a gun. It was a knife he had. And the idea was to take me to his friends and cut me up, and he kept telling me that, for hours. And if he hadn't needed more drugs I would have been just one more news report, where you see the parents grieving for their daughter.\nAnd I was singing hymns, as I say in the song, because he told me to. I sang to stay alive. Yet I survived that torture, which left me urinating all over myself and left me paralyzed for years. That's what that night was all about, mutilation, more than violation through sex.\nI really do feel as though I was psychologically mutilated that night and that now I'm trying to put the pieces back together again. Through love, not hatred. And through my music. My strength has been to open again, to life, and my victory is the fact that, despite it all, I kept alive my vulnerability.\"\nWhen released as a single, the track was not the A-side: \"Silent All These Years,\" another song from \"Little Earthquakes\", was the first track, with \"Me and a Gun\" appearing third (or as the B-side on the 7\" release). \"Silent All These Years\" was a more accessible song, and radio stations began to play that instead. Ultimately the single was re-released with nearly identical packaging but retitled as \"Silent All These Years.\"\nAmos made a habit of singing this song during live appearances. In 1994, the DC Rape Crisis Center awarded her a Visionary award for the song and the co-creation of RAINN. Amos stopped singing the song live in December 2001 and did not sing it live again until September 2007 (with the exception of one performance in Istanbul in August 2005).\nEffect on rape myths.\nThe lyrics of \"Me and a Gun\" address the rape myth where some people believe that a woman who dresses in revealing clothes is somehow responsible for her rape. Amos acknowledges wearing a revealing red top and challenges her rapist with the question of whether this made him think she deserved to be raped. A survey of thousands of Amos listeners revealed that only about 6% of the Amos listeners believed this myth as compared to 26% of the general population. This was the rape myth most rejected by Amos listeners, but the survey went on to analyze the attitudes of Amos listeners to other rape myths as well. All rape myths were rejected more strongly\u2014to varying degrees\u2014by Amos listeners than by the general population.\nTrack listing.\nTracks 1 &amp; 3 are from the album. Track 2 also appeared on the single for \"Winter\". Track 4 was otherwise unavailable until it was remastered and released on the deluxe reissue of Little Earthquakes in 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71310", "revid": "45417033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71310", "title": "Cocoon", "text": "Cocoon may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "71318", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71318", "title": "100-year flood", "text": "Indication of the likelihood of a flooding\nA 100-year flood, also called a 1% flood, or High Probability in the UK, is a flood event for a defined location at a level reached or exceeded once per hundred years, on average, but as there are many locations there are multiple independent 100-year floods within the same year. In the US, it is estimated on past records as having a 1 in 100 chance (1% probability) of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.\nThe estimated boundaries of inundation in a 100-year or 1% flood are marked on flood maps.\nUK planning guidance defines Flood Zone 3a \"High Probability\" as Land having a 1% or greater annual probability of river flooding; or Land having a 0.5% or greater annual probability of sea.\nMaps, elevations and flow rates.\nFor coastal flooding and lake flooding, a 100-year flood is generally expressed as a water level elevation or depth, and includes a combination of tide, storm surge, and waves. \nFor river systems, a 100-year flood can be expressed as a flow rate, from which the flood elevation is derived. The resulting area of inundation is referred to as the \"100-year floodplain\". Estimates of the 100-year flood flow rate and other streamflow statistics for any stream in the United States are available. \nA 100-year storm may or may not cause a 100-year flood, because of rainfall timing and location variations among different drainage basins, and independent causes of floods, such as snow melt and ice dams.\nIn the UK, the Environment Agency publishes a comprehensive map of all areas at risk of a 100-year flood. In the US, the Federal Emergency Management Agency publishes maps of the 100-year and 500-year floodplains.\nMaps of the riverine or coastal 100-year floodplain may figure importantly in building permits, environmental regulations, and flood insurance. These analyses generally represent 20th-century climate and may underestimate the effects of climate change.\nRisk.\nA common misunderstanding is that a 100-year flood happens once in a 100-year period. On average one happens per 100 years, five per 500 years, ten per thousand years. Any average hides variations. In any particular 100 years at one spot, there is a 37% chance that no 100-year flood happens, 37% chance that exactly one happens, and 26% chance that two or more happen. On the Danube River at Passau, Germany, the actual intervals between 100-year floods during 1501 to 2013 ranged from 37 to 192 years. \nA related misunderstanding is that floods bigger than 100-year floods are too rare to be of concern. The 1% chance per year accumulates to 10% chance per decade, 26% chance during a 30-year mortgage, and 55% chance during an 80-year human lifetime. It is common to refer to 100-year floods as floods with 1% chance per year. It is equally true to refer to them as floods with 10% chance per decade.\nOver a large diverse area, such as a large country or the world, in an average year 1% of watersheds have 100-year floods or bigger, and 0.1% of watersheds have 1,000-year floods or bigger. There are more in wet years, fewer in dry years. Of 1.6 million kilometers of coastline in the world, \nin an average year 1,600 kilometers have 1,000-year floods or bigger, more in stormy years, fewer in calmer years.\nThe US flood insurance program, starting in the 1960s, chose to foster rules in, and insure buildings in, 100-year floodplains, as \"a fair balance between protecting the public and overly stringent regulation.\" \nAfter the North Sea flood of 1953, the United Kingdom mapped 1,000-year floods and the Netherlands raised its flood defenses to protect against up to 10,000 year floods. \nIn 2017 the Netherlands designed some areas against million-year floods.\nThe American Society of Civil Engineers recommends designing some structures for up to 1,000-year floods,\nwhile it recommends designing for up to 3,000-year winds.\nPer century, any one area has a 63% chance of a 100-year flood or worse, 10% chance of a 1,000-year flood, 1% chance of a 10,000-year flood, and 0.01% chance of a million-year flood.\nAs David van Dantzig, working on the government response to the 1953 flood, said, \"One will surely be willing to spend a multiple of the amount that would be lost by a flood if the flood can thereby be prevented.\"\nFlood insurance.\nIn the United States, the 100-year flood provides the risk basis for flood insurance rates. A \"regulatory flood\" or \"base flood\" is routinely established for river reaches through a science-based rule-making process targeted to a 100-year flood at the historical average recurrence interval. In addition to historical flood data, the process accounts for previously established regulatory values, the effects of flood-control reservoirs, and changes in land use in the watershed. Coastal flood hazards have been mapped by a similar approach that includes the relevant physical processes. Most areas where serious floods can occur in the United States have been mapped consistently in this manner. On average nationwide, those 100-year flood estimates are sufficient for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and offer reasonable estimates of future flood risk, if the future is like the past. Approximately 3% of the U.S. population lives in areas subject to the 1% annual chance coastal flood hazard.\nIn theory, removing homes and businesses from areas that flood repeatedly can protect people and reduce insurance losses, but in practice it is difficult for people to retreat from established neighborhoods.\nProbability.\nThe probability \"Pe\" that one or more floods occurring during any period will exceed a given flood threshold can be expressed, using the binomial distribution, as\nformula_1\nwhere \"T\" is the threshold mean recurrence interval (e.g. 100-yr, 50-yr, 25-yr, and so forth), greater than 1. If T is in years, then \"n\" is the number of years in the period, and Pe is the chance per year, Annual Exceedance Probability.\nThe formula can be understood as:\nThe probability of exceedance \"Pe\" is also described as the natural, inherent, or hydrologic risk of failure. However, the expected value of the number of 100-year floods occurring in any 100-year period is 1.\nTen-year floods have a 10% chance of occurring in any given year (Pe =0.10); 500-year floods have a 0.2% chance of occurring in any given year (Pe =0.002); etc. The percent chance of a T-year flood occurring in a single year is 100/T, where T is bigger than 1. \nThe same formula above can give the chance of occurrence in less than a year. A 1-year flood is a 12-month flood, with a 1/12 chance each month, and the formula in months shows 65% chance each year.\nThe field of extreme value theory was created to model rare events such as 100-year floods for the purposes of civil engineering. This theory is most commonly applied to the maximum or minimum observed stream flows of a given river. In desert areas where there are only ephemeral washes, this method is applied to the maximum observed flow over a given period of time (24-hours, 6-hours, or 3-hours). The extreme value analysis only considers the most extreme event observed in a given year. So, between the large spring runoff and a heavy summer rain storm, whichever resulted in more runoff would be considered the extreme event, while the smaller event would be ignored in the analysis (even though both may have been capable of causing terrible flooding in their own right).\nStatistical assumptions.\nThere are a number of assumptions that are made to complete the analysis that determines the 100-year flood. First, the extreme events observed in each year must be independent from year to year. In other words, the maximum river flow rate from 1984 cannot be found to be significantly correlated with the observed flow rate in 1985, which cannot be correlated with 1986, and so forth. The second assumption is that the observed extreme events must come from the same probability density function. The third assumption is that the probability distribution relates to the largest storm (rainfall or river flow rate measurement) that occurs in any one year. The fourth assumption is that the probability distribution function is stationary, meaning that the mean (average), standard deviation and maximum and minimum values are not increasing or decreasing over time. This concept is referred to as stationarity.\nThe first assumption is often but not always valid and should be tested on a case-by-case basis. The second assumption is often valid if the extreme events are observed under similar climate conditions. For example, if the extreme events on record all come from late summer thunderstorms (as is the case in the southwest U.S.), or from snow pack melting (as is the case in north-central U.S.), then this assumption should be valid. If, however, there are some extreme events taken from thunder storms, others from snow pack melting, and others from hurricanes, then this assumption is most likely not valid. The third assumption is only a problem when trying to forecast a low, but maximum flow event (for example, an event smaller than a 2-year flood). Since this is not typically a goal in extreme analysis, or in civil engineering design, then the situation rarely presents itself.\nThe final assumption about stationarity is difficult to test from data for a single site because of the large uncertainties in even the longest flood records (see next section). More broadly, substantial evidence of climate change strongly suggests that the probability distribution is also changing and that managing flood risks in the future will become even more difficult. The simplest implication of this is that most of the historical data represent 20th-century climate and might not be valid for extreme event analysis in the 21st century.\nProbability uncertainty.\nWhen these assumptions are violated, there is an \"unknown\" amount of uncertainty introduced into the reported value of what the 100-year flood means in terms of rainfall intensity, or flood depth. When all of the inputs are known, the uncertainty can be measured in the form of a confidence interval. For example, one might say there is a 95% chance that the 100-year flood is greater than X, but less than Y.\nDirect statistical analysis to estimate the 100-year riverine flood is possible only at the relatively few locations where an annual series of maximum instantaneous flood discharges has been recorded. In the United States as of 2014, taxpayers have supported such records for at least 60 years at fewer than 2,600 locations, for at least 90 years at fewer than 500, and for at least 120 years at only 11. For comparison, the total area of the nation is about , so there are perhaps 3,000 stream reaches that drain watersheds of and 300,000 reaches that drain . In urban areas, 100-year flood estimates are needed for watersheds as small as . For reaches without sufficient data for direct analysis, 100-year flood estimates are derived from indirect statistical analysis of flood records at other locations in a hydrologically similar region or from other hydrologic models. Similarly for coastal floods, tide gauge data exist for only about 1,450 sites worldwide, of which only about 950 added information to the global data center between January 2010 and March 2016.\nMuch longer records of flood elevations exist at a few locations around the world, such as the Danube River at Passau, Germany, but they must be evaluated carefully for accuracy and completeness before any statistical interpretation.\nFor an individual stream reach, the uncertainties in any analysis can be large, so 100-year flood estimates have large individual uncertainties for most stream reaches. For the largest recorded flood at any specific location, or any potentially larger event, the recurrence interval always is poorly known. Spatial variability adds more uncertainty, because a flood peak observed at different locations on the same stream during the same event commonly represents a different recurrence interval at each location. If an extreme storm drops enough rain on one branch of a river to cause a 100-year flood, but no rain falls over another branch, the flood wave downstream from their junction might have a recurrence interval of only 10 years. Conversely, a storm that produces a 25-year flood simultaneously in each branch might form a 100-year flood downstream. During a time of flooding, news accounts necessarily simplify the story by reporting the greatest damage and largest recurrence interval estimated at any location. The public can easily and incorrectly conclude that the recurrence interval applies to all stream reaches in the flood area.\nObserved intervals between floods.\nPeak elevations of 14 floods as early as 1501 on the Danube River at Passau, Germany, reveal great variability in the actual intervals between floods. Flood events greater than the 50-year flood occurred at intervals of 4 to 192 years since 1501, and the 50-year flood of 2002 was followed only 11 years later by a 500-year flood. Only half of the intervals between 50- and 100-year floods were within 50 percent of the nominal average interval. Similarly, the intervals between 5-year floods during 1955 to 2007 ranged from 5 months to 16 years, and only half were within 2.5 to 7.5 years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71320", "revid": "16868722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71320", "title": "Entrenched river", "text": "Stream that cuts a narrow gorge deep into the land below\nAn entrenched river, or entrenched stream is a river or stream that flows in a narrow trench or valley cut into a plain or relatively level upland. Because of lateral erosion streams flowing over gentle slopes over a time develops meandering (snake like pattern) course. Meanders form where gradient is very gentle, for example in floodplains and deltas. Meandering is a feature of the middle and final course of the river, but very deep and wide meanders can also be found cutting hard rocks. Such meanders are called incised or entrenched meanders. The exception is entrenched meanders that are formed during the upliftment of land where a river is young. They widen and deepen over time and can be found as deep gorges or canyons in hard rock. \nIn the case of an entrenched stream or river, it is often presumed that the watercourse has inherited its course by cutting down into bedrock from a pre-existing plain with little modification of the original course. The down-cutting of the river system could be the result not only of tectonic uplift but also of other factors such as river piracy, decrease of load, increase of runoff, extension of the drainage basin, or change in base level such as a fall in sea level. General, non-generic terminology for either a river or stream that flows in a narrow trench or valley, for which evidence of a preexisting plain or relatively level upland can be either absent or present is either valley meander or meander valley with the latter term being preferred in literature.\nThe meanders that form part of either an entrenched river or meander valley are most commonly known as incised meanders. They are commonly classified as either an ingrown meander or an entrenched meander. For a long time, it was argued that ingrown meander occurs when the downcutting process is slow and the river can cause lateral erosion, leading to an asymmetric valley. In addition, it was also argued for a long time that an entrenched meander forms when there is a rapid incision of the river bed such that the river does not have the opportunity to erode the lateral side. This leads to symmetrical valleys with a gorge-like appearance. However, more detailed studies have shown the development of ingrown meanders versus entrenched meanders depends on a complex mixture of factors such as bedrock lithology, tectonic activity, and climate.\nCauses.\nAs observed above, an entrenched river can be caused by either tectonic uplift in the area or when the lowering of the sea level occurs. It can also be caused by increased level of downcutting or a collapse of moraine-dammed lake downstream, or capture of the river by another river. Moreover, the process of river rejuvenation can also be the cause of river entrenchment, especially when the process has occurred due to tectonic uplift. River rejuvenation increases the power of the flowing water and, therefore, the process of erosion is accelerated.\nStudies show that tectonic movement, particularly movement associated with uplift, can influence spatial patterns of erosion and sedimentation. Although it is very difficult to offer detailed information of past tectonic activity, the basic temporal and spatial scale can show evidence of how this movement leads to the formation of an entrenched river. Various authors have used an entrenched river as evidence of tectonic movement in the past, and in this way they have proven the significant role of tectonic uplifts in the formation of an entrenched river.\nSeveral studies have cited incised meander a major feature of river entrenchment, as an impact of river rejuvenation. On the other hand, scholars argue that incised meanders and entrenched meanders are features formed before river rejuvenation. Incised meanders occur at the base of the river and they occur when the river base level has reduced, thus giving the river enough power for vertical erosion to take place. Some studies also indicate that anthropogenic factors such as clearing of vegetation, development of dams, and reservoir and urbanization are also causes of river entrenchment. For example, gravel mining along the Russian River developed the Middle Reach pit, which in turn led to the creation of the entrenched river. According to Posamentier, in the 1950s and 1980s, the Russian River had gravel pits and dry creek. However, over time the river has become entrenched due to mining (p.\u00a01777).\nUrbanization and clearing of vegetation increase runoff water, which in turn increases water volume, especially during rainy seasons. Therefore, the increased level of vertical erosion of the river increases the power of the water, leading to erosion of the river. A study of San Pedro River and another river in the southwest have indicated that floods were the main cause of river entrenchment in the 18th century. The study shows that increased population and human activities in these places increased floods and, consequently, the volume of runoff water (Hereford 43).\nConsequences.\nRosgen indicates that the consequences of incised meander are associated with accelerated stream bank erosion, land loss, aquatic habitat loss, as well as lowering the water table. Additionally, the study also found that incised meanders also cause loss of land productivity and downstream sedimentation (p.\u00a02). The factors are likely to affect not only the economic development on the land where it passes but it is also very costly when restoration is to be initiated. River entrenchment happens because of the water having the power to cause erosion on the river bed. This increased velocity has shown a negative effect on the riparian habitat, because of increased erosion of the area. For example, a study by Simon revealed that channel incision is a major characteristic of entrenched rivers, and it affects variables in riparian vegetation and growth of fish in the areas (p.\u00a0528). Lowering of the channels means that the ground water level has also reduced. Specifically, the development of the entrenched river reduces the amount of ground water due to water loss through infiltration. The movement of the base level changes tributaries and the entrenchment of a tributary channel. Studies of various rivers have revealed that the process of river entrenchment has been associated with adjustment of river positions through bank erosion, as well as widening.\nRiver restoration.\nRiver entrenchment causes negative impacts, such as accelerated stream bank erosion, land loss, loss of aquatic habitat, loss of land productivity, lowering of water table and sedimentation of the river downstream. However, in order to offset these problems, channel restoration measures focusing on restoration of the river in its original or to its previous characteristics are available. Though to achieve good results, a good understanding of the river patterns and profile of stable channels is a critical requirement. The process also needs an elaborate procedure to be followed to ensure all important factors and actions are followed. Numerous projects across the globe involving river restoration have been conducted, and a good example of such projects is Maggie Creek, Nevada. The project was completed in 1990 on upper Maggie Creek in Nevada. It was a partnership between the government and a private ranch, and the project entailed straightening of many miles of unstable gravel bed regarded as the C4/D4 type.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71322", "revid": "64853", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71322", "title": "Ron Turcotte", "text": "Canadian thoroughbred jockey (1941\u20132025)\nRonald Joseph Morel Turcotte (July 22, 1941 \u2013 August 22, 2025) was a Canadian thoroughbred race horse jockey best known as the rider of Secretariat, winner of the U.S. Triple Crown in 1973.\nEarly life.\nRon Turcotte was born on July 22, 1941, in Drummond, New Brunswick. His father was a lumberjack, and his family spoke French. Turcotte dropped out of school at 14 to work with his father, but due to his small stature, he was tasked with managing the horses.\nCareer.\nTurcotte began his career in Toronto as a hot walker for E. P. Taylor's Windfields Farm in 1960, but he was soon wearing the silks and winning races. As an apprentice jockey, he rode Windfields's Northern Dancer to his first victory. He gained prominence with his victory aboard Tom Rolfe in the 1965 Preakness Stakes.\nTurcotte soon started working with Canadian trainer Lucien Laurin at the racetrack in Laurel, Maryland.\nIn 1972, he rode Riva Ridge to victory in the Kentucky Derby and the Belmont Stakes.\nTurcotte became internationally famous in 1973 when he rode Secretariat to win the first Triple Crown in 25 years, with records in each race and Secretariat's phenomenal finish 31 lengths ahead of the field in the Belmont. A photograph of Secretariat winning the Belmont, with Turcotte looking over his shoulder at the pack far behind, became famous. Turcotte was North America's leading stakes-winning jockey in 1972 and 1973. He was the first jockey to win back-to-back Kentucky Derbies since Jimmy Winkfield in 1902 and the first jockey ever to have won five of six consecutive Triple Crown races (matched in 2015 by Victor Espinoza).\nHe was voted the prestigious George Woolf Memorial Jockey Award, which honors a rider whose career and personal conduct exemplifies the very best of participants in the sport of thoroughbred racing. He was the first person from Thoroughbred racing ever to be appointed a member of the Order of Canada.\nTurcotte's career ended on July 13, 1978, when he fell from his horse, Flag of Leyte Gulf, during the 8th race at Belmont Park. He suffered injuries that rendered him a paraplegic.\nHe was inducted into the National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame in 1979. He was voted into the New Brunswick Sports Hall of Fame and in 1980 was inducted into Canada's Sports Hall of Fame. In 1984 he became the first recipient of the Avelino Gomez Memorial Award, given annually to the jockey who is Canadian-born, Canadian-raised, or a regular in the country who has made significant contributions to the sport.\nIn 2015, a statue of Secretariat and Turcotte crossing the finish line at the Belmont Stakes was unveiled in Turcotte's hometown of Grand Falls, New Brunswick.\nPersonal life and death.\nBorn in Drummond, New Brunswick, Turcotte was one of 12 children. He left school at age 14 to work with his father as a lumberjack, then at age 18 headed to Toronto looking for construction work.\nTurcotte lived in his home town of Grand Falls, New Brunswick, Canada, with his wife Ga\u00ebtane and their four daughters. He was an advocate for those with disabilities and helped to raise funds for disability programs.\nAs a well-known survivor of an on-track accident, Turcotte made appearances at racetracks to raise funds and awareness of the assistance that the Permanently Disabled Jockeys Fund (PDJF) provides to fellow injured riders.\nTurcotte was hospitalized on March 9, 2015, following a single-vehicle accident in New Brunswick. The van he was driving flipped after hitting a snowbank. Turcotte and a friend were both injured in the accident. Turcotte sustained fractures to both legs, while his friend suffered minor injuries.\nTurcotte died at his home in Drummond, New Brunswick, on August 22, 2025, at the age of 84.\nMedia.\nIn the 2010 Disney movie \"Secretariat\", the role\nof Turcotte as Secretariat's jockey is played by Otto Thorwarth, a real-life jockey himself.\nDirected by Phil Comeau, a National Film Board of Canada documentary feature film on Turcotte's life and career, \"Secretariat's Jockey, Ron Turcotte\", had its world premiere in Louisville, Kentucky, in May 2013.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71324", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71324", "title": "Salt peter", "text": ""}
{"id": "71325", "revid": "21054272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71325", "title": "Lindisfarne Gospels", "text": "8th-century illuminated manuscript\nThe Lindisfarne Gospels (London, British Library Cotton MS Nero D.IV) is an illuminated manuscript gospel book probably produced around the years 715\u2013720 in the monastery at Lindisfarne, off the coast of Northumberland, which is now in the British Library in London. The manuscript is considered one of the finest works in the unique style of Hiberno-Saxon or Insular art, combining Mediterranean, Anglo-Saxon and Celtic elements.\nThe Lindisfarne Gospels are presumed to be the work of a monk named Eadfrith, who became Bishop of Lindisfarne in 698 and died in 721. Current scholarship indicates a date around 715, and it is believed they were produced in honour of St. Cuthbert. However, some parts of the manuscript were left unfinished so it is likely that Eadfrith was still working on it when he died. It is also possible that he produced them prior to 698, in order to commemorate the elevation of Cuthbert's relics in that year, which is also thought to have been the occasion for which the St Cuthbert Gospel (also in the British Library) was produced. The Gospels are richly illustrated in the insular style and were originally encased in a fine leather treasure binding covered with jewels and metals made by Billfrith the Anchorite in the 8th century. During the Viking raids on Lindisfarne this jewelled cover was lost and a replacement was made in 1852. The text is written in insular script, and is the best documented and most complete insular manuscript of the period.\nAn Old English translation of the Gospels was made in the 10th century: a word-for-word gloss of the Latin Vulgate text, inserted between the lines by Aldred, Provost of Chester-le-Street. This is the oldest extant translation of the Gospels into the English language. The Gospels may have been taken from Durham Cathedral during the Dissolution of the Monasteries ordered by Henry VIII and were acquired in the early 17th century by Sir Robert Cotton from Robert Bowyer, Clerk of the Parliaments. Cotton's library came to the British Museum in the 18th century and went to the British Library in London when this was separated from the British Museum.\nHistory.\nLindisfarne, also known as \"Holy Island\", is located off the coast of Northumberland in northern England (Chilvers 2004). In around 635 AD, the Irish missionary Aidan founded the Lindisfarne monastery on \"a small outcrop of the land\" on Lindisfarne. King Oswald of Northumbria sent Aidan from Iona to preach to and baptise the pagan Anglo-Saxons, following the conversion to Christianity of the Northumbrian monarchy in 627. By the time of Aidan's death in 651, the Christian faith was becoming well-established in the area. The Lindisfarne gospel book is associated with the Cult of St. Cuthbert. Cuthbert was an ascetic member of a monastic community in Lindisfarne, before his death in 687. The book was made as part of the preparations to translate Cuthbert's relics to a shrine in 698. Lindisfarne has a reputation as the probable place of genesis according to the Lindisfarne Gospels. Around 705 an anonymous monk of Lindisfarne wrote the \"Life of St Cuthbert\". His bishop, Eadfrith, swiftly commissioned the most famous scholar of the age, Bede, to help shape the cult to a new purpose.\nIn the 10th century, about 250 years after the production of the book, Aldred, a priest of the monastery at Chester-le-Street, added an Old English translation between the lines of the Latin text. In his colophon he recorded the names of the four men who produced the Lindisfarne Gospels: Eadfrith, Bishop of Lindisfarne, was credited with writing the manuscript; Ethelwald, Bishop of the Lindisfarne islanders, was credited with binding it; Billfrith, an anchorite, was credited with ornamenting the manuscript; and finally, Aldred lists himself as the person who glossed it in Anglo-Saxon (Old English).\nSome scholars have argued that Eadfrith and Ethelwald did not produce the manuscript but commissioned someone else to do so. However, Janet Backhouse argues for the validity of the statement by pointing out that \"there is no reason to doubt [Aldred's] statement\" because he was \"recording a well-established tradition\". Eadfrith and Ethelwald were both bishops at the monastery of Lindisfarne where the manuscript was produced. As Alan Thacker notes, the Lindisfarne Gospels are \"undoubtedly the work of a single hand\", and Eadfrith remains regarded as \"the scribe and painter of the Lindisfarne Gospels\".\nCommission.\nThe Lindisfarne Gospels is a Christian manuscript, containing the four gospels recounting the life and teachings of Jesus Christ. The manuscript was used for ceremonial purposes to promote and celebrate the Christian religion and the word of God. Because the body of Cuthbert was buried there, Lindisfarne became an important pilgrimage destination in the 7th and 8th centuries, and the Lindisfarne Gospels would have contributed to the cult of St Cuthbert. The gospels used techniques reminiscent of elite metalwork to impress a Northumbrian audience, most of whom could not read, and certainly not understand the Latin text.\nAccording to Aldred's colophon, the Lindisfarne Gospels were made in honour of God and Saint Cuthbert, a Bishop of the Lindisfarne monastery who was becoming \"Northern England's most popular Saint\". Scholars think that the manuscript was written sometime between Cuthbert's death in 687 and Eadfrith's death in 721. There is a significant amount of information known about Cuthbert thanks to two accounts of his life that were written shortly after his death, the first by an anonymous monk from Lindisfarne, and the second by Bede, a famous monk, historian, and theologian.\nCuthbert entered into the monastery of Melrose, now in lowland Scotland but then in Northumbria, in the late 7th century, and after being ordained a priest he began to travel throughout Northumbria, \"rapidly acquiring a reputation for holiness and for the possession of miraculous powers\". The Synod of Whitby in 664 pitted the Hiberno-Celtic church against the Roman church regarding the calculation of the date of Easter. The dispute was adjudged by King Oswiu of Northumbria in favour of the Roman church, but many of the leading monks at Lindisfarne then returned to Iona and Ireland, leaving only a residue of monks affiliated to the Roman church at Lindisfarne. Due to increasingly slack religious practice in Lindisfarne, Cuthbert was sent to Lindisfarne to reform the religious community. In Lindisfarne Cuthbert began to adopt a solitary lifestyle, eventually moving to Inner Farne Island, where he built a hermitage. Cuthbert agreed to become bishop at the request of King Ecgfrith in 684, but within about two years he returned to his hermitage in Farne as he felt death approaching. Cuthbert died on 20 March 687 and was buried in Lindisfarne. As a venerated saint, his tomb attracted many pilgrims to Lindisfarne.\nTechniques.\nThe Lindisfarne Gospels manuscript was produced in a scriptorium in the monastery of Lindisfarne. It took approximately 10 years to create. Its pages are vellum, and evidence from the manuscript reveals that the vellum was made using roughly 150 calf skins. The book is 516 pages long. The text is written \"in a dense, dark brown ink, often almost black, which contains particles of carbon from soot or lamp black\". The pens used for the manuscript could have been cut from either quills or reeds, and there is also evidence to suggest that the trace marks (seen under oblique light) were made by an early equivalent of a modern pencil. Lavish jewellery, now lost, was added to the binding of the manuscript later in the 8th century. Eadfrith manufactured 90 of his own colours with \"only six local minerals and vegetable extracts\".\nThere is a huge range of individual pigments used in the manuscript. The colours are derived from animal, vegetable and mineral sources. Gold is used in only a couple of small details. While some colours were obtained from local sources, others were imported from the Mediterranean. The blue was long thought to be ultramarine from Afghanistan, but analysis with Raman microscopy in the 2000s revealed it to be indigo. The medium used to bind the colours was primarily egg white, with fish glue perhaps used in a few places. Backhouse emphasizes that \"all Eadfrith's colours are applied with great skill and accuracy, but ... we have no means of knowing exactly what implements he used\". \nProfessor Brown added that Eadfrith \"knew about lapis lazuli [a semi-precious stone with a blue tint] from the Himalayas but could not get hold of it, so made his own [substitute]\".\nThe pages were arranged into gatherings of eight. Once the sheets had been folded together, the highest-numbered page was carefully marked out by pricking with a stylus or a small knife. Holes were pricked through each gathering of eight leaves, and then individual pages were separately ruled for writing with a sharp, dry, and discrete point.\nThe Lindisfarne Gospels are impeccably designed, and as Backhouse points out, vellum would have been too expensive for \"practice runs\" for the pages, and so preliminary designs may have been done on wax tablets (hollowed-out wood or bone with a layer of wax). These would have been an inexpensive medium for a first draft; once a sketch had been transferred to the manuscript, the wax could be remelted and a new design or outline inscribed.\nHistory.\nAs a result of Viking raids, the monastic community left Lindisfarne around 875, taking with them Cuthbert's body, relics, and books, including the Lindisfarne Gospels and the St Cuthbert Gospel. It is estimated that after around seven years the Lindisfarne community settled in the Priory at Chester-le-Street in Durham, where they stayed until 995 (and where Aldred would have done his interlinear translation of the text). After Henry VIII ordered the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1539, the manuscript was separated from the priory. In the early 17th century the Gospels were owned by Sir Robert Cotton (1571\u20131631), and in 1753 they became part of the founding collections of the British Museum.\nCondition.\nThe Lindisfarne Gospels are in remarkable condition and the text is complete and undamaged. However, the original binding of the manuscript was destroyed. In March 1852 a new binding was commissioned by bishop Edward Maltby; Smith, Nicholson and Co. (silversmiths) made the binding with the intention of recreating motifs in Eadfrith's work.\nFormal and stylistic elements of the manuscript.\nIn \"The Illuminated Manuscript\", Backhouse states that \"The Lindisfarne Gospels is one of the first and greatest masterpieces of medieval European book painting\". The Lindisfarne Gospels is described as Insular or Hiberno-Saxon art, a general term for manuscripts produced in the British Isles between 500 and 900 AD.\nAs a part of Anglo-Saxon art the manuscript reveals a love of riddles and surprise, shown through the pattern and interlace in the meticulously designed pages. Many of the patterns used for the Lindisfarne Gospels date back before the Christian period. There is a strong presence of Celtic, Germanic, and Irish art styles. The spiral style and \"knot work\" evident in the formation of the designed pages are influenced by Celtic art.\nOne of the most characteristic styles in the manuscript is the zoomorphic style (adopted from Germanic art) and is revealed through the extensive use of interlaced animal and bird patterns throughout the book. The birds that appear in the manuscript may also have been from Eadfrith's own observations of wildlife in Lindisfarne. The geometric design motifs are also Germanic influence, and appear throughout the manuscript.\nThe carpet pages (pages of pure decoration) exemplify Eadfrith's use of geometrical ornamentation. Another notable aspect of the Gospels is the tiny drops of red lead, which create backgrounds, outlines, and patterns, but never appear on the carpet pages. The red dots appear in early Irish manuscripts, revealing their influence in the design of the Lindisfarne Gospels. Thacker points out that Eadfrith acquired knowledge from, and was influenced by, other artistic styles, showing that he had \"eclectic taste\". While there are many non-Christian artistic influences in the manuscript, the patterns were used to produce religious motifs and ideas.\nEadfrith was a highly trained calligrapher and he used insular majuscule script in the manuscript.\nInsular context.\nThe Lindisfarne Gospels are not an example of \"isolated genius... in an otherwise dark age\": there were other Gospel books produced in the same time period and geographic area that have similar qualities to the Lindisfarne Gospels. The Lindisfarne monastery not only produced the Lindisfarne gospels, but also the Durham Gospels and Echternach Gospels. These gospel books were credited to \"the 'Durnham-Echternach Calligrapher', thought to be the oldest member of the Lindisfarne Scriptorium\". The Echternach gospels might have been made during the creation of the Lindisfarne Gospels and the Durham Gospels came after, but in an old-fashioned style. The Lichfield Gospels (Lichfield Cathedral, Chapter Library) employ a very similar style to the Lindisfarne Gospels, and it is even speculated that the artist was attempting to emulate Eadfrith's work. Surviving pages from the Lichfield Gospels also have a cross-carpet page and animal and bird interlace, but the designs do not achieve the same perfection, and are seen as looser and heavier than Eadfrith's.\nThe design of the Lindisfarne Gospels has also been related to the Tara Brooch (National Museum of Ireland, Dublin), displaying animal interlace, curvilinear patterns, and borders of bird interlace, but unfortunately the origin of the brooch is unknown. The Durham Gospels (Durham Cathedral Library) are suspected as having been created slightly earlier than the Lindisfarne Gospels, and while they have the bird interlace, the birds are less natural and real than Eadfrith's birds in the Lindisfarne Gospels. The Book of Durrow (Trinity College, Dublin) is also thought of as an earlier insular manuscript, as the style of the manuscript is simpler and less developed than that of the Lindisfarne Gospels. The Book of Kells (Trinity College, Dublin, MS A. I.6 (58)) employs decorative patterns that are similar to other insular art pieces of the period, but is thought to have been produced much later than the Lindisfarne Gospels.\nIconography.\nThe Lindisfarne Gospels is a manuscript that contains the Gospels of the four Evangelists Mark, John, Luke, and Matthew. The Lindisfarne Gospels begins with a carpet page in the form of a cross and a major initial page, introducing the letter of St. Jerome and Pope Damasus I. There are sixteen pages of arcaded canon tables, where parallel passages of the four Evangelists are laid out. A portrait of the appropriate Evangelist, a carpet page and a decorated initial page precedes each Gospel. There is an additional major initial of the Christmas narrative of Matthew.\nThe Evangelists.\nBede explains how each of the four Evangelists was represented by his own symbol: Matthew was the man, representing the human Christ; Mark was the lion, symbolising the triumphant Christ of the Resurrection; Luke was the calf, symbolising the sacrificial victim of the Crucifixion; and John was the eagle, symbolising Christ's second coming. A collective term for the symbols of the four Evangelists is the Tetramorphs. Each of the four Evangelists is accompanied by his respective symbol in his miniature portrait in the manuscript. In these portraits, Matthew, Mark, and Luke are shown writing, while John looks straight ahead at the reader holding his scroll. The Evangelists also represent the dual nature of Christ. Mark and John are shown as young men, symbolising the divine nature of Christ, and Matthew and Luke appear older and bearded, representing Christ's mortal nature.\nThe decoration of the manuscript.\nA manuscript so richly decorated reveals that the Lindisfarne Gospels not only had a practical ceremonial use but also attempted to symbolize the Word of God in missionary expeditions. Backhouse points out that the clergy was not unaware of the profound impression a book such as the Lindisfarne Gospels made on other congregations. The opening words of the Gospel (the incipits) are highly decorated, revealing Roman capitals, Greek and Germanic letters, filled with interlaced birds and beasts, representing the splendour of God's creation. On one page alone, there are 10,600 decorative red dots. Different kinds of pigment are used throughout the manuscript. Red lead and gold were also used for decoration.\nThe carpet pages.\nEach carpet page contains a different image of a cross (called a cross-carpet page), emphasising the importance of the Christian religion and of ecumenical relationships between churches. The pages of ornamentation have motifs familiar from metalwork and jewellery that pair alongside bird and animal decoration.\nCampaign to relocate.\nA campaign exists to have the gospels housed in the North East of England. Supporters include the Bishop of Durham, Viz creator Simon Donald, and the Northumbrian Association. The move is vigorously opposed by the British Library. Several possible locations have been mooted, including Durham Cathedral, Lindisfarne itself or one of the museums in Newcastle upon Tyne or Sunderland. In 1971 professor Suzanne Kaufman of Rockford, Illinois, presented a facsimile copy of the Gospels to the clergy of the Island.\nExhibitions in the north of England.\nBetween September and 3 December 2022 the manuscript was exhibited in the Laing Art Gallery in Newcastle upon Tyne.\nFrom July to September 2013 the Lindisfarne Gospels were displayed in Palace Green Library, Durham. Nearly 100,000 visitors saw the exhibition. The manuscript exhibition also included items from the Staffordshire Hoard, the Yates Thompson 26 \"Life of Cuthbert\", and the gold Taplow belt buckle. Also included was the closely related St Cuthbert Gospel, which was bought by the British Library in 2012. This returned to Durham in 2014 (1 March to 31 December) for an exhibition of bookbindings at the library. Alongside the Lindisfarne Gospels Exhibition was a festival of more than 500 events, exhibitions and performances across the North East and Cumbria.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71327", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71327", "title": "United Arab Emirates/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "71331", "revid": "526368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71331", "title": "John Backus", "text": "American computer scientist\nJohn Warner Backus (December 3, 1924 \u2013 March 17, 2007) was an American computer scientist. He led the team that invented and implemented FORTRAN, the first widely used high-level programming language, and was the inventor of the Backus\u2013Naur form (BNF), a widely used notation to define syntaxes of formal languages. He also contributed to the design of ALGOL, and later researched the function-level programming paradigm, presenting his findings in his influential 1977 Turing Award lecture \"Can Programming Be Liberated from the von Neumann Style?\"\nThe IEEE awarded Backus the W. W. McDowell Award in 1967 for the development of FORTRAN. He received the National Medal of Science in 1975 and the 1977 Turing Award \"for profound, influential, and lasting contributions to the design of practical high-level programming systems, notably through his work on FORTRAN, and for publication of formal procedures for the specification of programming languages\".\nJohn Backus retired in 1991. He died at his home in Ashland, Oregon on March 17, 2007.\nEarly life.\nBackus was born in Philadelphia and grew up in nearby Wilmington, Delaware. He studied at The Hill School in Pottstown, Pennsylvania, but he was apparently not a diligent student. He entered college at the University of Virginia to study chemistry, but struggled with his classes there, and he was expelled after less than a year for poor attendance. He was subsequently conscripted into the U.S. Army during World War II, and eventually came to hold the rank of corporal, being put in command of an anti-aircraft battery stationed at Fort Stewart, Georgia.\nAfter receiving high scores on a military aptitude test, the Army sent him to study engineering at the University of Pittsburgh. He later transferred to a pre-medical program at Haverford College. During an internship at a hospital, he was diagnosed with a cranial bone tumor, which was successfully removed, and a plate was installed in his head. He then moved to the Flower and Fifth Avenue Medical School for medical school, but found it uninteresting and dropped out after nine months. He soon underwent a second operation to replace the metal plate in his head with one of his own design, and received an honorable medical discharge from the U.S. Army in 1946.\nFortran.\nAfter moving to New York City he trained initially as a radio technician and became interested in mathematics. He graduated from Columbia University with a bachelor's degree in 1949 and a master's degree in 1950, both in mathematics, and joined IBM in 1950. During his first three years, he worked on the Selective Sequence Electronic Calculator (SSEC); his first major project was to write a program to calculate positions of the Moon. In 1953, Backus developed the language Speedcoding, the first high-level language created for an IBM computer, to aid in software development for the IBM 701 computer.\nProgramming was very difficult at this time, and in 1954 Backus assembled a team to define and develop Fortran for the IBM 704 computer. Fortran was the first high-level programming language to be put to broad use. This widely used language made computers practical and accessible machines for scientists and others without requiring them to have deep knowledge of the machinery.\nBackus\u2013Naur form.\nBackus served on the international committees that developed ALGOL 58 and the very influential ALGOL 60, which quickly became the \"de facto\" worldwide standard for publishing algorithms. Backus developed the Backus\u2013Naur form (BNF), published in the UNESCO report on ALGOL 58. It was a formal notation able to describe any context-free programming language, and was important in the development of compilers. A few deviations from this approach were tried (notably in Lisp and APL), but by the 1970s, Backus\u2013Naur context-free specifications for computer languages had become quite standard, following the development of automated compiler generators such as yacc.\nThis contribution helped Backus win the Turing Award in 1977.\nFunction-level programming.\nBackus later worked on a function-level programming language known as FP, which was described in his Turing Award lecture \"Can Programming be Liberated from the von Neumann Style?\". Sometimes viewed as Backus's apology for creating Fortran, this paper did less to garner interest in the FP language than to spark research into functional programming in general. When Backus publicized the function-level style of programming, his message was mostly misunderstood as being the same as traditional functional programming style languages.\nFP was strongly inspired by Kenneth E. Iverson's APL, even using a non-standard character set. An FP interpreter was distributed with the 4.2BSD Unix operating system, but there were relatively few implementations of the language, most of which were used for educational purposes.\nBackus spent the latter part of his career developing FL (from \"Function Level\"), a successor to FP. FL was an internal IBM research project, and development of the language stopped when the project was finished. Only a few papers documenting it remain, and the source code of the compiler described in them was not made public. FL was at odds with functional programming languages being developed in the 1980s, most of which were based on the lambda calculus and static typing systems instead of, as in APL, the concatenation of primitive operations. Many of the language's ideas have now been implemented in versions of the J programming language, Iverson's successor to APL.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71349", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71349", "title": "Grenadier", "text": "Type of infantry soldier, now mostly unused\nA grenadier ( , ; derived from the word \"grenade\") was historically an assault-specialist soldier who threw hand grenades in siege operation battles. The distinct combat function of the grenadier was established in the mid-17th century, when grenadiers were recruited from among the strongest and largest soldiers. By the 18th century, the grenadier dedicated to throwing hand grenades had become a less necessary specialist, yet in battle, the grenadiers were the physically robust soldiers who led vanguard assaults, such as storming fortifications in the course of siege warfare.\nCertain countries such as France (Grenadiers \u00e0 Cheval de la Garde Imp\u00e9riale) and Argentina (Regiment of Mounted Grenadiers) established units of Horse Grenadiers, and for a time the British Army had Horse Grenadier Guards. Like their infantry grenadier counterparts, these horse-mounted soldiers were chosen for their size and strength (heavy cavalry). In modern warfare, a grenadier is a soldier armed with a grenade launcher, either as a standalone weapon or attached to another service weapon.\nOrigins.\nThe concept of troops being equipped with grenades dates back to the military of the Ming dynasty, when Chinese soldiers stationed on the Great Wall used thunder crash bombs. The earliest references to soldiers using grenades in European armies dates back to the early modern era in the Austrian and Spanish armies. References to grenade-throwing troops also appear in England during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, and it was during the reign of King Louis XIV that companies of soldiers serving as grenadiers were first introduced into the French Royal Army. According to Ren\u00e9 Chartrand, Jean Martinet formed a grenadier company in the \"R\u00e9giment du Roi\" in 1667. By 1670 27 French infantry regiments were authorised to include elite companies trained to carry and hurl grenades\nThe infantry of the Dutch States Army, influenced by their French invaders, adopted grenadiers in 1672. By 1678 six men in each company were trained to throw hand grenades, developed by the Dutch master fireworker Johan van Haren.\nIn May 1677, the English Army ordered that two soldiers of every Guards Regiment were to be trained as grenadiers; in April 1678 it was ordered that a company of grenadiers be added to the senior eight regiments of foot of the army. On 29 June of that year the diarist John Evelyn saw them drilling at an encampment at Hounslow, near London:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now were brought into service a new sort of soldier called Grenadiers, who were dexterous in flinging hand grenadoes, every one having a pouch full; they had furred caps with coped crowns like Janizaries, which made them look very fierce, and some had long hoods hanging down behind, as we picture fools. Their clothing being likewise piebald, yellow and red.\nGrenades.\nThe first grenades were small iron spheres filled with gunpowder fused with a length of slow-match, and roughly the size of a tennis ball. The grenadiers had to be tall and strong enough to hurl these heavy objects far enough so as not to harm themselves or their comrades, and disciplined enough to stand at the forefront of the fight, light the fuse and throw at the appropriate moment to minimize the ability of an enemy to throw the grenade back. Understandably, such requirements led to grenadiers being regarded as an elite fighting force.\nEarly distinctions of dress and equipment.\nThe wide hats with broad brims characteristic of infantry during the late 17th century were in some armies discarded and replaced with caps. This was originally to allow the grenadier to sling his musket over his back with greater ease while throwing grenades (initially, only these troops were provided with slings). It has been suggested that a brimless hat also permitted the grenadier greater ease in throwing the grenade overhand. Preben Kannik, former Curator of the Danish Army Museum, however, definitely states that grenades were thrown underhand and that it was the slinging of firearms that required the special headdresses typical of early grenadiers.\nThe grenadiers of the French infantry were by the 1690s distinguished from their musketeer colleagues by special issues of equipment. These included slings for their flintlocks, curved sabres instead of straight swords, large leather pouches for grenades and hatchets.\nBy 1700, grenadiers in the English and other armies had adopted a cap in the shape of a bishop's mitre, usually decorated with the regimental insignia in embroidered cloth. In addition to grenades, they were equipped with Flintlock muskets. Attached to the shoulder belt was a brass 'match case' that housed the slow match used to ignite the grenade fuse, a feature that was retained in later grenadier uniforms.\nElite status in the 18th century.\nGrenade usage declined in the 18th century, a fact that can be attributed to the improved effectiveness of infantry line tactics and flintlock technology. The need for elite assault troops remained, however, and the existing grenadier companies were used for this purpose. As noted, above average physical size had been considered important for the original grenadiers and, in principle, height and strength remained the basis of selection for these picked companies. In the British regiments of foot during the 18th century the preference was, however, to draw on steady veterans for appointment to individual vacancies in a grenadier company (one of the ten companies comprising each regiment). The traditional criterion of size was only resorted to when newly raised regiments required a quick sorting of a mass of new recruits. Prior to the Battle of Culloden in 1745 the Duke of Cumberland ordered that grenadier companies were \"to be completed out of the best men of their respective Regiments, and to be constantly kept so\".\nBy contrast, French grenadier companies of the 18th century appear to have selected their new recruits according to the classic criteria of height. However with the outbreak of the Revolutionary Wars the urgency of mass mobilisation meant that the selection of grenadier and other special sub-units was done according to the preferences of individual officers. \nTransferral to a grenadier company generally meant both enhanced status and an increase in pay.\nWhether for reasons of appearance or reputation, grenadiers tended to be the showpiece troops of their respective armies. In the Spanish Army of the early 19th century, for example, grenadier companies were excused routine duties such as town patrols but were expected to provide guards at the headquarters and residences of senior officers. When a regiment was in line formation the grenadier company always formed on the right flank. In the British Army, when Trooping the Colour, \"The British Grenadiers\" march is played no matter which regiment is on the parade ground, as the colour party stands at the right-hand end of the line, as every regiment formerly had a company of grenadiers at the right of their formation.\nHeadgear.\nAs noted above, grenadiers were distinguished by their headgear from the ordinary musketeers (or \"Hatmen\") in each regiment of foot. While there were some exceptions, the most typical grenadier headdress was either the mitre cap or the bearskin. Both began to appear in various armies during the second half of the 17th century because grenadiers were impeded by the wide brimmed infantry hats of the period when slinging their firearms while throwing grenades.\nThe cloth caps worn by the original grenadiers in European armies during the 17th century were frequently trimmed with fur. This fell out of fashion in many armies until the mid-18th century when grenadiers in the British, Spanish and French armies began wearing high fur-trimmed caps with crowns of coloured cloth and, in some cases, ornamental front plates. This added to the apparent height and impressive appearance of these troops both on the parade ground and the battlefield.\nThe mitre cap, whether in stiffened cloth or metal, had become the distinguishing feature of the grenadier in the armies of Britain, Russia, Prussia and most German states during the late 17th and early 18th centuries. Spanish and Austrian grenadiers favoured high fur hats with long coloured cloth 'hoods' (\"bags\"). The mitre was gradually replaced by bearskin caps in other armies, and by 1914 it only survived in the 1st Foot Guards and the 1st (Emperor Alexander) Guards Grenadiers of the Prussian Imperial Guard, plus the Russian Pavlovsky Guard. Russian grenadiers had worn their brass fronted mitre hats on active service until 1807 and some of these preserved for parade wear by the Pavlovsky Guards until 1914 still had dents or holes from musket balls. Some have survived for display in museums and collections.\nWhile Northern European armies such as Britain, Russia, Sweden, and various German states wore the mitre cap, southern countries such as France, Spain, Austria, Portugal, and various Italian states preferred the bearskin. By 1768, Britain had adopted the bearskin.\nThe shape and appearance of fur caps differed according to period and country. While France used smaller bearskins, Spain preferred towering caps with long flowing bags. Britain initially favoured tall cloth mitres with lacing and braiding, while Russia would sport equally tall leather helmets with brass front-plates. The first grenadier headdresses were fairly low, and in the case of Spain and Austria sometimes contained elements from both mitres and bearskins. Until the mid-18th century, French grenadiers wore tricorne hats, rather than either the mitre or fur cap. Grenadier caps gradually increased in size and decoration, with added devices such as pompoms, cords, badges, front-plates, plumes, and braiding, as well as various national heraldic emblems.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars, both mitres and fur caps fell out of use in favour of the shako. Two notable exceptions were the grenadier companies and Imperial Guard regiments of the French Grande Arm\u00e9e, plus those of the Austrian Army. After the Battle of Friedland in 1807, because of their distinguished performance, Russia's Pavlovsk Regiment were allowed to keep their mitre caps and were admitted to the Imperial Guard.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars, British grenadiers had usually worn the bearskin cap only for full dress when on home service, since the fur was found to deteriorate rapidly during campaigning overseas. Following their role in the defeat of the French Imperial Guard at the Battle of Waterloo, the 1st Foot Guards was renamed the 1st (or Grenadier) Regiment of Foot Guards and all companies of the regiment adopted the bearskin. In 1831, it was ordered that all three Foot Guards should wear the bearskin cap, by then resembling the modern headdress in shape and size. The grenadier companies of line infantry regiments meanwhile retained the bearskin cap for parade dress until it was abolished in 1842. During the Crimean War, the Foot Guard regiments wore their bearskins in the field, the only time the celebrated Guards' headdress was worn in action.\nGrenadier companies.\nFrom the 17th Century to the mid 19th centuries the \"Foot\" or infantry regiments of the British and several other armies comprised ten companies; eight of them \"Battalion\" or \"Centre\" companies, and two \"Flank Companies\" consisting of one Grenadier and one Light or Light Infantry Company. In the United States, an Act of Congress made on 8 May 1792 directed that for every infantry battalion there should be one company of grenadiers, riflemen, or light infantry.\nOn occasion the grenadier and light companies could be \"brigaded\" together into separate grenadier and light infantry battalions for assaults or skirmishing respectively.\nEach of the line infantry regiments of the Austrian Army of this period included a grenadier division of two companies, separate from the fusilier companies that made up the bulk of the unit. The grenadier companies were frequently detached from the parent regiment and grouped into composite grenadier battalions for a particular campaign or purpose.\nThe Russian Imperial Army of the 18th century followed a different line of development. Prior to 1731 grenadiers made up five separate regiments. These were disbanded prior to the outbreak of war with Turkey and picked infantrymen were transferred to one of two grenadier companies incorporated in each (two-battalion) line infantry regiment. In 1753, 2 grenadier companies were added to the infantry regiments and all regiments were ordered to consist of a 3-battalion structure, with 3 grenadier companies of 200 grenadiers in each. In 1756 each of the grenadier companies was brought together in four permanent grenadier regiments. This policy of maintaining a separate corps of grenadiers continued until the Russian Revolution of 1917. The Palace Grenadiers was a ceremonial company selected from distinguished veterans, in existence from 1827 to 1917 with the primary role of guarding the Winter Palace.\nWith the standardisation of training and tactics, the need for separate grenadier companies at regimental level had passed by the mid-19th century and the British, French and Austrian armies phased out these sub-units between 1850 and 1862.\nGrenadier regiments.\nThe term grenadier was retained or adopted by various elite infantry units, including the Prussian Potsdam Grenadiers; the (Grenadiers of Sardinia) in Italy; France's Foot Grenadiers, Fusilier-Grenadiers, Tirailleur-Grenadiers and ; the Russian Empire's Imperial Guard; Britain's Grenadier Guards and the 101st Grenadiers. The latter was part of the British Indian Army and claimed to be the first and oldest grenadier regiment (as opposed to grenadier companies) in the British Empire. In 1747 the grenadier companies of a number of disbanded French infantry regiments were brought together to form a single permanent unit - the .\nDuring the American Revolution of 1775\u20131783, the Connecticut 1st Company Governor's Guards and the 11th Regiment of Connecticut Militia had grenadier companies.\nNew York City also had a Grenadier unit, as did South Carolina \u2013 the elite 1st South Carolina Regiment, raised and commanded by Charles Cotesworth Pinckney.\nIn Mexico Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna created the Grenadier Guards of the Supreme Power on 7 December 1841. The formation remained in service until 1847.\nA Toronto militia unit was renamed the 10th Royal Grenadiers in 1881, then later became the Royal Regiment of Canada.\nGrenadier divisions.\nIn the nineteenth century, France had the Oudinot Grenadier Division and the Russian army had grenadier divisions such as the Caucasus Grenadier Division. During World War II, the Polish army had the 1st Grenadier Division, and the German military had several grenadier and \"panzergrenadier\" divisions.\nWorld War I and beyond.\nIn 1914, the Imperial German and Russian Armies still included a number of grenadier regiments. In the Russian Army, these comprised the Grenadier Guards Regiment (\"L-G Grenadierski Polk\") as well as the Grenadier Corps of sixteen regiments. Finally a reinforced company of distinguished veterans, designated as Palace Grenadiers, was retained for ceremonial purposes, guarding the St. Petersburg Imperial residences and various monuments.\nFive regiments of the Prussian Guard were designated as \"Garde-Grenadiers\" and there were an additional fourteen regiment of grenadiers amongst the line infantry of the German Empire. In both the Russian and German armies, the grenadier regiments were considered as a historic elite; distinguished by features such as plumed helmets in full dress, distinctive facings (yellow for all Russian grenadiers) or special braiding. Their role and training, however, no longer differed from that of the rest of the infantry.\nToday, regiments using the name grenadiers are effectively indistinguishable from other infantry, especially when hand grenades, RPGs, and other types of explosive arms have become standard-issue weaponry; however, such regiments retain at least the tradition of their elite past. Grenadier can also refer to soldiers using grenade launchers, including those mounted on rifles. During World War I a proposal to designate specialist grenade launching units in the British Army as grenadiers was vetoed by the Grenadier Guards, who considered that they now had exclusive rights to the ancient distinction, and the term \"bomber\" was substituted.\nDuring World War I, German troops referred to as assault pioneers, who were early combat engineers or sappers and stormtroopers began using two types of hand grenades in trench warfare operations against the French to clear opposing trenches of troops. The more effective of the two was the so-called \"potato masher\" \"Stielhandgranate\", which were stick grenades.\nThe term \"Panzergrenadier\" was adopted in the German \"Wehrmacht\" to describe mechanized heavy infantry elements whose greater protection and mobility allowed them to keep pace with (and provide intimate protection to) armoured units and formations. This designation reflects the traditional role of grenadiers as shock troops. The term in today's \"Bundeswehr\" refer to mechanized infantry.\nWhen parachute units were first created in the United States Army, the Air Corps desired them to be under their control and to be designated \"air grenadiers\".\nThe last known unit to serve as grenadiers, and employing grenades as their weapons, was a special \"Grenadier brigade\" formed by the Red Army within the 4th Army during the Tikhvin defensive operation in October 1941. It was a measure taken because of lack of firearms, and the commander of the brigade was appropriately General Major G.T. Timofeyev who had served in one of the Russian Imperial Army's grenadier regiments during the First World War.\nIn the Vietnam War, U.S. squads usually had at least one soldier whose role was that of a grenadier, armed with just an M79 grenade launcher and an M1911 pistol, though in some cases grenadiers were not even issued this sidearm. The M79 was designed to bridge the gap between the maximum throwing range of a grenade and the minimum distance of mortar fire. The XM148 grenade launcher, the M79's replacement designed to be mounted to the M16 rifle, was first issued in December 1966, but was beset by problems: the cocking mechanism was difficult to squeeze, the sight was hard to use, and the complicated trigger design required constant maintenance. By May 1967, it was deemed unsuitable for use in the field, and was eventually replaced by the M203 grenade launcher. Though the M203 was later replaced by the M320 Grenade Launcher Module in U.S. Army service starting in 2009, the M203 remains a popular and familiar choice in the grenadier role and is still issued by other U.S. military branches.\nArgentina.\nThe Argentine Army still maintains a prestigious unit known as the Regiment of Mounted Grenadiers (\"Regimiento de Granaderos a Caballo\")--actually a squadron-strength formation\u2014which serves as the Presidential ceremonial escort and guard unit. The regiment was founded in 1903 as a recreation of a unit that existed from 1813 to 1826 under the leadership of national hero General Jos\u00e9 de San Mart\u00edn.\nUnlike most other units that carried the title of \"grenadiers\", the Argentine Grenadiers are a cavalry unit, and continue to mount horses for ceremonial purposes, as well as carrying lances and cavalry sabers.\nBelgium.\nThe Belgian Land Component retains two regiments of grenadiers based in Brussels. First raised in 1837 from companies drawn from the line infantry of the newly independent kingdom, these troops served with distinction in both World Wars. In peacetime they had a ceremonial role that corresponded to that of royal guards in other armies. In 1960 the historic blue and red full dress worn prior to World War I was reintroduced for limited wear, although the tall bearskin headdress is now made of synthetic material.\nCanada.\nThe Canadian Grenadier Guards is one of the longest serving units in the Canadian Army's Primary Reserve. It still continues today, both in its reserve role and as a ceremonial guard at the National War Memorial, Rideau Hall, and other places of symbolic importance.\nThe 10th Royal Grenadiers (later The Royal Grenadiers) of Toronto later became the Royal Regiment of Canada with tradition surviving in a grenadier company.\nThe Winnipeg Grenadiers was one of the two Canadian infantry regiments of C Force that took part in the Battle of Hong Kong in December 1941. The regiment is currently on the Supplementary Order of Battle.\nChile.\nThe Presidential Horse Guards Cavalry Regiment \"Grenadiers\" (\"Regimiento Escolta Presidencial n.1 \"Granaderos\"\") of the Chilean Army is active since 1827, has fought in every major battle of the Chilean Army in the 19th century and since 1840 and 1907 has served as the Escort Regiment to the President of Chile on important national occasions. This regiment is named after General Manuel Bulnes Prieto, the founding patron of the regiment, who led the Chilean Army and the anti-confederation North Peruvian dissidents to victory in the War of the Peru-Bolivia Confederation in the crucial Battle of Yungay in 1839, which signaled the confederation's demise.\nThe Chilean Grenadiers' uniforms, until 2011, were similar to the full \"Feldgrau\" uniforms of the Chilean Army, but adapted for the cavalry and like their Argentine counterparts, carry lances but not cavalry sabers, which are reserved for officers and the mounted colors guard escort. Starting in 2011, the regiment now wears a cavalry light blue full dress uniform with Pickelhaubes for all ranks.\nEcuador.\nThe \"Tarqui Grenadiers\" serve as the Presidential Escort Squadron for the President of Ecuador. The unit stands guard at Quito's Carondelet Palace and retains the uniform worn during the Battle of Tarqui of 1829, reporting as part of the Ecuadorian Army.\nFrance.\nWhile the French army has not included any grenadiers since 1870, the grenade badge is still a distinctive mark of the Foreign Legion, the National Gendarmerie and the French Customs, which was a military unit until 1940.\nIndia.\nThe oldest grenadier regiment of the armies in the Commonwealth belongs to the Indian Army. The concept of 'Grenadiers' evolved from the practice of selecting the bravest and strongest men for the most dangerous tasks in combat. The Grenadiers have the longest unbroken record of existence in the Indian Army.\nItaly.\nThe Granatieri di Sardegna Mechanized Brigade (\"Reggimento Granatieri di Sardegna\") is currently part of the mechanized infantry brigade with the same name in the Italian Army. This unit traces its history back to a guards regiment raised in 1659 and is made up predominantly of one year volunteers. Historically, as the senior regiment in the Piedmontese and Italian armies the Grenadiers of Sardinia took the tallest recruits of each intake. On ceremonial occasions the Italian Grenadiers parade in their 19th century blue uniforms and fur headdresses. The 1st Grenadiers of Sardinia regiment is currently (2010) the only infantry regiment of the Italian Army with two battalions (1st \"Assietta\" and 2nd \"Cengio\" Grenadiers battalions), and it is likely that in 2020 its 2nd Battalion will be detached to re-activate the 2nd Sardinia Grenadiers Regiment.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, Grenadiers (\"Granaderos\") are armored specialist police units used for anti-riot duties and other security roles. The National Guard maintains regional grenadier companies for public security duties, while performing law enforcement and wearing NG uniforms.\nNetherlands.\nThe Royal Netherlands Army maintains a regiment of Guard Grenadiers who retain the bearskin headdress of the early 19th century. This regiment has been amalgamated with the Jager Guards to form the \"Garderegiment Grenadiers en Jagers\" Two of its companies are Jagers (riflemen), the other two are grenadiers; it wears the maroon beret and is an air assault and airborne forces trained unit.\nNorway.\nIn the Norwegian Army and Air Force, grenadier () is used as a rank, the lowest enlisted below sergeant, to distinguish professional soldiers from conscripts. The grenadiers are employed for positions requiring more experience and/or professional presence. Fully professionalised units, such as the Telemark Battalion, serve in international operations. Professional enlisted personnel in the Navy has the equivalent rank (able seaman).\nSpain.\nThere is one company of the 1st King's Immemorial Infantry Regiment, which during ceremonies, is authorized to use grenadier uniforms of the Charles III period.\nSweden.\nThe Grenadier Company is the honor guard of the Swedish Army's Life Guards for state ceremonies. Their uniform includes bearskin hats, and white baldrics (cross belts) that originally carried the fuses used to light grenades. The grenadiers bear the King's own Life Company banner, which was presented to the unit in 1868 by Charles XV's consort, Queen Louise.\nSwitzerland.\nIn the military of Switzerland, the Grenadiers form well trained mechanized infantry units. They are used for especially challenging operations and are initially trained in Isone, a secluded, mountainous region in the South of Switzerland. The Swiss Kommando Spezialkr\u00e4fte specialize in urban warfare, guerrilla warfare, anti-terrorist operations, commando tactics, sniper missions, hand-to-hand combat, and other special operations.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Grenadier Guards are the most senior of the five prestigious regiments of Foot Guards, each of which retains the bearskin headdress originally associated with grenadiers.\nAlthough the Coldstream Guards can trace their origins to an earlier date (1650) than that of the Grenadier Guards (1656), they are officially recognized as second in seniority since having been formed initially to serve the Commonwealth, their service to the Crown only dates from the Restoration of the Monarchy in 1660.\nUnited States.\nThe United States Army rifle squad consists of two fireteams of four soldiers each, with the designated grenadier being equipped with an M4/M16 with the M203 grenade launcher (or newer M320 Grenade Launcher Module) slung under the barrel and providing limited high-angle fire over 'dead space'.\nThe United States Marine Corps rifle squad consists of three four-man fireteams including a designated grenadier who works either the M320 grenade launcher module or the M-32 module grenade launcher. During the Vietnam War there was one grenadier in the squad armed with an M79 grenade launcher.\nYugoslavia.\nBomba\u0161i (Serbian Cyrillic: \u0431\u043e\u043c\u0431\u0430\u0448\u0438; \"bombardiers\" or \"bombers\") is the name widely used for the Yugoslav Partisan volunteer grenadiers, who had a significant importance in operations during World War II and are regarded as particularly heroic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71370", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71370", "title": "Anne of Bohemia", "text": "Queen of England from 1382 to 1394\nAnne of Bohemia (11 May 1366 \u2013 7 June 1394), also known as Anne of Luxembourg, was Queen of England as the first wife of King Richard II. A member of the House of Luxembourg, she was the daughter of Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Bohemia, and Elizabeth of Pomerania. Her death at the age of 28 was believed to have been caused by plague.\nEarly life.\nAnne had four brothers, including the Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund, and one younger sister, Margaret of Bohemia, Burgravine of Nuremberg. She also had five half-siblings from her father's previous marriages, including Margaret of Bohemia, Queen of Hungary. She was brought up mainly at Prague Castle and spent much of her early life in the care of her brother, King Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia. She could read German, Czech, and Latin. On her journey through Flanders on the way to her new life in England, she came under the protection of her uncle, Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg.\nQueen of England.\nRichard II married Anne of Bohemia in 1382 as a result of the Western Schism (1378\u20131417) in the Papacy that had resulted in two rival popes. According to Eduard Perroy, Pope Urban VI sanctioned the marriage between Richard and Anne in an attempt to create an alliance on his behalf, particularly so that he might be stronger against the French and their preferred pope, Clement. Anne's father was the most powerful monarch in Europe at the time, ruling over about half of Europe's population and territory.\nThe marriage was contracted against the wishes of many members of his nobility and members of parliament and occurred primarily at the instigation of Richard's advisor Michael de la Pole. Richard had been offered Caterina Visconti, one of the daughters of Bernab\u00f2 Visconti, the Lord of Milan, who would have brought a great deal of money with her as a dowry. However, instead, Anne was chosen. She brought with her no dowry, and in return for her hand in marriage, Richard gave 20,000 florins (around \u00a34,000,000 in today's value) in payments to her brother King Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia, who had written to Richard to stress their joint duty to reunite Christendom. He also gave grants to those in her train. There were few diplomatic benefits to the marriage \u2013 although English merchants were now allowed to trade freely within both the Bohemian lands and the lands of the Holy Roman Empire, this was not much when compared to the usual diplomatic benefits from marriages made as a result of the war with France.\nNegotiations could not be completed until 1380 because Richard's negotiating team were held for ransom while returning from Prague. The marriage treaty was signed in May 1381.\nOn her arrival in England in December 1381, having been delayed by storms, Anne was severely criticised by contemporary chroniclers, probably as a result of the financial arrangements of the marriage, although it was quite typical for queens to be viewed in critical terms. The Westminster Chronicler called her \"a tiny scrap of humanity\", and Thomas Walsingham related a disastrous omen upon her arrival; her ships smashed to pieces as soon as she had disembarked. Nevertheless, Anne and King Richard II were married in Westminster Abbey on 20 January 1382. Still, the reception from Londoners was hostile at times. Tournaments were held for several days after the ceremony in celebration. They then made a tour of the realm, staying at many major abbeys along the way. In 1383, Anne visited the city of Norwich, where at the Great Hospital a ceiling comprising 252 black eagles was made in her honour. Anne and Richard were only 15 years old when they first met and married. Yet these \"two wispy teenagers\" soon fell into a loving relationship and \"over the years the king proved truly devoted to his new wife\". Walsingham later wrote that Richard rarely allowed Anne to leave his side.\nThe court of Charles IV, Anne's father, based in Prague, was a centre of the International Gothic style, then at its height, and her arrival seems to have coincided with, and probably caused, new influences on English art. The Crown of Princess Blanche, now in Munich, may have been made for Anne, either in Prague or Paris.\nIn 1393, Violant of Bar wrote to Anne and she was drawn into a long-standing dispute between England and Aragon, which involved hostages.\nAnne and Richard were married for 12 years, but had no children. Anne's death from plague in 1394 at Sheen Manor was a devastating blow to Richard. He was so grief-stricken that he demolished Sheen Manor, where she had died. Historians have speculated that her counsel had a moderating effect on Richard during her lifetime. This is supported by his unwise conduct in the years after Anne's death that lost him his throne.\nRichard married his second wife, the six-year-old Isabella of Valois, on 4 November 1396.\nEstimation.\nAlthough Anne was originally disliked and defamed by chroniclers, there is evidence that she became more popular in time. She was a very kind person and popular with the people of England; for example, she was well known for her tireless attempts to \"intercede\" on behalf of the people, procuring pardons for participants in the Peasants' Revolt of 1381, and numerous other pardons for wrongdoers. In 1389, for example, she sought a pardon for a man who had been indicted for the murder of William de Cantilupe 14 years previously.\nShe also made several high-profile intercessions in front of the king. Anne saved the life of John Northampton, a former mayor of London, in 1384; her humble begging convinced Richard II to merely commit the offender to lifelong imprisonment. Anne's most famous act of intercession was on behalf of the citizens of London in the ceremonial reconciliation of Richard and London in 1392. The queen's role has been memorialized in Richard Maidstone's \"Reconciliation of Richard II with the City of London\". Anne also interceded on behalf of Simon de Burley, Richard II's former tutor during his minority, in the 1388 Merciless Parliament. Despite her pleas to the Lords Appellant, Burley was executed.\nShe was praised in a eulogy by Thomas Walsingham for her \u201cdedication to God, for her almsgiving, her support for the poor and the Church.\u201d\nOn the other hand, she never fulfilled many traditional duties of queens. In particular, she did not bear children, despite twelve years of marriage, and this is perhaps emphasised in her epitaph, whereby she is mentioned as having been kind to \"pregnant women\". The Evesham chronicler said, \"this queen, although she did not bear children, was still held to have contributed to the glory and wealth of the realm, as far as she was able. Noble and common people suffered greatly at her death\". Nevertheless, her popular legacy as \"Good Queen Anne\" suggests that this lack of children was unimportant to many contemporaries.\nLegacy.\nAnne is buried in Westminster Abbey beside her husband. In 1395, Richard sealed contracts for a monument for himself and for Anne. This was an innovation, the first time a double tomb was ordered for an English royal burial. Contracts for the base of Purbeck marble were sealed with two London masons, Henry Yevele and Stephen Lote, and for the two life size effigies with Nicholas Broker and Godfrey Prest, both coppersmiths of London. Designs, now lost, were supplied to both sets of craftsmen. The coppersmiths' contract stipulated that the effigies were to be made of gilded copper and latten and to lie under canopies. They were to be crowned, their right hands were to be joined, and they were to hold sceptres in their left hands.\nTheir joint tomb is now damaged, and the hands of the effigies are chipped off. The inscription on her tomb describes her as \"beauteous in body and her face was gentle and pretty.\" When her tomb was opened in 1871, it was discovered that many of her bones had been stolen via a hole in the side of the casket.\nAnne of Bohemia is known to have made the sidesaddle more popular to ladies of the Middle Ages. She also influenced the design of carts in England when she arrived in a carriage, presumably from Kocs, Hungary, to meet her future husband Richard (the name of Kocs is considered to have given rise to the English word \"coach\"). She also made the horned, Bohemian-style headdress the fashion for Englishwomen in the late 14th century.\nIn popular culture.\nTheatre.\nShe is one of the main characters in the play \"Richard of Bordeaux\" (1932) written by Gordon Daviot. The play tells the story of Richard II of England in a romantic fashion, emphasizing the relationship between Richard and Anne of Bohemia. The play was a major hit in 1933, ran for over a year in the West End, playing a significant role in turning its director and leading man John Gielgud into a major star.\nAnne also appears in \"Two Planks and a Passion\" (1983) by Anthony Minghella, in which she accompanies her husband and their close friend Robert de Vere in attending the York Corpus Christi mystery plays.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71376", "revid": "49950361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71376", "title": "Ed Gein", "text": "American murderer and body snatcher (1906\u20131984)\nEdward Theodore Gein (August 27, 1906 \u2013 July 26, 1984), also known as the Butcher of Plainfield and the Plainfield Ghoul, was an American murderer, serial killer, and body snatcher. His crimes, committed around his hometown of Plainfield, Wisconsin, gathered widespread notoriety in 1957 after authorities discovered that he stole corpses from local graveyards and fashioned keepsakes from their bones and skin. He also confessed to killing two women: tavern owner Mary Hogan in 1954 and hardware store owner Bernice Worden in 1957.\nGein was initially found unfit to stand trial and confined to a mental health facility. By 1968 he was judged competent to stand trial. He was found guilty of the murder of Worden, but was found legally insane and thus was remanded to a psychiatric institution.\nEarly life.\nChildhood.\nEdward Theodore Gein was born in La Crosse County, Wisconsin, on August 27, 1906, the second of two sons to George Philip Gein (1873\u20131940) and Augusta Wilhelmine Gein (n\u00e9e Lehrke; 1878\u20131945), both of German descent. Gein's only sibling was an older brother named Henry. Augusta, who was fervently religious and nominally Lutheran, frequently preached to her sons about the innate immorality of the world, the evils of drinking and her belief that all women were naturally promiscuous and instruments of the devil. She reserved time every afternoon to read to them from the Bible, usually selecting verses from the Old Testament and the Book of Revelation concerning death, murder, and divine retribution. Gein idolized and eventually became obsessed with his mother.\nIn La Crosse, Gein's father worked as a carpenter, tanner, and firefighter. He also owned a local grocery store but soon sold the business and left the city with his family to live on a farm in the town of Plainfield, Wisconsin, which became their permanent residence. Gein's father was known to be a violent alcoholic who regularly beat both of his sons. This caused Ed's ears to ring when his father beat him on the head. Augusta took advantage of the farm's isolation by turning away outsiders who could have influenced her sons.\nGein left the farm only to attend school. Outside of school, he spent most of his time doing chores on the farm. Gein was shy. Classmates and teachers remembered him as having strange mannerisms, such as seemingly random laughter, as if he were laughing at his own personal jokes. Augusta punished Gein whenever he tried to make friends, according to family acquaintances. Despite his poor social development, Gein did fairly well in school, particularly in reading.\nDeaths in immediate family.\nOn April 1, 1940, George Gein died of heart failure at the age of 66. Ed and his brother Henry began doing odd jobs around town to help cover living expenses. The brothers were generally considered reliable and honest by the rest of the community. While both worked as handymen, Ed frequently babysat for neighbors, seeming to relate more easily to children than to adults. Henry began dating a divorced mother of two and planned to move in with her. He worried about his brother's attachment to their mother and often spoke ill of her around Ed, who responded with shock and hurt.\nOn May 16, 1944, Henry was burning vegetation on the property. The fire got out of control, requiring intervention by the local fire department. By the end of the day\u2014the fire having been extinguished and the firefighters gone\u2014Ed reported Henry missing. With lanterns and flashlights, a search party searched for 43-year-old Henry, whose dead body was found lying face down. Apparently, Henry had been dead for some time, and it appeared that the cause of death was heart failure, since he had not been burned or injured otherwise.\nIt was later reported by biographer Harold Schechter that Henry had bruises on his head. Police dismissed the possibility of foul play and the county coroner later listed asphyxiation as the cause of death. The authorities accepted the accident theory, but no official investigation was conducted and an autopsy was not performed. Questioning Ed about the death of Bernice Worden in 1957, state investigator Joe Wilimovsky brought up questions about Henry's death. George Arndt, who studied the case, wrote that, in retrospect, it was \"possible and likely\" that Henry's death was \"the 'Cain and Abel' aspect of this case.\"\nWith Henry deceased, Ed and his mother were now alone. Augusta suffered a paralyzing stroke shortly after Henry's death, and Ed devoted himself to her care. Sometime in 1945, he later recounted, he and his mother visited a man named Smith, who lived nearby, to purchase straw. According to Gein, Augusta witnessed Smith beating a dog. A woman inside the Smith residence came outside and yelled for him to stop, but Smith beat the dog to death. Augusta was extremely upset by this scene; what bothered her did not appear to be the brutality toward the dog but, rather, the presence of the woman.\nAugusta told Gein that the woman was not married to Smith and so had no business being there, angrily calling her \"Smith's harlot.\" She suffered a second stroke soon after, and her health deteriorated rapidly. Augusta died on December 29, 1945, at the age of 67. Gein was devastated by his mother's death. In the words of Schechter, he had \"lost his only friend and one true love. And he was absolutely alone in the world\".\nWork.\nGein held onto the farm and earned money from odd jobs. He boarded up rooms used by his mother, including the upstairs, the downstairs parlor, and the living room, leaving them untouched. While the rest of the house became increasingly squalid, these rooms remained pristine. Gein lived in a small room next to the kitchen. Around this time, he became interested in reading pulp magazines and adventure stories, particularly those involving cannibals or Nazi atrocities, specifically concerning Ilse Koch, who had been accused of selecting tattooed prisoners for death to fashion lampshades and other items from their skins. In 1951, Gein started receiving a farm subsidy from the federal government. He occasionally worked for the local municipal road crew and crop-threshing crews in the Plainfield area. Sometime between 1946 and 1956, he sold an parcel of land that Henry had owned.\nCrimes.\nConfirmed.\nOn the morning of November 16, 1957, 58-year-old Plainfield hardware store owner Bernice Worden disappeared. The hardware store's truck was seen driving out from the rear of the building at around 9:30a.m. The store saw few customers the entire day; some area residents believed that this was because of deer hunting season. Worden's son, Deputy Sheriff Frank Worden, entered the store around 5:00p.m. to find the cash register open and blood stains on the floor.\nFrank Worden told investigators that on the evening before his mother's disappearance, Gein had been in the store and was expected to return the next morning for a gallon of antifreeze. A sales slip for the antifreeze was the last receipt written by Bernice Worden on the morning that she disappeared. That evening, Gein was arrested at a West Plainfield grocery store, and the Waushara County Sheriff's Department searched the Gein farm.\nA sheriff's deputy discovered Worden's decapitated body in a shed on Gein's property, hung upside down by her legs with a crossbar at her ankles and ropes at her wrists. The torso had been \"dressed out like a deer\". Worden had been shot with a .22-caliber rifle, and mutilations were made after her death. Searching Gein's house, authorities found:\nThese artifacts were photographed at the state crime laboratory and then \"decently disposed of.\" When questioned, Gein told investigators that between 1947 and 1952, he had made as many as forty nocturnal visits to three local graveyards to exhume recently buried bodies while he was in a \"daze-like\" state. On about thirty of those visits, he said that he came out of the daze while in the cemetery, left the grave in good order, and returned home empty-handed. On the other occasions, he dug up the graves of recently buried middle-aged women he thought resembled his mother and took the bodies home, where he tanned their skins to make his paraphernalia.\nGein admitted to stealing from nine graves and led investigators to them. Allan Wilimovsky of the state crime laboratory participated in opening three test graves identified by Gein. The caskets were inside wooden boxes. The top boards ran crossways, not lengthwise. The tops of the boxes were about below the surface in sandy soil. Gein had robbed the graves soon after the funerals, while the graves were incomplete. The test graves were exhumed because authorities were uncertain as to whether the slight Gein was capable of single-handedly digging up a grave during an evening. They were found as Gein described: one casket was empty; another casket was empty but contained a few bones and Gein's crowbar, and the final casket had most of the body missing yet Gein had returned rings and some body parts. Thus, Gein's confession was largely corroborated.\nSoon after his mother's death, Gein began to create a \"woman suit\" so that \"he could become his mother\u2014to literally crawl into her skin.\" He denied having sex with the bodies he exhumed, explaining: \"They smelled too bad.\" During the state crime laboratory interrogation, Gein admitted to shooting 51-year-old Mary Hogan, a tavern owner who had been missing since December 8, 1954. Her head was later found in his house, though he denied any memory of the details surrounding her death.\nA 16-year-old youth, whose parents were friends of Gein and who attended baseball games and movies with him, reported that Gein kept shrunken heads in his house, which he had described as relics sent by a cousin who had served in the Philippines during World War II. Upon investigation by police, these were determined to be human facial skins, carefully peeled from corpses and used by Gein as masks.\nDuring questioning, Sheriff Art Schley reportedly assaulted Gein by banging his head and face into a brick wall. As a result, Gein's initial confession was ruled inadmissible. Schley died of heart failure in 1968 at the age of 43, before Gein's trial. Many who knew Schley said he was traumatized by the horror of Gein's crimes and this, along with the fear of having to testify, especially about assaulting Gein, caused his death.\nSuspected.\nGein was considered a suspect in several other unsolved cases in Wisconsin. In November 1957, authorities confronted Gein with missing persons cases that had occurred between the death of his mother and that of Worden. Their suspicions were further aroused after the discovery of Hogan's remains. Lie detector tests failed to implicate Gein of any other murders, and his psychiatrists concluded that his violence was only directed to women who physically resembled his mother.\nAftermath.\nTrial.\nOn November 21, 1957, Gein was arraigned on one count of first-degree murder in Waushara County Court, where he pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity. He was diagnosed with schizophrenia and found mentally incompetent, thus unfit for trial. Gein was sent to the Central State Hospital for the Criminally Insane, now Dodge Correctional Institution, a maximum-security facility in Waupun, and was later transferred to the Mendota Mental Health Institute in Madison.\nIn 1968, doctors determined Gein was \"mentally able to confer with counsel and participate in his defense\". The trial began on November 7, 1968, and lasted one week. A psychiatrist testified that Gein had told him that he did not know whether the killing of Worden was intentional or accidental. Gein told him that while he examined a gun in Worden's store, the weapon discharged and killed Worden. He claimed to not have aimed the rifle at Worden, and did not remember anything else that happened that morning.\nAt the request of the defense, Gein's trial was held without a jury, with Judge Robert H. Gollmar presiding. Gein was found guilty by Gollmar on November 14. A second trial dealt with Gein's sanity. After testimony by doctors for the prosecution and defense, Gollmar ruled Gein \"not guilty by reason of insanity\" and ordered him committed to Central State Hospital for the Criminally Insane. Gein spent the rest of his life in a mental hospital. Judge Gollmar wrote, \"Due to prohibitive costs, Gein was tried for only one murder\u2014that of Mrs. Worden. He also admitted to killing Mary Hogan.\"\nFate of Gein's property.\nGein's house, the outbuildings, and his property were appraised at $4,700, . His possessions were scheduled to be auctioned on March 30, 1958, amidst rumors that the house and the land it stood on might become a tourist attraction. Early on the morning of March 20, the house was destroyed by fire. A deputy fire marshal reported that a garbage fire had been set from the house by a cleaning crew which was given the task of disposing refuse; that hot coals were recovered from the spot of the bonfire, but that the fire did not spread along the ground from that location to the house. Arson was suspected, but the cause of the fire was never officially determined.\nIt is possible that the fire was not considered a matter of urgency to Fire Chief Frank Worden, the son of Gein's victim, Bernice Worden. When Gein learned of the incident while in detention, he shrugged and said, \"Just as well.\" Gein's Ford sedan, which he used to haul the bodies of his victims, was sold at public auction for $760 () to carnival sideshow operator Bunny Gibbons. Gibbons charged carnival-goers 25\u00a2 admission to see it. The current whereabouts of Gein's Ford sedan is unknown.\nDeath.\nGein died at the Mendota Mental Health Institute due to respiratory failure, secondary to lung cancer, on July 26, 1984, at the age of 77. Gein is interred between his parents and brother in Plainfield Cemetery. Over the years, souvenir seekers chipped away pieces from his gravestone, until the stone itself was stolen in 2000. It was recovered in June 2001, near Seattle, Washington, and was placed in storage at the Waushara County Sheriff's Department. Since then, his gravesite has remained unmarked.\nIn popular culture.\nGein's story has been depicted widely in American popular culture via numerous appearances in film, music, and literature. The tale first came to widespread public attention in the fictionalized version presented by Robert Bloch in his 1959 suspense novel, \"Psycho\". In addition to Alfred Hitchcock's 1960 film adaptation of Bloch's novel of the same name, Gein's story was loosely adapted into numerous films, including \"Deranged\" (1974), \"The Texas Chainsaw Massacre\" (1974), \"In the Light of the Moon\" (2000) (released in the United States and Australia as \"Ed Gein\" [2001]), \"\" (2007), \"Ed Gein, the Musical\" (2010) and the Rob Zombie films \"House of 1000 Corpses\" (2003) and \"The Devil's Rejects\" (2005).\nGein served as the inspiration for myriad fictional serial killers, most notably Norman Bates (\"Psycho\"), Leatherface (\"The Texas Chain Saw Massacre\"), Buffalo Bill (\"The Silence of the Lambs\"), Garland Greene (\"Con Air\"), and the character of Dr. Oliver Thredson in the TV series \"\".\nAmerican filmmaker Errol Morris and German filmmaker Werner Herzog tried to collaborate on a film project about Gein from 1975 to 1976. Morris claimed to have interviewed Gein several times and ended up spending almost a year in Plainfield interviewing dozens of locals. The pair planned secretly to exhume Gein's mother from her grave to test a theory, but never followed through on the scheme, and eventually ended their collaboration. The aborted project was described in a 1989 \"New Yorker\" profile of Morris.\nGein's story inspired American grunge band Tad to write the song \"Nipple Belt\" for their 1989 album, \"God's Balls\". Gein also inspired American thrash metal band Slayer to write the song \"Dead Skin Mask\" for their 1990 album, \"Seasons in the Abyss\". Also, Blind Melon singer Shannon Hoon stated in interviews that the song \"Skinned\" on their 1995 album, \"Soup\", was about Gein, and many of the crimes he committed. Additionally, Gein was the inspiration and namesake for the song \"Nothing to Gein\", by American heavy metal band Mudvayne; released in 2000 on their album, \"L.D. 50.\"\nThe character Patrick Bateman, in the 1991 novel \"American Psycho\" and its 2000 film adaptation, mistakenly attributes a quote by Edmund Kemper to Gein saying, \"You know what Ed Gein said about women? ... He said, 'When I see a pretty girl walking down the street, I think two things. One part of me wants to take her out, talk to her, be real nice and sweet and treat her right ... [the other part wonders] what her head would look like on a stick'.\"\nIn 2012, German director J\u00f6rg Buttgereit wrote and directed a stage play about Gein's case titled \"Kannibale und Liebe,\" at Theater Dortmund in Germany. The part of Gein was played by actor Uwe Rohbeck. According to George W. Arndt, news reports at the time of Gein's crimes spawned a subgenre of black humor called \"Geiners.\" Gein was portrayed in flashbacks by Michael Wincott in the 2012 biographical film \"Hitchcock\".\nIn 2022, Gein was portrayed by Shane Kerwin in the first season of Netflix's anthology series \"Monster\", where he was suggested as a possible inspiration for the crimes of serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer. However, any direct connection between the two remains speculative. The third season of the Ryan Murphy series, titled \"\", focused on Gein's life and crimes, with Charlie Hunnam cast in the lead role. The season was released on Netflix on October 3, 2025.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71377", "revid": "28941978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71377", "title": "Rock crystal vase", "text": "Vase made from rock crystal\nVases and ewers made of rock crystal were rare, expensive, and usually decorated with gold and gemstones. They are a type of hardstone carving. They were a specialty of Fatimid art and were often used by royalty in Europe.\nExamples.\nEleanor of Aquitaine's vase.\nA with honeycomb decoration that probably originated from either the Sassanid (6th\u20137th century) or post-Sassanid (9th\u201310th century) period was given to Duke William IX of Aquitaine (the Troubadour) by a Muslim ally (Abd al-Malik Imad ad-Dawla, referred to in Latinised form as Mitadolus on the inscription). When William IX's granddaughter Duchess Eleanor of Aquitaine married King Louis VII of France in 1137, she gave him the rock crystal vase as a wedding present. The inscription finally says that the king gave it to Suger, who in turn offered it to the saints, to be kept at the Abbey of St.-Denis which he had rebuilt. The vase is now in the Louvre in Paris, and is the only artefact of Eleanor's known to exist today.\nMary I and Philip II's vase.\nAnother was a crystal and gold posset that the Spanish ambassador gave Queen Mary I of England and Philip of Spain as a betrothal gift. It was made by Benvenuto Cellini and the whole set is now on display at Hatfield House in England."}
{"id": "71378", "revid": "15934865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71378", "title": "Bab el Mandeb", "text": ""}
{"id": "71379", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71379", "title": "Abbey of St.-Denis", "text": ""}
{"id": "71386", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71386", "title": "Wyomia Tyus", "text": "American sprinter\nWyomia Tyus (pronunciation: \"why-o-mi\"; born August 29, 1945) is a retired American track and field sprinter, and the first person to retain the Olympic title in the 100 m (a feat since duplicated by Carl Lewis, Gail Devers, Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce, Usain Bolt, and Elaine Thompson-Herah).\nEarly life.\nRaised on a dairy farm, as the youngest of four children, and the only girl in the family Tyus was encouraged by her father to participate in sports. While a high school athlete Tyus participated in basketball and began her track endeavors as a high jumper before transitioning to the sprints after being invited to a summer track clinic at Tennessee State University in 1960. It was in this same year that Tyus's father died leaving the job of male role model in Tyus's life to her soon to be track coach at Tennessee State Ed Temple.\nCollege and professional career.\nTyus, from Tennessee State University, participated in the 1964 Summer Olympics at age 19. In the heats of the event, she equaled Wilma Rudolph's world record, propelling her to a favored position for the final, where her main rival was fellow American Edith McGuire. Tyus won the final, beating McGuire by 0.2 seconds. At the same Olympics, she also won a silver medal with the 4 \u00d7 100 m relay team.\nThe following years, Tyus won numerous national championships in the sprint events, and a gold medal in the 200 m at the Pan-American Games. In 1968, she returned to the Olympics to defend her title in the 100 m. In the final, she set a new world record of 11.08 s to become the first person, male or female, to retain the Olympic 100 metres title. Tyus also qualified for the 200 m final, in which she finished sixth. Running the final leg for the relay team, Tyus helped setting a new world record, winning her third gold medal.\nDirector Bud Greenspan filmed Tyus casually dancing behind her starting blocks before the Olympic final. When interviewed later she said she was doing the \"Tighten Up\" to stay loose.\nTyus retired from international sports after the 1968 Olympics. In 1973, she was invited to compete in the 60-yard dash in the new International Track Association competitions. In her first-year return, she won eight of eighteen events. The following year, she won every event she entered, a total of twenty-two races. Tyus continued to compete in the 60 yard dash up until 1982.\nPost athletics.\nTyus went on to coach at Beverly Hills High School, and was a founding member of the Women's Sports Foundation.\nDuring the Richard Dawson era of \"Family Feud\", Tyus appeared with her family (1980). They won the $5,000 prize. In 1976, Tyus was inducted into the Georgia Sports Hall of Fame. In 1980, Tyus was inducted into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame. At the 1984 Summer Olympics, she was one of eleven athletes who carried in the Olympic Flag during the Opening Ceremony. In 1985, she was inducted into the U.S. Olympic Hall of Fame.\nIn 1999, her hometown Griffin, Georgia honored her with the unveiling of the Wyomia Tyus Olympic Park. The 2010 Breeder's World Cup featured a two-year-old filly racing horse bearing her namesake. In 2018, she published the memoir \"Tigerbelle : the Wyomia Tyus story\", with co-author Elizabeth Terzakis; it is part of Dave Zirin's \"Edge of Sports\" series.\nPersonal life.\nTyus grew up in a primarily white neighborhood and became aware of her race and of racial segregation at an early age. She was forced to take an hour bus ride to school each day, in spite of the fact that there was a white school within walking distance. Racial divide in her neighborhood also prevented Tyus from playing with the white girls that lived nearby and as the nearest black family lived almost a mile away, Tyus spent most of her time playing sports with her brothers and the white boys in the neighborhood. As she grew older her father helped to solidify the idea that she could accomplish anything in her life, but not without hard work to overcome racial stigma.\nAfter finishing high school Tyus attended Tennessee State University (TSU), making her the first of her family to go to college. While at TSU Tyus participated in the Tigerbelles collegiate team. Tyus began training with TSU coach Ed Temple, but poor grades, study habits, and a general lack of interest in classes nearly derailed Tyus's chances to continue her training and attend the 1964 Olympics. She has credited her training with Coach Temple as helping with her development and success in sporting, academic, and professional life, especially as he highlighted the struggle that comes with being a black athlete and having to work harder to receive positive recognition.\nIn December 1968, Tyus moved with her then boyfriend from Georgia to California, where she worked as a substitute teacher. She married her boyfriend Art Simburg in 1969 and held multiple jobs until becoming a teacher in 1971. Tyus left this job within a year in order to stay at home with her first child. Tyus's first marriage ended in 1974 and in 1978 she married Duane Tillman, with whom she had her second child, a son.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71394", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71394", "title": "Jane Jacobs", "text": "American\u2013Canadian journalist, author, and activist (1916\u20132006)\nJane Isabel Jacobs (\"n\u00e9e\" Butzner; 4 May 1916 \u2013 25 April 2006) was an American-Canadian journalist, author, theorist, and activist who influenced urban studies, sociology, and economics. Her book \"The Death and Life of Great American Cities\" (1961) argued that \"urban renewal\" and \"slum clearance\" did not respect the needs of city-dwellers.\nJacobs organized grassroots efforts to protect neighborhoods from urban renewal and slum clearance, in particular plans by Robert Moses to overhaul her own Greenwich Village neighborhood. She was instrumental in the eventual cancellation of the Lower Manhattan Expressway, which would have passed directly through the area of Manhattan that would later become known as SoHo, as well as part of Little Italy and Chinatown. She was arrested in 1968 for inciting a crowd at a public hearing on that project. After moving to Toronto in 1968, she joined the opposition to the Spadina Expressway and the associated network of expressways in Toronto that were planned and under construction.\nJacobs was often criticized as a woman and a writer who criticized experts in the male-dominated field of urban planning. Routinely, she was described first as a housewife, as she did not have a college degree or any formal training in urban planning; as a result, her lack of credentials was seized upon as grounds for criticism. The influence of her concepts eventually was acknowledged by highly respected professionals, such as Richard Florida and Robert Lucas.\nEarly years.\nJane Isabel Jacobs was born Jane Isabel Butzner in Scranton, Pennsylvania, the daughter of Bess Robison Butzner, a former teacher and nurse, and John Decker Butzner, a physician. They were a Protestant family. Her brother, John Decker Butzner Jr., served as a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. After graduation from Scranton High School, she worked for a year as the unpaid assistant to the women's page editor at the \"Scranton Tribune\".\nNew York City.\nIn 1935, during the Great Depression, she moved to New York City with her sister Betty. Jane Butzner took an immediate liking to Manhattan's Greenwich Village, which deviated some from the city's grid structure. The sisters soon moved there from Brooklyn.\nDuring her early years in Manhattan, Jacobs held a variety of jobs working as a stenographer and freelance writer, writing about working districts in the city. These experiences, she later said, \"gave me more of a notion of what was going on in the city and what business was like, what work was like\". Her first job was for a trade magazine, as a secretary, then an editor. She sold articles to the \"Sunday Herald Tribune\", \"Cue\" magazine, and \"Vogue\".\nShe studied at Columbia University's School of General Studies for two years, taking courses in geology, zoology, law, political science, and economics. About the freedom to pursue study across her wide-ranging interests, she said:\nFor the first time I liked school and for the first time I made good marks. This was almost my undoing because after I had garnered, statistically, a certain number of credits I became the property of Barnard College at Columbia, and once I was the property of Barnard I had to take, it seemed, what Barnard wanted me to take, not what I wanted to learn. Fortunately my high-school marks had been so bad that Barnard decided I could not belong to it and I was therefore allowed to continue getting an education.\nCareer.\nAfter attending Columbia University's School of General Studies for two years, Butzner found a job at \"Iron Age\" magazine. Her 1943 article on economic decline in Scranton was well publicized and led the Murray Corporation of America to locate a warplane factory there. Encouraged by this success, Butzner petitioned the War Production Board to support more operations in Scranton. Experiencing job discrimination at \"Iron Age\", she also advocated for equal pay for women and for the right of workers to unionize.\n\"Amerika\".\nShe became a feature writer for the Office of War Information and then a reporter for \"Amerika\", a publication of the US State Department in the Russian language. While working there she met Robert Hyde Jacobs Jr., a Columbia-educated architect who was designing warplanes for Grumman. They married in 1944. Together they had a daughter, Burgin, and two sons, James and Ned. They bought a three-story building at 555 Hudson Street. Jane continued to write for \"Amerika\" after the war, while Robert left Grumman and resumed work as an architect. The Jacobses rejected the rapidly growing suburbs as \"parasitic\", choosing to remain in Greenwich Village. They renovated their house, in the middle of a mixed residential and commercial area, and created a garden in the backyard.\nWorking for the State Department during the McCarthy era, Jacobs received a questionnaire about her political beliefs and loyalties. Jacobs was anti-communist and had left the Federal Workers Union because of its apparent communist sympathies. Nevertheless, she was pro-union and purportedly appreciated the writing of Saul Alinsky, and therefore she was under suspicion. On 25 March 1952, Jacobs delivered her response to Conrad E. Snow, chairman of the Loyalty Security Board at the US Department of State. In her foreword to her answer, she said:\nThe other threat to the security of our tradition, I believe, lies at home. It is the current fear of radical ideas and of people who propound them. I do not agree with the extremists of either the left or the right, but I think they should be allowed to speak and to publish, both because they themselves have, and ought to have, rights, and once their rights are gone, the rights of the rest of us are hardly safe.\n\"Architectural Forum\".\nJacobs left \"Amerika\" in 1952 when it announced its relocation to Washington, DC. She then found a well-paying job at \"Architectural Forum\", published by Henry Luce of Time Inc. She was hired as an associate editor. After early success in that position, Jacobs began to take assignments on urban planning and \"urban blight\". In 1954, she was assigned to cover the Society Hill development designed by Edmund Bacon. Although her editors expected a positive story, Jacobs criticized Bacon's project, reacting against its lack of concern for the poor African Americans who were directly affected. When Bacon showed Jacobs examples of undeveloped and developed blocks, she determined that \"development\" seemed to end community life on the street. When Jacobs returned to the offices of \"Architectural Forum\", she began to question the 1950s consensus on urban planning.\nIn 1955, Jacobs met William Kirk, an Episcopal minister who worked in East Harlem. Kirk came to the \"Architectural Forum\" offices to describe the impact that \"revitalization\" had on East Harlem, and he introduced Jacobs to the neighborhood.\nIn 1956, while standing in for Douglas Haskell of \"Architectural Forum\", Jacobs delivered a lecture at Harvard University. She addressed leading architects, urban planners, and intellectuals (including Lewis Mumford), speaking on the topic of East Harlem. She urged this audience to \"respect \u2013 in the deepest sense \u2013 strips of chaos that have a weird wisdom of their own not yet encompassed in our concept of urban order\". Contrary to her expectations, the talk was received with enthusiasm, but it also marked her as a threat to established urban planners, real estate owners, and developers. \"Architectural Forum\" printed the speech that year, along with photographs of East Harlem.\nRockefeller Foundation and \"Death and Life of Great American Cities\".\nAfter reading her Harvard speech, William H. Whyte invited Jacobs to write an article for \"Fortune\" magazine. The resulting piece, \"Downtown Is for People\", appeared in a 1958 issue of \"Fortune\", and marked her first public criticism of Robert Moses. Her criticism of the Lincoln Center was not popular with supporters of urban renewal at \"Architectural Forum\" and \"Fortune\". C.\u00a0D. Jackson, the publisher of \"Fortune\", was outraged and over the telephone, demanded of Whyte: \"Who is this crazy dame?\"\nThe \"Fortune\" article brought Jacobs to the attention of Chadbourne Gilpatric, then associate director of the Humanities Division at the Rockefeller Foundation. The foundation had moved aggressively into urban topics, with a recent award to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for studies of urban aesthetics that would culminate in the publication of Kevin A. Lynch's \"Image of the City\". In May 1958, Gilpatric invited Jacobs to begin serving as a reviewer for grant proposals. Later that year, the Rockefeller Foundation awarded a grant to Jacobs to produce a critical study of city planning and urban life in the US. (From the mid-1950s to the mid-1960s, the foundation's Humanities Division sponsored an \"Urban Design Studies\" research program, of which Jacobs was the best known grantee.) Gilpatric encouraged Jacobs to \"explor[e] the field of urban design to look for ideas and actions which may improve thinking on how the design of cities might better serve urban life, including cultural and humane value.\" Affiliating with The New School (then called The New School for Social Research), she spent three years conducting research and writing drafts. In 1961, Random House published the result: \"The Death and Life of Great American Cities\".\n\"The Death and Life of Great American Cities\" remains one of the most influential books in the history of American city planning. She coined the terms \"mixed primary uses\", and \"eyes on the street\", which were adopted professionally in urban design, sociology, and many other fields. Jacobs painted a devastating picture of the profession of city planning, labeling it a pseudoscience. This angered the male-dominated urban planning profession. Jacobs was criticized with ad hominem attacks, being called a \"militant dame\" and a \"housewife\": an amateur who had no right to interfere with an established discipline. One planner dismissed Jacobs's book as \"bitter coffee-house rambling\". Robert Moses, sent a copy, called it \"intemperate and also libelous\u00a0... Sell this junk to someone else.\"\nLater, her book was criticized from the left for leaving out race and openly endorsing gentrification, which Jacobs referred to as \"unslumming\".\nIn 1962, she resigned her position at \"Architectural Forum\" to become a full-time author and concentrate on raising her children. In other political activities she became an opponent of the Vietnam War, marched on the Pentagon in October 1967, and criticized the construction of the World Trade Center as a disaster for Manhattan's waterfront.\nStruggle for Greenwich Village.\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s, her home neighborhood of Greenwich Village was being transformed by city and state efforts to build housing (see, for example, Jacobs's 1961 fight to build the West Village Houses in lieu of large apartment houses), private developers, the expansion of New York University, and by the urban renewal plans of Robert Moses. Moses' plan, funded as \"slum clearance\" by Title I of the Housing Act of 1949, also called for several blocks to be razed and replaced with upscale high-rises. The plan forced 132 families out of their homes and displaced 1,000 small businesses\u00a0\u2013 the result was Washington Square Village.\nAs part of his efforts to revitalize the area, Moses had proposed the extension of Fifth Avenue through Washington Square Park in 1935. In the face of community opposition, Moses had shelved the project, but revived the idea in the 1950s. Moses argued that the Fifth Avenue extension would improve the flow of traffic through the neighborhood and provide access to the planned Lower Manhattan Expressway (LOMEX), which would connect the Manhattan Bridge and Williamsburg Bridge with the Holland Tunnel.\nIn response, local activist Shirley Hayes created the \"Committee to Save Washington Square Park\", a coalition of dozens of local neighborhood groups that opposed the roadway extension. Raymond S. Rubinow eventually took over the organization, changing its name to the \"Joint Emergency Committee to Close Washington Square to Traffic\". Jacob\u2014recruited to the cause by Gerard La Mountain, a local Catholic priest whose church was in the path of the planned LOMEX route\u2014had joined the committee under Hayes, but she took a more prominent role under Rubinow, reaching out to media outlets such as \"The Village Voice\", which provided more sympathetic coverage than \"The New York Times\". The committee gained the support of Margaret Mead, Eleanor Roosevelt, Lewis Mumford, Charles Abrams, and William H. Whyte, as well as Carmine De Sapio, a Greenwich Village resident and influential Democratic leader. De Sapio's involvement proved decisive. On 25 June 1958, the city closed Washington Square Park to traffic, and the joint committee held a ribbon tying (not cutting) ceremony.\nPlans for LOMEX expressway continued despite growing community opposition in areas such as Little Italy. In the 1960s, Jacobs chaired the Joint Committee to Stop the Lower Manhattan Expressway. \"The New York Times\" was sympathetic to Moses, while \"The Village Voice\" covered community rallies and advocated against the expressway. Jacobs continued to fight the expressway when plans resurfaced in 1962, 1965, and 1968, and she became a local hero for her opposition to the project. She was arrested by a plainclothes police officer on 10 April 1968, at a public hearing during which the crowd had charged the stage and destroyed the stenographer's notes. She was accused of inciting a riot, criminal mischief, and obstructing public administration. After months of trials conducted in New York City (to which Jacobs commuted from Toronto), her charge was reduced to disorderly conduct.\n\"\" devoted an hour of the eight-part, seventeen-and-a-half-hour series to the battle between Moses and Jacobs. Robert Caro's biography of Moses, \"The Power Broker\", gives only passing mention to this event, however, despite Jacobs's strong influence on Caro. In 2017, Caro told an interviewer about the difficulty in cutting more than 300,000 words from his initial manuscript: \"The section that I wrote on Jane Jacobs disappeared. To this day, when someone says: 'There's hardly a mention of Jane Jacobs,' I think, 'But I wrote a lot about her.' Every time I'm asked about that, I have this sick feeling.\"\nLife in Toronto.\nSoon after her arrest in 1968, Jacobs moved to Toronto, eventually settling at 69 Albany Avenue in The Annex from 1971 until her death in 2006. She decided to leave the US in part because she opposed the Vietnam War, she worried about the fate of her two draft-age sons, and she did not want to continue fighting the New York City government. She and her husband chose Toronto because it was pleasant and offered employment opportunities, and they moved to an area of Toronto that included so many Americans avoiding the draft that it was called the \"American ghetto\".\nShe quickly became a leading figure in her new city and helped stop the proposed Spadina Expressway. A frequent theme of her work was to ask whether cities were being built for people or for cars. She was arrested twice during demonstrations. She also had considerable influence on the regeneration of the St. Lawrence neighbourhood, a housing project regarded as a major success. She became a Canadian citizen in 1974 and later, she told writer James Howard Kunstler that dual citizenship was not possible at the time, implying that her US citizenship was lost.\nIn 1980, she offered a more urban perspective on Quebec's sovereignty in her book, \"The Question of Separatism: Quebec and the Struggle over Separation\". Jacobs was an advocate of a Province of Toronto to separate the city proper from Ontario. Jacobs said, \"Cities, to thrive in the twenty-first century, must separate themselves politically from their surrounding areas.\" \nShe was selected to be an officer of the Order of Canada in 1996 for her seminal writings and thought-provoking commentaries on urban development. The community and urban sociology section of the American Sociological Association awarded her its Outstanding Lifetime Contribution award in 2002. In 1997, the city government of Toronto sponsored a conference entitled, \"Jane Jacobs: Ideas That Matter\", which led to a book by the same name. At the end of the conference, the Jane Jacobs Prize was created. It includes an annual stipend of $5,000 for three years to be given to \"celebrate Toronto's original, unsung heroes \u2013 by seeking out citizens who are engaged in activities that contribute to the city's vitality\".\nJacobs never shied away from expressing her political support for specific candidates. She opposed the 1997 amalgamation of the cities of Metro Toronto, fearing that individual neighbourhoods would have less power with the new structure. She backed an ecologist, Tooker Gomberg, who lost Toronto's 2000 mayoralty race, and she was an adviser to David Miller's successful mayoral campaign in 2003, at a time when he was seen as a longshot. During the mayoral campaign, Jacobs helped lobby against the construction of a bridge to join the city waterfront to island airport on the Toronto Islands. Following the election, the Toronto City Council's earlier decision to approve the bridge was reversed and the bridge construction project was stopped. The airport instead upgraded the ferry service and later built a pedestrian tunnel.\nJacobs also was active in a campaign against a plan of Royal St. George's College (an established school very close to the Jacobs residence in Toronto's Annex district) to reconfigure its facilities. Jacobs suggested not only that the redesign be stopped but that the school be forced from the neighbourhood entirely. Although Toronto council initially rejected the school's plans, the decision later was reversed \u2013 and the project was given the go-ahead by the Ontario Municipal Board (OMB) when opponents failed to produce credible witnesses and tried to withdraw from the case during the hearing.\nShe also had an influence on Vancouver's urban planning. Jacobs has been called \"the mother of Vancouverism\", referring to that city's use of her \"density done well\" philosophy.\nJacobs died in Toronto Western Hospital aged 89, on 25 April 2006, apparently of a stroke. She was survived by a brother, James Butzner (d. 2009); a daughter, Burgin Jacobs, her sons, James and Ned of Vancouver, and by two grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. Upon her death her family's statement noted: \"What's important is not that she died but that she lived, and that her life's work has greatly influenced the way we think. Please remember her by reading her books and implementing her ideas\".\nLegacy.\nJacobs is credited, along with Lewis Mumford, with inspiring the New Urbanist movement. She has been characterized as a major influence on decentralist and radical centrist thought. She discussed her legacy in an interview with \"Reason\" magazine.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Reason: What do you think you'll be remembered for most? You were the one who stood up to the federal bulldozers and the urban renewal people and said they were destroying the lifeblood of these cities. Is that what it will be?\nJacobs: No. If I were to be remembered as a really important thinker of the century, the most important thing I've contributed is my discussion of what makes economic expansion happen. This is something that has puzzled people always. I think I've figured out what it is.\nExpansion and development are two different things. Development is differentiation of what already existed. Practically every new thing that happens is a differentiation of a previous thing, from a new shoe sole to changes in legal codes. Expansion is an actual growth in size or volume of activity. That is a different thing.\nI've gone at it two different ways. Way back when I wrote \"The Economy of Cities\", I wrote about import replacing and how that expands, not just the economy of the place where it occurs, but economic life altogether. As a city replaces imports, it shifts its imports. It doesn't import less. And yet it has everything it had before.\nReason: It's not a zero-sum game. It's a bigger, growing pie.\nJacobs: That's the actual mechanism of it. The theory of it is what I explain in \"The Nature of Economies\". I equate it to what happens with biomass, the sum total of all flora and fauna in an area. The energy, the material that's involved in this, doesn't just escape the community as an export. It continues being used in a community, just as in a rainforest the waste from certain organisms and various plants and animals gets used by other ones in the place.\u2014\u200a\nWhile Jacobs saw her greatest legacy to be her contributions to economic theory, it is in the realm of urban planning that she has had her most extensive effect. Her observations about the ways in which cities function revolutionized the urban planning profession and discredited many accepted planning models that had dominated mid-century planning. The influential Harvard economist Edward Glaeser, known for his work on urban studies, acknowledged that Jane Jacobs (1960s) had been prescient in attacking Moses for \"replacing well-functioning neighborhoods with Le Corbusier-inspired towers\". Glaeser agreed that these housing projects proved to be Moses' greatest failures, \"Moses spent millions and evicted tens of thousands to create buildings that became centers of crime, poverty, and despair.\"\nShe also was famous for introducing concepts such as the \"Ballet of the Sidewalk\" and \"Eyes on the Street\", a reference to what would later be known as natural surveillance. The concept had a huge influence on planners and architects such as Oscar Newman, who prepared the idea through a series of studies that would culminate in his defensible space theory. The work of Jacobs and Newman would go on to affect American housing policy through the HOPE VI Program, an effort by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development to demolish the high-rise public housing projects so reviled by Jacobs and to replace them with low-rise, mixed-income housing.\nThroughout her life, Jacobs fought to alter the way in which city development was approached. By arguing that cities were living beings and ecosystems, she advocated ideas such as \"mixed use\" development and bottom-up planning. Furthermore, her harsh criticisms of \"slum clearing\" and \"high-rise housing\" projects were instrumental in discrediting these once universally supported planning practices.\nJacobs is remembered as being an advocate for the mindful development of cities, and for leaving \"a legacy of empowerment for citizens to trust their common sense and become advocates for their place\".\nDespite the fact that Jacobs mainly focused on New York City, her arguments have been identified as universal. For instance, her opposition against the demolition of urban neighborhoods for projects of urban renewal had \"special resonance\" in Melbourne, Australia. In Melbourne in the 1960s, resident associations fought against large-scale high-rise housing projects of the Housing Commission of Victoria, which they argued had little regard for the impact on local communities.\nJacobs fought an uphill battle against dominant trends of planning. Despite the United States remaining very much a suburban nation, the work of Jacobs has contributed to city living being rehabilitated and revitalized. Because of her ideas, today, many distressed urban neighborhoods are more likely to be gentrified than cleared for redevelopment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It may be that we have become so feckless as a people that we no longer care how things do work, but only what kind of quick, easy outer impression they give. If so, there is little hope for our cities or probably for much else in our society. But I do not think this is so.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In her book 'Death and Life of Great American Cities,' written in 1961, Ms. Jacobs's enormous achievement was to transcend her own withering critique of 20th-century urban planning and propose radically new principles for rebuilding cities. At a time when both common and inspired wisdom called for bulldozing slums and opening up city space, Ms. Jacobs's prescription was ever more diversity, density and dynamism \u2013 in effect, to crowd people and activities together in a jumping, joyous urban jumble.\u2014\u200a\nSamuel R. Delany's book \"Times Square Red, Times Square Blue\" relies heavily on \"The Death and Life of Great American Cities\" in its analysis of the nature of social relations within the realm of urban studies.\nJane Jacobs Days.\nAfter the death of Jacobs in April 2006, New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced a Jane Jacobs Day, held on 28 June 2006. The City of Toronto proclaimed her birthday the following year, 4 May 2007, as Jane Jacobs Day.\nJane's Walks.\nIn connection with Jane Jacobs Day in Toronto, two dozen free neighborhood walks in the city were offered that weekend (5 May 2007) as an active memorial to Jacobs, and they were dubbed Jane's Walks. Later, a Jane's Walk event was held in New York on 29\u201330 September 2007. In 2008, the event spread to eight cities and towns throughout Canada, and by 2016, Jane's Walks were taking place in 212 cities in 36 countries, on six continents. The interpretive walks typically apply ideas Jacobs identified or espoused to local areas, which are explored on foot and sometimes by bicycle. The walks normally take place in early May, on or close to her 4 May birth anniversary. Walks are organized and led by local volunteers, coordinated by a headquarters office in Toronto. There are more than 200 walks offered in Toronto, alone, in 2016, taking place on 6, 7 and 8 May.\nExhibitions.\nIn 2016, to mark the hundredth birth anniversary of Jane Jacobs, a Toronto gallery staged \"Jane at Home\", an exhibition running from 29 April \u2013 8 May. Curated by Jane's son, Jim Jacobs, it offered glimpses of her home life, where she also worked. Her Toronto living room was represented, based on the one at her Albany Avenue house in The Annex, where she often spoke with noted thinkers and political leaders including Marshall McLuhan, Paul Martin, and the Queen of the Netherlands. On display were her typewriter, original manuscripts, rediscovered photographs demonstrating her distinctive styles, and personal mementos. The exhibit included furniture from previous homes in New York (her dining room is set up) and from Scranton, Pennsylvania.\nIn 2007, the Municipal Art Society of New York partnered with the Rockefeller Foundation to host an exhibit focusing on \"Jane Jacobs and the Future of New York\", which opened at the society in September that year. The exhibit aimed to educate the public on her writings and activism and used tools to encourage new generations to become active in issues involving their own neighborhoods. An accompanying exhibit publication included essays and articles by such architecture critics, artists, activists, and journalists as Malcolm Gladwell, Reverend Billy, Robert Neuwirth, Tom Wolfe, Thomas de Monchaux, and William McDonough. Many of these contributors participated in a series of panel discussions on \"Jane Jacobs and the Future of New York\".\nJane Jacobs Medal.\nAs a tribute to Jacobs, the Rockefeller Foundation, which had awarded grants to Jacobs in the 1950s and 1960s, announced on 9 February 2007, the creation of the Jane Jacobs Medal, \"to recognize individuals who have made a significant contribution to thinking about urban design, specifically in New York City\". Recipients include:\nThe Canadian Urban Institute offers an award to honor her, the Jane Jacobs Lifetime Achievement Award, to recognize a person \"who has had significant impact on the health of their region consistent with Jane Jacob's belief that successful cities foster a place-based, community-centered approach\". The 2011 winner was Eberhard Zeidler, while his daughter, Margie Zeidler, won the 2015 award. In 2012, Anne Golden took the prize \"for her long-standing leadership in public policy, her academic work and her varied leadership experience in business, not-for-profit and government sectors\". William (Bill) Teron accepted the 2013 award \"for his influential career in public policy and passionate advocacy for quality design and commitment to development in the Ottawa area\". In 2014, Jack Diamond was recognized for his \"contribution to improving the built form and advocacy for cities and the future of the Greater Toronto Area\".\nIn April 2014, \"Spacing\" was appointed the stewards of the Jane Jacobs Prize. \"Spacing\", winners of the prize in 2010, has continued to provide the award with a new life and new ways of promoting (and finding) the winners.\nOther honors.\nJacobs received the second Vincent Scully Prize from the National Building Museum in 2000.\nJacobs is the subject of the 2017 documentary film \"Citizen Jane: Battle for the City\", which depicts her victories over Robert Moses and her philosophy of urban design.\nCriticism.\nThe planners and developers she fought against to preserve the West Village were among those who initially criticized her ideas. Robert Moses has generally been identified as her arch-rival during this period. One of their primary differences was their opposite views, the \"top down\" aggressive approach practiced by Moses contrasted the \"bottom up\" approach practiced by Jacobs that considered the community. Since then, Jacobs's ideas have been analysed many times, often in regard to the outcomes that their influences have produced.\nIn places such as the West Village, the factors that she argued would maintain economic and cultural diversity have led instead to gentrification and some of the most expensive real estate in the world. Her family's conversion of an old candy shop into a home is an example of the gentrifying trend that would continue under the influence of Jacobs's ideas.\nGentrification also was caused, however, by \"the completely unexpected influx of affluent residents back into the inner city\". The extent to which her ideas facilitated this phenomenon was at the time unimaginable. For example, she advocated the preservation of older buildings specifically because their lack of economic value made them affordable for poor people. In this respect, she saw them as \"guarantors of social diversity\". That many of these older structures have increased in economic value solely due to their age was implausible in 1961. Issues of gentrification have dominated criticism of Jane Jacobs's planning ideas.\nEconomist Tyler Cowen has criticized her ideas for not addressing problems of scale or infrastructure, and suggests that economists disagree with some of her approaches to development. For example, although her ideas of planning were praised at times as \"universal\", they are now thought inapplicable when a city grows from one million to ten million (as has happened many times in developing nations). Such arguments suggest that her ideas apply only to cities with similar issues to those of New York, where Jacobs developed many of them.\nWorks.\nJane Jacobs spent her life studying cities. Her books include:\n\"The Death and Life of Great American Cities\".\n\"The Death and Life of Great American Cities\" is her single-most influential book and, possibly, the most influential book on urban planning and cities. Published in 1961, this book was widely read by both planning professionals and the general public. The book is a strong critique of the urban renewal policies of the 1950s, which, she claimed, destroyed communities and created isolated, unnatural urban spaces. In the book, she celebrates the diversity and complexity of old mixed-use neighborhoods while lamenting the monotony and sterility of modern planning. Jacobs described the key factors for achieving diversity as (1) districts must serve multiple functions to allow for diverse and overlapping uses during the day, (2) blocks should be company to allow for mixed uses, chance encounters, and commercial activities, (3) districts should include buildings of various ages and conditions to accommodate different users, and (4) districts should have sufficient populations to sustain vibrant atmospheres.262\nJacobs advocated the abolition of zoning laws and restoration of free markets in land, which would result in dense, mixed-use neighborhoods and she frequently cited New York City's Greenwich Village as an example of a vibrant urban community.\nRobert Caro has cited it as the strongest influence on \"The Power Broker\", his Pulitzer-winning biography of Robert Moses, although Caro does not mention Jacobs by name in the book despite Jacobs's battles with Moses over his proposed Lower Manhattan Expressway. Caro reportedly cut a chapter about Jacobs due to his book's length.\nBeyond the practical lessons in city design and planning that \"Death and Life\" offers, the theoretical underpinnings of the work challenge the modern development mindset. Jane Jacobs defends her positions with common sense and anecdotes.\n\"The Economy of Cities\".\nThe thesis of this 1979 book is that cities are the primary drivers of economic development. Her main argument is that explosive economic growth derives from urban import replacement. Import replacement is the process of producing goods locally that formerly were imported, e.g., Tokyo bicycle factories replacing Tokyo bicycle importers in the 1800s. Jacobs claims that import replacement builds up local infrastructure, skills, and production. Jacobs also claims that the increased production is subsequently exported to other cities, giving those other cities a new opportunity to engage in import replacement, thus producing a positive cycle of growth.\nIn an interview with Bill Steigerwald in \"Reason\", Jacobs said that if she is remembered for being a great intellectual she will be remembered not for her work concerning city planning, but for the discovery of import replacement. Critics erroneously claim that her ideas parrot the idea of import substitution advanced earlier by scholars such as Andre Gunder Frank. Import substitution was a national economic theory implying that if a nation substituted its imports with national production, the nation would become wealthier, whereas Jacob's idea is entirely about cities and could be called urban import substitution. However, even this would lead to confusion since in practice, import substitution in India and Latin America were government subsidized and mandated, whereas Jacobs's concept of import replacement is a free market process of discovery and division of labor within a city.\nIn the second part of the book, Jacobs argues that cities preceded agriculture. She argues that in cities trade in wild animals and grains allowed for the initial division of labor necessary for the discovery of husbandry and agriculture; these discoveries then moved out of the city due to land competition. It is commonly taught that agriculture preceded cities. This notion was promoted originally by archaeologist Vere Gordon Childe and in recent times, by Charles Keith Maisels. The apparent opposition between the traditional history and Jacobs' rests in differing definition of 'city', 'civilization', or 'urban'. Traditional history and archeology define 'urban' or 'civilization' as Synoecism\u00a0\u2013 as a literate, socially stratified, monolithic political community, whereas, as one can see from \"The Economy of Cities\" or from \"Cities and the Wealth of Nations\", Jacobs defined the city purely along the lines of geographically dense trade giving way to entrepreneurial discovery and subsequent improvements in the division of labor. Without the requirements of literacy, permanent and monumental building, or the signs of specialized civil and armed forces, 'cities' can be accurately interpreted as existing thousands of years before when Childe and Maisels place them.\n\"The Question of Separatism\".\n\"The Question of Separatism: Quebec and the Struggle over Sovereignty\" incorporated and expanded Jacobs's presentation of the 1979 Massey Lectures, entitled \"Canadian Cities and Sovereignty-Association\". It was published in 1980 and reprinted in 2011 with a previously-unpublished 2005 interview with Robin Philpot on the subject in which she evokes the relative overlooking of that book among her usual readership. This was the first time Jacobs was requested to discuss it in an interview. Columnist Richard Gwyn advanced that while not openly criticizing her, English-speaking Canadian readers thought she did not understand how Canadian politics worked and that she was not being helpful in a time of distress for national unity (the 1980 referendum was just defeated by a vote of 60 per cent). \"The Question of Separatism\" was also not mentioned in the bibliography of her 2006 obituary in \"The Globe and Mail\".\nJacobs's book advances the view that Quebec's eventual independence is best for Montreal, Toronto, the rest of Canada, and the world; and that such independence can be achieved peacefully. As precedent, she cites Norway's secession from Sweden and how it enriched both nations. The origins of the contemporary secessionist-movement in the Quiet Revolution are examined, along with Canada's historical reliance on natural resources and foreign-owned manufacturing for its own economic development. Jacobs asserts that such an approach is colonial and hence backward, citing by example, Canada buying its skis and furniture from Norway or Norwegian-owned factories in Canada, the latter procedure being a product of Canadian tariffs designed specifically to foster such factories.\nThe relevant public views of Ren\u00e9 L\u00e9vesque, Claude Ryan, and then Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau are also critically analyzed, an example being their failure to recognize that two respective, independent currencies are essential to the success of an independent Quebec and a smaller resultant Canada, an issue that is central to her book. Jacobs stresses the need for Montreal to continue developing its leadership of Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois culture, but that ultimately, such a need can never be fulfilled by Montreal's increasing tendencies toward regional-city status, tendencies foretelling economic, political, and cultural subservience to English-speaking Toronto. Such an outcome, Jacobs believed, would in the long run doom Quebec's independence as much as it would hinder Canada's own future. She concludes with her observation that the popular equating of political secession with political and economic failure is the result of the Enlightenment, which perceived nature as a force for \"standardization, uniformity, universality, and immutability\". Since then, naturalists and their readers have gradually realized that nature is a force for diversity, and that, \"diversity itself is of the essence of excellence\". The right kind of secession, Jacobs states, can lead to the right kind of diversity, and Quebec and Canada are capable of both, and must achieve both, to survive.\n\"Cities and the Wealth of Nations\".\n\"Cities and the Wealth of Nations\" (1984) attempts to do for economics what \"The Death and Life of Great American Cities\" did for modern urban planning, although it has not received the same critical attention. Beginning with a concise treatment of classical economics, this book challenges one of the fundamental assumptions of the greatest economists. Classical (and Neo-classical) economists consider the nation-state to be the main player in macroeconomics. Jacobs argues that it is not the nation-state, rather it is the city that is the true player in this worldwide game. She restates the idea of import replacement from her earlier book \"The Economy of Cities\", while speculating on the further ramifications of considering the city first and the nation second, or not at all.\nA spectrum of economic regions\nAlong with the previous books focused on economics, Jacobs proposes an array of types of regional economies (stylized facts) which can help to understand their different challenges, and potential for development. One can start at the bottom end of the spectrum with the 'backward' region, which are economies who have lost their competitive advantages and are losing population or becoming dependent on \"largesse\" transfers from wealthier areas. Next are the 'supply regions', which are usually known as natural resource extraction towns, and may be very wealthy during their heyday, but often suffer a decline into backwardness if the resource has run-out or has been substituted on outside markets. Similar to this is the 'transplant region', a fundamental aspect of Jacobs economic theory. Transplant economies are usually manufacturing plants who have been moved from the location where the product was invented. The reason for the transplant is to save land, labour, fiscal, and transportation costs. Transplant regions are usually found along main transportation routes, where there is a large labour pool of available labour. Backward regions, Supply regions, and Transplant regions make up the most vulnerable types of economies to outside shocks and competition from low-cost production zones.\nThe Jacobs spectrum of regions also includes types of cities which rely on classical principles of central-location. Jacobs discusses 'Entrep\u00f4t cities', which are economies based on the accumulation and warehousing of export goods, usually at a maritime port location. Next are 'Hub cities', or regional capitals, which are central locations for private markets and public services in a given geography.\nFinally, Jacobs presents the qualities of growing metropolitan areas. Jacobs defines the metropolis as a city that grows beyond its political borders. She terms the core city as the 'Import-Replacing' city. She terms the suburban sprawl of the metropolis as the 'City-Region'. Economic literature sometimes uses the term \"Jacobs agglomeration\" for these growing and innovative cities. CA Ramsay has proposed the term Forward Cities, as an echo to the opposing principle of 'Backward' economies.\nAccording to Jacobs, economies are constantly evolving and may move in and out of any of these categories. However, for an export-based economy such as a supply region, or a transplant town, to develop into a Forward city, the economy must engage in what she terms new-work. This implies a diversification of the economy. Jacobs strongly encourages breakaway entrepreneurship and local investment capital to do this. The modus operandi may be in import-replacing, in world-first innovation, or the adoption of production which is new to the community. Jacobs also insists on the benefits of having a city-currency, which acts as a positive feedback mechanism, to help drive local innovation and import-replacement. It also protects from outside demand shocks.\n\"Systems of Survival\".\n\"Systems of Survival: A Dialogue on the Moral Foundations of Commerce and Politics\" (1992) moves outside of the city, studying the moral underpinnings of work. As with her other work, she used an observational approach. This book is written as a Platonic dialogue. It appears that she (as described by characters in her book) took newspaper clippings of moral judgments related to work, collected and sorted them to find that they fit two patterns of moral behavior that were mutually exclusive. She calls these two patterns \"moral syndrome A\", or commercial moral syndrome, and \"moral syndrome B\", or guardian moral syndrome. She claims that the commercial moral syndrome is applicable to business owners, scientists, farmers, and traders. Similarly, she claims that the guardian moral syndrome is applicable to government, charities, hunter-gatherers, and religious institutions. She also claims that these moral syndromes are fixed, and do not fluctuate over time.\nIt is important to stress that Jane Jacobs is providing a theory about the morality of work, and not all moral ideas. Moral ideas that are not included in her system are applicable to both syndromes.\nJane Jacobs goes on to describe what happens when these two moral syndromes are mixed, showing the work underpinnings of the Mafia and communism, and what happens when New York subway police are paid bonuses here \u2013 reinterpreted slightly as a part of the larger analysis.\n\"The Nature of Economies\".\n\"The Nature of Economies\" (2000), a dialog between friends concerning the premise: \"human beings exist wholly within nature as part of the natural order in every respect\" (p. \"ix\"), argues that the same principles underlie both ecosystems and economies: \"development and co-development through differentiation and their combinations; expansion through diverse, multiple uses of energy; and self-maintenance through self-refueling\" (p.\u00a082). Jacobs also comments on the nature of economic and biological diversity and its role in the development and growth of the two kinds of systems.\nJacobs's characters discuss the four methods by which \"dynamically stable systems\" may evade collapse: \"bifurcations; positive-feedback loops; negative-feedback controls; and emergency adaptations\" (p.\u00a086). Their conversations also cover the \"double nature of fitness for survival\" (traits to avoid destroying one's own habitat as well as success in competition to feed and breed, p.\u00a0119), and unpredictability including the butterfly effect characterized in terms of multiplicity of variables as well as disproportional response to cause, and self-organization where \"a system can be making itself up as it goes along\" (p.\u00a0137).\nThe book is infused with many real-world economic and biological examples, which help keep the book \"down to earth\" and comprehensible, if dense. Concepts are furnished with both economic and biological examples, showing their coherence in both worlds.\nOne particularly interesting insight is the creation of \"something from nothing\" \u2013 an economy from nowhere. In the biological world, free energy is given through sunlight, but in the economic world human creativity and natural resources supply this free energy, or at least starter energy. Another interesting insight is the creation of economic diversity through the combination of different technologies, for example the typewriter and television as inputs and outputs of a computer system: this can lead to the creation of \"new species of work\".\n\"Dark Age Ahead\".\nPublished in 2004 by Random House, \"Dark Age Ahead\" posits Jacobs's argument that North American civilization shows signs of a spiral decline comparable to the Roman empire's collapse. Her discussion focuses on \"five pillars of our culture that we depend on to stand firm\", summarized as the nuclear family and community; quality in education; free thought in science; representational government and responsible taxes; and corporate and professional accountability. As the title of this book suggests, Jacobs's outlook is far more pessimistic than that of her previous works. However, in the conclusion she admits: \"At a given time it is hard to tell whether forces of cultural life or death are in the ascendancy. Is suburban sprawl, with its murders of communities and wastes of land, time, and energy, a sign of decay? Or is rising interest in overcoming sprawl a sign of vigor and adaptability in North American culture? Arguably, either could turn out to be true.\" While Jacobs idealized US democracy, \"Dark Age Ahead\" echoes the skepticism and disappointment that led to her emigration to Canada in 1968. Later, she would indicate that North American cultures, among others, were grounded in a \"plantation mentality\" that was culturally and ecologically unsustainable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71396", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71396", "title": "Cedilla", "text": "Diacritical mark (\u00b8)\nA cedilla ( ; from Spanish \"cedilla\", \"small \"ceda\"\", i.e. small \"z\"), or cedille (from French , ), is a hook or tail (\u00b8) added under certain letters (as a diacritical mark) to indicate that their pronunciation is modified. In Catalan (where it is called ), French, and Portuguese (where it is called a ) it is used only under the letter \u27e8c\u27e9 (to form \u27e8\u00e7\u27e9), and the entire letter is called, respectively, (i.e. \"broken C\"), , and (or , colloquially). It is used to mark vowel nasalization in many languages of Sub-Saharan Africa, including Vute from Cameroon.\nThis diacritic is not to be confused with the \"ogonek\" (\u25cc\u0328), which resembles the cedilla but mirrored. It looks also very similar to the diacritical comma, which is used in the Romanian and Latvian alphabet, and which is misnamed \"cedilla\" in the Unicode standard.\nThere is substantial overlap between the cedilla and a diacritical comma. The cedilla is traditionally centered on the letter, and when there is no stroke for it to attach to in that position, as in \"\u0145\u202f\u0146\", the connecting stroke is omitted, taking the form of a comma. However, the cedilla may instead be shifted left or right to attach to a descending leg. In some orthographies the comma form has been generalized even in cases where the cedilla could attach, as in \"\u1e10 \u1e11\", but is still considered to be a cedilla. This produces a contrast between attached and non-attached (comma) glyphs, which is usually left to the font but in the cases of \"\u015e\u202f\u015f \u0162\u202f\u0163\" and \"\u0218 \u0219 \u021a \u021b\" is formalized by Unicode.\nOrigin.\nThe tail originated in Spain as the bottom half of a miniature cursive z. The word \"cedilla\" is the diminutive of the Old Spanish name for this letter, (). Modern Spanish and isolationist Galician no longer use this diacritic, although it is used in Reintegrationist Galician, Portuguese, Catalan, Occitan, and French, which gives English the alternative spellings of \"cedille\", from French \"\", and the Portuguese form . An obsolete spelling of \"cedilla\" is \"cerilla\". The earliest use in English cited by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" is a 1599 Spanish-English dictionary and grammar. Chambers' \"Cyclop\u00e6dia\" is cited for the printer-trade variant \"ceceril\" in use in 1738. Its use in English is not universal and applies to loan words from French and Portuguese such as \"fa\u00e7ade\", \"lima\u00e7on\" and \"cacha\u00e7a\" (often typed \"facade\", \"limacon\" and \"cachaca\" because of lack of \"\u00e7\" keys on English-language keyboards).\nWith the advent of typeface modernism, the calligraphic nature of the cedilla was thought somewhat jarring on sans-serif typefaces, and so some designers instead substituted a comma design, which could be made bolder and more compatible with the style of the text. This reduces the visual distinction between the cedilla and the diacritical comma.\nC.\nThe most frequent character with cedilla is \"\u00e7\" (\"c\" with cedilla, as in \"fa\u00e7ade\"). It was first used for the sound of the voiceless alveolar affricate in old Spanish and stems from the letter \u27e8\ua763\u27e9 (the Visigothic form of the letter \u27e8z\u27e9), whose upper loop was lengthened and reinterpreted as a \"c\", whereas its lower loop became the diminished appendage, the cedilla.\nIt represents the \"soft\" sound , the voiceless alveolar sibilant, where a \"c\" would normally represent the \"hard\" sound (before \"a\", \"o\", \"u\", or at the end of a word) in English and in certain Romance languages such as Catalan, Galician, French (where \u00e7 appears in the name of the language itself, '), Ligurian, Occitan, and Portuguese. In Occitan, Friulian, and Catalan, \"\u00e7\" can also be found at the beginning of a word (', ') or at the end (').\nIt represents the voiceless postalveolar affricate (as in English \"church\") in Albanian, Azerbaijani, Crimean Tatar, Friulian, Kurdish, Tatar, Turkish (as in ', ', ', '), and Turkmen. It is also sometimes used this way in Manx, to distinguish it from the velar fricative.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet, \u27e8\u00e7\u27e9 represents the voiceless palatal fricative.\nS.\nThe character \"\u015f\" represents the voiceless postalveolar fricative (as in \"show\") in several languages, including many belonging to the Turkic languages, and included as a separate letter in their alphabets:\nIn HTML character entity references codice_1 and codice_2 can be used.\nT.\nGagauz uses \u0162 (T with cedilla), one of the few languages to do so, and \u015e (S with cedilla). Besides being present in some Gagauz orthographies, T with Cedilla also exists in the General Alphabet of Cameroon Languages, in the Kabyle language, in the Manjak and Mankanya languages, and possibly elsewhere.\nIn 1868, Ambroise Firmin-Didot suggested in his book ' (Observations on French Spelling) that French phonetics could be better regularized by adding a cedilla beneath the letter \"t\" in some words. For example, the suffix ' is usually not pronounced as but as . It has to be distinctly learned that in words such as ' (but not '), it is pronounced . A similar effect occurs with other prefixes or within words. Firmin-Didot surmised that a new character could be added to French orthography. A letter with the same description, T-cedilla (majuscule: \u0162, minuscule: \u0163), is used in Gagauz. A similar letter, the T-comma (majuscule: \u021a, minuscule: \u021b), exists in Romanian, but it has a comma accent, not a cedilla.\nLanguages with other characters with cedillas.\nLatvian.\nComparatively, some consider the diacritics on the palatalized Latvian consonants \"\u0123\", \"\u0137\", \"\u013c\", \"\u0146\", and formerly \"\u0157\" to be cedillas. Although their Adobe glyph names are commas, their names in the Unicode Standard are \"g\", \"k\", \"l\", \"n\", and \"r\" with a cedilla. The letters were introduced to the Unicode standard before 1992, and their names cannot be altered. The uppercase equivalent \"\u0122\" sometimes has a regular cedilla.\nMarshallese.\nIn Marshallese orthography, four letters in Marshallese have cedillas: \u27e8\u013c m\u0327 \u0146 o\u0327\u27e9. In standard printed text they are \"always\" cedillas, and their omission or the substitution of comma below and dot below diacritics are nonstandard.\nAs of 2011[ [update]], many font rendering engines do not display \"any\" of these properly, for two reasons:\nBecause of these font display issues, it is not uncommon to find nonstandard \"ad hoc\" substitutes for these letters. The online version of the Marshallese-English Dictionary (the only complete Marshallese dictionary in existence) displays the letters with dot below diacritics, all of which do exist as precombined glyphs in Unicode: \", \", \" and \". The first three exist in the International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration, and \"\" exists in the Vietnamese alphabet, and both of these systems are supported by the most recent versions of common fonts like Arial, Courier New, Tahoma and Times New Roman. This sidesteps most of the Marshallese text display issues associated with the cedilla, but is still inappropriate for polished standard text.\nVute.\nVute, a Mambiloid language from Cameroon, uses cedilla for the nasalization of all vowel qualities (cf. the ogonek used in Polish and Navajo for the same purpose). This includes unconventional Roman letters that are formalized from the IPA into the official writing system. These include &lt;\"i\u0327 \u0229 \u0268\u0327 \u0259\u0327 a\u0327 u\u0327 o\u0327 \u0254\u0327&gt;.\"\nHebrew.\nThe ISO 259 romanization of Biblical Hebrew uses \u0228 (E with cedilla) and \u1e1c (E with cedilla and breve).\nSaanich.\nSaanich uses a spacing cedilla \u27e8\u00b8\u27e9 as a letter. For fonts created or updated after 2025, a cedilla in the middle of a word should not trigger a word break at the end of a line, to accommodate Saanich.\nDiacritical comma.\nLanguages such as Romanian, Latvian and Livonian add a comma (virgula) to some letters, such as \"\", which looks somewhat like a cedilla, but is more precisely a diacritical comma. This is particularly confusing with letters which can take either diacritic: for example, the consonant is written as \"\u015f\" in Turkish but as \"\u0219\" in Romanian, and Romanian writers will sometimes use the former instead of the latter because of insufficient computer support. \nAdobe names of the Latvian letters ( and formerly ) use the word \"comma\", but in the Unicode Standard they are named \"g\", \"k\", \"l\", \"n\", and \"r\" with \"cedilla\". The letters were introduced to the Unicode standard before 1992, and their names cannot be altered. Influenced by Latvian, Livonian has the same problem for \"d\u0326\", \"\u013c\", \"\u0146\", \"\u0157\" and \"\u021b\". \nThe Polish letters and and Lithuanian letters and are not made with the cedilla either, but with the unrelated ogonek diacritic.\nUnicode.\nUnicode encodes a number of cases of \"letter with cedilla\" (so called, as explained above) as precomposed characters. In addition, several more letters in language orthographies are composed using the combining character facility ( and ).\nIn ambiguous cases, typeface designers must choose whether to use a cedilla diacritic or comma-below diacritic for these codepoints, leaving it to others to provide the user with a method to achieve the other form (i.e., that relies on the combining character method). Here are three popular faces that demonstrate the choices made:\nIn each case, the diacritic displayed with D, G, K, L, N and R is a comma-below; in the other cases it is displayed as a cedilla. It may be that computer fonts are sold in the Romanian and Turkish markets that favour the national standard form of this diacritic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71397", "revid": "735741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71397", "title": "Cadaver monument", "text": "Effigy tombs or slabs depicting decomposition\nA cadaver monument or transi is a type of funerary monument to a deceased person, featuring a sculpted tomb effigy of a skeleton, or of an emaciated or decomposing dead body, with closed eyes. It was particularly characteristic of the Late Middle Ages when they were designed as a to remind viewers of the transience and vanity of mortal life compared to the eternity and desirability of the Christian after-life. The format is in stark contrast to gisants, which are always recumbent, in full dress, with open eyes and hands clasped and raised in prayer.\nCadaver monuments first appeared in the 1380s and remained a popular form of funerary art for 200 subsequent years. In a still widely debated theory popularized by the historians Helen M. Roe and John Aberth, cadaver monuments are often interpreted as a form of \"memento mori\" or adaption of the motif of \"The Three Living and the Three Dead\". They show the human body's \"transition\" from life to decomposition, highlighting the contrast between worldly riches and elegance and the degradation of death.\nOver the centuries, the depictions became more realistic and gruesome, while earlier tendencies to line the tombs with moralizing inscriptions on the vanities of life were abandoned. The morbid art form reached its peak in the late 16th century, with more extreme effigies depicting putrefied corpses outside of the funerary monument context, and taking centre stage as stand-alone sculptures.\nDevelopment.\nA depiction of a rotting cadaver in art (as opposed to a skeleton) is called a transi. However, the term \"cadaver monument\" can really be applied to other varieties of monuments, e.g. with skeletons or with the deceased completely wrapped in a shroud. In the \"double-decker\" monuments, in Erwin Panofsky's phrase, a sculpted stone bier displays on the top level the recumbent effigy (or \"gisant\") of a living person, where they may be life-sized and sometimes represented kneeling in prayer, and in dramatic contrast as a rotting cadaver on the bottom level, often shrouded and sometimes in company of worms and other flesh-eating creatures. The iconography is regionally distinct: the depiction of such animals on these cadavers is more commonly found on the European mainland, and especially in the German regions. The dissemination of cadaver imagery in the late-medieval danse macabre may also have influenced the iconography of cadaver monuments.\nIn Christian funerary art, cadaver monuments were a dramatic departure from the usual practice of depicting the deceased as they were in life, for example recumbent but with hands together in prayer, or even as dynamic military figures drawing their swords, such as the 13th- and 14th-century effigies surviving in the Temple Church, London. Cadaver monuments often acted as a portrait of the deceased in death.\nThe term can also be used for a monument which shows only the cadaver without a corresponding representation of the living person. The sculpture is intended as a didactic example of how transient earthly glory is, since it depicts what all people of every status finally become. Kathleen Cohen's study of five French ecclesiastics who commissioned \"transi\" monuments determined that common to all of them was a successful worldliness that seemed almost to demand a shocking display of transient mortality. A classic example is the \"Transi de Ren\u00e9 de Chalons\" by Ligier Richier, in the church of Saint Etienne in Bar-le-Duc, France, pictured below right.\nCadaver monuments were made only for high-ranking persons, usually royalty, bishops, abbots or nobility, because one had to be wealthy to have one made, and influential enough to be allotted space for one in a church of limited capacity. Some monuments for royalty were double tombs, for both a king and queen. The French kings Louis XII, Francis I and Henry II were doubly portrayed, as couples both as living effigies and as naked cadavers, in their double double-decker monuments in the Basilica of Saint-Denis near Paris. Other varieties also exist, such as cadaver imagery on incised slabs and monumental brasses, including the so-called \"shroud brasses\", of which many survive in England.\nCountries.\nFrance.\nFrance has a long history of cadaver monuments, though not as many examples or varieties survive as in England. One of the earliest and anatomically convincing examples is the gaunt cadaver effigy of the medieval physician Guillaume de Harsigny (d. 1393) at Laon. Another early example is the effigy on the multi-layered wall-monument of Cardinal Jean de La Grange (died 1402) in Avignon. Kathleen Cohen lists many further extant examples. A revival of the form occurred in the Renaissance, as testified by the two examples to Louis XII and his wife Anne of Brittany at Saint-Denis, and of Queen Catherine de' Medici who commissioned a cadaver monument for her husband Henry II.\nEngland.\nThe earliest known \"transi\" monument is the very faint matrix (i.e. indent) of a now lost monumental brass shrouded demi-effigy on the ledger stone slab commemorating \"John the Smith\" (c.1370) at St Bartholomew\u2019s Church in Brightwell Baldwin in Oxfordshire. In the 15th century the sculpted \"transi\" effigy made its appearance in England. Cadaver monuments survive in many English cathedrals and parish churches. The earliest surviving one is in Lincoln Cathedral, to Bishop Richard Fleming who founded Lincoln College, Oxford and died in 1431. Canterbury Cathedral houses the well-known cadaver monument to Henry Chichele, Archbishop of Canterbury (died 1443) and in Exeter Cathedral survives the 16th-century monument and chantry chapel of Precentor Sylke, inscribed in Latin: \"I am what you will be, and I was what you are. Pray for me I beseech you.\" Winchester Cathedral has two cadaver monuments.\nThe cadaver monument traditionally identified as that of John Wakeman, Abbot of Tewkesbury from 1531 to 1539, survives in Tewkesbury Abbey. Following the dissolution of the monasteries, he retired and later became the first Bishop of Gloucester. The monument, with vermin crawling on a sculpted skeletal corpse, may have been prepared for him, but his body was in fact buried at Forthampton in Gloucestershire.\nA rarer, modern type is the standing, shrouded effigy type exemplified by the tomb of the poet John Donne (d. 1631) in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral in London. Similar examples from the Early Modern period signify faith in the Resurrection.\nItaly.\nCadaver monuments are found in many Italian churches. Andrea Bregno sculpted several of them, including those of Cardinal Alain de Co\u00ebtivy in Santa Prassede, Ludovico Cardinal d'Albert at Santa Maria in Ara Coeli and Bishop Juan D\u00edaz de Coca in Santa Maria sopra Minerva in Rome. Three other prominent monuments are those of Cardinal Matteo d'Acquasparta in Santa Maria in Ara Coeli and those of Bishop Gonsalvi (1298) and of Cardinal Gonsalvo (1299) in Santa Maria Maggiore, all sculpted by Giovanni de Cosma, the youngest of the Cosmati family lineage.\nGermany and the Netherlands.\nMany cadaver monuments and ledger stones survive in Germany and the Netherlands. An impressive example is the 16th-century Van Brederode double-decker monument at Vianen near Utrecht, which depicts Reynoud van Brederode (d. 1556) and his wife Philippote van der Marck (d. 1537) as shrouded figures on the upper level, with a single verminous cadaver below.\nIreland.\nA total of 11 cadaver monuments have been recorded in Ireland, many of which are no longer in situ. The earliest complete record of these monuments was compiled by Helen M. Roe in 1969. The monumental limestone slab known as \"The Modest Man\", dedicated to Thomas Ronan (d. 1554) and his wife Johanna Tyrry (d. 1569) is in the Triskel Christchurch in Cork. A variant form is the Cadaver Stones, which lack any sculpted superstructure or canopy. These may merely be sculptural elements removed from more elaborate now lost monuments, as is the case with the stone of Sir Edmond Goldyng and his wife Elizabeth Fleming, built in the early 16th century into the churchyard wall of St. Peter's Church of Ireland, Drogheda.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71399", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71399", "title": "Jeanne d'Arc", "text": ""}
{"id": "71402", "revid": "46065980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71402", "title": "Margaret of York", "text": "Duchess of Burgundy from 1468 to 1477\nMargaret of York (3 May 1446 \u2013 23 November 1503), also known as Margaret of Burgundy, was Duchess of Burgundy from 1468 to 1477 as the third wife of Charles the Bold, and after his death (1477) acted as a protector of the Burgundian State. She was a daughter of Richard, 3rd Duke of York, and of Cecily Neville, and the sister of two kings of England, Edward IV and Richard III. Born at Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire, in the Kingdom of England, she died at Mechelen in the Low Countries.\nEarly life.\nIsabella of Portugal, Duchess of Burgundy, the mother of Charles the Bold, was, through her blood ties and her perception of Burgundian interests, pro-English. As a granddaughter of John of Gaunt, she was consequently sympathetic to the House of Lancaster. She believed that Burgundian trade, from which the Burgundian State drew its vast wealth, depended upon friendly relations with England. For this reason she was prepared to favour any English faction which was willing to favour Burgundy. By 1454, she favoured the House of York, headed by Margaret's father, Richard, 3rd Duke of York. Although the King of England, Henry VI, was the head of the House of Lancaster, his wife, Margaret of Anjou, was a niece of Burgundy's bitter enemy, Charles VII of France, and was herself an enemy of the Burgundians. The Duke of York, by contrast, shared Burgundy's enmity towards the French, and preferred the Burgundians.\nBecause of this, when the Duke of York came to power in 1453\u20131454, during Henry VI's first period of insanity, negotiations were made between himself and Isabella for a marriage between Charles the Bold, then Count of Charolais, and one of York's unmarried daughters, of whom the 8-year-old Margaret was the youngest. The negotiations petered out, however, due to power struggles in England, and the preference of Charles's father, Philip the Good, for a French alliance. Philip had Charles betrothed to Isabella of Bourbon, the daughter of Charles I, Duke of Bourbon, and Agnes of Burgundy, in late March 1454, and the pair were married on 31 October 1454.\nMargaret, being a useful bargaining tool to her family, was still unmarried at age 19, when Isabella of Bourbon died in September 1465. She had borne Charles only a daughter, Mary, which made it an imperative for him to remarry and father a son. The situation had changed since 1454: Charles was now highly respected by his father, who had in his old age entrusted the rule of Burgundy to his son. Charles was pro-English, and wished to make an English marriage and alliance against the French. For her own part, Margaret's family were far more powerful and secure than they had been in 1454: her father had been killed at the Battle of Wakefield on 30 December 1460, but her brother was now King Edward IV, opposed ineffectively only by Margaret of Anjou and her son, Edward of Westminster. This made Margaret a far more valuable bride than she had been as the mere daughter of a duke. Because of this, Charles sent his close advisor, Guillaume de Clugny, to London weeks after the death of his wife, to propose to Edward IV a marriage between himself and Margaret. Edward responded warmly, and in spring 1466 sent his brother-in-law, Lord Scales, to Burgundy, where Scales made a formal offer of Margaret's hand in marriage to Charles, and put forward Edward's own proposal of a reciprocal marriage between Charles' daughter Mary and Edward's brother, George, 1st Duke of Clarence.\nMarriage.\nThe marriage did not take place immediately, however. Continued talks were required, particularly since Charles was unwilling to marry his only child and potential heiress to George, Duke of Clarence, and these talks were undertaken by Anthony, Grand Bastard of Burgundy, Charles's half-brother. But added problems were introduced by the French: Louis XI did not want an alliance between Burgundy and England, his two greatest enemies. Louis accordingly tried to break the two apart, by offering the hand of his elder daughter, Anne, to Charles, that of his younger daughter, Joan, to Edward's youngest brother, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, and that of his brother-in-law, Philip of Bresse, to Margaret. Edward showed interest in the latter two propositions, offending Charles the Bold, and delaying the Anglo-Burgundian relations.\nInstead, in 1466, Margaret was betrothed to Peter, Constable of Portugal, whom the rebellious Catalans had invited to become their King. Peter was himself a nephew of Duchess Isabella of Burgundy, and the betrothal thus signified an attempt to placate Burgundy. It was not to be, however; worn out by illness, disappointments, sorrow and overwork, Peter died on 29 June 1466, leaving Margaret available once more.\nBy 1467, the situation had changed again. Philip the Good had died, and Charles the Bold had become Duke of Burgundy. Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, had turned against Edward IV, and was plotting against him with French support. Edward in such circumstances needed the support of Charles, and provided no further obstacles to the marriage negotiations, formally agreeing to it in October 1467. Negotiations between the Duke's mother, Isabella, and the King of England's in-laws, Lord Scales and Earl Rivers, then proceeded between December 1467 and June 1468.\nDuring this time, Louis XI did all he could to prevent the marriage, demanding that the Pope refuse to give a dispensation for the marriage (the pair were cousins in the fourth degree), promising trade favours to the English, undermining Edward's credit with the international bankers to prevent him being able to pay for Margaret's dowry, encouraging a Lancastrian invasion of Wales, and slandering Margaret, claiming that she was not a virgin and had borne a bastard son. He was ignored, and a dispensation was secured after Burgundian bribes secured Papal acquiescence. A complex agreement was drawn up between England and Burgundy, covering mutual defence, trade, currency exchange, fishing rights and freedom of travel, all based on the marriage between the Duke and Margaret. By the terms of the marriage contract, Margaret retained her rights to the English throne, and her dowry was promised to Burgundy even if she died within the first year (often, the dowry would return to the bride's family under such circumstances). For his own part, Charles dowered Margaret with the cities of Mechelen, Oudenaarde and Dendermonde.\nThe marriage contract was completed in February 1468, and signed by Edward IV in March. The Papal dispensation arrived in late May, and preparations to send Margaret to Burgundy began. There was little enthusiasm for it outside Burgundy \u2013 the French naturally detested this union between their two enemies, whilst the English merchants, who still suffered from restrictions on the sale of their cloth in England, showed their disapproval by attacking Dutch and Flemish merchants amongst them.\nMargaret left Margate for Sluys on 23 June 1468. Lord Scales and Richard Boyville were among those who escorted her to meet her future bridegroom. Despite Louis XI having ordered his ships to seize her on her journey, her convoy crossed without incident, reaching Sluys on the evening of the 25th. The following day, she met with her bridegroom's mother, Isabella, and daughter, Mary; the meeting was a success, and the three of them would remain close friends for the rest of their lives. On 27 June, she met Charles for the first time, and the pair were privately married between 5am and 6am on 3 July, in the house of a wealthy merchant of Damme. Charles then left for Bruges, allowing the new Duchess the honour of entering separately a few hours later.\nThe celebrations that followed were extravagant even by the standards of the Burgundians, who were already noted for their opulence and generous festivities. The bride made her Joyous Entry in a golden litter drawn by white horses, wearing upon her head a coronet. During this procession, she charmed the burghers of Bruges when she chose to wave to them rather than shut herself away from the wind and rain. In the city itself, wine spurted freely from sculpted archers and artificial pelicans in artificial trees; the canals were decorated with torches, and the bridges decked with flowers; the arms of the happy couple were displayed everywhere, accompanied by the mottoes of the pair: Charles's \"Je l'ay emprins\" (\"I have undertaken it\") and Margaret's \"Bien en aviengne\" (\"May good come of it\"). The celebrations also included the \"Tournament of the Golden Tree\" that was arranged around an elaborately detailed allegory, designed to honor the bride.\nCrown of Margaret of York.\nWhen the Duke and Duchess appeared there, both wore magnificent crowns. Margaret's crown was adorned with pearls, and with enamelled white roses for the House of York set between red, green and white enamelled letters of the Latinization of her name (\"Margarita de York\", \"m ar ga ri ta de yo rk\"), with gold Cs and Ms, entwined with lovers' knots. Though it seems to have been made some years earlier, Margaret wore this crown at her wedding to Charles the Bold in Bruges in 1468. Its original leather case still bears traces of old gilt. The initials CM as well as the coats of arms of York and Burgundy are again found on the lid. The rest of the case is decorated with tendrils and small dragons embossed in the leather. \nThe crown is much too small to fit around a head, and was probably intended to be worn around a pointed hennin, or on top of piled-up hair. It may always have been intended to be presented at some point after the coronation as a votive crown for a famous statue of the Virgin Mary. Margaret presented the crown to the Church of Our Lady during a visit to Aachen in 1475. Today the statue, placed next to the altar in the cathedral, wears the crown on festive days. In 1475 a matching crown was fashioned for the child.\nMargaret's donation of the crown to Aachen spared it the fate of much royal regalia in the English Civil War which saw the destruction of all the main English Crown Jewels. It thus remains one of only two medieval royal English crowns still surviving, the other being the Crown of Princess Blanche, now in the Munich Residenz in Germany. Margaret's crown can still be seen in the Aachen Cathedral Treasury. \nCharles wore an equally splendid but no doubt larger crown, accompanied by a golden gown encrusted with diamonds, pearls and great jewels. The parades, the streets lined with tapestry hung from houses, the feasting, the masques and allegorical entertainments, the jewels, impressed all observers as \"the marriage of the century\". It is re-enacted at Bruges for tourists every five years as the Procession of the Golden Tree.\nDuchess of Burgundy.\nAlthough the marriage produced no children, Margaret proved a valuable asset to Burgundy. Immediately after her wedding, she journeyed with her step-daughter Mary through Flanders, Brabant and Hainaut, visiting the great towns: Ursel, Ghent, Dendermonde, Asse, Brussels, Oudenaarde and Kortrijk were all impressed by her intelligence and capability. Less valuable, perhaps, were the family connections she brought. In May 1469, her brother, Edward IV, attempted to present Charles the Bold with the Order of the Garter, an honour which would have made Charles guilty of treason against Louis XI had he accepted it; although the Dowager Duchess Isabella warned her son to refuse the offer, which he did, giving Louis XI an excuse for further machinations against Burgundy.\nIn August 1469, Edward IV temporarily lost power, when his brother the Duke of Clarence and the Earl of Warwick rebelled and took the King into custody; Charles was forced to intercede on the part of his brother-in-law, ordering the London merchants to swear loyalty to Edward under threat of losing their trading rights in Burgundy, a threat that proved successful. But the next year, Margaret was left despairing when Clarence and Warwick supported a French-backed Lancastrian invasion of England: although she, together with her mother Cecily, Dowager Duchess of York, attempted to reconcile Clarence and Edward IV, the rebellion continued, and on 2 October 1470 the Lancastrians were returned to power and Edward had fled to Margaret and Charles in Burgundy.\nHer brother's overthrow lessened Margaret's dynastic worth; this, together with regard for her brother, made her plead passionately to her husband that he support Edward and make measures to restore him. Nonetheless, her husband paid little attention to her begging; when he decided to support Edward, it was when he had decided for himself that it was in his best interests to oppose the Lancastrian rule of England, backed as it was by a France which had in early December 1470 been encouraged by the English situation to declare war on Burgundy. Even so, by 4 January 1471, Charles had agreed to support the King-in-exile in regaining the English throne, and this renewal of friendship between the two men was followed by Edward visiting Margaret at Hesdin until 13 January, the first time the pair had seen one another since Margaret's departure from England.\nBy April 1471, Edward was back in England: Margaret followed events carefully, requesting meticulous details of events in England, and was pleased to note the reconciliation between her brothers George and Edward. She also provided her mother-in-law, Isabella, with information on the progress of Edward's campaign to regain the throne: it was she, for example, who replied to Isabella's questions over alleged disrespectful treatment of the Earl of Warwick, by explaining that Edward had \"heard that nobody in the city believed that Warwick and his brother were dead, so he [Edward] had their bodies brought to St Paul's where they were laid out and uncovered from the chest upwards in the sight of everybody.\" Edward IV was successfully restored; Edward of Westminster, the son and heir of Henry VI, had died in battle, and Henry VI, who had been briefly restored, died or was murdered in his cell in the Tower of London two weeks later. The two deaths brought to an end the direct line of the House of Lancaster.\nBy this time, Isabella's health was beginning to fail; in June 1471, she drew up her will, in which she bequeathed her favourite residence of La-Motte-au-Bois to Margaret. Yet, at the same time, Isabella and Charles struck against Margaret's family: with Henry VI and his son dead, Isabella was one of the most senior members of the House of Lancaster, and had a good claim to the English throne; this claim she legally transferred to Charles in July, which would allow Charles later that year to officially claim the English throne, despite the fact that his brother-in-law was the Yorkist King of England. However, Charles chose not to press the claim, finding it more to his advantage to maintain his support of Edward IV.\nBy 1477, Margaret's position as Duchess of Burgundy was no longer as brilliant as it had been: after Isabella's death in 1471, Charles had become increasingly tyrannical and grandiose, dreaming of assembling a new Kingdom of Lotharingia from the North Sea to the Mediterranean; to accomplish this, he warred continuously with his neighbours, who responded by allying against him. Meanwhile, Louis XI had proved masterful at destabilising the Burgundian State: Edward IV had been detached from his alliance, Charles' reputation and banking credit had been undermined by Louis, and Burgundian trade was choked by French embargoes. By 1476, the Duke was regarded as a tyrant by his people, who were suffering from the French refusal to export their wine and bread to Burgundy, and who dreaded his terrible reprisals against rebels being unleashed on them. In 1476, he arranged for his daughter and heiress, Mary, to be betrothed to Maximilian of Austria; on 5 January 1477 he was killed in battle outside Nancy, in Lorraine.\nDowager duchess.\nIt was in the wake of her husband's death that Margaret proved truly invaluable to Burgundy. She had always been regarded as a skillful and intelligent politician; now, she went beyond even that. To her step-daughter, Mary, now Duchess of Burgundy, she gave guidance and help using her own experiences in the court of Edward IV, where she had largely avoided being used as a pawn and contributed to the arrangement of her own marriage; against the wave of marriage offers that flooded to the two duchesses in Ghent (from the recently widowed Duke of Clarence, from Charles, the 7-year-old Dauphin of France, and from a brother of Edward IV's wife, Elizabeth Woodville) she stood firm and advised Mary to marry Maximilian of Austria. Maximilian, the 18-year-old son of the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick III to whom Charles the Bold had betrothed Mary, was ambitious and active enough, in Margaret's opinion, to defend Mary's legacy.\nShe strongly advised Mary to accept Maximilian's suit and marry him immediately; he arrived in Burgundy on 5 August 1477, and by 17 August had arrived at Ten Waele Castle, in Ghent. He met Mary there\u2014they were both \"pale as death\", but found each other to their mutual liking\u2014and Margaret took part in the traditional courtly games of love, telling Maximilian before the assembled nobility that his bride \"had about her a carnation it behoved him to discover.\" The carnation duly proved to be in the Duchess's bodice, from which Maximilian carefully removed it. The pair were married the next day, on 18 August.\nBurgundy was far from safe: the Duchy of Burgundy itself had already been conquered by the French, who were continuing to attack from all sides, taking advantage of the state's instability. Margaret now moved to secure military support from her brother, Edward IV; he sent enough support to allow Mary and Maximilian to resist the French advances any further, although the Duchy itself remained lost. Louis XI, recognising the danger Margaret posed to him, attempted to buy her off with a French pension and a promise of personally protecting her; she contemptuously refused, and instead sailed in summer 1480 to London, where she was again attended by Richard Boyville and negotiated a resumption of the Anglo-Burgundian alliance and renewed trade. Nor did she stop there in supporting Mary and Maximilian; when, on 22 July 1478, Mary gave birth to a son and heir, Philip, Louis XI had rumours spread that the child was, in fact, a girl. Margaret, who was standing godmother to the child, matter-of-factly disproved the rumour: as the Christening party left the church of St Donat, she conclusively proved that the child was an undoubted male, by undressing him and presenting him to the assembled crowd. In 1480, the next child of Mary and Maximilian was a girl: the Duke and Duchess named her Margaret, after the dowager Duchess.\nMargaret was however dealt a devastating blow in 1482: her much-loved step-daughter, Mary, fell from her horse whilst hunting, and broke her back. The injuries were fatal, and Mary died on 27 March. From a personal point of view, this was a harsh blow to Margaret; politically, Mary's death weakened the Burgundian state further. The Burgundians were now sick of war, and unwilling to accept the rule of Maximilian as regent for his son, the 4-year-old Duke Philip, or even as guardian of the children. They forced his hand: on 23 December 1482, the Three Estates of the Lowlands signed the Treaty of Arras with Louis XI, granting him the Burgundian Lowlands, Picardy and the county of Boulogne. Margaret was unable to secure assistance from Edward IV, who had made a truce with France; consequently, she and Maximilian were forced to accept the \"fait accompli\". Maximilian brokered a personal peace with Louis by arranging for his daughter, Margaret, to be betrothed to the young Dauphin of France; she was sent to be raised at the French court, taking with her the Free County of Burgundy and the County of Artois with her as a dowry.\nThis was not the end of the problems for Margaret and Maximilian: the Netherlanders still disliked his rule of the territory. In 1488, he was taken prisoner in Bruges by the citizens. Margaret called on the emperor for help. Later he was released after making concessions and also because Bruges feared his father's army. The next year, he was summoned back to Austria by his father, the Emperor; Burgundy was left to be governed by Margaret together with the Burgundian Estates, both of whom also undertook the guardianship of the young Duke Philip. She would later welcome his daughter, Margaret, after her rejection by the French court in 1493. Her residence in Mechelen thus became a princely court. This was also the place Philip the Fair's children would be educated when he departed for Spain in 1501. Margaret of Austria, her godchild, would continue to choose Mechelen as residence (and thus the capital city of the Low Countries) as a widowed governor in 1507. Blockmans opines that Margaret of York was the model of Margaret of Austria as well as later widowed female governors, as they inherited her residence, library and household. Another indication of the close relationship between Margaret and Maximilian was a book recounting Macedonian monarchy and the Hellenistic kingdom, written by Justinius, that she gave him, with the inscription \"Your loyal mother\". The sign that showed this book was intended for Maximilian was the imperial coat of arms, which he could not have carried before his father's death in 1493, as well as the codex style, the subject, the language.\nBy this time, Margaret had already suffered more personal tragedies. Her brother, the Duke of Clarence, had been executed by Edward IV in 1478; Edward himself had died of illness in 1483 and finally, her younger brother Richard, who took the throne as Richard III was in 1485 killed at the Battle of Bosworth by the leader of the House of Lancaster, Henry Tudor, Earl of Richmond, a cousin and nephew of Henry VI, who went on to become Henry VII, and to marry the daughter of Edward IV, Elizabeth of York. With the death of Richard, the House of York ceased to rule in England. Margaret consequently was a staunch supporter of anyone willing to challenge Tudor, and backed both Lambert Simnel and Perkin Warbeck, even going so far as to acknowledge Warbeck as her nephew, the younger son of Edward IV, the Duke of York. She offered financial backing to support his attempt to take the throne, hiring continental mercenaries to accompany him on an expedition to England in 1495. Warbeck suffered a significant defeat at the Battle of Deal, and then failed to take Waterford in Ireland. Warbeck was probably an imposter and would be locked up in the Tower of London and subsequently executed by Henry VII. Henry in fact found Margaret undoubtedly problematic, but there was little he could do since she was protected by her step-son-in-law Maximilian.\nMargaret died on 23 November 1503, at the age of 57, shortly after the return of her step-grandson, Philip the Handsome, to Burgundy. Her death in that year allowed her to be spared the grief of Philip's untimely death of typhoid fever in 1506. She was buried in the Church of the Cordeliers in Mechelen.\nLegacy and personal life.\nWilliam Caxton, who introduced the new art of printing into the Kingdom of England and was a staunch Yorkist supporter, counted Margaret as one of his patrons. A presentation copy of \"Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye\", the first book printed in the English language (late 1473 \u2013 early 1474), has a specially made engraving showing Caxton presenting the book to Margaret. The volume is now in the Huntington Library, San Marino, California. This \"patronage\" may be more advertising than analogous to traditional medieval patronage.\nOf the many illuminated manuscripts commissioned by Margaret when she was Duchess of Burgundy, one of the most celebrated is \"The Visions of Tondal\", illustrated by Simon Marmion and currently in the Getty Museum (a facsimile has been published).\nA good-looking woman, but (rarely for the hyperbole of her age) never described as beautiful, Margaret had fine features, and was, at almost 6 feet, very tall, a feature accentuated by her slimness, and her straight and upright bearing. Her eyes were grey, and her mouth was small; her smile allowed her to demonstrate her wry humour, her wit, and her graciousness. In appearance, she was utterly unlike the dark and burly Duke Charles the Bold, who was shorter than her: when they met for the first time, she was forced to bend in order to receive his kiss. But her intelligence was keen, and her will strong; she made a worthy bride for the Duke in nature.\nWith her husband's family, she got on excellently: she became a mother figure to her step-daughter, Mary, who shared Margaret's interests in reading, riding, hunting, and falconry; her mother-in-law, Isabella of Portugal, said of Margaret that she was \"well pleased with the sight of this lovely lady, and pleased with her manners and virtues\". A capable ruler, she proved a masterful Duchess; she was a Yorkist in sympathies, but she was before that the Duchess of Burgundy. She bore no male heir to succeed to Burgundy, but she preserved it from ruin; to her actions can be ascribed the survival of the Burgundian state, and the prevention of French dominance in Europe.\nIn fiction and media.\nMargaret is the major character in the 2008 novel \"A Daughter of York\" by Anne Easter Smith. The book begins with Margaret mourning her father and brother and continues through her marriage and the aftermath of her husband's death. She also features in Easter Smith's 2009 \"The King's Grace\".\nIn the video game \"\", there is a contract mission in London where Margaret is killed on behalf of Henry VII.\nIn the 1972 BBC drama \"The Shadow of the Tower\" she was played by Rachel Kempson.\nIn the 2017 Starz drama \"The White Princess\" (not to be confused with its predecessor \"The White Queen\"), she was portrayed by English actress Joanne Whalley.\nIn the 2017 German-Austrian TV series \"Maximilian\" about Maximilian I and Mary of Burgundy, she was portrayed by French actress Alix Poisson.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71406", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71406", "title": "PagePlus", "text": "Desktop publishing software for Windows (1991\u20132019)\nPagePlus was a desktop publishing (page layout) program developed by Serif for Microsoft Windows. The first version was released in 1991 as the first commercial sub-\u00a3100 DTP package for Microsoft Windows. The final release was PagePlus X9, which was released in November 2016. In June 2019 it was officially replaced by Serif with Affinity Publisher.\nHistory.\nPagePlus was first launched in 1990 and was the first sub-\u00a3100 desktop publishing program for Windows 3.0. Three years later, in spring 1993, PagePlus 2 was released and provided full colour printing support. Following this release, a new version of the product was released on a roughly annual basis.\nSerif did a complete rewrite of the original program source code for the release of PagePlus version 8. Despite the rewrite, at that time the program name was retained and the version number was simply incremented. Version 8 was able to read data files created in previous versions 1 to 7.\nReplacement by Affinity Publisher.\nSerif announced that PagePlus X9 was to be the final PagePlus release. The last build issued to date is v19.0.2.22 from 28 April 2017. Serif ceased further development of all \"Plus\" products to focus efforts on their 'Affinity' product line.\nSerif began rewriting their DTP software, to allow a multi-platform implementation, and allow new methods of internal program operation with more modern operating systems and the typical current (2018/9) configuration of PCs.\nA public beta of Serif's Affinity Publisher (the closest of the Affinity applications to PagePlus functionality) was launched in August 2018, followed by the first full version of the application in June 2019.\nOverview.\nWhile PagePlus was generally targeted at the \"entry level\" DTP user, some of the functionality present in the market leading applications (Quark's XPress and Adobe's InDesign) is present in PagePlus, such as working in the CMYK colour space, OpenType Feature support, and Optical margin alignment (Optical Justification). PagePlus also has the ability to view, create, edit and publish PDF files, and publish E-books in *.epub or *mobi formats suitable for the Kindle store. It also includes support for EPUB3 fixed layout eBooks for textbooks, children's books etc.\nPagePlus is primarily written in C++ using Visual Studio 2008, with a heavy dependence on the MFC framework. The Windows GDI library was discarded early in development in favour of an in-house composition engine supporting advanced bitmap and typeface operations. The text engine supports Unicode text entry.\nSupported platforms.\nPagePlus was first developed for 16-bit Microsoft Windows v3.0 running on PC/MS DOS but the final releases support Windows XP, Windows Vista (32/64bit), Windows 7 (32/64bit), Windows 8 (32/64bit) and Windows 10 (32/64bit).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71407", "revid": "32860082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71407", "title": "Sylt", "text": "German island in the North Sea\nSylt (; ; S\u00f6l'ring North Frisian: ) is an island in northern Germany, part of Nordfriesland district, Schleswig-Holstein, with a distinctively shaped shoreline. It belongs to the North Frisian Islands and is the largest island in North Frisia.\nThe northernmost island of Germany, it is known for its tourist resorts, notably Westerland, Kampen and Wenningstedt-Braderup, as well as for its sandy beach. It is frequently covered by the media in connection with its exposed situation in the North Sea and its ongoing loss of land during storm tides. Since 1927, Sylt has been connected to the mainland by the Hindenburgdamm causeway. In later years, it has been a resort for the German jet set and tourists in search of occasional celebrity sightings.\nGeography.\nWith , Sylt is the fourth-largest German island and the largest German island in the North Sea. Sylt is located from off the mainland, to which it is connected by the Hindenburgdamm. Southeast of Sylt are the islands of F\u00f6hr and Amrum, to the north lies the Danish island of R\u00f8m\u00f8. The island of Sylt extends for in a north\u2013south direction. At its northern point at K\u00f6nigshafen, it is only wide. Its greatest width, from the town of Westerland in the west to the eastern \"N\u00f6ssespitze\" near Morsum, measures . On the western and northwestern shore, there is a sandy beach. To the east of Sylt, is the Wadden Sea, which belongs to the Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park and mostly falls dry during low tide.\nThe island's shape has constantly shifted over time, a process which is still ongoing today. The northern and southern spits of Sylt are exclusively made up of infertile sand deposits, while the central part with the municipalities of Westerland, Wenningstedt-Braderup and Sylt-Ost consists of a geestland core, which becomes apparent in the form of the Red Cliff of Wenningstedt. The geestland facing the Wadden Sea gradually turns into fertile marshland around Sylt-Ost. Sylt has only been an island since the \"Grote Mandrenke\" flood of 1362. The so-called \"Uwe-D\u00fcne\" (Uwe Dune) is the island's highest elevation with above sea level.\nThe island in its current form has only existed for about 400 years. Like the mainland geestland, it was formed of moraines from the older ice ages, thus being made up of a till core, which is now apparent in the island's west and centre by the cliff, dunes and beach. This sandy core began to erode as it was exposed to a strong current along the island's steep basement when the sea level rose 8000 years ago. During the process, sediments were accumulated north and south of the island. The west coast, which was originally situated off today's shore, was thus gradually moved eastward, while at the same time the island began to extend to the north and south. After the ice ages, marshland began to form around this geestland core.\nIn 1141, Sylt is recorded as an island, yet before the \"Grote Mandrenke\" flood it belonged to a landscape cut by tidal creeks and, at least during low tide, it could be reached on foot. It is only since this flood that the creation of a spit from sediments began to form the current characteristic shape of Sylt. It is the northern and southern edges of Sylt which were, and still are, the subject of greatest change. For example, Listland was separated from the rest of the island in the 14th century and from the later 17th century onwards the \"K\u00f6nigshafen\" (King's Harbour) began to silt up as the \"elbow\" spit began to form.\nIn addition to the constant loss of land, the inhabitants during the Little Ice Age were constrained by sand drift. Dunes shifting to the east threatened settlements and arable land and had to be stopped by the planting of marram grass in the 18th century. Consequently, though, material breaking off the island was increasingly washed away and the island's extent continued to decrease.\nRecords of the annual land loss exist since 1870. According to them, Sylt lost an annual of land in the north and in the south from 1870 to 1951. From 1951 to 1984, the rate increased to respectively, while shorelines at the island's very edges at H\u00f6rnum and List are even more affected.\nSevere storm surges of the last decades have repeatedly endangered Sylt to the point of breaking in two, e.g. H\u00f6rnum was temporarily cut off from the island in 1962. Part of the island near Rantum which is only 500\u00a0metres (yards) wide is especially threatened.\nMeasures of protection against the continuous erosion date back to the early 19th century when groynes of wooden poles were constructed. Those were built at right angles into the sea from the coast line. Later they were replaced by metal and eventually by armoured concrete groynes. The constructions did not have the desired effect of stopping the erosion caused by crossways currents. \"Leeward erosion\", i.e. erosion on the downwind side of the groynes prevented sustainable accumulation of sand.\nIn the 1960s, breaking the power of the sea was attempted by installing tetrapods along the groyne bases or by putting them into the sea like groynes. The four-armed structures, built in France and many tons in weight, were too heavy for Sylt's beaches and were equally unable to prevent erosion. Therefore, they were removed from the H\u00f6rnum west beach in 2005.\nSince the early 1970s, the only effective means so far has been flushing sand onto the shore. Dredging vessels are used to pump a mixture of sand and water to a beach where it is spread by bulldozers. Thus storm floods would only erase the artificial accumulation of sand, while the shoreline proper remains intact and erosion is slowed down. This procedure incurs considerable costs. The required budget of an annual \u20ac10\u00a0million is currently provided by federal German, Schleswig-Holstein state and EU funds. Since 1972, an estimated 35.5\u00a0million cubic metres (46.4 million cu. yd.) of sand have been flushed ashore and dumped on Sylt. The measures have so far cost more than \u20ac134\u00a0million in total, but according to scientific calculations they are sufficient to prevent further loss of land for at least three decades, so the benefits for the island's economic power and for the economically underdeveloped region in general would outweigh the costs. In the 1995 study \"Klimafolgen f\u00fcr Mensch und K\u00fcste am Beispiel der Nordseeinsel Sylt\" (Climate impact for Man and Shores as seen on the North Sea island Sylt), it reads: \"H\u00e4tte Sylt nicht das Image einer attraktiven Ferieninsel, g\u00e4be es den K\u00fcstenschutz in der bestehenden Form gewiss nicht\" (If Sylt did not have the image of an attractive holiday island, coastal management in its current form would certainly not exist).\nThe enforcement of a natural reef off Sylt is being discussed as an alternative solution. A first experiment was conducted from 1996 to 2003. A sand drainage as being successfully used on Danish islands is not likely to work on Sylt owing to the underwater slope here.\nIn parallel to the ongoing sand flushing, the deliberate demolition of groynes has begun amid great effort at certain beach sections where they were proven largely ineffective. This measure also terminated the presumably most famous groyne of Sylt, \"Buhne 16\" \u2013 the namesake of the local naturist beach.\nA number of experts, however, fears that Sylt will still have to face considerable losses of land until the mid 21st century. The continuous global warming is thought to result in increasing storm activity, which would result in increased land loss and, as a first impact, might mean the end of property insurance. Measurements showed that, unlike in former times, the wave energy of the sea is no longer lost offshore, today it carries its destructive effects on to the beaches proper. This will result in an annual loss of sand of .\nThe dunes of the island constitute nature reserves and may only be traversed on marked tracks. So called \"wild paths\" promote erosion and are not to be followed. Where vegetation is tread upon, no roots are left to hold the sand and it will be removed by wind and water.\nThe Wadden Sea on the east side between Sylt and the mainland has been a nature reserve and bird sanctuary since 1935 and is part of the Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park. The construction of breakwaters in this area will abate sedimentation and is used for land reclamation.\nAlso the grazing of sheep on the sea dikes and heaths of Sylt eventually serves coastal management, since the animals keep the vegetation short and compress the soil with their hooves. Thus they help create a denser dike surface, which in case of storm surges provides less area for the waves to impact.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe flora of Sylt is shaped by the island's original sparseness. Until the mid 19th century, Sylt was an island almost completely devoid of trees except for small areas of forest and bush created by plantations. Today, one can still recognize the man-made origin of the \"Friedrichshain\" and \"S\u00fcdw\u00e4ldchen\" forests in Westerland where many of the trees stand in rank and file. Also, the now widespread rose \"Rosa rugosa\", known as the \"Sylt rose\" on the island was imported to Sylt. It originates from the Kamchatka peninsula in Siberia. The undemanding rose met ideal conditions on Sylt and spread so quickly that it is now a common sight on the island. Its proliferation is viewed critically from a biological point of view, since it threatens to displace endangered local species, especially on the heaths.\nThe ample heaths on the eastern side of the island provide habitats for many rare species of plants and animals which are adapted to the extreme conditions such as drought, warmth, wind. About 2,500 animal species and 150 species of plants have so far been recorded. 45% of those plants are on the IUCN Red List. Especially notable are the 600 species of butterflies that live in the heaths, small tortoiseshell, brimstone, painted lady and peacock butterfly among them.\nWith several thousand individuals in the dune belt of Sylt, the natterjack toad, endangered in Germany, has one of Germany's largest populations here. Their spawning places are wet dune slacks and shallow, short-lived pools. For a habitat they prefer sandy areas with vegetation, but the species has also been observed on the top of the Uwe Dune. The main threat for this species on Sylt is road traffic.\nThe many water birds and other coastal avians that have their hatching grounds on Sylt or use the island for resting on their migrations constitute an ornithological feature. There are two notable hatching areas on Sylt, the \"K\u00f6nigshafen\" bay with the small island Uth\u00f6rn in the north and the Rantum basin in the southeast. Birds that hatch on Sylt include black-headed gull, Arctic tern, pied avocet, common redshank, common gull, oystercatcher, northern lapwing, common shelduck and tufted duck. During the migration, Sylt is a resting spot for thousands of brent geese and shelducks, Eurasian wigeons and common eiders, as well as bar-tailed godwits, red knots, dunlins and Eurasian golden plovers. Ringed plover, common snipe, ruff and other species are less common visitors to the island.\nRegarding land mammals, there is no significant difference from the neighbouring areas of mainland Nordfriesland. Primarily European hare, rabbit and roe deer can be found and are also hunted as game on the island. When the island was connected to the mainland by the causeway, red fox and European badger also became common.\nWest of Sylt a breeding area of harbour porpoises is located. In addition, great numbers of harbour seals and grey seals, the latter being rather uncommon in German seas, can be found on sand banks off Sylt.\nNumerous associations and societies that care for the exploration and the protection of endangered animals and plants have branches on Sylt. Among them are the Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Polar and Marine Research, Verein Jordsand and Wadden Sea Conservation Station. Also the Federal Office for the Environment operates a research station in the dunes at Westerland.\nClimate.\nOn Sylt, a marine climate influenced by the Gulf Stream is predominant. With an average of , winter months are slightly milder than on the mainland, summer months though, with a median of , are somewhat cooler, despite a longer sunshine period. The annual average sunshine period on Sylt is 4.4 hours per day. It is due to the low relief of the shoreline that Sylt had a total of 1,899 hours of sunshine in 2005, 180 hours above the German average. Clouds cannot accumulate as quickly and are generally scattered by the constant westerly or northwesterly winds.\nThe annual mean temperature is . The annually averaged wind speed measures 6.7\u00a0m/s (15\u00a0mph), predominantly from western directions. The annual rainfall amounts to about 650 millimetres (25\u00bd\"). Since 1937 weather data are collected at Deutscher Wetterdienst's northernmost station on a dune near List, which has meanwhile become automated. A number of commercial meteorological services like Meteomedia AG operate stations in List too.\nSylt features an oceanic climate that is influenced by the Gulf Stream. On average, the winter season is slightly warmer than in mainland Nordfriesland. The summer season, however, is cooler despite longer sunshine periods. The yearly average sunshine period is greater than 4.4 hours per day with some years exceeding the average sunshine for all of Germany. Also precipitation is lower than on the mainland. This is due to the low relief of Sylt's shoreline where clouds are not able to accumulate and rain off.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSettlements.\nSylt is divided into two administrative bodies: the \"Amt\" Landschaft Sylt administers all municipalities on the island, save for the \"Gemeinde Sylt\", which was established in 2009 from the formerly independent municipalities of Westerland, Rantum and Sylt-Ost. As of December 2007, Sylt had 21,190 inhabitants, 9,072 of whom living in Westerland. These numbers do not include owners of summer residences.\nA referendum held in May 2008 resulted in a merger of the Sylt-Ost municipality with the town of Westerland on 1 January 2009. Various interest groups hope to merge every island municipality into one governing body.\nSettlements along the west coast.\nSix municipalities are situated along the west coast of Sylt. List in the very north of the island constitutes Germany's northernmost municipality; it retained a certain independence due to its remote location and its long-time adherence to the kingdom of Denmark. On its eastern shore, a harbour is located where, in addition to tourist ships, the \"Sylt-Express\" ferry-boat sails to Havneby on the Danish island of R\u00f8m\u00f8. Wenningstedt together with Braderup and Kampen used to form the \"Nordd\u00f6rfer\" (Northern Villages) municipality, an early intercommunal association, which partly remains today in form of a school union. While Kampen, mainly in the 1950s and 1960s, was famous in Germany for attracting celebrities, Wenningstedt has been known as a \"family resort\" for more than 100 years. Since 1855, the prominent black and white Kampen Lighthouse has been located between Kampen and Wenningstedt; it is the oldest one on the island. East of there, the \"Braderuper Heide\" nature reserve is situated. Right south of Wenningstedt are the town limits of the island's largest town, Westerland.\nAfter the complete destruction of the village Eidum by a storm surge on 1 November 1436, the survivors founded a new village northeast of their old home: Westerland. The name was first recorded in 1462. In 1865, a seaside spa was founded and, 50 years later, Westerland was granted town privileges. In 1949, it was officially recognised as a health resort. In 2007, the town numbered 9,072 citizens.\nSouth of Westerland, the island extends for about in the form of a spit, until it is cut by the \"H\u00f6rnumtief\" tidal creek that runs through the Wadden Sea mudflats east of Sylt. Here is the location of Rantum. This village, like no other on Sylt, had to fight sand drift during the past centuries. Many farmsteads and a church had to be abandoned because of shifting dunes moving eastward. Only the planting of marram grass stopped the dunes and put an end to this threat. To the east, there are a few scattered spots of marshland, but the area is mostly dominated by dunes.\nH\u00f6rnum on the island's southern headland is the youngest village. It was founded shortly after 1900, although the uninhabited southern tip of Sylt was said to serve as refuge for pirates and fishermen. The name \"Budersand\" in the area emanates from that custom, marking a great dune where booths () stood in former times to serve as shelters. This southern headland, called \"Odde\", is marked by continuous loss of land. Each year great amounts of sand are washed away by storm floods and coastal management has not yet seen sustainable effects in the area, so that further losses have to be expected.\nSylt-Ost.\nSylt-Ost (\"East Sylt\") is a former municipality which was formed in 1970 out of several small villages on the \"N\u00f6ssehalbinsel\" of Sylt. The population (as of 2000) was 5,500. The villages included Tinnum, Munkmarsch, Archsum, Morsum and Keitum. In 2009, Sylt-Ost merged with Westerland and Rantum to form \"Gemeinde Sylt\".\nHistory.\nGeographically, Sylt was originally part of Jutland (today Schleswig-Holstein and mainland Denmark), with evidence of human habitation going back to 3000 BC at Denghoog. The first settlements of Frisians appeared during the 8th century and 9th century. In 1386, Sylt was divided between the Duke of Schleswig and the King of Denmark; except for the village of List, Sylt became part of the Duchy of Schleswig in 1435.\nDuring the 17th and 18th century, whaling, fishing and oyster breeding increased the wealth of the population. At this time, Keitum became the capital of the island, and a place for rich captains to settle down. In the 19th century, tourism began. Westerland replaced Keitum as the capital. During World War I, Sylt became a military outpost. On 25 March 1916, British seaplanes bombed the German airship sheds on Sylt. The main connection for tourists was boats from H\u00f8jer. Since H\u00f8jer was ceded to Denmark in 1920, a rail causeway to the mainland was built in 1927, the Hindenburgdamm, named after Paul von Hindenburg. During World War II, Sylt became a fortress, with concrete bunkers built below the dunes at the shore, some of which are still visible today. Lager Sylt, the concentration camp on Alderney was named after the island. Rudolf H\u00f6ss hid on the island after Nazi Germany's defeat, but he was later captured and brought to trial in Poland.\nToday, Sylt is mainly a tourist destination, famous for its sandy beaches and healthy climate. The west beach has a number of surf schools and also a nude section. The PWA World Tour Windsurf World Cup Sylt, established in 1984, is annually held at Westerland's beach front. Sylt is also popular for second home owners, and many German celebrities who own vacation homes on \"the island\".\nThe \"Freik\u00f6rperkultur\" and nude bathing.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the bathing beaches on Sylt were segregated by sex into \"ladies' bath\" (\"Damenbad\") and \"men's bath\" (\"Herrenbad\"); one bathed in long bathing dresses of that time period. From the beginning of the 20th century - starting from the Free German Youth camp Klappholttal and the intellectuals and artists in the village of Kampen - a social movement developed that lived a beach life without clothing (part of the German \"Freik\u00f6rperkultur - FKK\" and \"Lebensreform\" movement). The first official nude bathing beach in Germany was opened on Sylt in 1920. Nude bathing and sunbathing (also erroneously referred to as \"nudist\" or \"nudism\") spread over the entire island. \"Sylt\" was associated with nude bathing and the ideal environment for supporters of the \"Freik\u00f6rperkultur (FKK)\". Since the 1960s, there have been designated nudist beaches (marked \"FKK-Strand\") with names such as \"Abyssinia\", \"Samoa\" or \"Zanzibar\" on the entire west beach. The most famous nudist beach on Sylt became the \"Groyne 16\" (\"Buhne 16\") in Kampen through regular reports in the tabloid media. Today the boundaries between nude and textile beaches are becoming more and more blurred. While nude beaches have lost some of their popularity, it is no longer unusual or sensational to bathe or sunbathe on \"normal\" beaches with no clothes on.\nCulture.\nSylt is a part of the Frisian Islands. It has its own local dialect, S\u00f6l'ring, which is the indigenous speech of Sylt. S\u00f6l'ring is a dialect of insular North Frisian, with elements of Danish, Dutch and English. The island has a museum called \"Altfriesisches Haus\" (S\u00f6lring Museen, Altfriesisches Haus in Keitum).\nToday, only a small fraction of the population still speak S\u00f6l'ring. A law to promote the language (\"Friesisch-Gesetz\") was passed in 2004. The northernmost part of the island, \"Listland\", was traditionally Danish-speaking.\nAs in many areas in Schleswig-Holstein on New Year's Eve, groups of children go masked from house to house, reciting poems. This is known as \"Rummelpottlaufen\", and as a reward, children receive sweets or money.\nSylt also features many Frisian-style houses with thatched roofs.\nSince the mid-18th century, the vowel in the name of the island has been represented as \"y\" for unknown reasons, while older spellings are \"Sildt\" and \"Silt\", allegedly derived from Danish \"sild\" \"herring\", or maybe related to English silt.\nSylt is mentioned in a pangram, a sentence that uses every letter in the German alphabet, including every umlaut (\u00e4, \u00f6, \u00fc) plus the \u00df: \"Victor jagt zw\u00f6lf Boxk\u00e4mpfer quer \u00fcber den gro\u00dfen Sylter Deich\" (\"Victor chases twelve boxers across the Great Levee of Sylt\").\nSylt in painting.\nAmong the first painters who discovered Sylt as a theme were Eugen D\u00fccker and Eugen Bracht. Franz Korwan followed them.\nThe painter Andreas Dirks was born in Tinnum on Sylt in 1865. He studied at the D\u00fcsseldorf Art Academy and in Weimar, lived in D\u00fcsseldorf since 1895, accepted a professorship there in 1916 and at the same time maintained a studio in Westerland.\nUlrich Schulte-W\u00fclwer described him as \"...\u00a0the strongest artistic talent that the island has produced\". Carl Arp came to Sylt in 1903.\nPainters like Emil Nolde, Erich Heckel, Anita R\u00e9e and Albert Aereboe moved to Sylt. Contemporary artists include the painters and sculptors Rainer Fetting and Ingo K\u00fchl, who live in Berlin and on Sylt.\nTransport.\nSylt is connected to the German mainland by the Hindenburgdamm, a causeway with a railway line on top. The passenger trains connect Westerland (Sylt) to Nieb\u00fcll or Klanxb\u00fcll, and the Deutsche Bahn's \"Syltshuttle\" as well as RDC's \"Autozug Sylt\", allow the transfer of cars and trucks between Westerland and Nieb\u00fcll. There are also car ferry services to the nearby Danish island of R\u00f8m\u00f8, which offers a road connection to the mainland. Sylt Airport at Westerland serves the region.\nIn other media.\nThe island was used during the filming of \"The Ghost Writer,\" as an alternate location for Martha's Vineyard, due to the film's director, Roman Polanski being unable to travel to the United States, due to an outstanding arrest warrant for rape. The ferry between the islands of Sylt and R\u00f8m\u00f8 features prominently in the film.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; travel guide from Wikivoyage"}
{"id": "71410", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71410", "title": "Frankie Fredericks", "text": "Namibian sprinter (born 1967)\nFrank \"Frankie\" Fredericks (born 2 October 1967) is a former track and field athlete from Namibia. Running in the 100 metres and 200 metres, he won four silver medals at the Olympic Games (two in 1992 and two in 1996), making him Namibia's only Olympic medalist until Christine Mboma's silver medal at the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo. He also won gold medals at the World Championships, World Indoor Championships, All-Africa Games and Commonwealth Games. He is the world indoor record-holder for 200 metres, with a time of 19.92 seconds set in 1996.\nFredericks has broken 20 seconds for the 200 metres 24 times. He also holds the joint-third-fastest non-winning time for the 200 metres. In August 1996, Fredericks ran 19.68 seconds in the Olympic final in Atlanta, Georgia.\nHe is also the oldest man to have broken 20 seconds for the 200 metres. On 12 July 2002 in Rome, Fredericks won the 200 metres in a time of 19.99 seconds at the age of 34 years 283 days. He is currently serving as a council member in the IAAF.\nOn 3 March 2017, Fredericks was implicated in the IAAF corruption scandal, stemming from a large cash payment he received in 2009. The investigation is still to be concluded.\nEducation and early life.\nFredericks was born in Windhoek, the only child of Riekie Fredericks, a seamstress, and Andries Kangootui, a farmer. He grew up in the city's Katutura township, his parents splitting up while he was little. In 1981 he switched to the Catholic school at D\u00f6bra to play competitive soccer. When he received a scholarship to complete his matric at Concordia College Fredericks took up athletics because the soccer was not strong at Concordia. He still played for Black Africa, one of the country's top teams.\nAfter school, he took up work at R\u00f6ssing Uranium Ltd. in Swakopmund and soon got a partial scholarship at Brigham Young University in the US in 1987. There he studied computer science and graduated with an MBA.\nDuring his college career, Fredericks earned numerous All-American citations and won three NCAA championships.\nAthletics career.\nIn 1990, after his country had become independent of South Africa, Fredericks could participate in international competition. At the World Championships in 1991, Fredericks won a silver medal in the 200 m, finishing behind Michael Johnson, and placed 5th in the 100 m. He then went on to The following year, at the Barcelona 1992 Summer Olympics, Fredericks became Namibia's first Olympic medalist when he finished second in both the 100 m and 200 m. He won the silver medal in the men's 100-metre dash, with a time of 10.02 seconds, just .06 seconds behind the gold medal winner. In 1993, in Stuttgart, he became the nation's first World Champion, winning the 200 m. At the 1994 Commonwealth Games, he won gold in the 200 m and bronze in the 100 m. His time of 19.97\u00a0seconds in the 200 metres is the current Commonwealth Games record. At the 1995 World Championships 100 m, after crossing the line he immediately went to help his friend Linford Christie who pulled a muscle in the race and signalled for help. This act of kindness endeared him to many (particularly British) athletics fans.\nFor the 1996 Summer Olympics, Fredericks was among the title favourites for both the 100 m and 200 m. He reached both finals and again finished second in both. In the 100 m, he was beaten by Donovan Bailey, who set a new World Record, and in the 200 m, he was beaten by Michael Johnson, who also set a new World Record. At the time, Fredericks's second-place run was the third-fastest in history, beaten only by Johnson (twice). At the 1998 Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Frankie once again missed out on the chance of gold in the 100 m; he was beaten by Ato Boldon of Trinidad and Tobago.\nSuffering from injuries, Fredericks had to withdraw from the 1999 and 2001 World Championships, and the 2000 Summer Olympics. When he arrived in Abuja to represent Namibia at the 2003 All-Africa Games, he was lauded by Nigerian supporters and came away with a silver medal. He then went on to win the 200\u00a0m at the inaugural Afro-Asian Games in 2003. In the 200\u00a0m final at the 2004 Summer Olympics, he finished 4th.\nAfter the end of the 2004 outdoor season, Fredericks retired from competition. He had run the 100 m under 10 seconds 27 times.\nIOC career.\nIn 2004 Fredericks became a member of the International Olympic Committee. In 2009 Fredericks became the head of the Athletics Namibia in a controversial leadership contest. In 2012 Fredericks was nominated to be a member of the International Olympic Committee.\nFrank Fredericks is a member of the 'Champions for Peace' club, a group of 54 famous elite athletes committed to serving peace in the world through sport, created by Peace and Sport, a Monaco-based international organisation.\nBribery investigation.\nOn 3 March 2017, French newspaper \"Le Monde\" reported that Fredericks had received US$299,300 from Pamodzi Sports Consulting, a company owned by Papa Massata Diack (the son of disgraced former IAAF head Lamine Diack, who is currently facing corruption charges in France). The payment went to Yemi Limited, a company set up by Fredericks in Seychelles, a tax haven, and was made on 2 Oct. 2009, the same day as Rio was announced as the winning bid for the 2016 Olympics. Fredericks has denied that the payment has anything to do with the Olympic bid, but instead says it was fees paid for consulting services he provided for \"relay championships\" and marketing programs related to African championships and other IAAF programs.\nWhen the allegation was made Fredericks was the chair of the 2024 Olympic bid evaluation committee. On 6 March 2017, Fredericks stepped down from his position in the IAAF task force that is evaluating if or when to re-admit Russia's national sports body RusAF after a widespread doping scandal. On 7 March 2017, the Ethics Commission of the IOC recommended a provisional suspension of Fredericks from his IOC-related duties. Before the IOC Executive meeting Fredericks while maintaining his innocence withdrew from his position as the Chair of the 2024 Olympic bidding process \"in the best interests\" of the process. Fredericks was replaced as the chair of the 2024 Olympic bidding process by former FIBA secretary general Patrick Baumann.\nBusiness career.\nAfter his athletic career, Fredericks worked as a business manager. He also founded the Frank Fredericks Foundation in 1999, a non-profit organisation supporting talented athletes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71411", "revid": "9612106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71411", "title": "Barcelona (disambiguation)", "text": "Barcelona is a city in northeastern Spain and the capital city of Catalonia.\nBarcelona may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "71413", "revid": "93143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71413", "title": "Hokkaid\u014d Ainu", "text": ""}
{"id": "71415", "revid": "8356162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71415", "title": "Dune (1984 film)", "text": "1984 film directed by David Lynch\nDune is a 1984 American epic space opera film written and directed by David Lynch, and based on the 1965 novel of the same name by Frank Herbert. It was filmed at the Churubusco Studios in Mexico City. The soundtrack was composed by the rock band Toto, with a contribution from Brian Eno. Its large ensemble cast includes Kyle MacLachlan (in his film debut), Patrick Stewart, Brad Dourif, Dean Stockwell, Virginia Madsen, Jos\u00e9 Ferrer, Sean Young, Silvana Mangano, Sting, Linda Hunt, and Max von Sydow.\nThe setting is the distant future, chronicling the conflict between rival noble families as they battle for control of the extremely harsh desert planet Arrakis, also known as Dune. The planet is the only source of the drug melange (spice), which allows prescience and is vital to space travel, making it the most essential and valuable commodity in the universe. Paul Atreides is the scion and heir of a powerful noble family, whose appointment to the control of Arrakis brings them into conflict with its former overlords, House Harkonnen. Paul is also possibly the Kwisatz Haderach, a messianic figure expected by the Bene Gesserit sisterhood.\nAfter the novel's initial success, attempts to adapt \"Dune\" as a film began in 1971. A lengthy process of development followed throughout the 1970s, during which Arthur P. Jacobs, Alejandro Jodorowsky, and Ridley Scott unsuccessfully tried to bring their visions to the screen. In 1981, executive producer Dino De Laurentiis hired Lynch as director.\nThe film underperformed at the box office, grossing $30.9 million against a $40\u201342 million budget. At least four versions have been released worldwide. Lynch largely disowned the finished film and had his name removed or changed to pseudonyms in the credits on certain versions. Despite receiving mainly negative reviews upon release, the film has developed a cult following, but opinion varies between fans of the novel and fans of Lynch's films.\nPlot.\nIn the year 10,191 AG (roughly 23,352 CE), the known universe is ruled by the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV. The most valuable substance in the empire is the spice melange, which extends life and expands consciousness. The spice also allows the Spacing Guild to fold space, allowing safe, instantaneous interstellar travel. The Guild's leader demands Shaddam clarify a conspiracy that could jeopardize spice production. Shaddam reveals that he has transferred power and control of the planet Arrakis, the only source of the spice, to House Atreides from their archenemies, House Harkonnen. However, once the Atreides arrive, the Harkonnens will eliminate them with aide from Shaddam's own Sardaukar troops. Shaddam fears the Atreides due to reports of a secret army that they are amassing.\nLady Jessica, the concubine of Duke Leto Atreides, is an acolyte of the Bene Gesserit, an exclusive sisterhood with advanced physical and mental abilities. As part of a centuries-long breeding program to produce the Kwisatz Haderach, a mental \"superbeing\" whom the Bene Gesserit would use to their advantage, Jessica was ordered to bear a daughter but disobeyed and bore a son, Paul Atreides. Paul is tested by Reverend Mother Mohiam to assess his impulse control and, to her surprise, passes the test.\nThe Atreides leave their homeworld Caladan for Arrakis, a barren desert planet populated by gigantic sandworms. The native people of Arrakis, the Fremen, prophesy that a messiah will lead them to freedom and paradise. Duncan Idaho, one of Leto's loyalists, tells him that he suspects Arrakis holds vast numbers of Fremen who could prove to be powerful allies. Before Leto can form an alliance with the Fremen, the Harkonnen launch their attack. Leto's personal physician who is also secretly a Harkonnen double-agent, Dr. Wellington Yueh, disables the shields, leaving the Atreides defenseless. Idaho is killed, Leto is captured, and nearly the entire House of Atreides is wiped out by the Harkonnen. Baron Harkonnen orders Mentat Piter De Vries to kill Yueh with a poisoned blade. Leto dies in a failed attempt to assassinate the Baron using a poison-gas tooth implanted by Yueh in exchange for sparing the lives of Jessica and Paul, killing Piter instead.\nPaul and Jessica survive the attack and escape into the deep desert, where they are given sanctuary by a sietch of Fremen. Paul assumes the Fremen name Muad'Dib and emerges as the messiah for whom the Fremen have been waiting. He teaches them to use Weirding Modules\u2014sonic weapons developed by House Atreides\u2014and targets spice mining. Over the next two years, spice production is nearly halted due to Paul's raids. The Spacing Guild informs the Emperor of the deteriorating situation on Arrakis.\nPaul falls in love with young Fremen warrior Chani. Jessica becomes the Fremen's Reverend Mother by ingesting the Water of Life, a deadly poison, which she renders harmless by using her Bene Gesserit abilities. As an after-effect of this ritual, Jessica's unborn child, Alia, later emerges from the womb with the full powers of an adult Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother. In a prophetic dream, Paul learns of the plot by the Emperor and the Guild to kill him. When Paul's dreams suddenly stop, he drinks the Water of Life and has a profound psychedelic trip in the desert. He gains powerful psychic abilities and the ability to control the sandworms, which he realizes are the spice's source.\nThe Emperor amasses a huge invasion fleet above Arrakis to wipe out the Fremen and regain control of the planet. He has the Baron's older nephew Glossu \"The Beast\" Rabban beheaded and summons the Baron to explain why spice mining has stopped. Paul launches a final attack against the Harkonnen and the Emperor's Sardaukar at Arrakeen, the capital city. Riding atop sandworms and brandishing sonic weapons, Paul's Fremen warriors easily defeat the Emperor's legions. Alia assassinates the Baron while Paul confronts the Emperor and fights the Baron's younger nephew Feyd-Rautha in a duel to the death. After killing Feyd, Paul demonstrates his newfound powers and fulfills the Fremen prophecy by causing rain to fall on Arrakis. Alia declares him to be the Kwisatz Haderach.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Francesca Annis as Lady Jessica, concubine of Duke Leto and mother to Paul and Alia\nAdditionally, Honorato Magalone appears as Otheym, Judd Omen appears as Jamis, and Molly Wryn as Harah. Director David Lynch appears in an uncredited cameo as a spice worker, while Danny Corkill is shown in the onscreen credits as Orlop despite his scenes being deleted from the theatrical release.\nProduction.\nEarly attempts and Jodorowsky's \"Dune\".\nAfter the book's initial success, producers began attempting to adapt it. In mid-1971, film producer Arthur P. Jacobs optioned the film rights to Frank Herbert's 1965 novel \"Dune\", on agreement to produce a film within nine years, but died in mid-1973, while plans for the film (including David Lean already attached to direct) were still in development.\nThe film rights reverted in 1974, when the option was acquired by a French consortium led by Jean-Paul Gibon, with Alejandro Jodorowsky attached to direct. Jodorowsky approached contributors including the progressive rock groups Pink Floyd and Magma for some of the music, Dan O'Bannon for the visual effects, and artists H. R. Giger, Jean Giraud (a.k.a. M\u0153bius), and Chris Foss for set and character design. Potential cast included Salvador Dal\u00ed as the Emperor, Orson Welles as Baron Harkonnen, Mick Jagger as Feyd-Rautha, Udo Kier as Piter De Vries, David Carradine as Leto Atreides, Jodorowsky's son Brontis Jodorowsky as Paul Atreides, and Gloria Swanson. The project was ultimately canceled for several reasons, largely because funding disappeared when the project expanded into a 10\u201314 hour epic.\nAlthough their film project never reached production, the work that Jodorowsky and his team put into \"Dune\" significantly impacted subsequent science-fiction films. In order to obtain funding, a substantial hardback book was produced, with about 20 copies printed, and was presented to many major film studios. Copies of the storyboard book, which included the artwork from Foss, Giraud and Geiger, the screenplay, and most details of musical style, were passed around Hollywood. The influence on science fiction films such as \"Star Wars\", \"The Terminator\" and \"Flash Gordon\" was apparent. In particular, \"Alien\" (1979), written by O'Bannon, shared much of the same creative team for the visual design as had been assembled for Jodorowsky's film. A copy of the book sold for over $2 million in late 2021.\nA documentary, \"Jodorowsky's Dune\" (2013), was made about Jodorowsky's failed attempt at an adaptation.\nDe Laurentiis's first attempt.\nIn late 1976, Italian producer Dino De Laurentiis purchased the rights for \"Dune\" from Gibon's consortium. De Laurentiis commissioned Herbert to write a new screenplay in 1978; the script Herbert turned in was 175 pages long, the equivalent of nearly three hours of screen time. De Laurentiis then hired director Ridley Scott in 1979, with Rudy Wurlitzer writing the screenplay and H. R. Giger retained from the Jodorowsky production. Scott intended to split the book into two movies. He worked on three drafts of the script, using \"The Battle of Algiers\" (1966) as a point of reference, before moving on to direct another science-fiction film, \"Blade Runner\" (1982). He recalled the pre-production process was slow, and finishing the project would have been even more time-intensive:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But after seven months I dropped out of \"Dune\", by then Rudy Wurlitzer had come up with a first-draft script, which I felt was a decent distillation of Frank Herbert's [book]. But I also realized \"Dune\" was going to take a lot more work\u2014at least two and a half years' worth. And I didn't have the heart to attack that because my [older] brother Frank unexpectedly died of cancer while I was prepping the De Laurentiis picture. Frankly, that freaked me out. So, I went to Dino and told him the \"Dune\" script was his.\n\u2014From \"Ridley Scott: The Making of His Movies\" by Paul M. Sammon\nLynch's screenplay and direction.\nIn 1981, the nine-year film rights were set to expire. De Laurentiis renegotiated the rights from the author, adding to them the rights to the \"Dune\" sequels, written and unwritten. He then showed the book to Sid Sheinberg, president of MCA, the parent company of Universal City Studios, which approved the book. After seeing \"The Elephant Man\" (1980), producer Raffaella De Laurentiis decided that David Lynch should direct the movie. Around that time, Lynch received several other directing offers, including \"Return of the Jedi\". De Laurentiis contacted Lynch, who said he had not heard of the book. After reading it and \"loving it\", he met with De Laurentiis and agreed to direct the film. Lynch worked on the script for six months with Eric Bergren and Christopher De Vore. The team yielded two drafts of the script and split over creative differences. Lynch then worked on five more drafts. Initially, Lynch had scripted \"Dune\" across two films, but eventually it was condensed into a single film.\nWhile De Laurentiis looked for a young actor for the film; Tom Cruise, Kevin Costner, Lewis Smith, Zach Galligan, Michael Biehn, Kenneth Branagh and Val Kilmer either auditioned or were screen-tested for the role of Paul. Kilmer was the top choice for the role until MacLachlan screen-tested. Aldo Ray was cast as Gurney Halleck, but due to his alcoholism was replaced with Stewart. Glenn Close tested for the role of Lady Jessica, but lost to Annis. Helena Bonham Carter was originally cast as Princess Irulan, but she left due to scheduling conflicts with \"A Room with a View\". Madsen said in 2016 that she was signed for three films, as the producers \"thought they were going to make \"Star Wars\" for grown-ups.\"\nOn March 30, 1983, with the 135-page sixth draft of the script, \"Dune\" finally began shooting. It was shot entirely in Mexico, mostly at Churubusco Studios; De Laurentiis said this was due in part to the favorable exchange rate to get more value for their production budget, and that no studio in Europe had the expansive capabilities they needed for the production. With a budget over $40\u201342 million, \"Dune\" required 80 sets built on 16 sound stages, and had a total crew of 1,700, with over 20,000 extras. Many of the exterior shots were filmed in the Samalayuca Dune Fields in Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, Chihuahua. Filming ran for at least six months into September 1983, plagued by various production problems such as failing electricity or communication lines due to the country's infrastructure, or health-related problems with their cast and crew.\nEditing.\nThe rough cut of \"Dune\" without post-production effects ran over four hours long, but Lynch's intended cut of the film (as reflected in the seventh and final draft of the script) was almost three hours long. Universal and the film's financiers expected a standard, two-hour cut of the film. Dino De Laurentiis, his daughter Raffaella, and Lynch excised numerous scenes, filmed new scenes that simplified or concentrated plot elements, and added voice-over narrations, plus a new introduction by Virginia Madsen. Contrary to rumor, Lynch made no other version than the theatrical cut.\nVersions.\nA television version was aired in 1988 in two parts totaling 186 minutes; it replaced Madsen's opening monolog with a much longer description of the setting that used concept art stills. Lynch disavowed this version and had his name removed from the credits. Alan Smithee was credited, a pseudonym used by directors who wish to disavow a film. The extended and television versions additionally credit writer Lynch as Judas Booth. This version (without recap and second credit roll) has previously been released on DVD as \"Dune: Extended Edition\".\nSeveral longer versions have been spliced together, particularly for two other versions, one for San Francisco station KTVU, and the other a 178-minute fan edit from scratch by SpiceDiver. The latter cut was officially released by Koch Films (on behalf of current international rights holder Lionsgate) on a deluxe 4K/Blu-ray box set released in Germany in 2021. The KTVU and SpiceDiver versions combine footage from the theatrical and television versions, and downplay the repeated footage in the TV cut. While working on \"A Masterpiece In Disarray\", Max \u00c9vry discovered a never before-seen deleted scene which was released in restored form in March 2024. The author also reconstructed the film's originally planned ending which is more in line with the source text.\nAlthough Universal had approached Lynch for a possible director's cut prior to the director's death in 2025, Lynch had declined every offer and preferred not to discuss \"Dune\" in interviews. In 2022, though, during an interview about the remaster of his film \"Inland Empire\" (2006), he admitted to the surprised interviewer that he was interested in the idea. He offered the caveat that he did not believe it would ever happen, nor that anything in the unused footage would satisfy him enough for a director's cut, as he said he was \"selling out\" during production. Nevertheless, he said enough time had passed that he was at least curious to take another look at the footage.\nCanceled sequels.\nWhen production started, it was anticipated for the film to launch a \"Dune\" franchise, and plans had been made to film two sequels back-to-back. Many of the props were put into storage after the completion of production in anticipation of future use, MacLachlan had signed for a two-film deal, and Lynch had begun writing a screenplay for the second film. Once \"Dune\" was released and failed at the box office, the sequel plans were canceled. In January 1985 Lynch stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'm writing the script for \"Dune II\". \"Dune II\" is totally \"Dune Messiah\", with variations on the theme. [...] \"Dune Messiah\" is a very short book, and a lot of people don't like it, but in there are some really nifty ideas. I'm real excited about that, and I think it could make a really good film. It starts 12 years later, and this creates a whole new set of problems. [...] It should have a different mood. [...] It should be 12 strange years later.\n\u2014From \"David Lynch\", \"Starburst\" #78 (January 1985)\nIn July 2023, writer Max \u00c9vry, doing research for his book, \"A Masterpiece in Disarray: David Lynch's Dune\", on the first film's influence, discovered Lynch's half-completed draft treatment for the second film at the Frank Herbert Archives at California State University, Fullerton. Lynch was reached for comment in January 2024 and responded through a representative that he recalled beginning work on a script, but much like the first film, did not want to comment further. Based partly on \"Dune Messiah\", \u00c9vry described the tentatively-titled \"Dune II\" as having surpassed the novel's narrative approach in the screenplay adaption.\nRelease.\nMarketing.\n\"Dune\" premiered in Washington, DC, on December 3, 1984, at the Kennedy Center and was released worldwide on December 14. Prerelease publicity was extensive, because it was based on a bestselling novel, and because it was directed by Lynch, who had had success with \"Eraserhead\" and \"The Elephant Man\". Several magazines followed the production and published articles praising the film before its release, all part of the advertising and merchandising of \"Dune\", which also included a documentary for television, and items placed in toy stores.\nHome media.\nThe film was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray by Arrow Films in North America and the United Kingdom on August 31, 2021, a few weeks ahead of the release of \"Dune\", the 2021 film adaptation of the book. This release only contains the theatrical cut of the film, as Universal removed the extended cut from circulation in North America following the DVD release going out of print and denied Arrow's request to license the cut for this release.\nKoch Films has also released what fans consider to be a more definitive multi-disc edition (available only in Germany) containing three of the four versions\u2014theatrical, TV, and SpiceDiver fan edit\u2014plus supplemental materials (some not available on the Arrow release) and the CD soundtrack.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film opened on December 14, 1984, in 915 theaters, and grossed US$ in its opening weekend, ranking number two in the US box office behind \"Beverly Hills Cop\". By the end of its run, \"Dune\" had grossed $. It earned theatrical rentals of $37.9 million worldwide. On an estimated production budget of $40\u201342 million, the film was considered a box-office disappointment. The film later had more success, and has been called the \"\"Heaven's Gate\" of science fiction\".\nCritical response.\n\"Dune\" received mostly negative reviews upon release. Roger Ebert gave one star out of four, and wrote: { On \"At the Movies\" with Gene Siskel and Ebert, Siskel began his review: { The film was later listed as the worst film of 1984 and the \"biggest disappointment of the year\" in their \"Stinkers of 1984\" episode. Other negative reviews focused on the same issues and on the length of the film.\nJanet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" gave \"Dune\" a negative review of one star out of five. She said, \"Several of the characters in \"Dune\" are psychic, which puts them in the unique position of being able to understand what goes on in the movie\" and explained that the plot was \"perilously overloaded, as is virtually everything else about it\".\n\"Variety\" gave \"Dune\" a less negative review, stating \"\"Dune\" is a huge, hollow, imaginative, and cold sci-fi epic. Visually unique and teeming with incident, David Lynch's film holds the interest due to its abundant surface attractions, but won't, of its own accord, create the sort of fanaticism which has made Frank Herbert's 1965 novel one of the all-time favorites in its genre.\" They also commented on how \"Lynch's adaptation covers the entire span of the novel, but simply setting up the various worlds, characters, intrigues, and forces at work requires more than a half-hour of expository screen time.\" They did enjoy the cast and said, \"Francesca Annis and J\u00fcrgen Prochnow make an outstandingly attractive royal couple, Si\u00e2n Phillips has some mesmerizing moments as a powerful witch, Brad Dourif is effectively loony, and best of all is Kenneth McMillan, whose face is covered with grotesque growths and who floats around like the Blue Meanie come to life.\"\nRichard Corliss of \"Time\" gave \"Dune\" a negative review, stating, \"Most sci-fi movies offer escape, a holiday from homework, but \"Dune\" is as difficult as a final exam. You have to cram for it. [...] MacLachlan, 25, grows impressively in the role; his features, soft and spoiled at the beginning, take on a he-manly glamour once he assumes his mission. [...] The actors seem hypnotized by the spell Lynch has woven around them\u2014especially the lustrous Francesca Annis, as Paul's mother, who whispers her lines with the urgency of erotic revelation. In those moments when Annis is onscreen, \"Dune\" finds the emotional center that has eluded it in its parade of rococo decor and austere special effects. She reminds us of what movies can achieve when they have a heart, as well as a mind.\"\nFilm scholar Robin Wood called \"Dune\" \"the most obscenely homophobic film I have ever seen\"\u2014referring to a scene in which Baron Harkonnen sexually assaults and kills a young man by bleeding him to death\u2014charging it with \"managing to associate with homosexuality in a single scene physical grossness, moral depravity, violence, and disease\". Dennis Altman suggested that the film showed how \"AIDS references began penetrating popular culture\" in the 1980s, asking, \"Was it just an accident that in the film \"Dune\" the homosexual villain had suppurating sores on his face?\"\nCritic and science-fiction writer Harlan Ellison reviewed the film positively. In his 1989 book of film criticism, \"Harlan Ellison's Watching\", he says that because critics were denied screenings at the last minute after several reschedules, it made the film community feel nervous and negative towards \"Dune\" before its release. Ellison later said, \"It was a book that shouldn't have been shot. It was a script that couldn't have been written. It was a directorial job that was beyond anyone's doing ... and yet the film was made.\" Daniel Snyder also praised elements of the film in a 2014 article which called the movie \"a deeply flawed work that failed as a commercial enterprise, but still managed to capture and distill essential portions of one of science fiction's densest works.\" Snyder stated that Lynch's \"surreal style\" created \"a world that felt utterly alien [full of] bizarre dream sequences, rife with images of unborn fetuses and shimmering energies, and unsettling scenery like the industrial hell of the Harkonnen homeworld, [making] the fil[m] actually closer to Kubrick (\"\") than [George] Lucas. It seeks to put the viewer somewhere unfamiliar while hinting at a greater, hidden story.\" Snyder praised the production and stated that Herbert had said he was pleased with Lynch's film.\nColin Greenland reviewed \"Dune\" for \"Imagine\" magazine, and stated, \"Anthony Masters's magnificent design features none of the gleaming chrome and sterile plastic we expect of space opera: instead, sinister paraphernalia of cast iron and coiled brass, corridors of dark wood and marble, and the sand, the endless sand...\"\nScience-fiction historian John Clute argued that though Lynch's \"Dune\" \"spared nothing to achieve its striking visual effects\", the film adaptation \"unfortunately\u2014perhaps inevitably\u2014reduced Herbert's dense text to a melodrama\". Conversely, Slovenian philosopher Slavoj \u017di\u017eek referred to the film as Lynch's \"neglected masterpiece, with genuine moments of breathtaking poetic beauty,\" and has cited it as his favorite of Lynch's films.\nOn review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, \"Dune\" has an approval rating of 36% based on 117 reviews, with an average score of 5.6/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"This truncated adaptation of Frank Herbert's sci-fi masterwork is too dry to work as grand entertainment, but David Lynch's flair for the surreal gives it some spice.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 41 out of 100 based on 20 critic reviews, indicating \"mixed or average\" reviews.\nAs a result of its poor commercial and critical reception, all initial plans for \"Dune\" sequels were canceled. David Lynch reportedly was working on the screenplay for \"Dune Messiah\" and was hired to direct both proposed second and third \"Dune\" films. Lynch later said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I started selling out on \"Dune\". Looking back, it's no one's fault but my own. I probably shouldn't have done that picture, but I saw tons and tons of possibilities for things I loved, and this was the structure to do them in. There was so much room to create a world. But I got strong indications from Raffaella and Dino De Laurentiis of what kind of film they expected, and I knew I didn't have final cut.\nIn the introduction for his 1985 short story collection \"Eye\", author Frank Herbert discussed the film's reception and his participation in the production, complimented Lynch, and listed scenes that were shot but left out of the released version. He wrote, \"I enjoyed the film even as a cut and I told it as I saw it: What reached the screen is a visual feast that begins as \"Dune\" begins and you hear my dialogue all through it. [...] I have my quibbles about the film, of course. Paul was a man \"playing\" god, not a god who could make it rain. [...] It's my opinion that David's film of \"Dune\" will also be alive and well long after people have forgotten the potboilers that come out of corporate boardrooms. This is based partly on the reactions of everyone who worked on the film: They were sad to be parting when it was over and glad they had done it. The wrap party was a rare scene of happy nostalgia.\"\nAlejandro Jodorowsky, who had earlier been disappointed by the collapse of his own attempt to film \"Dune\", later said he had been disappointed and jealous when he learned Lynch was making \"Dune\", as he believed Lynch was the only other director capable of doing justice to the novel. At first, Jodorowsky refused to see Lynch's film, but his sons coerced him. As the film unfolded, Jodorowsky says he became very happy, seeing that it was a \"failure\", but that this was certainly the producers' fault and not Lynch's.\nAccolades.\n\"Dune\" was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Sound (Bill Varney, Steve Maslow, Kevin O'Connell, and Nelson Stoll).\nThe film won a 1984 Stinkers Bad Movie Awards for Worst Picture.\nTie-in media.\nNovelization.\nAn illustrated junior novelization by Joan D. Vinge, commonly published for movies during the 1970s and 1980s, titled \"The Dune Storybook\" was released in 1984.\nToys.\nA line of \"Dune\" action figures from toy company LJN was released to lackluster sales in 1984. Styled after Lynch's film, the collection includes figures of Paul Atreides, Baron Harkonnen, Feyd-Rautha, Glossu Rabban, Stilgar, and a Sardaukar warrior, plus a poseable sandworm, several vehicles, weapons, and a set of View-Master stereoscope reels. Figures of Gurney and Lady Jessica previewed in LJN's catalog were never produced. In 2006, SOTA Toys produced a Baron Harkonnen action figure for their \"Now Playing Presents\" line. In October 2019, Funko started a \"\"Dune\" Classic\" line of POP! vinyl figures, the first of which was Paul in a stillsuit and Feyd in a blue jumpsuit, styled after the 1984 film. An alternate version of Feyd in his blue loincloth was released for the 2019 New York Comic Con.\nGames.\nSeveral \"Dune\" games have been styled after Lynch's film. Parker Brothers released the board game \"Dune\" in 1984, and a 1997 collectible card game called \"Dune\" was followed by the role-playing game ' in 2000. The first licensed \"Dune\" video game is \"Dune\" (1992) from Cryo Interactive/Virgin Interactive. Its successor, Westwood Studios's \"Dune II\" (1992), is generally credited for popularizing and setting the template for the real-time strategy genre of PC games. This game was followed by \"Dune 2000\" (1998), a remake of \"Dune II\" from Intelligent Games/Westwood Studios/Virgin Interactive. Its sequel is the 3D video game ' (2001) by Intelligent Games/Westwood Studios/Electronic Arts.\nComics.\nMarvel Comics published an adaptation of the movie written by Ralph Macchio and illustrated by Bill Sienkiewicz.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71416", "revid": "50810751", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71416", "title": "Dune (novel)", "text": "1965 science fiction novel by Frank Herbert\nDune is a 1965 epic science fiction novel by American author Frank Herbert, originally published as two separate serials (1963\u201364 novel Dune World and 1965 novel Prophet of Dune) in \"Analog\" magazine. It tied with Roger Zelazny's \"This Immortal\" for the Hugo Award for Best Novel and won the inaugural Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1966. It is the first installment of the \"Dune Chronicles\". It is one of the world's best-selling science fiction novels.\n\"Dune\" is set in the distant future in a feudal interstellar society, descended from terrestrial humans, in which various noble houses control planetary fiefs. It tells the story of young Paul Atreides, whose family reluctantly accepts the stewardship of the planet Arrakis. While the planet is an inhospitable and sparsely populated desert wasteland, it is the only source of melange or \"spice\", an enormously valuable drug that extends life and enhances mental abilities. Melange is also necessary for space navigation, which requires a kind of multidimensional awareness and foresight that only the drug provides. As melange can only be produced on Arrakis, control of the planet is a coveted and dangerous undertaking. The story explores the multilayered interactions of politics, religion, ecology, technology, and human emotion as the factions of the empire confront each other in a struggle for the control of Arrakis and its spice.\nHerbert wrote five sequels: \"Dune Messiah\", \"Children of Dune\", \"God Emperor of Dune\", \"Heretics of Dune\", and \"\". Following Herbert's death in 1986, his son Brian Herbert and author Kevin J. Anderson continued the series in over a dozen additional novels since 1999.\nAdaptations of the novel to cinema have been notoriously difficult and complicated. In the 1970s, cult filmmaker Alejandro Jodorowsky attempted to make a film based on the novel. After three years of development, the project was canceled due to a constantly growing budget. In 1984, a film adaptation directed by David Lynch was released to mostly negative responses from critics and failure at the box office, although it later developed a cult following. The book was also adapted into the 2000 Sci-Fi Channel miniseries \"Frank Herbert's Dune\" and its 2003 sequel, \"Frank Herbert's Children of Dune\" (the latter of which combines the events of \"Dune Messiah\" and \"Children of Dune\"). A second film adaptation, directed by Denis Villeneuve, was released on October 21, 2021, to positive reviews. It went on to be nominated for ten Academy Awards, including Best Picture, ultimately winning six. Villeneuve's film covers roughly the first half of the original novel; a , which covers the second half, was released on March 1, 2024, to critical acclaim. Both films have grossed over $1 billion worldwide.\nThe series has also been used as the basis for several board, role-playing, and video games.\nSince 2009, the names of planets from the \"Dune\" novels have been adopted for the real-life nomenclature of plains and other features on Saturn's moon Titan.\nOrigins.\nAfter his novel \"The Dragon in the Sea\" was published in 1957, Herbert traveled to Florence, Oregon, at the north end of the Oregon Dunes. Here, the United States Department of Agriculture was attempting to use poverty grasses to stabilize the sand dunes. Herbert claimed in a letter to his literary agent, Lurton Blassingame, that the moving dunes could \"swallow whole cities, lakes, rivers, highways.\" Herbert's article on the dunes, \"They Stopped the Moving Sands\", was never completed (and only published decades later in \"The Road to Dune\"), but its research sparked Herbert's interest in ecology and deserts.\nHerbert further drew inspiration from Native American mentors like \"Indian Henry\" (as Herbert referred to the man to his son; likely a Henry Martin of the Hoh tribe) and Howard Hansen. Both Martin and Hansen grew up on the Quileute reservation near Herbert's hometown. According to historian Daniel Immerwahr, Hansen regularly shared his writing with Herbert. \"White men are eating the earth,\" Hansen told Herbert in 1958, after sharing a piece on the effect of logging on the Quileute reservation. \"They're gonna turn this whole planet into a wasteland, just like North Africa.\" The world could become a \"big dune,\" Herbert responded in agreement.\nHerbert was also interested in the idea of the superhero mystique and messiahs. He believed that feudalism was a natural condition humans fell into, where some led and others gave up the responsibility of making decisions and just followed orders. He found that desert environments have historically given birth to several major religions with messianic impulses. He decided to join his interests together so he could play religious and ecological ideas against each other. In addition, he was influenced by the story of T. E. Lawrence and the \"messianic overtones\" in Lawrence's involvement in the Arab Revolt during World War I. In an early version of \"Dune\", the hero was actually very similar to Lawrence of Arabia, but Herbert decided the plot was too straightforward and added more layers to his story.\nHerbert drew heavy inspiration also from Lesley Blanch's \"The Sabres of Paradise\" (1960), a narrative history recounting a mid-19th-century conflict in the Caucasus between rugged caucasian Muslim tribes and the expanding Russian Empire. Language used on both sides of that conflict become terms in Herbert's world\u2014\"chakobsa\", a Caucasian hunting language, becomes a battle language of humans spread across the galaxy; \"kanly\", a word for blood feud in the 19th-century Caucasus, represents a feud between Dune's noble Houses; \"sietch\" and \"tabir\" are both words for camp borrowed from Ukrainian Cossacks (of the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe).\nHerbert also borrowed some lines which Blanch stated were Caucasian proverbs. \"To kill with the point lacked artistry\", used by Blanch to describe the Caucasus peoples' love of swordsmanship, becomes in Dune \"Killing with the tip lacks artistry\", a piece of advice given to a young Paul during his training. \"Polish comes from the city, wisdom from the hills\", a Caucasian aphorism, turns into a desert expression: \"\"Polish comes from the cities, wisdom from the desert\".\"\nAnother significant source of inspiration for \"Dune\" was Herbert's experiences with psilocybin and his hobby of cultivating mushrooms, according to mycologist Paul Stamets's account of meeting Herbert in the 1980s:Frank went on to tell me that much of the premise of \"Dune\"\u2014the magic spice (spores) that allowed the bending of space (tripping), the giant sand worms (maggots digesting mushrooms), the eyes of the Freman (the cerulean blue of \"Psilocybe\" mushrooms), the mysticism of the female spiritual warriors, the Bene Gesserits (influenced by the tales of Maria Sabina and the sacred mushroom cults of Mexico)\u2014came from his perception of the fungal life cycle, and his imagination was stimulated through his experiences with the use of magic mushrooms.Herbert spent the next five years researching, writing, and revising. He published a three-part serial \"Dune World\" in the monthly \"Analog\", from December 1963 to February 1964. The serial was accompanied by several illustrations that were not published again. After an interval of a year, he published the much slower-paced five-part \"The Prophet of Dune\" in the January\u2013May 1965 issues. The first serial became \"Book One: Dune\" in the final published \"Dune\" novel, and the second serial was divided into \"Book Two: Muad'dib\" and \"Book Three: The Prophet\". The serialized version was expanded, reworked, and submitted to more than twenty publishers, each of whom rejected it. The novel, \"Dune\", was finally accepted and published in August 1965 by Chilton Books, a printing house better known for publishing auto repair manuals. Sterling Lanier, an editor at Chilton, had seen Herbert's manuscript and had urged his company to take a risk in publishing the book. However, the first printing, priced at $, did not sell well and was poorly received by critics as being atypical of science fiction at the time. Chilton considered the publication of \"Dune\" a write-off and Lanier was fired. Over the course of time, the book gained critical acclaim, and its popularity spread by word-of-mouth to allow Herbert to start working full time on developing the sequels to \"Dune\", elements of which were already written alongside \"Dune\".\nAt first Herbert considered using Mars as setting for his novel, but eventually decided to use a fictional planet instead. His son Brian said that \"Readers would have too many preconceived ideas about that planet, due to the number of stories that had been written about it.\"\nHerbert dedicated his work \"to the people whose labors go beyond ideas into the realm of 'real materials'\u2014to the dry-land ecologists, wherever they may be, in whatever time they work, this effort at prediction is dedicated in humility and admiration.\"\nPlot.\nDuke Leto Atreides of House Atreides, ruler of the ocean world Caladan, is assigned by the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV to serve as fief ruler of the planet Arrakis. Although Arrakis is a harsh and inhospitable desert planet, it is of enormous importance because it is the only planetary source of melange, or the \"spice\", a unique and incredibly valuable substance that extends human youth, vitality and lifespan. It is also through the consumption of spice that Spacing Guild Navigators are able to effect safe interstellar travel through a limited ability to see into the future. The Emperor is jealous of the Duke's rising popularity in the Landsraad, the council of Great Houses, and sees House Atreides as a potential rival and threat. He conspires with House Harkonnen, the former stewards of Arrakis and the longstanding enemies of the Atreides, to destroy Leto and his family after their arrival. Leto is aware his assignment is a trap of some kind, but is compelled to obey the Emperor's orders anyway.\nLeto's concubine Lady Jessica is an acolyte of the Bene Gesserit, an exclusively female group that pursues mysterious political aims and wields seemingly superhuman physical and mental abilities, such as the ability to control their bodies down to the cellular level, and also decide the sex of their children. Though Jessica was instructed by the Bene Gesserit to bear a daughter as part of their breeding program, out of love for Leto she bore him a son, Paul. From a young age, Paul is trained in warfare by Leto's aides, the elite soldiers Duncan Idaho and Gurney Halleck. Thufir Hawat, the Duke's Mentat (human computers, able to store vast amounts of data and perform advanced calculations on demand), has instructed Paul in the ways of political intrigue. Jessica has also trained her son in Bene Gesserit disciplines.\nPaul's prophetic dreams interest Jessica's superior, the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam. She subjects Paul to a deadly test. She holds a poisoned needle, the gom jabbar, to his neck, ready to strike should he withdraw his hand from a box which creates extreme pain by nerve induction but causes no physical damage. This is to test Paul's ability to endure the pain and override his animal instincts, proving that he is, in Bene Gesserit eyes, human. Paul passes, enduring greater pain than any woman has ever been subjected to in the test.\nPaul and his parents travel with their household to occupy Arrakeen, the capital on Arrakis. Leto learns of the dangers involved in harvesting the spice, which is protected by giant sandworms, and seeks to negotiate with the planet's indigenous Fremen people, seeing them as a valuable ally rather than foes. Soon after the Atreides' arrival, Harkonnen forces attack, joined by the Emperor's ferocious Sardaukar troops in disguise. Leto is betrayed by his personal physician, the Suk doctor Wellington Yueh, who delivers a drugged Leto to the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen and his twisted Mentat, Piter De Vries.\nYueh, who delivered Leto under duress, arranges for Jessica and Paul to escape into the desert. Duncan is killed helping them flee, and they are subsequently presumed dead in a sandstorm by the Harkonnens. Yueh replaces one of Leto's teeth with a poison gas capsule, hoping Leto can kill Baron Harkonnen during their encounter. Piter kills Yueh, and the Baron narrowly avoids the gas (due to his defensive shield), which kills Leto, Piter, and the others in the room. The Baron forces Thufir to take over Piter's position by dosing him with a long-lasting, fatal poison and threatening to withhold the regular antidote doses. While he follows the Baron's orders, Thufir works secretly to undermine the Harkonnens.\nHaving fled into the desert, Paul is exposed to high concentrations of spice and has visions through which he realizes he has significant powers (as a result of the Bene Gesserit breeding scheme). He foresees potential futures in which he lives among the Fremen before leading them on a holy war across the known universe. Paul reveals that Jessica's father is Baron Harkonnen, a secret kept from her by the Bene Gesserit.\nPaul and Jessica traverse the desert in search of Fremen people. After being captured by a Fremen band, Paul and Jessica agree to teach the Fremen the Bene Gesserit fighting technique known to the Fremen as the \"weirding way\" and are accepted into the community of Sietch Tabr. Paul proves his manhood by killing a Fremen man named Jamis in a ritualistic crysknife fight and chooses the Fremen name Muad'Dib, while Jessica opts to undergo a ritual to become a Reverend Mother by drinking and neutralizing the poisonous Water of Life. Pregnant with Leto's daughter, she inadvertently causes her unborn daughter Alia to become infused with the same powers in the womb. Paul takes a Fremen lover, Chani, who bears him a son he names Leto.\nTwo years pass, and Paul's powerful prescience manifests, which confirms to the Fremen that he is their prophesied \"Lisan al-Gaib\" messiah, a legend planted by the Bene Gesserit's Missionaria Protectiva. Paul embraces his father's belief that the Fremen could be a powerful fighting force to take back Arrakis, but also sees that if he does not control them, their jihad could consume the entire universe. Word of the new Fremen leader reaches both the Baron and the Emperor as spice production falls due to their increasingly destructive raids. The Baron encourages his brutish nephew Glossu \"Beast\" Rabban to rule with an iron fist, hoping the contrast with his shrewder nephew Feyd-Rautha will make the latter popular among the people of Arrakis when he eventually replaces Rabban. The Emperor, suspecting the Baron of trying to create troops more powerful than the Sardaukar to seize power, sends spies to Arrakis. Thufir uses the opportunity to sow seeds of doubt in the Baron about the Emperor's true plans, putting further strain on their alliance.\nGurney, who survived the Harkonnen coup and became a smuggler, reunites with Paul and Jessica after a Fremen raid on his harvester. Believing Jessica to be a traitor, Gurney threatens to kill her but is stopped by Paul. Paul did not foresee Gurney's attack and concludes he must increase his prescience by drinking the Water of Life, which is fatal to males. Paul falls into unconsciousness for three weeks after drinking the poison, but when he wakes, he has clairvoyance across time and space: he \"is\" the Kwisatz Haderach, the ultimate goal of the Bene Gesserit breeding program.\nPaul senses the Emperor and the Baron are amassing fleets around Arrakis to quell the Fremen rebellion, and prepares the Fremen for a major offensive. The Emperor arrives with the Baron on Arrakis. The Sardaukar seize a Fremen outpost, killing many, including young Leto, while Alia is captured and taken to the Emperor. Under cover of an electric storm, which shorts out the Sardaukar's defensive shields, Paul and the Fremen, riding giant sandworms, destroy the capital's natural rock fortifications with atomics and attack, while Alia assassinates the Baron and escapes. The Fremen quickly defeat both the Harkonnen and Sardaukar troops, killing Rabban in the process. Thufir is ordered to assassinate Paul, who gives him the opportunity to take anything that Thufir wishes of him. Thufir chooses to stab himself with the poisoned needle intended for Paul.\nPaul faces the Emperor, threatening to destroy spice production forever unless Shaddam abdicates the throne. Feyd-Rautha challenges Paul to a knife fight, during which he cheats and tries to kill Paul with a poison spur in his belt. Paul gains the upper hand and kills him. The Emperor reluctantly cedes the throne to Paul and promises his daughter Princess Irulan's hand in marriage. Paul takes control of the Empire, but realizes that he cannot stop the Fremen jihad, as their belief in him is too powerful to restrain.\nThemes and influences.\nThe \"Dune\" series is a landmark of science fiction. Herbert deliberately suppressed technology in his \"Dune\" universe so he could address the politics of humanity, rather than the future of humanity's technology. For example, a key pre-history event to the novel's present is the \"Butlerian Jihad\", in which all robots and computers were destroyed, eliminating these common elements to science fiction from the novel as to allow focus on humanity. \"Dune\" considers the way humans and their institutions might change over time. Director John Harrison, who adapted \"Dune\" for Syfy's 2000 miniseries, called the novel a universal and timeless reflection of \"the human condition and its moral dilemmas\", and said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A lot of people refer to \"Dune\" as science fiction. I never do. I consider it an epic adventure in the classic storytelling tradition, a story of myth and legend not unlike the \"Morte d'Arthur\" or any messiah story. It just happens to be set in the future ... The story is actually more relevant today than when Herbert wrote it. In the 1960s, there were just these two colossal superpowers duking it out. Today we're living in a more feudal, corporatized world more akin to Herbert's universe of separate families, power centers and business interests, all interrelated and kept together by the one commodity necessary to all.\nBut \"Dune\" has also been called a mix of soft and hard science fiction since \"the attention to ecology is hard, the anthropology and the psychic abilities are soft.\" Hard elements include the ecology of Arrakis, suspensor technology, weapon systems, and ornithopters, while soft elements include issues relating to religion, physical and mental training, cultures, politics, and psychology.\nHerbert said Paul's messiah figure was inspired by the Arthurian legend, and that the scarcity of water on Arrakis was a metaphor for oil, as well as air and water itself, and for the shortages of resources caused by overpopulation. Novelist Brian Herbert, his son and biographer, wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Dune\" is a modern-day conglomeration of familiar myths, a tale in which great sandworms guard a precious treasure of melange, the geriatric spice that represents, among other things, the finite resource of oil. The planet Arrakis features immense, ferocious worms that are like dragons of lore, with \"great teeth\" and a \"bellows breath of cinnamon.\" This resembles the myth described by an unknown English poet in \"Beowulf\", the compelling tale of a fearsome fire dragon who guarded a great treasure hoard in a lair under cliffs, at the edge of the sea. The desert of Frank Herbert's classic novel is a vast ocean of sand, with giant worms diving into the depths, the mysterious and unrevealed domain of Shai-hulud. Dune tops are like the crests of waves, and there are powerful sandstorms out there, creating extreme danger. On Arrakis, life is said to emanate from the Maker (Shai-hulud) in the desert-sea; similarly all life on Earth is believed to have evolved from our oceans. Frank Herbert drew parallels, used spectacular metaphors, and extrapolated present conditions into world systems that seem entirely alien at first blush. But close examination reveals they aren't so different from systems we know ... and the book characters of his imagination are not so different from people familiar to us.\nEach chapter of \"Dune\" begins with an epigraph excerpted from the fictional writings of the character Princess Irulan. In forms such as diary entries, historical commentary, biography, quotations and philosophy, these writings set tone and provide exposition, context and other details intended to enhance understanding of Herbert's complex fictional universe and themes. They act as foreshadowing and invite the reader to keep reading to close the gap between what the epigraph says and what is happening in the main narrative. The epigraphs also give the reader the feeling that the world they are reading about is epically distanced, since Irulan writes about an idealized image of Paul as if he had already passed into memory. Brian Herbert wrote: \"Dad told me that you could follow any of the novel's layers as you read it, and then start the book all over again, focusing on an entirely different layer. At the end of the book, he intentionally left loose ends and said he did this to send the readers spinning out of the story with bits and pieces of it still clinging to them, so that they would want to go back and read it again.\"\nMiddle-Eastern and Islamic references.\nDue to the similarities between some of Herbert's terms and ideas and actual words and concepts in the Arabic language, as well as the series' \"Islamic undertones\" and themes, a Middle-Eastern influence on Herbert's works has been noted repeatedly. In his descriptions of the Fremen culture and language, Herbert uses both authentic Arabic words and Arabic-sounding words. For example, one of the names for the sandworm, Shai-hulud, is derived from or . The title of the Fremen housekeeper, the Shadout Mapes, is borrowed from the , the Egyptian term for a device used to raise water. In particular, words related to the messianic religion of the Fremen, first implanted by the Bene Gesserit, are taken from Arabic, including Muad'Dib (from ), Lisan al-Gaib (from ), Usul (from ), Shari-a (from ), Shaitan (from ), and jinn (from ). It is likely Herbert relied on second-hand resources such as phrasebooks and desert adventure stories to find these Arabic words and phrases for the Fremen. They are meaningful and carefully chosen, and help create an \"imagined desert culture that resonates with exotic sounds, enigmas, and pseudo-Islamic references\" and has a distinctly Bedouin aesthetic.\nAs a foreigner who adopts the ways of a desert-dwelling people and then leads them in a military capacity, Paul Atreides bears many similarities to the historical T. E. Lawrence. His 1962 biopic \"Lawrence of Arabia\" has also been identified as a potential influence. \"The Sabres of Paradise\" (1960) has also been identified as a potential influence upon \"Dune\", with its depiction of Imam Shamil and the Islamic culture of the Caucasus inspiring some of the themes, characters, events and terminology of \"Dune\".\nThe environment of the desert planet Arrakis was primarily inspired by the environments of the Middle East. Similarly Arrakis as a bioregion is presented as a particular kind of political site. Herbert has made it resemble a desertified petrostate area. The Fremen people of Arrakis were influenced by the Bedouin tribes of Arabia, and the Mahdi prophecy originates from Islamic eschatology. Inspiration is also adopted from medieval historian Ibn Khaldun's cyclical history and his dynastic concept in North Africa, hinted at by Herbert's reference to Khaldun's book Kit\u0101b al-\u02bfibar (\"The Book of Lessons\"). The fictionalized version of the \"Kitab al-ibar\" in \"Dune\" is a combination of a Fremen religious manual and a desert survival book.\nAdditional language and historic influences.\nIn addition to Arabic, \"Dune\" derives words and names from a variety of other languages, including Navajo, Latin, Old Scandinavian (\"\"), Romani, Hebrew (\"Kefitzat haderech\", ), Serbo-Croatian, Nahuatl, Greek, Persian, Sanskrit (\"prana bindu\", \"prajna\"), Russian, Turkish, Finnish, and Old English. \"Bene Gesserit\" is part of the Latin legal phrase \"as long as he shall behave himself well\" seen in grants of certain offices (such as judgeships) meaning that the appointee shall remain in office so long as he shall not be guilty of abusing it. Some critics miss the connotation of the phrase, misled by the Latin future perfect , taking it over-literally (and adding an unwarranted passive) to mean \"it will have been well borne\", an interpretation which is not well supported by the Bene Gesserit doctrine in the story.\nThrough the inspiration from \"The Sabres of Paradise\", there are also allusions to the tsarist-era Russian nobility and Cossacks. Frank Herbert stated that bureaucracy that lasted long enough would become a hereditary nobility, and a significant theme behind the aristocratic families in \"Dune\" was \"aristocratic bureaucracy\" which he saw as analogous to the Soviet Union.\nEnvironmentalism and ecology.\n\"Dune\" has been called the \"first planetary ecology novel on a grand scale\". Herbert hoped it would be seen as an \"environmental awareness handbook\" and said the title was meant to \"echo the sound of 'doom'\". It was reviewed in the best-selling countercultural Whole Earth Catalog in 1968 as a \"rich re-readable fantasy with clear portrayal of the fierce environment it takes to cohere a community\".\nAfter the publication of \"Silent Spring\" by Rachel Carson in 1962, science fiction writers began treating the subject of ecological change and its consequences. \"Dune\" responded in 1965 with its complex descriptions of Arrakis life, from giant sandworms (for whom water is deadly) to smaller, mouse-like life-forms adapted to live with limited water. \"Dune\" was followed in its creation of complex and unique ecologies by other science fiction books such as \"A Door into Ocean\" (1986) and \"Red Mars\" (1992). Environmentalists have pointed out that \"Dune\"'s popularity as a novel depicting a planet as a complex\u2014almost living\u2014thing, in combination with the first images of Earth from space being published in the same time period, strongly influenced environmental movements such as the establishment of the international Earth Day.\nWhile the genre of climate fiction was popularized in the 2010s in response to real global climate change, \"Dune\" as well as other early science fiction works from authors like J. G. Ballard (\"The Drowned World\") and Kim Stanley Robinson (the \"Mars\" trilogy) have retroactively been considered pioneering examples of the genre.\nDeclining empires.\nThe Imperium in \"Dune\" contains features of various empires in Europe and the Near East, including the Roman Empire, Holy Roman Empire, and Ottoman Empire. Lorenzo DiTommaso compared \"Dune\"'s portrayal of the downfall of a galactic empire to Edward Gibbon's \"Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,\" which argues that Christianity allied with the profligacy of the Roman elite led to the fall of Ancient Rome. In \"The Articulation of Imperial Decadence and Decline in Epic Science Fiction\" (2007), DiTommaso outlines similarities between the two works by highlighting the excesses of the Emperor on his home planet of Kaitain and of the Baron Harkonnen in his palace. The Emperor loses his effectiveness as a ruler through an excess of ceremony and pomp. The hairdressers and attendants he brings with him to Arrakis are even referred to as \"parasites\". The Baron Harkonnen is similarly corrupt and materially indulgent. Gibbon's \"Decline and Fall\" partly blames the fall of Rome on the rise of Christianity. Gibbon claimed that this exotic import from a conquered province weakened the soldiers of Rome and left it open to attack. The Emperor's Sardaukar fighters are little match for the Fremen of Dune not only because of the Sardaukar's overconfidence and the fact that Jessica and Paul have trained the Fremen in their battle tactics, but because of the Fremen's capacity for self-sacrifice. The Fremen put the community before themselves in every instance, while the world outside wallows in luxury at the expense of others.\nThe decline and long peace of the Empire sets the stage for revolution and renewal by genetic mixing of successful and unsuccessful groups through war, a process culminating in the Jihad led by Paul Atreides, described by Frank Herbert as depicting \"war as a collective orgasm\" (drawing on Norman Walter's 1950 \"The Sexual Cycle of Human Warfare\"), themes that would reappear in \"God Emperor of Dune\"'s Scattering and Leto II's all-female Fish Speaker army.\nGender dynamics.\nGender dynamics are complex in \"Dune\". Herbert offers a multi-layered portrayal of gender roles within the context of a feudal, hierarchical society, particularly through the Bene Gesserit Sisterhood. Although the Bene Gesserit tend to hold roles that are traditionally associated with women, such as wives, concubines, and mothers, their characters transcend stereotypes as they play politics and pursue long-term strategic goals. Full gender equality is not depicted in \"Dune\", but the Bene Gesserit use specialized training and access to high-ranking men to gain agency and power within the constraints of their environment. Their training in prana-bindu allows them to exert control over their minds and bodies, including over pregnancy, and they are skilled in hand-to-hand combat and use of the Voice to command others. Jessica's disobedience in bearing a son instead of daughter and training him in the Bene Gesserit Way is a major plot point that sets in motion the events of the novel. By setting up certain women with leaders of certain Houses in the Imperium, the Bene Gesserit can control bloodlines across generations through their secret breeding program. Even within the male-dominated Imperium, then, the Bene Gesserit wield reproductive power and choose which genetic markers to continue into the future.\nReverend Mother Mohiam uses skills in Truthsaying to act as the Emperor's official Truthsayer and advisor. Her role can be considered similar to that of abbesses in the medieval Church. Before Princess Irulan appears as a character who agrees to a political marriage with Paul, she acts as a historian who shapes the reader's interpretation of the story and Paul's legacy due to the excerpts from her writing that frame each chapter.\nAmong the Fremen, women have roles as mothers and wives and also exercise agency through combat and religious authority. Fremen women and children have a reputation for being just as violent and dangerous as Fremen men. Chani travels with Stilgar in his military party, armed like the others. After becoming Paul's concubine, she kills one of the men who comes to challenge him. Alia leads an attack against the Emperor's Sardaukar and kills Baron Harkonnen with a gom jabbar. Women also take on the role of religious leaders. Chani is a Sayyadina who presides over tribal rituals such as Paul's worm-riding test, and Reverend Mother Ramallo carries the tribe's memories and passes them along to Jessica through the Water of Life ceremony. Within the male-led sietches, Fremen women find different avenues of authority.\nThe gom jabbar test of humanity is administered by the female Bene Gesserit order but rarely to males. The Bene Gesserit have seemingly mastered the unconscious and can play on the unconscious weaknesses of others using the Voice, yet their breeding program seeks after a male Kwisatz Haderach. Their plan is to produce a male who can \"possess complete racial memory, both male and female,\" and look into the black hole in the collective unconscious that they fear. A central theme of the book is the connection, in Jessica's son, of this female aspect with his male aspect. This aligns with concepts in Jungian psychology, which features conscious/unconscious and taking/giving roles associated with males and females, as well as the idea of the collective unconscious. Paul's approach to power consistently requires his upbringing under the matriarchal Bene Gesserit, who operate as a long-dominating shadow government behind all of the great houses and their marriages or divisions. He is trained by Jessica in the Bene Gesserit Way, which includes prana-bindu training in nerve and muscle control and precise perception. Paul also receives Mentat training, thus helping prepare him to be a type of androgynous Kwisatz Haderach, a male Reverend Mother.\nIn a Bene Gesserit test early in the book, it is implied that people are generally \"inhuman\" in that they irrationally place desire over self-interest and reason. This applies Herbert's philosophy that humans are not created equal, while equal justice and equal opportunity are higher ideals than mental, physical, or moral equality.\nHeroism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am showing you the superhero syndrome and your own participation in it.\u2014\u200a\nThroughout Paul's rise to superhuman status, he follows a plotline common to many stories describing the birth of a hero. He has unfortunate circumstances forced onto him. After a long period of hardship and exile, he confronts and defeats the source of evil in his tale. As such, \"Dune\" is representative of a general trend beginning in 1960s American science fiction in that it features a character who attains godlike status through scientific means. Eventually, Paul Atreides gains a level of omniscience which allows him to take over the planet and the galaxy, and causes the Fremen of Arrakis to worship him like a god. Author Frank Herbert said in 1979, \"The bottom line of the \"Dune\" trilogy is: beware of heroes. Much better to rely on your own judgment, and your own mistakes.\" He wrote in 1985, \"\"Dune\" was aimed at this whole idea of the infallible leader because my view of history says that mistakes made by a leader (or made in a leader's name) are amplified by the numbers who follow without question.\"\nJuan A. Prieto-Pablos says Herbert achieves a new typology with Paul's superpowers, differentiating the heroes of \"Dune\" from earlier heroes such as Superman, van Vogt's Gilbert Gosseyn and Henry Kuttner's telepaths. Unlike previous superheroes who acquire their powers suddenly and accidentally, Paul's are the result of \"painful and slow personal progress.\" And unlike other superheroes of the 1960s\u2014who are the exception among ordinary people in their respective worlds\u2014Herbert's characters grow their powers through \"the application of mystical philosophies and techniques.\" For Herbert, the ordinary person can develop incredible fighting skills (Fremen, Ginaz swordsmen and Sardaukar) or mental abilities (Bene Gesserit, Mentats, Spacing Guild Navigators).\nZen and religion.\nEarly in his newspaper career, Herbert was introduced to Zen by two Jungian psychologists, Ralph and Irene Slattery, who \"gave a crucial boost to his thinking\". Zen teachings ultimately had \"a profound and continuing influence on [Herbert's] work\". Throughout the \"Dune\" series and particularly in \"Dune\", Herbert employs concepts and forms borrowed from Zen Buddhism. The Fremen are referred to as Zensunni adherents, and many of Herbert's epigraphs are Zen-spirited. In \"\"Dune\" Genesis\", Frank Herbert wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What especially pleases me is to see the interwoven themes, the fugue like relationships of images that exactly replay the way \"Dune\" took shape. As in an Escher lithograph, I involved myself with recurrent themes that turn into paradox. The central paradox concerns the human vision of time. What about Paul's gift of prescience\u2014the Presbyterian fixation? For the Delphic Oracle to perform, it must tangle itself in a web of predestination. Yet predestination negates surprises and, in fact, sets up a mathematically enclosed universe whose limits are always inconsistent, always encountering the unprovable. It's like a koan, a Zen mind breaker. It's like the Cretan Epimenides saying, \"All Cretans are liars.\"\nBrian Herbert called the \"Dune\" universe \"a spiritual melting pot\", noting that his father incorporated elements of a variety of religions, including Buddhism, Sufi mysticism and other Islamic belief systems, Catholicism, Protestantism, Judaism, and Hinduism. He added that Frank Herbert's fictional future in which \"religious beliefs have combined into interesting forms\" represents the author's solution to eliminating arguments between religions, each of which claimed to have \"the one and only revelation.\"\nAsimov's \"Foundation\".\nTim O'Reilly suggests that Herbert also wrote \"Dune\" as a counterpoint to Isaac Asimov's \"Foundation\" series. In his monograph on Frank Herbert, O'Reilly wrote that \"\"Dune\" is clearly a commentary on the \"Foundation\" trilogy. Herbert has taken a look at the same imaginative situation that provoked Asimov's classic\u2014the decay of a galactic empire\u2014and restated it in a way that draws on different assumptions and suggests radically different conclusions. The twist he has introduced into \"Dune\" is that the Mule, not the Foundation, is his hero.\" According to O'Reilly, Herbert bases the Bene Gesserit on the scientific shamans of the Foundation, though they use biological rather than statistical science. In contrast to the \"Foundation\" series and its praise of science and rationality, \"Dune\" proposes that the unconscious and unexpected are actually what are needed for humanity.\nBoth Herbert and Asimov explore the implications of prescience (i.e., visions of the future) both psychologically and socially. The \"Foundation\" series deploys a broadly determinist approach to prescient vision rooted in mathematical reasoning on a macroscopic social level. \"Dune\", by contrast, invents a biologically rooted power of prescience that becomes determinist when the user actively relies on it to navigate past an undefined threshold of detail. Herbert's eugenically produced and spice-enhanced prescience is also personalized to individual actors whose roles in later books constrain each other's visions, rendering the future more or less mutable as time progresses. In what might be a comment on \"Foundation\", Herbert's most powerfully prescient being in \"God Emperor of Dune\" laments the boredom engendered by prescience, and values surprises, especially regarding one's death, as a psychological necessity.\nHowever, both works contain a similar theme of the restoration of civilization and seem to make the fundamental assumption that \"political maneuvering, the need to control material resources, and friendship or mating bonds will be fundamentally the same in the future as they are now.\"\nCritical reception.\n\"Dune\" tied with Roger Zelazny's \"This Immortal\" for the Hugo Award in 1966 and won the inaugural Nebula Award for Best Novel. Reviews of the novel have been largely positive, and \"Dune\" is considered by some critics to be the best science fiction book ever written. The novel has been translated into dozens of languages, and has sold almost 20 million copies. \"Dune\" has been regularly cited as one of the world's best-selling science fiction novels.\nArthur C. Clarke described \"Dune\" as \"unique\" and wrote, \"I know nothing comparable to it except \"The Lord of the Rings\".\" Robert A. Heinlein described the novel as \"powerful, convincing, and most ingenious.\" It was described as \"one of the monuments of modern science fiction\" by the \"Chicago Tribune\", and P. Schuyler Miller called \"Dune\" \"one of the landmarks of modern science fiction ... an amazing feat of creation.\" \"The Washington Post\" described it as \"a portrayal of an alien society more complete and deeply detailed than any other author in the field has managed ... a story absorbing equally for its action and philosophical vistas ... An astonishing science fiction phenomenon.\" Algis Budrys praised \"Dune\" for the vividness of its imagined setting, saying \"The time lives. It breathes, it speaks, and Herbert has smelt it in his nostrils\". He found that the novel, however, \"turns flat and tails off at the end. ... [T]ruly effective villains simply simper and melt; fierce men and cunning statesmen and seeresses all bend before this new Messiah\". Budrys faulted in particular Herbert's decision to kill Paul's infant son offstage, with no apparent emotional impact, saying \"you cannot be so busy saving a world that you cannot hear an infant shriek\". After criticizing unrealistic science fiction, Carl Sagan in 1978 listed \"Dune\" as among stories \"that are so tautly constructed, so rich in the accommodating details of an unfamiliar society that they sweep me along before I have even a chance to be critical\".\n\"The Louisville Times\" wrote, \"Herbert's creation of this universe, with its intricate development and analysis of ecology, religion, politics, and philosophy, remains one of the supreme and seminal achievements in science fiction.\" Writing for \"The New Yorker\", Jon Michaud praised Herbert's \"clever authorial decision\" to exclude robots and computers (\"two staples of the genre\") from his fictional universe, but suggested that this may be one explanation why \"Dune\" lacks \"true fandom among science-fiction fans\" to the extent that it \"has not penetrated popular culture in the way that \"The Lord of the Rings\" and \"Star Wars\" have\". Tamara I. Hladik wrote that the story \"crafts a universe where lesser novels promulgate excuses for sequels. All its rich elements are in balance and plausible\u2014not the patchwork confederacy of made-up languages, contrived customs, and meaningless histories that are the hallmark of so many other, lesser novels.\"\nOn November 5, 2019, the \"BBC News\" listed \"Dune\" on its list of the 100 most influential novels.\nJ. R. R. Tolkien refused to review \"Dune\", on the grounds that he disliked it \"with some intensity\" and thus felt it would be unfair to Herbert, another working author, if he gave an honest review of the book.\nFirst edition prints and manuscripts.\nThe first edition of \"Dune\" is one of the most valuable in science fiction book collecting. Copies have been sold for more than $20,000 at auction.\nCalifornia State University, Fullerton's Pollak Library has several of Herbert's draft manuscripts of \"Dune\" and other works, with the author's notes, in their Frank Herbert Archives.\nSequels and prequels.\nAfter \"Dune\" proved to be a critical and financial success for Herbert, he was able to devote himself full time to writing additional novels in the series. He had already drafted parts of the second and third while writing \"Dune\". The series included \"Dune Messiah\" (1969), \"Children of Dune\" (1976), \"God Emperor of Dune\" (1981), \"Heretics of Dune\" (1984), and \"\" (1985), each sequentially continuing on the narrative from \"Dune\". Herbert died on February 11, 1986.\nHerbert's son, Brian Herbert, had found several thousand pages of notes left by his father that outlined ideas for other narratives related to \"Dune\". Brian Herbert enlisted author Kevin J. Anderson to help build out prequel novels to the events of \"Dune\". Brian Herbert's and Anderson's \"Dune\" prequels first started publication in 1999, and have led to additional stories that take place between those of Frank Herbert's books. The notes for what would have been \"Dune 7\" also enabled them to publish \"Hunters of Dune\" (2006) and \"Sandworms of Dune\" (2007), sequels to Frank Herbert's final novel \"Chapterhouse: Dune\", which complete the chronological progression of his original series, and wrap up storylines that began in \"Heretics of Dune\".\nAdaptations.\n\"Dune\" has been considered an \"unfilmable\" and \"uncontainable\" work to adapt from novel to film or other visual medium. Described by \"Wired\", \"It has four appendices and a glossary of its own gibberish, and its action takes place on two planets, one of which is a desert overrun by worms the size of airport runways. Lots of important people die or try to kill each other, and they're all tethered to about eight entangled subplots.\" There have been several attempts to achieve this difficult conversion with various degrees of success.\nEarly stalled attempts.\nIn 1971, the production company Apjac International (APJ) (headed by Arthur P. Jacobs) optioned the rights to film \"Dune\". As Jacobs was busy with other projects, such as the sequel to \"Planet of the Apes\", \"Dune\" was delayed for another year. Jacobs' first choice for director was David Lean, but he turned down the offer. Charles Jarrott was also considered to direct. Work was also under way on a script while the hunt for a director continued. Initially, the first treatment had been handled by Robert Greenhut, the producer who had lobbied Jacobs to make the movie in the first place, but subsequently Rospo Pallenberg was approached to write the script, with shooting scheduled to begin in 1974. However, Jacobs died in 1973.\nIn December 1974, a French consortium led by Jean-Paul Gibon purchased the film rights from APJ, with Alejandro Jodorowsky set to direct. In 1975, Jodorowsky planned to film the story as a 3-hour feature, set to star his own son Brontis Jodorowsky in the lead role of Paul Atreides, Salvador Dal\u00ed as Shaddam IV, Padishah Emperor, Amanda Lear as Princess Irulan, Orson Welles as Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, Gloria Swanson as Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, David Carradine as Duke Leto Atreides, Geraldine Chaplin as Lady Jessica, Alain Delon as Duncan Idaho, Herv\u00e9 Villechaize as Gurney Halleck, Udo Kier as Piter De Vries, and Mick Jagger as Feyd-Rautha. It was at first proposed to score the film with original music by Karlheinz Stockhausen, Henry Cow, and Magma; later on, the soundtrack was to be provided by Pink Floyd. Jodorowsky set up a pre-production unit in Paris consisting of Chris Foss, a British artist who designed covers for science fiction periodicals, Jean Giraud (Moebius), a French illustrator who created and also wrote and drew for \"Metal Hurlant\" magazine, and H. R. Giger. Moebius began designing creatures and characters for the film, while Foss was brought in to design the film's space ships and hardware. Giger began designing the Harkonnen Castle based on Moebius's storyboards. Dan O'Bannon was to head the special effects department.\nDal\u00ed was cast as the Emperor. Dal\u00ed later demanded to be paid $100,000 per hour; Jodorowsky agreed, but tailored Dal\u00ed's part to be filmed in one hour, drafting plans for other scenes of the emperor to use a mechanical mannequin as substitute for Dal\u00ed. According to Giger, Dal\u00ed was \"later invited to leave the film because of his pro-Franco statements\". Just as the storyboards, designs, and script were finished, the financial backing dried up. Frank Herbert traveled to Europe in 1976 to find that $2 million of the $9.5 million budget had already been spent in pre-production, and that Jodorowsky's script would result in a 14-hour movie (\"It was the size of a phone book\", Herbert later recalled). Jodorowsky took creative liberties with the source material, but Herbert said that he and Jodorowsky had an amicable relationship. Jodorowsky said in 1985 that he found the \"Dune\" story mythical and had intended to re-create it rather than adapt the novel; though he had an \"enthusiastic admiration\" for Herbert, Jodorowsky said he had done everything possible to distance the author and his input from the project. Although Jodorowsky was embittered by the experience, he said the \"Dune\" project changed his life, and some of the ideas were used in his and Moebius's \"The Incal\". O'Bannon entered a psychiatric hospital after the production failed, then worked on 13 scripts, the last of which became \"Alien\". A 2013 documentary, \"Jodorowsky's Dune\", was made about Jodorowsky's failed attempt at an adaptation.\nIn 1976, Dino De Laurentiis acquired the rights from Gibon's consortium. De Laurentiis commissioned Herbert to write a new screenplay in 1978; the script Herbert turned in was 175 pages long, the equivalent of nearly three hours of screen time. De Laurentiis then hired director Ridley Scott in 1979, with Rudy Wurlitzer writing the screenplay and H. R. Giger retained from the Jodorowsky production; Scott and Giger had also just worked together on the film \"Alien\", after O'Bannon recommended the artist. Scott intended to split the novel into two movies. He worked on three drafts of the script, using \"The Battle of Algiers\" as a point of reference, before moving on to direct another science fiction film, \"Blade Runner\" (1982). As he recalls, the pre-production process was slow, and finishing the project would have been even more time-intensive:\nBut after seven months I dropped out of \"Dune\", by then Rudy Wurlitzer had come up with a first-draft script which I felt was a decent distillation of Frank Herbert's. But I also realised \"Dune\" was going to take a lot more work\u2014at least two and a half years' worth. And I didn't have the heart to attack that because my older brother Frank unexpectedly died of cancer while I was prepping the De Laurentiis picture. Frankly, that freaked me out. So I went to Dino and told him the \"Dune\" script was his.\n\u2014From \"Ridley Scott: The Making of his Movies\" by Paul M. Sammon\nA draft of the screenplay for the Scott version was discovered in 2024 in the Wheaton College archives.\n1984 film by David Lynch.\nIn 1981, the nine-year film rights were set to expire. De Laurentiis re-negotiated the rights from the author, adding to them the rights to the \"Dune\" sequels (written and unwritten). After seeing \"The Elephant Man\", De Laurentiis' daughter Raffaella decided that David Lynch should direct the movie. Around that time Lynch received several other directing offers, including \"Return of the Jedi\". He agreed to direct \"Dune\" and write the screenplay even though he had not read the book, was not familiar with the story, or even been interested in science fiction. Lynch worked on the script for six months with Eric Bergren and Christopher De Vore. The team yielded two drafts of the script before it split over creative differences. Lynch would subsequently work on five more drafts. Production of the work was troubled by problems at the Mexican studio and hampering the film's timeline. Lynch ended up producing a nearly three-hour-long film, but at demands from Universal Pictures, the film's distributor, he cut it back to about two hours, hastily filming additional scenes to make up for some of the cut footage.\nThis first film of \"Dune\", directed by Lynch, was released in 1984, nearly 20 years after the book's publication. Though Herbert said the book's depth and symbolism seemed to intimidate many filmmakers, he was pleased with the film, saying that \"They've got it. It begins as \"Dune\" does. And I hear my dialogue all the way through. There are some interpretations and liberties, but you're gonna come out knowing you've seen \"Dune\".\" Reviews of the film were negative, saying that it was incomprehensible to those unfamiliar with the book, and that fans would be disappointed by the way it strayed from the book's plot. Upon release for television and other forms of home media, Universal opted to reintroduce much of the footage that Lynch had cut, creating an over-three-hour-long version with extensive monologue exposition. Lynch was extremely displeased with this move, and demanded that Universal replace his name on these cuts with the pseudonym \"Alan Smithee\", and has generally distanced himself from the film since.\n2000 miniseries by John Harrison.\nIn 2000, John Harrison adapted the novel into \"Frank Herbert's Dune\", a miniseries that premiered on the Sci-Fi Channel. As of 2004, the miniseries was one of the three highest-rated programs broadcast on the Sci-Fi Channel.\nFurther film attempts.\nIn 2008, Paramount Pictures announced that they would produce a new film based on the book, with Peter Berg attached to direct. Producer Kevin Misher, who spent a year securing the rights from the Herbert estate, was to be joined by Richard Rubinstein and John Harrison (of both Sci-Fi Channel miniseries) as well as Sarah Aubrey and Mike Messina. The producers stated that they were going for a \"faithful adaptation\" of the novel and considered \"its theme of finite ecological resources particularly timely\". Science fiction author Kevin J. Anderson and Frank Herbert's son Brian Herbert, who had together written multiple \"Dune\" sequels and prequels since 1999, were attached to the project as technical advisors. In October 2009, Berg dropped out of the project, later saying that it \"for a variety of reasons wasn't the right thing\" for him. Subsequently, with a script draft by Joshua Zetumer, Paramount reportedly sought a new director who could do the film for under $175 million. In 2010, Pierre Morel was signed on to direct, with screenwriter Chase Palmer incorporating Morel's vision of the project into Zetumer's original draft. By November 2010, Morel left the project. Paramount finally dropped plans for a remake in March 2011.\nFilms by Denis Villeneuve.\nIn November 2016, Legendary Entertainment acquired the film and TV rights for \"Dune\". \"Variety\" reported in December 2016 that Denis Villeneuve was in negotiations to direct the project, which was confirmed in February 2017. In April 2017, Legendary announced that Eric Roth would write the screenplay. Villeneuve explained in March 2018 that his adaptation will be split into two films, with the first installment scheduled to begin production in 2019. Casting includes Timoth\u00e9e Chalamet as Paul Atreides, Dave Bautista as Rabban, Stellan Skarsg\u00e5rd as Baron Harkonnen, Rebecca Ferguson as Lady Jessica, Charlotte Rampling as Reverend Mother Mohiam, Oscar Isaac as Duke Leto Atreides, Zendaya as Chani, Javier Bardem as Stilgar, Josh Brolin as Gurney Halleck, Jason Momoa as Duncan Idaho, David Dastmalchian as Piter De Vries, Chang Chen as Dr. Yueh, and Stephen Henderson as Thufir Hawat. Warner Bros. Pictures distributed the film, which had its initial premiere on September 3, 2021, at the Venice Film Festival, and wide release in both theaters and streaming on HBO Max on October 21, 2021, as part of Warner Bros.' approach to handling the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the film industry. The film received \"generally favorable reviews\" on Metacritic. It has gone on to win multiple awards and was named by the National Board of Review as one of the 10 best films of 2021, as well as the American Film Institute in their annual top 10 list. The film went on to be nominated for ten Academy Awards, winning six, the most wins of the night for any film in contention.\nA sequel, \"\", was scheduled for release on November 3, 2023, but was released on March 1, 2024, due to the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike. It had its world premiere at the Odeon Luxe Leicester Square, London, on February 15, 2024, and opened in the United States on March 1. It received critical acclaim especially for its visual effects and has grossed over $711 million worldwide, making it the fourth-highest-grossing film of 2024.\nAudiobooks.\nIn 1993, Recorded Books Inc. released a 20-disc audiobook narrated by George Guidall. In 2007, Audio Renaissance released an audio book narrated by Simon Vance with some parts performed by Scott Brick, Orlagh Cassidy, Euan Morton, and other performers.\nCultural influence.\n\"Dune\" has been widely influential, inspiring numerous novels, music, films, television, games, and comic books. It is considered one of the most influential science fiction novels of all time, with numerous modern science fiction works owing their existence to \"Dune\".\" Dune\" has been referenced in numerous works of popular culture, including \"Star Wars\", \"Star Trek\", \"Chronicles of Riddick\", \"The Kingkiller Chronicle\" and \"Futurama\". \"Dune\" was cited as a source of inspiration for Hayao Miyazaki's anime film \"Nausica\u00e4 of the Valley of the Wind\" (1984) for its post-apocalyptic world.\n\"Dune\" was parodied in 1984's \"National Lampoon's Doon\" by Ellis Weiner, which William F. Touponce called \"something of a tribute to Herbert's success on college campuses\", noting that \"the only other book to have been so honored is Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\",\" which was parodied by \"The Harvard Lampoon\" in 1969.\nGames.\nThere have been a number of games based on the book, starting with the strategy\u2013adventure game \"Dune\" (1992). The most important game adaptation is \"Dune II\" (1992), which established the conventions of modern real-time strategy games and is considered to be among the most influential video games of all time.\nThe online game \"Lost Souls\" includes \"Dune\"-derived elements, including sandworms and melange\u2014addiction to which can produce psychic talents. The 2016 game \"Enter the Gungeon\" features the spice melange as a random item which gives the player progressively stronger abilities and penalties with repeated uses, mirroring the long-term effects melange has on users.\nRick Priestley cites \"Dune\" as a major influence on his 1987 wargame, \"Warhammer 40,000\".\nIn 2023, Funcom announced \"\", an upcoming massively multiplayer online game set in the universe of \"Dune\".\nSpace exploration.\nThe Apollo 15 astronauts named a small crater on Earth's Moon after the novel during the 1971 mission, and the name was formally adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1973. Since 2009, the names of planets from the \"Dune\" novels have been adopted for the real-world nomenclature of plains and other features on Saturn's moon Titan, like Arrakis Planitia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71417", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71417", "title": "Tim Blake Nelson", "text": "American actor (born 1964)\nTimothy Blake Nelson (born May 11, 1964) is an American actor. Described as a \"modern character actor\", his roles include Delmar O'Donnell in \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" (2000), Gideon in \"Minority Report\" (2002), Doctor Steve Pendanski in \"Holes\" (2003), Doctor Jonathan Jacobo in \"\" (2004), Danny Dalton Jr. in \"Syriana\" (2005), Samuel Sterns / The Leader in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, Richard Schell in \"Lincoln\" (2012), the eponymous character of \"The Ballad of Buster Scruggs\" (2018) and Henry McCarty in \"Old Henry\" (2021). He portrayed Wade Tillman / Looking Glass in the HBO limited series \"Watchmen\" (2019), for which he received a Critics' Choice Television Awards nomination for Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series in 2020.\nNelson's directorial credits include \"Eye of God\" (1997), which was nominated for the Sundance Grand Jury Prize and an Independent Spirit Award; \"O\" (2001), a modern-day adaptation of \"Othello;\" and the Holocaust drama \"The Grey Zone\" (2001). \"Eye of God\" and \"The Grey Zone\" were both adapted from Nelson's own plays. Nelson has also co-directed music videos for Billy Woods and Kenny Segal including \"Babylon by Bus\" and \"Soft Landing\". He also co-directed the music video for Armand Hammer feat. Pink Siifu's \"Trauma Mic\".\nNelson recently published his debut novel, \"City of Blows\" (2023), an epic group portrait of four men grappling for control of a script in a radically changing Hollywood.\nEarly life.\nNelson was born to a Jewish family in Tulsa, Oklahoma, the son of Ruth Nelson (\"n\u00e9e\" Kaiser), a noted Tulsa social activist and philanthropist, and Don Nelson, a geologist and wildcatter. His maternal uncle is businessman George Kaiser.\nHis maternal grandparents Herman Geo. Kaiser and Kate Kaiser, daughter of businessman Max Samuel, were from Germany, and left Germany shortly before World War II. They moved to Britain in 1938, where Nelson's mother was born, and immigrated to the United States in 1941. His father's family were Russian-Jewish emigrants.\nNelson attended the Oklahoma Summer Arts Institute at Quartz Mountain Resort Arts and Conference Center in Lone Wolf, Oklahoma.\nNelson is a 1982 graduate of Holland Hall School in Tulsa, and a graduate of Brown University, where he was a classics major as well as senior orator for his class of 1986. At Brown, he studied under philosopher Martha Nussbaum. He is a member of Phi Beta Kappa society. He won the Workman/Driskoll award for excellence in classical studies. He graduated from Juilliard in 1990, a member of Group 19.\nCareer.\nNelson's debut play, \"Eye of God\", was produced at Seattle Repertory Theatre in 1992. \"The Grey Zone\" premiered at MCC Theater in New York in 1996, where his 1998 work \"Anadarko\" was produced. He was a co-star of the sketch comedy show \"The Unnaturals\", which ran on HA! (later , and would turn into Comedy Central) between 1989 and 1991, alongside Paul Zaloom, John Mariano and Siobhan Fallon Hogan.\nNelson has appeared as an actor in film, TV and theatre. He had a featured role as Delmar in the film \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" According to directors Joel and Ethan Coen, he was the only one in the cast or crew who had read Homer's \"Odyssey\", a story upon which the film is loosely based. He sang \"In the Jailhouse Now\" on the film's soundtrack (which received a Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 2002). He has had a number of supporting performances in feature films such as \"Holes\", \"Minority Report\", \"Syriana\" and \"Lincoln\". He also appeared in Marvel Comics adaptations \"The Incredible Hulk\", \"Fantastic Four, and \".\nNelson narrated the 2001 audiobook \"At the Altar of Speed: The Fast Life and Tragic Death of Dale Earnhardt, Sr\". He appeared on stage extensively off-Broadway in New York at theatres including Manhattan Theater Club, Playwrights Horizons, Manhattan Class Company, Soho Repertory Theater, New York Theatre Workshop, and Central Park's Open Air Theater in the Shakespeare plays \"Richard III\", \"Troilus and Cressida\", and \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\".\nHe has directed film versions of his plays \"The Grey Zone\" and \"Eye of God\" (for which he received an Independent Spirit Awards nomination for the Someone to Watch Award), and directed two of his original screenplays: \"Kansas\" (1998) and \"Leaves of Grass\" (2009). He directed the film \"O\", based on \"Othello\" and set in a modern-day high school. For \"Eye of God\", he received the Tokyo Bronze Prize at the Tokyo International Film Festival (1997) and the American Independent Award at the Seattle International Film Festival (1997); for \"O\", the Best Director Award at the Seattle International Film Festival (2001); and for \"The Grey Zone\", the National Board of Review's Freedom of Expression Award (2002). Nelson is on the boards of directors of The Actors Center in New York City and the Soho Rep Theatre.\nNelson guest-starred on the \"\" season 10 episode \"Working Stiffs\". In the episode \"My Brother's Bomber\" (aired September 29, 2015) of the PBS investigative series \"Frontline\", he talked about the loss of his friend David Dornstein in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.\nIn 2018, Nelson played the title character in \"The Ballad of Buster Scruggs\", a western anthology film by Joel and Ethan Coen, after receiving the original script 16 years prior, in 2002. The film was released on Netflix on November 16, after a limited theatrical run, and received positive reviews, with many highlighting Nelson's performance and his overall segment. He portrayed Ralph Myers in the drama/legal drama \"Just Mercy\" (2019). In January 2023, he joined the cast of \"\", though his role was ultimately cut out of the film.\nPlaywright.\nNelson's play \"Socrates\" opened at The Public Theater in 2019, starring Michael Stuhlbarg. It was favorably received by numerous publications, including the \"New York Times\".\nPersonal life.\nNelson resides in New York City with his wife, Lisa Benavides, and their three sons. One of his sons is Henry Nelson, a film director who directed \"Asleep in My Palm\". On May 8, 2009, he was inducted as an honorary member of the University of Tulsa's Beta of Oklahoma chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa national collegiate honor society. Nelson currently serves on the Board of Trustees of Bryn Mawr College, the school from which his mother Ruth Nelson graduated in 1958.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71418", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71418", "title": "Non-Hodgkin lymphoma", "text": "Type of cancer of lymph nodes\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nNon-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), also known as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, is a group of blood cancers that includes all types of lymphomas except Hodgkin lymphomas. Symptoms include enlarged lymph nodes, fever, night sweats, weight loss, and tiredness. Other symptoms may include bone pain, chest pain, or itchiness. Some forms are slow-growing while others are fast-growing. Unlike Hodgkin lymphoma, which spreads contiguously, NHL is largely a systemic illness.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe signs and symptoms of non-Hodgkin lymphoma vary depending upon its location within the body. Symptoms include enlarged lymph nodes, fever, night sweats, weight loss, and tiredness. Other symptoms may include bone pain, chest pain, or itchiness. Some forms are slow growing, while others are fast growing. Enlarged lymph nodes may cause lumps to be felt under the skin when they are close to the surface of the body. Lymphomas in the skin may also result in lumps, which are commonly itchy, red, or purple. Lymphomas in the brain can cause weakness, seizures, problems with thinking, and personality changes.\nWhile an association between non-Hodgkin lymphoma and endometriosis has been described, these associations are tentative.\nDiagnosis.\nTests for non-Hodgkin lymphoma include;\nIf cancer is found, the following tests may be done to study the cancer cells:\nOther tests and procedures may be done depending on the signs and symptoms seen and where the cancer forms in the body.\nCauses.\nLymphomas are types of cancer that develop from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Risk factors include poor immune function, autoimmune diseases, \"Helicobacter pylori\" infection, hepatitis C, obesity, and Epstein\u2013Barr virus infection. The World Health Organization classifies lymphomas into five major groups, including one for Hodgkin lymphoma. Within the four groups for NHL are over 60 specific types of lymphoma. Diagnosis is by examination of a bone marrow or lymph node biopsy. Medical imaging is done to help with cancer staging.\nThe many different forms of lymphoma probably have different causes. These possible causes and associations with at least some forms of NHL include:\nFamilial component.\nFamilial lymphoid cancer is rare. The familial risk of lymphoma is elevated for multiple lymphoma subtypes, suggesting a shared genetic cause. However, a family history of a specific subtype is most strongly associated with risk for that subtype, indicating that these genetic factors are subtype specific. Genome-wide association studies have successfully identified 67 single-nucleotide polymorphisms from 41 loci, most of which are subtype specific.\nHIV/AIDS.\nThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) included certain types of non-Hodgkin lymphoma as AIDS-defining cancers in 1987. Immune suppression rather than HIV itself is implicated in the pathogenesis of this malignancy, with a clear correlation between the degree of immune suppression and the risk of developing NHL. Additionally, other retroviruses, such as HTLV, may be spread by the same mechanisms that spread HIV, leading to an increased rate of co-infection. The natural history of HIV infection has greatly changed over time. As a consequence, rates of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) in people infected with HIV has significantly declined in recent years.\nTreatment.\nTreatment depends on whether the lymphoma is slow or fast growing and if it is in one area or many areas. Treatments may include chemotherapy, radiation, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, stem-cell transplantation, surgery, or watchful waiting. If the blood becomes overly thick due to high numbers of antibodies, plasmapheresis may be used. Radiation and some chemotherapy, however, increase the risk of other cancers, heart disease, or nerve problems over the subsequent decades.\nThe traditional treatment of NHL includes chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and stem-cell transplants. There have also been developments in immunotherapy used in the treatment of NHL.\nChemotherapy.\nThe most common chemotherapy used for B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma is R-CHOP, which is a regimen of four drugs (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) plus rituximab.\nR-CHP with polatuzumab vedotin, an antibody-drug conjugate, was included as a category 1 preferred regimen for first-line DLBCL by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network in 2023.\nTreatment complications.\nIf participants receive stem-cell transplants, they can develop a graft-versus-host disease. When compared with placebo for treating immune mediated inflammation post transplantation and in autoimmunity, mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) may reduce the all-cause mortality if they are used for a therapeutic reason. Moreover, the therapeutic use of MSCs may increase the complete response of acute and chronic GvHD, but the evidence is very uncertain. The evidence suggests that MSCs for prophylactic reason result in little to no difference in the all-cause mortality, in the relapse of malignant diseases, and in the incidence of acute GvHD. The evidence suggests that MSCs for prophylactic reason reduce the incidence of chronic GvHD.\nPlatelet transfusions may be necessary for those who receive chemotherapy or undergo a stem cell transplantation due to the higher risk for bleeding. When comparing therapeutic/non-prophylactic platelet transfusions to prophylactic platelet transfusions there is little to no difference in the mortality secondary to bleeding and they may result in a slight reduction in the number of days on which a significant bleeding event occurred. The evidence suggests that therapeutic platelet transfusions result in a large increase in the number of people with at least one significant bleeding event and they likely result in a large reduction in the number of platelet transfusions.\nOther.\nIt is unclear if including aerobic physical exercise, in addition to the standard treatment for adult patients with haematological malignancies, is effective at reducing anxiety and serious adverse effects. Aerobic physical exercises may result in little to no difference in the mortality, in the quality of life and in the physical functioning. These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression and most likely reduce fatigue.\nPrognosis.\nPrognosis depends on the subtype, the staging, a person's age, and other factors. Across all subtypes, 5-year survival for NHL is 71\u201374%.\nEpidemiology.\nGlobally, as of 2010, there were 210,000 deaths, up from 143,000 in 1990.\nIn 2015, about 4.3 million people had non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and 231,400 (5.4%) died. In the United States, 2.1% of people are affected at some point in their life. The most common age of diagnosis is between 65 and 75 years old. The five-year survival rate in the United States is 71%.\nRates of non-Hodgkin lymphoma increase steadily with age. Up to 45 years NHL is more common among males than females.\nAustralia.\nAround 6600 people are diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma in Australia each year.\nCanada.\nIn Canada NHL is the fifth most common cancer in males and sixth most common cancer in females. The lifetime probability of developing a lymphoid cancer is 1 in 44 for males, and 1 in 51 for females.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOn average, according to data for the 2014\u20132016 period, around 13,900 people are diagnosed with NHL yearly. It is the sixth most common cancer in the UK, and is the eleventh most common cause of cancer death accounting for around 4,900 deaths per year.\nUnited States.\nAge adjusted data from 2012 to 2016 shows about 19.6 cases of NHL per 100,000 adults per year, 5.6 deaths per 100,000 adults per year, and around 694,704 people living with non-Hodgkin lymphoma. About 2.2 percent of men and women will be diagnosed with NHL at some point during their lifetime.\nThe American Cancer Society lists non-Hodgkin lymphoma as one of the most common cancers in the United States, accounting for about 4% of all cancers.\nHistory.\nWhile consensus was rapidly reached on the classification of Hodgkin lymphoma, there remained a large group of very different diseases requiring further classification. The Rappaport classification, proposed by Henry Rappaport in 1956 and 1966, became the first widely accepted classification of lymphomas other than Hodgkin. Following its publication in 1982, the Working Formulation became the standard classification for this group of diseases. It introduced the term non-Hodgkin lymphoma or NHL and defined three grades of lymphoma.\nNHL consists of many different conditions that have little in common with each other. They are grouped by their aggressiveness. Less aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphomas are compatible with a long survival while more aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphomas can be rapidly fatal without treatment. Without further narrowing, the label is of limited usefulness for people or doctors. The subtypes of lymphoma are listed there.\nNevertheless, the Working Formulation and the NHL category continue to be used by many. To this day, lymphoma statistics are compiled as Hodgkin's versus non-Hodgkin lymphomas by major cancer agencies, including the US National Cancer Institute in its SEER program, the Canadian Cancer Society and the IARC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71421", "revid": "50961432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71421", "title": "Manuel Noriega", "text": "Military dictator of Panama from 1983 to 1989\nManuel Antonio Noriega Moreno ( , ; February 11, 1934\u00a0\u2013 May 29, 2017) was a Panamanian dictator and military officer who was the \"de facto\" ruler of Panama from 1983 to 1989. He never officially served as president of Panama, instead ruling as an unelected military dictator through puppet presidents. Amassing a personal fortune through drug trafficking operations by the Panamanian military, Noriega had longstanding ties with American intelligence agencies before the U.S. invasion of Panama removed him from power.\nBorn in Panama City to a poor pardo family, Noriega studied at the Chorrillos Military School in Lima and at the School of the Americas. He became an officer in the Panamanian army, and rose through the ranks in alliance with Omar Torrijos. In 1968, Torrijos overthrew President Arnulfo Arias in a coup. Noriega became chief of military intelligence in Torrijos's government and, after Torrijos's death in 1981, consolidated power to become Panama's \"de facto\" ruler in 1983. Beginning in the 1950s, Noriega worked with U.S. intelligence agencies, and became one of the Central Intelligence Agency's most valued intelligence sources. He also served as a conduit for illicit weapons, military equipment, and cash destined for U.S.-backed forces throughout Latin America.\nNoriega's relationship with the U.S. deteriorated in the late 1980s after the murder of Hugo Spadafora and the forced resignation of President Nicol\u00e1s Ardito Barletta. Eventually, his relationship with intelligence agencies in other countries came to light, and his involvement in drug trafficking was investigated further. In 1988, Noriega was indicted by federal grand juries in Miami and Tampa on charges of racketeering, drug smuggling, and money laundering. The U.S. launched an invasion of Panama following failed negotiations seeking his resignation, and Noriega's annulment of the 1989 Panamanian general election. Noriega was captured and flown to the U.S., where he was tried on the Miami indictment, convicted on most of the charges, and sentenced to 40 years in prison, ultimately serving 17 years after a reduction in his sentence for good behavior. Noriega was extradited to France in 2010, where he was convicted and sentenced to seven years of imprisonment for money laundering. In 2011 France extradited him to Panama, where he was incarcerated for crimes committed during his rule, for which he had been tried and convicted \"in absentia\" in the 1990s. Diagnosed with a brain tumor in March 2017, Noriega suffered complications during surgery, and died two months later.\nNoriega's dictatorship was marked by repression of the media, an expansion of the military, and the persecution of political opponents, effectively controlling the outcomes of any elections. He relied upon military nationalism to maintain his support, and did not espouse a specific social or economic ideology. Noriega was known for his complicated relationship with the U.S., and was described as being its ally and adversary simultaneously.\nEarly life and family.\nManuel Antonio Noriega Moreno was born in Panama City, into a relatively poor pardo, or triracial, family with Native Panamanian, African, and Spanish heritage. His date of birth is generally given as February 11, 1934, but is a matter of uncertainty. It has been variously recorded as that date in 1934, 1936, and 1938. Noriega himself provided differing dates of birth. He was born in the neighborhood of El Terraplen de San Felipe. Noriega's mother, who was not married to his father, has been described as a cook and a laundress, while his father, Ricaurte Noriega, was an accountant. His mother, whose family name was Moreno, died of tuberculosis when he was a child, and Noriega was brought up by a godmother in a one-room apartment in the slum area of Terrapl\u00e9n. Both of his parents were dead by the time he was five years old.\nNoriega was educated first at the Escuela Rep\u00fablica de M\u00e9xico, and later at the Instituto Nacional, a well-regarded high school in Panama City that had produced a number of nationalist political leaders. He was described as an \"oddly serious child,\" a bookish student always neatly dressed by his godmother. During his time in the Instituto Nacional he met his older half-brother Luis Carlos Noriega Hurtado, a socialist activist and also a student at the school: Manuel had not previously met his siblings. Manuel began living with Luis, who introduced him to politics, including recruiting him into the Socialist Party's youth wing. Luis Noriega would later direct Panama's electoral tribunal. During his time in the socialist youth group, Noriega took part in protests and authored articles criticizing the U.S. presence in Panama. He is reported to have begun his association with the U.S. intelligence services at this time, providing information about the activities of his comrades. A $10.70 payment in 1955 was the first he received from the U.S.\nNoriega intended to become a doctor, but was unable to secure a place in the University of Panama's medical school. After graduating from the Instituto Nacional, Noriega won a scholarship to Chorrillos Military School in the Peruvian capital of Lima, with the help of Luis, who had by then received a position in the Panamanian embassy in Peru. Noriega began studying in Lima in 1958. While there, he made the acquaintance of Roberto D\u00edaz Herrera, then studying at the Peruvian Police academy, who later became a close ally.\nNoriega married Felicidad Sieiro in the late 1960s, and the couple had three daughters: Lorena; Sandra; and Thays. Sieiro had been a school teacher, and Noriega a member of the National Guard. Her family, of Basque heritage, was reported to have been unhappy with the marriage. Noriega was repeatedly unfaithful to his wife, who at one point expressed a desire for a divorce, though she changed her mind later.\nNational Guard career.\nNoriega graduated from Chorrillos in 1962 with a specialization in engineering. He returned to Panama and joined the Panama National Guard. Posted to Col\u00f3n, he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in September 1962. His commanding officer in Col\u00f3n was Omar Torrijos, then a major in the National Guard. Torrijos became a patron and mentor to Noriega. In a 1962 incident Torrijos helped Noriega avoid legal trouble after a prostitute accused Noriega of beating and raping her. Soon after, Noriega's drinking and violence obliged Torrijos to confine him to his quarters for a month. Despite Noriega's problems, Torrijos maintained their relationship, ensuring they were always in the same command; he also brought D\u00edaz Herrera into the same unit. D\u00edaz Herrera and Noriega became both friends and rivals for Torrijos's favor.\nIn 1964 Noriega had been posted to the province of Chiriqu\u00ed, where Torrijos and D\u00edaz Herrera were stationed. At the time, Arnulfo Arias, a native of that province, was preparing to contest the 1968 Panamanian Presidential election. Arias was a member of the National Revolutionary Party that represented the Paname\u00f1ista movement. The sitting president, Roberto Chiari, belonged to the Liberal Party, which ordered Torrijos to harass Arias's party members and weaken his election bid. Torrijos passed this task on to Noriega, whose men arrested a number of people. Several prisoners said that they had been tortured; others stated they had been raped in prison. The mistreatment of Arias' supporters sparked public outrage, and led to Noriega being suspended for ten days, an item of information that was picked up by the U.S. intelligence services. In 1966, Noriega was again involved in a violent incident, allegedly raping a 13-year-old girl and beating her brother. After this, Torrijos transferred Noriega to a remote posting.\nAs a second lieutenant in 1966, Noriega spent many months taking courses at the School of the Americas. The school was located at the United States Army's Fort Gulick in the Panama Canal Zone. Journalist John Dinges has suggested that Torrijos sent Noriega to the school to help him \"shape up\" and live up to Torrijos's expectations. Despite performing poorly in his classes, he was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant in 1966, and Torrijos found him a job as an intelligence officer in the \"North Zone\" of the National Guard. Shortly afterward, he returned to the School of the Americas for more training. At the school, Noriega participated in courses on infantry operations, counterintelligence, intelligence, and jungle warfare. He also took a course in psychological operations at Fort Bragg in North Carolina.\nNoriega's job required him to penetrate and disrupt the trade unions that had formed in the United Fruit Company's workforce, and he proved adept at this work. His new superior officer Boris Mart\u00ednez was a fervent anti-communist, and enforced strict discipline on Noriega. Reports have suggested that he continued to pass intelligence to the U.S. during this period, about the plantation workers' activities. In 1967 the administration of U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson concluded that Noriega would be a valuable asset, as he was a \"rising star\" in the Panamanian military. Later, as the \"de facto\" leader of Panama, Noriega maintained a close relationship with the School of the Americas, partly due to the school's presence in Panama. Officials from the Panamanian military were frequently given courses at the school free of charge. Noriega was proud of his relationship with the school, and wore its crest on his military uniform for the rest of his career.\nRise to power.\n1968 coup.\nArias was elected president in 1968 following a populist campaign. Soon after taking office he launched a purge of the National Guard, sending much of its general staff into \"diplomatic exile\" or retirement. In response, Torrijos and a few other officers led a coup against him, ousting him after an eleven-day presidency. The coup was set in motion by Mart\u00ednez, as the leader of the garrison at Chiriqu\u00ed, and received the support of most military officers. A power struggle followed between the various forces involved in the coup, and chiefly between Torrijos and Mart\u00ednez. Noriega was an important supporter of Torrijos during this conflict. In February 1969, Torrijos's men seized Mart\u00ednez and exiled him to Miami giving Torrijos control of the country.\nAt the end of 1969, Torrijos went to Mexico on holiday. A coup was launched in his absence, in which Noriega's loyalty allowed Torrijos to hang on to power, greatly enhancing Torrijos's image. Noriega was promoted to captain a month after the coup attempt: just 18 months later, in August 1970, Torrijos promoted him to the position of lieutenant colonel and appointed him chief of military intelligence. According to Dinges, by this point Noriega had left his undisciplined past behind him. When Arias's supporters launched a guerrilla uprising in his home province, Noriega as the head of intelligence played an important role in putting it down within a year.\nTorrijos retained power as a military ruler until 1981: during this time he negotiated the Torrijos\u2013Carter Treaties with U.S. President Jimmy Carter, which ensured that control over the Panama Canal would pass to Panama in 1999. These treaties, as well as a new labor code that included maternity leave, collective bargaining rights, and bonus pay, made Torrijos popular in Panama despite the absence of democratic elections. Torrijos's relationship with Noriega was symbiotic; Torrijos provided the political acumen, while Noriega enforced his unpopular decisions with force, when necessary. Noriega would provide intelligence and carry out covert operations that were critical to Torrijos successfully negotiating the release of the Panama Canal from the U.S.\nUpon seizing power in 1968, Torrijos's government had passed legislation favorable to foreign corporations, including banks in the U.S. The following years saw a large expansion in international business activity and the influx of foreign capital, thereby giving participating corporations a stake in the continued existence of the military government. The government used its access to foreign capital to borrow extensively, fueling a rapid expansion of the state bureaucracy that contributed to the military regime's stability. Panama's borrowing peaked in 1978 when the Panama Canal treaty was being negotiated, a time at which the Carter government was particularly supportive of the Torrijos regime. The Carter administration's interest in signing a new treaty led it to largely overlook the increasing militarization of the Panamanian government, and its involvement in drug-trafficking.\nHead of intelligence.\nNoriega proved to be a very capable head of intelligence. During his tenure, he exiled 1,300 Panamanians whom he viewed as threats to the government. He also kept files on several officials within the military, the government, and the judiciary, allowing him to blackmail them later. Noriega also held the positions of head of the political police and head of immigration. His tenure was marked by intimidation and harassment of opposition parties and their leaders. He was described as doing much of Torrijos's \"dirty work\". For instance, Noriega ordered the death of Jes\u00fas H\u00e9ctor Gallego Herrera, a priest whose work at an agricultural cooperative was seen as a threat by the government. Gallego's body is reported to have been thrown from a helicopter into the sea. He also made an effort during this period to portray Panama as a hub of enforcement against drug smuggling, possibly as a result of pressure from Torrijos.\nBy the early 1970s, American law enforcement officials had reports of Noriega's possible involvement with narcotics trafficking. No formal criminal investigations were begun, and no indictment was brought: according to Dinges, this was due to the potential diplomatic consequences. This evidence included the testimony of an arrested boat courier, and of a drug smuggler arrested in New York. Though Torrijos frequently promised the U.S. cooperation in dealing with drug smuggling, Noriega would have headed any effort at enforcement, and the U.S. began to see Noriega as an obstacle to combatting drug smuggling. Dinges writes that the U.S. government considered several options to move Noriega out of the drug trafficking business, including assassinating him, and linking him to a fictional plot against Torrijos. Though no assassination attempt was made, the other ploys may have been tried in the early 1970s, according to Dinges. Dinges wrote that beginning in 1972 the U.S. relaxed its efforts at trapping individuals involved with smuggling within the Panama government, possibly as a result of an agreement between Torrijos and U.S. President Richard Nixon.\nDuring the early 1970s, Noriega's relationship with the U.S. intelligence services was regularized. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) placed him on its payroll in 1971, while he held his position as head of Panamanian intelligence; he had previously been paid by U.S. intelligence services on a case-by-case basis. Regular payments to him were stopped under the Carter administration, before being resumed and later stopped again under the administration of Ronald Reagan. The CIA valued him as an asset because he was willing to provide information about the Cuban government and later about the Sandinista government in Nicaragua. Noriega also served as the U.S. emissary to Cuba during negotiations following the \"Johnny Express\" incident in December 1971. Noriega was given access to CIA contingency funds, which he was supposed to use to improve his intelligence programs, but which he could spend with little accountability. The contingency funds were as high as US$100,000 in some years.\nThe CIA was aware that Noriega was selling intelligence on the U.S. to Cuba while he was working for it. Noriega also undertook a number of activities while nominally working for the CIA that served his own ends at the expense of the U.S. government. Journalist Frederick Kempe wrote in 1990 that Noriega had been linked to a series of bombings targeting the U.S. territory in the Panama Canal Zone during the prelude to the U.S. Presidential election in 1976 after the administration of U.S. President Gerald Ford stepped back from negotiations about the Panama Canal. The bombings highlighted to the U.S. government the difficulty of holding on to the Panama Canal Zone in the face of hostility within Panama. Kempe stated that the U.S. knew of Noriega's involvement in the bombings but decided to turn a blind eye toward them. In a December 1976 meeting with George H. W. Bush, then Director of Central Intelligence, Noriega flatly denied involvement, instead suggesting that the CIA was responsible.\nDuring negotiations for the Panama Canal treaties, the U.S. government ordered its military intelligence to wiretap Panamanian officials. Noriega discovered this operation in early 1976, and instead of making it public, bribed the U.S. agents and bought the tapes himself; the incident came to be known as the \"Singing Sergeants affair\". Although some intelligence officials wanted Bush to prosecute the soldiers involved, he declined because doing so would have exposed Noriega's role in the matter. The CIA did not report this incident to either the National Security Agency or the U.S. Justice Department. Noriega and Torrijos later used their knowledge of the U.S. wiretapping operations to tilt the Panama Canal negotiations in their favor. Noriega's drug-related activities came to the U.S. government's attention once again during the ratification process for the Panama Canal treaties, but were once again downplayed by the U.S. intelligence services in order to get the treaty ratified by the U.S. Senate.\nDeath of Torrijos.\nAfter the Nicaraguan Revolution was launched by the Sandinistas against U.S.-backed authoritarian ruler Anastasio Somoza Debayle in August 1978, Torrijos and Noriega initially supported the rebels, providing them with surplus National Guard equipment and allowing Panama to be used as a cover for arms shipments from Cuba to Nicaragua. Torrijos sought for himself the same aura of \"democratic respectability\" that the Sandinista rebels had in Nicaragua, and so abandoned the title of \"Maximum Leader\" he had taken in 1972, promising that elections would be held in 1984. Noriega also arranged for weapons purchased in the U.S. to be shipped to the Sandinista forces, a deal on which he made a profit. The U.S. discovered Noriega's role in supplying weapons, and though the episode proved embarrassing to the Carter administration in the U.S., no charges were brought against Noriega because the U.S. did not wish to anger a friendly government, and the issue was rendered moot by the Sandinista victory in 1979. After Somoza's overthrow, Noriega continued to smuggle weapons, selling them to leftist guerrillas fighting the U.S.-backed authoritarian government in El Salvador. After one of these shipments was captured, Torrijos, who had friends in the Salvadoran military government, reprimanded Noriega, though the shipments did not stop altogether.\nTorrijos died in a plane crash on July 31, 1981. A later investigation by the aircraft manufacturer stated it was an accident; Noriega's authority over the government investigation led to speculation about his involvement. Florencio Flores Aguilar had inherited Torrijos's position, but true power lay with the trio of Noriega, D\u00edaz Herrera, and Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo Paredes, who ranked just below him. Flores was removed in a quiet coup on March 3, 1982. By general agreement, Paredes was made leader until 1983, after which the military would work together to ensure his election as the president in the election scheduled for 1984. During this period Noriega became a full colonel and the National Guard's chief of staff, effectively the second-highest rank in the country. He reformed the National Guard as the Panama Defense Forces (PDF), and with the financial assistance of the U.S., expanded and modernized it. The quick promotions they received earned him the officer corps' loyalty. Among the steps he took to consolidate his control was to bring the various factions of the army together into the PDF. On August 12, 1983, in keeping with Noriega's earlier deal with Paredes, Paredes handed over his position to Noriega, newly appointed a general, with the understanding that Noriega would allow him to stand for president. However, Paredes never received the political support he expected, and after assuming his new position Noriega reneged on the deal, telling Paredes he could not contest the election. Noriega, now head of the PDF, thus became the \"de facto\" ruler of Panama.\n\"De facto\" ruler of Panama.\nNoriega preferred to remain behind the scenes, rather than become president, and to avoid the public scrutiny that came with the post. He did not have a particular social or economic ideology, and used military nationalism to unify his supporters. The Partido Revolucionario Democr\u00e1tico (Democratic Revolutionary Party, PRD), which had been established by Torrijos and had strong support among military families, was used by Noriega as a political front for the PDF. This party drew considerable support from low-income employees brought into the government bureaucracy by its expansion under Torrijos and Noriega. Noriega compelled the Panamanian National Assembly to pass Law 20 of 1983, which was supposedly aimed at protecting the Panama Canal from communists, and allowed a huge influx of U.S. weapons to the Panamanian military. The law also tripled the size of the military forces. Noriega's period in power saw significant capital flight from Panama; according to Kempe, this was at least in part because wealthy individuals worried that their wealth would be seized by Noriega's administration.\nThe military government of Torrijos had maintained its power in large part by extracting resources from Panama's expanding service sector, particularly its illicit portions. According to political scientist Steve Ropp, Torrijos was a \"gifted politician with a genuine concern for improving the economic lot of the average Panamanian\", but his individual talent had a relatively small role to play in preserving his government. When Noriega created the PDF in 1983, he brought into its control Panama's customs and immigration apparatus, as well as the country's whole transportation network. This expansion of the military's role occurred simultaneously with a large growth in the cocaine trade, as well as in markets for weapons in various military conflicts in Central America. The profits the military reaped from these activities gave Noriega's military regime considerable financial clout.\nNoriega took control of most major newspapers by either buying a controlling stake in them or forcing them to shut down. The government also harassed, intimidated, or exiled individual journalists and editors. The newspaper \"La Prensa\", which remained independent and was frequently critical of Noriega, had its staff intimidated and its offices damaged; eventually, it too was forced to close. In May 1984, Noriega allowed the first presidential elections in 16 years. Noriega and D\u00edaz Herrera picked Nicol\u00e1s Ardito Barletta Vallarino to be the PRD's candidate, with the intention of keeping him under close control. When the initial results showed Arias, who had the support of much of the opposition, on his way to a landslide victory, Noriega halted the count. After brazenly manipulating the results, the government announced that Barletta had won by a slim margin of 1,713 votes. Independent estimates suggested that Arias would have won by as many as 50,000 votes had the election been conducted fairly. More than 60,000 votes were not included in the final count. Noriega's rule became increasingly repressive, even as the U.S. government of Ronald Reagan began relying on him in its covert efforts to undermine Nicaragua's Sandinista government. The U.S. accepted Barletta's election, and signalled a willingness to cooperate with him, despite being aware of the flaws in the election process.\nRelationship with the U.S..\nBetween 1981 and 1987, the relationship between Noriega and the U.S. grew considerably. It was driven both by the U.S.'s pursuit of its security interests, and Noriega using these as an effective means of gaining favor. The emergence of internal conflicts in Nicaragua and El Salvador between 1979 and 1981 led the Reagan administration to look for allies in the region, including in Panama. Noriega acted as a conduit for U.S. support, including funds and weapons, to the Contra rebels in Nicaragua. He allowed the CIA to establish listening posts in Panama, and also helped the U.S.-backed Salvadoran government against the leftist Salvadoran insurgent Farabundo Mart\u00ed National Liberation Front. U.S. spy ships used bases in Panama in their operations against the Nicaraguan government, and much of the intelligence gathered by these ships was processed in the U.S. bases in Panama. Noriega permitted these activities despite the Panama Canal treaties restricting the use of the U.S. bases to protecting the canal.\nBush, now U.S. vice president, met again with Noriega in December 1983 to discuss support for the Contras. Noriega had a working relationship with U.S. Marine Corps Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North by 1985. Noriega offered to assassinate or sabotage Sandinista leaders in return for North helping Noriega improve his image with the U.S. government. In June 1985 North met with Noriega in Panama and Noriega agreed to train Contra soldiers in Panama for an invasion of Nicaragua in 1986. In return for Panama's support for U.S. and Israeli efforts to supply the Contras with arms, the U.S. ignored Noriega's use of weapons-shipment networks to smuggle drugs into the U.S. Noriega was reported to have played a role in the Iran\u2013Contra affair in the mid-1980s.\nThere are varying reports about how much Noriega was paid by United States sources. In early 1990, Noriega biographer Frederick Kempe reported that the United States gave Noriega or his intelligence services annual payments in the range of $110,000 in 1976 increasing to $185,000 to $200,000 when he came to power during the Reagan administration. Dinges said that he could find no one willing to confirm persistent reports that he received a $200,000 per year stipend from the CIA.\nPrior to and during Noriega's trial, Noriega's lead attorney Frank A. Rubino claimed that Noriega had received $11 million in payments from the CIA. In January 1991, federal prosecutors filed a financial report indicating that Noriega had received a total of $322,000 from the United States Army and the CIA over a 31-year period from 1955 to 1986. They stated that the release of information was to rebut allegations from defense attorneys that Noriega had been paid \"millions of dollars\" from the CIA. These payments included a total of $76,039 as \"gifts and incentives\" from the CIA.\nDespite Noriega's alliance with the U.S., he also maintained close relationships with bitter enemies of the U.S., including Cuba, Libya, and Nicaragua. A 1990 book discussing Noriega's administration stated that he had sold thousands of Panamanian passports to the Cuban government for use by its intelligence services. Cuba also obtained hardware imports from Panama that were restricted by the U.S. embargo, while it provided Panama with weapons and military advisers. Libya, as well as some U.S. allies, provided Noriega with funds when the U.S. was seeking to remove him from power.\nRelationship with Japan.\nJapan was one of the few regimes to support Noriega at a time when he was under intense pressure from Reagan and found himself isolated. Japan was then Panama's second largest trading partner and had invested $8.8 billion in its economy. Japan had established Panama as the center of its expansion in Latin America. \"There was a peak of relations with Japan in which they saw the importance of the Pacific in relation to the Atlantic and the need to expand the Canal\", Noriega says in a 2017 interview.\nIn June 1988, Tokyo gave its official backing to the Panamanian military government.\nDrug and weapons operations.\nPanama's and Noriega's involvement in drug-trafficking grew considerably over the early 1980s, peaking in 1984. Intensifying conflicts in Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua had led to the creation of covert transportation networks that Noriega used to transport drugs to the U.S., particularly cocaine. During this period, Colombia's Medell\u00edn Cartel was also seeking allies. Noriega became intimately involved with their drug trafficking and money-laundering operations, and received considerable sums as protection money, bribes, or shares of profits. In June 1986, investigative journalist Seymour Hersh recorded a U.S. White House official as saying that reducing Noriega's activities could greatly reduce international drug trafficking.\nHersh reported unnamed U.S. officials as saying that Noriega had amassed a personal fortune in European banks as a result of his illegal activities, as well as owning two homes in Panama and one in France. The wealth generated for the Panamanian military from drug-smuggling also helped stabilize the authoritarian government that it dominated. However, the military's control over wealth from illicit trade alienated the Panamanian business elite that had previously also benefited from such trade. Under Noriega, these profits were shared within the military less evenly than under Torrijos, eventually creating friction in the military leadership.\nMany of the operations Noriega benefited from were run by associates such as Floyd Carlton and Cesar Rodr\u00edguez. Large sums from drug revenues were brought in from Miami and elsewhere to Panama for laundering, and Noriega received protection payments in these instances as well. American Steven Kalish also began a large scale business selling drugs, laundering money and selling hardware to the Panamanian military for considerable profits with Noriega's assistance. Dinges writes that at the time of the 1984 election, Kalish was preparing to ship a load of marijuana worth U.S. $1.4 million through Panama, for which Noriega had agreed to provide false Panamanian customs stamps; Noriega was to be paid $1 million for this exercise.\nBeginning in 1984, Noriega appeared to reduce the scale of his operations, and even ordered a raid against a cocaine factory in the interior of Panama, a raid which he then emphasized as evidence of his cooperation with the U.S. in their fight against drugs. He also ordered a crackdown on money laundering by Colombian cartel figures Jorge Ochoa and Gilberto Rodr\u00edguez Orejuela. Noriega's new image as an opponent of drug trafficking was symbolized by his being invited as a speaker in 1985 to Harvard University, for a conference on the role of the military in Central America's wars, a speech which received a lot of attention in Panama's pro-government press. In 1986, a convoluted operation involving the East German Stasi and the Danish ship \"Pia Vesta\" ultimately aimed to sell Soviet arms and military vehicles to South Africa's Armscor, with the Soviets using various intermediaries to distance themselves from the deal. Noriega was apparently one of these intermediaries but backed out on the deal as the ship and weapons were seized at a Panamanian port.\nMurder of Spadafora and aftermath.\nHugo Spadafora was a physician and political activist who had first clashed with Noriega when they were both members of Torrijos's government. Though an ally of Torrijos, he and Noriega had been personal enemies for a long time. Despite not being a member of the opposition, he became a vocal critic of Noriega after returning to Panama from Guatemala in 1981. Spadafora amassed evidence of corruption within the government by using his position as an ally of Torrijos to question Noriega's allies, including Rodriguez and Carlton. This included a lengthy conversation with Carlton in mid-1985 after his drug operations had collapsed due to conflicts over a missing shipment, and he had received negative publicity in the Panamanian press. In September 1985 he accused Noriega of having connections to drug trafficking and announced his intent to expose him. The drug trafficking charges threatened Noriega's support among his own constituency of middle class individuals who had benefited under his and Torrijos's government.\nAccording to writers R. M. Koster and Guillermo S\u00e1nchez, on an occasion when Spadafora was traveling by bus from Costa Rica to Panama, witnesses saw him being detained by the PDF after crossing the border. His decapitated body was later found wrapped in a United States Postal Service mail bag showing signs of brutal torture. Noriega was widely believed to be responsible for the murder, and according to Koster and S\u00e1nchez, the U.S. had intelligence implicating Noriega. On the day of Spadafora's arrest, the U.S. National Security Agency monitored a telephone conversation between Noriega and Luis C\u00f3rdoba, the military commander in Chiriqu\u00ed province where Spadafora was arrested. During the conversation C\u00f3rdoba told Noriega, \"We have the rabid dog.\" Noriega responded, \"And what does one do with a dog that has rabies?\"\nSpadafora's murder badly damaged Noriega's image, both within and outside Panama, and created a crisis for the Panamanian regime. Barletta, who was in New York City when Spadafora was murdered in September 1985, announced his intention to appoint an independent commission to investigate the murder. Upon his return to Panama, however, he was forced to resign by the PDF and was replaced by Vice President Eric Arturo Delvalle. Barletta was highly regarded in the Reagan administration, and his removal brought a downturn in the relations between the U.S. and Noriega. After Spadafora's murder the U.S. began to view Noriega as a liability rather than an asset, despite his ongoing support for U.S. interventions elsewhere. The U.S. response included reducing economic assistance and pressuring Panama to reform its banking secrecy laws, crack down on narcotics trafficking, investigate the murder of Spadafora, and reduce the PDF's role in the government. The response to Spadafora's murder created divisions within the PRD, and further damaged the credibility of the government-controlled news media.\nD\u00edaz Herrera considered using the uproar around Spadafora to seize power during a brief period that Noriega was traveling outside the country, but despite mobilizing some troops, eventually decided against following through with the coup, realizing he could not count on sufficient support. Furthermore, Noriega had made a deal with his deputy, to the effect that he would step down as military leader in 1987 and allow D\u00edaz Herrera to succeed him. In 1987, however, Noriega went back on this agreement, announced he would be heading the military for the next five years, and assigned D\u00edaz Herrera to a diplomatic post. D\u00edaz Herrera retaliated by making public statements accusing Noriega of rigging the 1984 election, murdering Spadafora, and of trafficking in drugs, as well as of assassinating Torrijos with a bomb on his plane.\nD\u00edaz Herrera's statements provoked huge protests against Noriega, with 100,000 people, approximately 25% of the population of Panama City, marching in protest on June 26, 1987. As with Spadafora's murder, these incidents strengthened and brought together the internal opposition to Noriega. Noriega charged D\u00edaz Herrera with treason, and cracked down hard on the protesters. The U.S. Senate passed a resolution asking Noriega to step down until D\u00edaz Herrera could be tried; in response Noriega sent government workers to protest outside the U.S. embassy, a protest which quickly turned into a riot. As a result, the U.S. suspended all military assistance to Panama, and the CIA stopped paying Noriega a salary. The Senate resolution had the effect of identifying the U.S. with the effort to remove Noriega; Noriega exploited the rising anti-American sentiment to strengthen his own position. Without the support of the U.S., Panama defaulted on its international debt, and that year the country's economy shrank by 20%. Though the U.S. considered not recognizing Delvalle as president, the State Department decided against it, as it would have amounted to breaking relations with Noriega.\n1989 election.\nNoriega's relationship with the U.S. deteriorated further during the late 1980s, particularly after the U.S. began to suspect that Noriega was supporting other intelligence services. Hersh wrote in 1986 that U.S. intelligence officials suspected that Noriega was selling intelligence to the Cuban government of Fidel Castro; his report received widespread attention. Bob Woodward published a story about Noriega in \"The Washington Post\" soon afterward, going into even greater detail about Noriega's intelligence connections. Woodward and Hersh's reputations made certain that the stories were taken seriously. Spadafora had also informed the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) of some of his findings about Noriega's involvement in drug smuggling. Multiple U.S. agencies continued to investigate Noriega despite opposition from the Reagan administration. In 1988 Noriega was indicted by U.S. federal grand juries in courts in Miami and Tampa on charges of drug-trafficking. The indictment accused him of \"turning Panama into a shipping platform for South American cocaine that was destined for the U.S., and allowing drug proceeds to be hidden in Panamanian banks\". Soon afterward an army colonel and a few soldiers made an attempt to overthrow Noriega; their poorly planned effort was crushed within a day.\nThe presidential election of May 1989 was marred by fraud and violence. \"Coalici\u00f3n para la Liberaci\u00f3n Nacional\" (Coalition for National Liberation), a pro-military coalition led by the PRD, named Carlos Duque, a former business partner of Noriega, as its candidate. The \"Alianza Democr\u00e1tica de Oposici\u00f3n C\u00edvica\" (Democratic Alliance of Civic Opposition), an opposition coalition, nominated Guillermo Endara, a member of Arias' Paname\u00f1ista Party, and two other prominent oppositionists, Ricardo Arias Calder\u00f3n and Guillermo Ford, as vice-presidential candidates. Anticipating fraud, the opposition tracked ballot counts at local precincts on the day of the election (local ballot counts were done in public). As an exit poll made it clear that the opposition slate was winning by a wide margin, reports of missing tally sheets and seizures of ballot boxes by the PDF soon emerged. In the afternoon of the day after the election, the Catholic bishops conference announced that a quick count of public tallies at polling centers showed the opposition slate winning 3\u20131. Official tallies the day after that, however, had Duque winning by a 2\u20131 margin.\nRather than publish the results, Noriega voided the election, claiming that \"foreign interference\" had tainted the results. Former U.S. President Jimmy Carter, present in Panama as an observer, denounced Noriega, saying the election had been \"stolen\", as did Archbishop of Panama Marcos G. McGrath. Noriega had initially planned to declare Duque the winner regardless of the actual result. Duque knew he had been badly defeated and refused to go along. The next day, Endara, Arias Calder\u00f3n, and Ford rolled through the old part of the capital in a triumphant motorcade, only to be intercepted by a detachment of Noriega's paramilitary Dignity Battalions. Arias Calder\u00f3n was protected by a couple of troops, but Endara and Ford were badly beaten. Images of Ford running to safety with his guayabera shirt covered in blood were broadcast around the world. When the 1984\u20131989 presidential term expired, Noriega named a longtime associate, Francisco Rodr\u00edguez, acting president. The U.S. recognized Endara as the new president. Noriega's decision to void the election results led to another coup attempt against him in October 1989. A number of Noriega's junior officers rose up against him, led by Lieutenant Colonel Mois\u00e9s Giroldi Vera, but the rebellion was easily crushed by the members of the PDF loyal to Noriega. After this attempt, he declared himself the \"maximum leader\" of the country. The rebels were captured and taken to a military base outside Panama City, where they were tortured and then executed.\nU.S. invasion of Panama.\nGenesis.\nIn March 1988, the U.S. government entered into negotiations with Noriega seeking his resignation. Panama was represented at these negotiations by R\u00f3mulo Escobar Bethancourt. Negotiations collapsed after several months of lengthy and inconclusive talks; according to Dinges, Noriega had no intentions of ever resigning. On December 15, 1989, the PRD-dominated legislature spoke of \"a state of war\" between the United States and Panama. It also declared Noriega \"chief executive officer\" of the government, formalizing a state of affairs that had existed for six years. The U.S. government stated that Noriega's forces were harassing U.S. troops and civilians. Three incidents in particular occurred very near the time of the invasion, and were mentioned by Bush as a reason for the invasion. In a December 16 incident, four U.S. personnel were stopped at a roadblock outside PDF headquarters in the El Chorrillo neighborhood of Panama City. The United States Department of Defense said that the servicemen were traveling unarmed in a private vehicle, and that they attempted to flee the scene only after their vehicle was surrounded by a crowd of civilians and PDF troops. First Lieutenant Robert Paz of the United States Marine Corps was shot and killed in the incident. An American couple who witnessed the incident was also arrested and harassed by the PDF.\nInvasion.\nThe U.S. launched its invasion of Panama on December 20, 1989. Although the killing of the Marine was the ostensible reason for the invasion, the operation had been planned for months before his death. The move was the largest military action by the U.S. since the Vietnam War, and included more than 27,000 soldiers, as well as 300 aircraft.\nThe invasion began with a bombing campaign that targeted Noriega's private vehicles, and the PDF headquarters located in Panama City. Several slums in the middle of the city were destroyed as a result. The day after the invasion, Noriega's deputy Colonel Luis del Cid retreated with some soldiers to the mountains outside David City, after laying mines at the airport. Though this was part of a contingency plan for the invasion, del Cid quickly decided that the Panamanian military was not in a position to fight a guerrilla war against the U.S., and negotiated a surrender. Twenty-three U.S. soldiers were killed in the operation, including two that were killed by friendly fire; 324 soldiers were injured. Casualties among the Panamanian forces were much higher; between 300 and 845. The U.S. government reported between 202 and 250 civilian deaths; Americas Watch estimated 300 civilian deaths; and the United Nations estimated 500 civilian deaths.\nOn December 29, the United Nations General Assembly voted, 75\u201320 with 40 abstentions, to condemn the invasion as a \"flagrant violation of international law\". According to a CBS poll, 92% of Panamanian adults supported the U.S. incursion, and 76% wished that U.S. forces had invaded in October during the coup. Activist Barbara Trent disputed this finding, saying in a 1992 Academy Award-winning documentary \"The Panama Deception\" that the Panamanian surveys were completed in wealthy, English-speaking neighborhoods in Panama City, among Panamanians most likely to support U.S. actions. Human Rights Watch described the reaction of the civilian population to the invasion as \"generally sympathetic\".\nCapture.\nNoriega received several warnings about the invasion from individuals within his government; though he initially disbelieved them, they grew more frequent as the invasion drew near, eventually convincing Noriega to go on the run. Noriega used a number of subterfuges, including lookalikes and playbacks of his recorded voice, to confuse U.S. surveillance as to his whereabouts. During his flight, Noriega reportedly took shelter with several supportive politicians, including Balbina Herrera, the mayor of San Miguelito. The last two days of his flight were spent partly with his ally Jorge Krupnick, an arms dealer also wanted by the U.S. Kempe reported that Noriega considered seeking sanctuary in the Cuban or Nicaraguan embassies, but both buildings were surrounded by U.S. troops. On the fifth day of the invasion, Noriega and four others took sanctuary in the Apostolic Nunciature, the Holy See's embassy in Panama. Having threatened to flee to the countryside and lead guerrilla warfare if not given refuge, he instead turned over the majority of his weapons, and requested sanctuary from Archbishop Jos\u00e9 Sebasti\u00e1n Laboa, the papal nuncio.\nPrevented by treaty from invading the Holy See's embassy, U.S. soldiers from Delta Force and part of Operation Nifty Package erected a perimeter around the Nunciature. Attempts to dislodge Noriega from within included gunning vehicle engines, turning a nearby field into a landing pad for helicopters, and playing rock music at loud volumes (a Van Halen cassette tape was provided by Special Forces Sergeant John Bishop). After ten days, Noriega surrendered on January 3, 1990. He was detained as a prisoner of war, and later taken to the United States.\nProsecution and imprisonment.\nProsecution in the United States.\nFollowing his capture Noriega was transferred to a cell in the Miami federal courthouse, where he was arraigned on the ten charges which the Miami grand jury had returned two years earlier. The trial was delayed until September 1991 over whether Noriega could be tried after his detention as a prisoner of war, the admissibility of evidence and witnesses, and how to pay for Noriega's legal defense. The trial ended in April 1992, when Noriega was convicted on eight of the ten charges of drug trafficking, racketeering, and money laundering. On July 10, 1992, Noriega was sentenced to 40 years in prison.\nIn pre-trial proceedings, the government stated that Noriega had received $322,000 from the U.S. Army and the CIA. Noriega insisted that he had in fact been paid close to $10,000,000, and that he should be allowed to testify about the work he had done for the U.S. government. The district court held that information about the operations in which Noriega had played a part supposedly in return for payment from the U.S. was not relevant to his defense. It ruled that \"the tendency of such evidence to confuse the issues before the jury substantially outweighed any probative value it might have had.\" One of the witnesses in the trial was Carlton, who had previously flown shipments of drugs for Noriega. Information about Noriega's connections to the CIA, including his alleged contact with Bush, were kept out of the trial. After the trial, Noriega appealed this exclusionary ruling by the judge to the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals. The court ruled in the government's favor, saying that the \"potential probative value of this material [...] was relatively marginal\".\nBefore receiving his permanent prison assignment, Noriega was placed in the Federal Detention Center, Miami. Noriega was incarcerated in the Federal Correctional Institution, Miami. Under Article 85 of the Third Geneva Convention, Noriega was considered a prisoner of war, despite his conviction for acts committed prior to his capture by the \"detaining power\" (the U.S.). This status meant that he had his own prison cell, furnished with electronics and exercise equipment. His cell was nicknamed \"the presidential suite\". While Noriega was in prison, he was visited regularly over two years by two evangelical Christian ministers, Clift Brannon and Rudy Hernandez. Noriega, nominally a Roman Catholic, was reported to have undergone a conversion to evangelical Christianity in May 1990, and was baptized in October 1992, while still in prison. Noriega's prison sentence was reduced from 40 to 30 years by the judge, then to 17 years for good behavior: his US sentence thus ended on September 9, 2007, though his incarceration ended up being extended while extradition requests by other countries were being adjudicated.\nProsecution in Panama.\nNoriega was tried \"in absentia\" in Panama for crimes committed during his rule. In October 1993 Noriega and two others were convicted of the murder of Spadafora by the court of the Third Judicial District, and sentenced to 20 years in prison. Panama's Supreme Court confirmed the sentence on December 20, 1995. In 1994, Noriega and Her\u00e1clides Sucre, an agent of his secret police, were convicted by a jury of the murder of Giroldi, who had led the 1989 coup attempt against Noriega. Though Noriega was tried \"in absentia\", a judge traveled to the U.S. to question him in December 1993. Noriega and Sucre both received a 20-year sentence, the maximum penalty sought by the prosecutor. Finally, Noriega received a third 20-year sentence in 1996 for his role in the death of nine military officers supporting Giroldi; the group had been executed in a hangar at the Albrook air base after the coup attempt, in an incident that came to be known as the massacre of Albrook. Noriega was also prosecuted over the 1968 disappearances of Luis Antonio Quir\u00f3s and Everett Clayton Kimble Guerra in Chiriqu\u00ed, and the 1971 death of Heliodoro Portugal. These cases had not reached a conclusion at the time of his death in 2017.\nProsecution in France.\nThe French government had requested Noriega's extradition after he was convicted of money laundering in 1999. It stated that Noriega had laundered $3 million in drug proceeds by purchasing luxury apartments in Paris. Noriega was convicted \"in absentia\", but French law required a new trial after the subject of an \"in absentia\" sentence was apprehended. France had previously made Noriega a \"Commandeur\" of the L\u00e9gion d'honneur in 1987.\nIn August 2007, a U.S. federal judge approved the French government's request to extradite Noriega to France after his release. Noriega appealed his extradition because he claimed France would not honor his legal status as a prisoner of war. Though Noriega had been scheduled to be released in 2007, he remained incarcerated while his appeal was pending in court. The Supreme Court of the United States refused to hear his appeal in January 2010, and in March declined a petition for a rehearing. Two days after the refusal, the District Court for the Southern District of Florida in Miami lifted the stay that was blocking Noriega's extradition. Later that month Noriega's attorney stated that he would travel to France and try to arrange a deal with the French government.\nNoriega was extradited to France on April 26, 2010. Noriega's lawyers claimed the La Sant\u00e9 Prison, at which he was held, was unfit for a man of his age and rank; the French government refused to grant him prisoner of war status, which he had maintained in the United States. On July 7, 2010, Noriega was convicted by the 11th chamber of the Tribunal Correctionnel de Paris and sentenced to seven years in jail. The prosecutor in the case had sought a ten-year prison term. In addition, the court ordered the seizure of \u20ac2.3\u00a0million (approximately U.S. $3.6\u00a0million) that had long been frozen in Noriega's French bank accounts.\nReturn, illness, and death.\nIn 1999, the Panamanian government had sought the extradition of Noriega from the U.S., as he had been tried \"in absentia\" and found guilty of murder in Panama in 1995. After Noriega was imprisoned in France, Panama asked the French government to extradite Noriega so he could face trial for human rights violations in Panama. The French government had previously stated that extradition would not happen before the case in France had run its course. On September 23, 2011, a French court ordered a conditional release for Noriega to be extradited to Panama on October 1, 2011. Noriega was extradited to Panama on December 11, 2011, and incarcerated at El Renacer prison to serve the sentences, totalling 60 years, that he had accumulated \"in absentia\" for crimes committed during his rule.\nOn February 5, 2012, Noriega was moved to Hospital Santo Tom\u00e1s in Panama City because of high blood pressure and a brain hemorrhage. He remained in the hospital for four days before being returned to prison. It was announced on March 21, 2012, that Noriega had been diagnosed with a brain tumor, which was later revealed to have been benign. On January 23, 2017, he was released from prison and placed under house arrest to prepare for surgery that would remove the tumor. On March 7, 2017, he suffered a brain hemorrhage during surgery which left him in critical condition in the intensive care unit of Hospital Santo Tom\u00e1s. Noriega died on May 29, 2017, at the age of 83. Panamanian President Juan Carlos Varela announced Noriega's death shortly before midnight, writing, \"The death of Manuel A. Noriega closes a chapter in our history; his daughters and his relatives deserve to bury him in peace.\" Noriega was cremated.\nImage and legacy.\nNoriega's authoritarian rule of Panama has been described as a dictatorship, while Noriega himself has been referred to as a \"strongman\". A 2017 obituary from the BBC stated that Noriega \"was an opportunist who used his close relationship with the United States to boost his own power in Panama and to cover up the illegal activities for which he was eventually convicted\". A 2010 article in \"The Guardian\" referred to him as the best known dictator of his time, and as \"Panama's answer to Libyan leader Colonel Muammar Gaddafi\". Dinges writes that though Noriega's regime saw a number of murders and crimes, they were similar in scale to those that occurred at the same time under the authoritarian governments of Guatemala, Chile, Argentina, and El Salvador; these governments never saw the level of condemnation from the U.S. that Noriega's did.\nAfter Noriega's death, an article in \"The Atlantic\" compared him to Castro and Augusto Pinochet, stating that while Castro had been the nemesis of the U.S., and Pinochet had been its ally, Noriega had managed to be both. It called Noriega the archetype of U.S. intervention in Latin America: \"The lawless, vicious leader whom the U.S. cultivated and propped up despite clear and serious flaws.\" The author stated that although Panama was a freer democracy after Noriega's removal, it was still plagued by corruption and drug trafficking, while Daniel Ortega, whom the U.S. tried to fight with Noriega's help, remained firmly in power in Nicaragua, and argued that this demonstrated the failure of the U.S.'s approach to Latin American interventions.\nNoriega took great care to shape perceptions of him. He permitted and encouraged rumors that as Panama's chief of intelligence, he was in possession of negative information about everybody in the country. Dinges suggests that the impression among some officials that Noriega made money off of every transaction in the country may have been cultivated by Noriega himself. Among opposition leaders in Panama, he was seen variously as a sexual pervert, a sadist, and a rapist. Within U.S. government circles, contradictory images abounded; Noriega was seen as a CIA spy, a drug trafficker, a nationalist supporting Torrijos, an ally of Cuba, and an ally of Oliver North and the Contras. He was perceived as a trusted collaborator in the war against drugs, even as the DEA was investigating him for involvement in smuggling. By the time of his removal, he had come to be hated in the U.S., and the invasion was portrayed as an attempt to remove an evil man. Dinges writes that these contradictory images played a large role in shaping the U.S. government's self-contradictory policy towards Noriega.\nNoriega used the moniker \"El Man\" to refer to himself, but he was also derogatorily known as \"cara de pi\u00f1a\", or \"pineapple face\" in Spanish, as a result of pockmarked features left by acne in his youth. He detested the name, and it would later be the subject of a lawsuit. When finally arrested and taken to detention by the Americans, the \u2018pineapple\u2019 moniker resurfaced in the form of an oft heard chant \u201cthe Pineapple\u2019s in the can\u201d. He lived a lavish lifestyle during his time as the \"de facto\" ruler of Panama, described in an obituary as a \"libertine life off drug-trade riches, complete with luxurious mansions, cocaine-fueled parties and voluminous collections of antique guns\". His bravado during public speeches was remarked upon by commentators; for instance, after his indictment in the U.S., he made a public speech while brandishing a machete, and declaimed \"Not one step back!\" The attitude of machismo that Noriega adopted has been described as a reaction to the persecution which his half-brother Luis faced as an openly homosexual man in Panama and Peru. This image of strength contrasted sharply with the impact of a mug shot which was taken of him after his capture, and the photo became a symbol of his fall from power. He was described as a deeply superstitious man, who placed trust in a number of talismans which he carried with him.\nIn popular culture.\nBritish actor Bob Hoskins portrayed Manuel Noriega in the biographical 2000 American television movie '. Noriega was also depicted in the 2012 video game '. In July 2014, he filed a lawsuit against the game company Activision for depicting him and using his name without his permission. Noriega, who filed the suit while in prison for murder, claimed he was portrayed as \"a kidnapper, murderer and enemy of the state\". On October 28, 2014, the case against Activision was dismissed in California by Judge William H. Fahey.\nAmerican rapper Noreaga derived his pseudonym from Noriega.\nNotes and references.\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71422", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71422", "title": "Lymphoma", "text": "Hematologic cancer that affects lymphocytes\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nLymphoma is a group of blood and lymph tumors that develop from lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). The name typically refers to just the cancerous versions rather than all such tumors. Signs and symptoms may include enlarged lymph nodes, fever, drenching sweats, unintended weight loss, itching, and constantly feeling tired. The enlarged lymph nodes are usually painless. The sweats are most common at night.\nMany subtypes of lymphomas are known. The two main categories of lymphomas are the non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) (90% of cases) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) (10%). Lymphomas, leukemias and myelomas are a part of the broader group of tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues.\nRisk factors for Hodgkin lymphoma include infection with Epstein\u2013Barr virus and a history of the disease in the family. Risk factors for common types of non-Hodgkin lymphomas include autoimmune diseases, HIV/AIDS, infection with human T-lymphotropic virus, immunosuppressant medications, and some pesticides. Eating large amounts of red meat and tobacco smoking may also increase the risk. Diagnosis, if enlarged lymph nodes are present, is usually by lymph node biopsy. Blood, urine, and bone marrow testing may also be useful in the diagnosis. Medical imaging may then be done to determine if and where the cancer has spread. Lymphoma most often spreads to the lungs, liver, and brain.\nTreatment may involve one or more of the following: chemotherapy, radiation therapy, proton therapy, targeted therapy, and surgery. In some non-Hodgkin lymphomas, an increased amount of protein produced by the lymphoma cells causes the blood to become so thick that plasmapheresis is performed to remove the protein. Watchful waiting may be appropriate for certain types. The outcome depends on the subtype, with some being curable and treatment prolonging survival in most. The five-year survival rate in the United States for all Hodgkin lymphoma subtypes is 85%, while that for non-Hodgkin lymphomas is 69%. Worldwide, lymphomas developed in 566,000 people in 2012 and caused 305,000 deaths. They make up 3\u20134% of all cancers, making them as a group the seventh-most-common form. In children, they are the third-most-common cancer. They occur more often in the developed world than in the developing world.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nLymphoma may present with certain nonspecific symptoms; if the symptoms are persistent, an evaluation to determine their cause, including possible lymphoma, should be undertaken.\nDiagnosis.\nLymphoma is definitively diagnosed by a lymph-node biopsy, meaning a partial or total excision of a lymph node examined under the microscope. This examination reveals histopathological features that may indicate lymphoma. After lymphoma is diagnosed, a variety of tests may be carried out to look for specific features characteristic of different types of lymphoma. These include:\nClassification.\nAccording to the World Health Organization (WHO), lymphoma classification should reflect in which lymphocyte population the neoplasm arises. Thus, neoplasms that arise from precursor lymphoid cells are distinguished from those that arise from mature lymphoid cells. Most mature lymphoid neoplasms comprise the non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Historically, mature histiocytic and dendritic cell (HDC) neoplasms have been considered mature lymphoid neoplasms, since these often involve lymphoid tissue.\nLymphoma can also spread to the central nervous system, often around the brain in the meninges, known as lymphomatous meningitis (LM).\nHodgkin lymphoma.\nHodgkin lymphoma accounts for about 15% of lymphomas. It differs from other forms of lymphomas in its prognosis and several pathological characteristics. A division into Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas is used in several of the older classification systems. A Hodgkin lymphoma is marked by the presence of a type of cell called the Reed\u2013Sternberg cell.\nNon-Hodgkin lymphomas.\nNon-Hodgkin lymphomas, which are defined as being all lymphomas except Hodgkin lymphoma, are more common than Hodgkin lymphoma. A wide variety of lymphomas are in this class, and the causes, the types of cells involved, and the prognoses vary by type. The number of cases per year of non-Hodgkin lymphoma increases with age. It is further divided into several subtypes.\nEpstein\u2013Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative diseases.\nEpstein\u2013Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative diseases are a group of benign, premalignant, and malignant diseases of lymphoid cells (i.e., B cells, T cells, NK cells, and histiocytic-dendritic cells) in which one or more of these cell types is infected with the Epstein\u2013Barr virus (EBV). The virus may be responsible for the development and/or progression of these diseases. In addition to EBV-positive Hodgkin lymphomas, the World Health Organization (2016) includes the following lymphomas, when associated with EBV infection, in this group of diseases: Burkitt lymphoma; large B cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified; diffuse large B cell lymphoma associated with chronic inflammation; fibrin-associated diffuse large B cell lymphoma; primary effusion lymphoma; plasmablastic lymphoma; extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, nasal type; peripheral T cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified; angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma; follicular T cell lymphoma; and systemic T cell lymphoma of childhood.\nWHO classification.\nThe WHO classification, published in 2001 and updated in 2008, 2017, and 2022, is based upon the foundations laid within the \"revised European\u2013American lymphoma classification\" (REAL). This system groups lymphomas by cell type (i.e., the normal cell type that most resembles the tumor) and defining phenotypic, molecular, or cytogenetic characteristics. The five groups are shown in the table. Hodgkin lymphoma is considered separately within the WHO and preceding classifications, although it is recognized as being a tumor, albeit markedly abnormal, of lymphocytes of mature B cell lineage.\nOf the many forms of lymphoma, some are categorized as indolent (e.g. small lymphocytic lymphoma), compatible with a long life even without treatment, whereas other forms are aggressive (e.g. Burkitt's lymphoma), causing rapid deterioration and death. However, most of the aggressive lymphomas respond well to treatment and are curable. The prognosis, therefore, depends on the correct diagnosis and classification of the disease, which is established after examination of a biopsy by a pathologist (usually a hematopathologist).\nLymphoma subtypes (WHO 2008)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Mature B cell neoplasms\n 3\u20134% of lymphomas in adults\n Small resting lymphocytes mixed with variable numbers of large activated cells, lymph nodes diffusely effaced\n CD5, surface immunoglobulin\n 5-year survival rate 50%.\n Occurs in older adults, usually involves lymph nodes, bone marrow and spleen, most patients have peripheral blood involvement, indolent\n About 5% of lymphomas in adults\n Variable cell size and differentiation, 40% show plasma cell differentiation, homing of B cells to epithelium creates lymphoepithelial lesions.\n CD5, CD10, surface Ig\n Frequently occurs outside lymph nodes, very indolent, may be cured by local excision\n About 40% of lymphomas in adults\n Small \"cleaved\" [cleft] cells (centrocytes) mixed with large activated cells (centroblasts), usually nodular (\"follicular\") growth pattern\n CD10, surface Ig\n About 72\u201377%\n Occurs in older adults, usually involves lymph nodes, bone marrow and spleen, associated with t(14;18) translocation overexpressing Bcl-2, indolent\n About 3\u20134% of lymphomas in adults\n Lymphocytes of small to intermediate size growing in diffuse pattern\n CD5\n About 50 to 70%\n Occurs mainly in adult males, usually involves lymph nodes, bone marrow, spleen and GI tract, associated with t(11;14) translocation overexpressing cyclin D1, moderately aggressive\n About 40\u201350% of lymphomas in adults\n Variable, most resemble B cells of large germinal centers, diffuse growth pattern\n Variable expression of CD10 and surface Ig\n Five-year survival rate 60%\n Occurs in all ages, but most commonly in older adults, may occur outside lymph nodes, aggressive\n &lt; 1% of lymphomas in the United States\n Round lymphoid cells of intermediate size with several nucleoli, starry-sky appearance by diffuse spread with interspersed apoptosis\n CD10, surface Ig\n Five-year survival rate 50%\n Endemic in Africa, sporadic elsewhere, more common in immunocompromised and children, often visceral involvement, highly aggressive\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Mature T cell and natural killer (NK) cell neoplasms\n Most common cutaneous lymphoid malignancy\n Usually small lymphoid cells with convoluted nuclei that often infiltrate the epidermis, creating Pautrier microabscesseses\n CD4\n 5-year survival 75%\n Localized or more generalized skin symptoms, generally indolent, in a more aggressive variant, S\u00e9zary's disease, skin erythema and peripheral blood involvement\n Most common T cell lymphoma\n Variable, usually a mix small to large lymphoid cells with irregular nuclear contours\n CD3\n Probably consists of several rare tumor types, often disseminated and generally aggressive\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Precursor lymphoid neoplasms\n 15% of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia and 90% of lymphoblastic lymphoma.\n Lymphoblasts with irregular nuclear contours, condensed chromatin, small nucleoli and scant cytoplasm without granules\n TdT, CD2, CD7\n It often presents as a mediastinal mass because of involvement of the thymus. It is highly associated with \"NOTCH1\" mutations, and is most common in adolescent males.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Hodgkin lymphoma\n Most common type of Hodgkin lymphoma\n Reed\u2013Sternberg cell variants and inflammation, usually broad sclerotic bands that consist of collagen\n CD15, CD30\n Most common in young adults, often arises in the mediastinum or cervical lymph nodes\n Second-most common form of Hodgkin lymphoma\n Many classic Reed\u2013Sternberg cells and inflammation\n CD15, CD30\n Most common in men, more likely to be diagnosed at advanced stages than the nodular sclerosis form Epstein\u2013Barr virus involved in 70% of cases\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Immunodeficiency-associated lymphoproliferative disorders\nPrevious classifications.\nSeveral previous classifications have been used, including Rappaport 1956, Lennert/Kiel 1974, BNLI, Working formulation (1982), and REAL (1994).\nThe Working Formulation of 1982 was a classification of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. It excluded the Hodgkin lymphomas and divided the remaining lymphomas into four grades (low, intermediate, high, and miscellaneous) related to prognosis, with some further subdivisions based on the size and shape of affected cells. This purely histological classification included no information about cell surface markers or genetics and made no distinction between T-cell lymphomas and B-cell lymphomas. It was widely accepted at the time of its publication but by 2004 was obsolete.\nIn 1994, the Revised European-American Lymphoma (REAL) classification applied immunophenotypic and genetic features in identifying distinct clinicopathologic entities among all the lymphomas except Hodgkin lymphoma. For coding purposes, the ICD-O (codes 9590\u20139999) and ICD-10 (codes C81-C96) are available.\nStaging.\nAfter a diagnosis and before treatment, cancer is staged. This refers to determining if the cancer has spread, and if so, whether locally or to distant sites. Staging is reported as a grade between I (confined) and IV (spread). The stage of a lymphoma helps predict a patient's prognosis and is used to help select the appropriate therapy.\nThe Ann Arbor staging system is routinely used for staging of both HL and NHL. In this staging system, stage I represents localized disease contained within a lymph node group, II represents the presence of lymphoma in two or more lymph nodes groups, III represents spread of the lymphoma to lymph nodes groups on both sides of the diaphragm, and IV indicates spread to tissue outside the lymphatic system. Different suffixes imply the involvement of different organs, for example, S for the spleen and H for the liver. Extra-lymphatic involvement is expressed with the letter E. In addition, the presence of B symptoms (one or more of the following: unintentional loss of 10% body weight in the last 6 months, night sweats, or persistent fever of 38\u00a0\u00b0C or more) or their absence is expressed with B or A, respectively.\nCT scan or PET scan imaging modalities are used to stage cancer. PET scanning is advised for fluorodeoxyglucose-avid lymphomas, such as Hodgkin lymphoma, as a staging tool that can even replace bone marrow biopsy. For other lymphomas, CT scanning is recommended for staging.\nAge and poor performance status are other established poor prognostic factors. This means that people who are elderly or too sick to take care of themselves are more likely to be killed by lymphoma than others.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nCertain lymphomas (extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type and type II enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma) can be mimicked by two benign diseases that involve the excessive proliferation of nonmalignant NK cells in the GI tract, natural killer cell enteropathy, a disease wherein NK cell infiltrative lesions occur in the intestine, colon, stomach, or esophagus, and lymphomatoid gastropathy, a disease wherein these cells' infiltrative lesions are limited to the stomach. These diseases do not progress to cancer, may regress spontaneously and do not respond to, and do not require, chemotherapy or other lymphoma treatments.\nTreatment.\nPrognoses and treatments are different for HL and between all the different forms of NHL, and also depend on the grade of tumor, referring to how quickly a cancer replicates. Paradoxically, high-grade lymphomas are more readily treated and have better prognoses: Burkitt lymphoma, for example, is a high-grade tumor known to double within days, and is highly responsive to treatment.\nLow-grade.\nMany low-grade lymphomas remain indolent (growing slowly or not at all) for many years \u2013 sometimes, for the rest of the person's life. With an indolent lymphoma, such as follicular lymphoma, watchful waiting is often the initial course of action, because monitoring is less risky and less harmful than early treatment.\nIf a low-grade lymphoma becomes symptomatic, radiotherapy or chemotherapy are the treatments of choice. Although these treatments do not permanently cure the lymphoma, they can alleviate the symptoms, particularly painful lymphadenopathy. People with these types of lymphoma can live near-normal lifespans, even though the disease is technically incurable.\nSome centers advocate the use of single agent rituximab in the treatment of follicular lymphoma rather than the wait-and-watch approach. Watchful waiting is not a desirable strategy for everyone, as it leads to significant distress and anxiety in some people. It has been called \"watch and worry\".\nHigh-grade.\nTreatment of some other, more aggressive, forms of lymphoma can result in a cure in the majority of cases, but the prognosis for people with a poor response to therapy is worse. Treatment for these types of lymphoma typically consists of aggressive chemotherapy, including the CHOP or R-CHOP regimen. A number of people are cured with first-line chemotherapy. Most relapses occur within the first two years, and the relapse risk drops significantly thereafter. For people who relapse, high-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation is a proven approach.\nThe treatment of side effects is also important as they can occur due to the chemotherapy or the stem cell transplantation. It was evaluated whether mesenchymal stromal cells can be used for the treatment and prophylaxis of graft-versus-host diseases. The evidence is very uncertain about the therapeutic effect of mesenchymal stromal cells to treat graft-versus-host diseases on the all-cause mortality and complete disappear of chronic acute graft-versus-host diseases. Mesenchymal stromal cells may result in little to no difference in the all-cause mortality, relapse of malignant disease and incidence of acute and chronic graft-versus-host diseases if they are used for prophylactic reason. Moreover, it was seen that platelet transfusions for people undergoing a chemotherapy or a stem cell transplantation for the prevention of bleeding events had different effects on the number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the mortality secondary to bleeding and the number of platelet transfusions depending on the way they were used (therapeutic, depending on a threshold, different dose schedules or prophylactic).\nFour chimeric antigen receptor T cell therapies are FDA-approved for non-Hodgkin lymphoma, including lisocabtagene maraleucel (for relapsed or refractory large B-cell lymphoma with two failed systemic treatments), axicabtagene ciloleucel, tisagenlecleucel (for large B-cell lymphoma), and brexucabtagene autoleucel (for mantle cell lymphoma). These therapies come with certification and other restrictions.\nHodgkin lymphoma.\nHodgkin lymphoma typically is treated with radiotherapy alone, as long as it is localized.\nAdvanced Hodgkin disease requires systemic chemotherapy, sometimes combined with radiotherapy. Chemotherapy used includes the ABVD regimen, which is commonly used in the United States. Other regimens used in the management of Hodgkin lymphoma include BEACOPP and Stanford V. Considerable controversy exists regarding the use of ABVD or BEACOPP. Briefly, both regimens are effective, but BEACOPP is associated with more toxicity. Encouragingly, a significant number of people who relapse after ABVD can still be salvaged by stem cell transplant.\nScientists evaluated whether positron emission tomography scans between the chemotherapy cycles can be used to make assumptions about the survival. The evidence is very uncertain about the effect of negative (= good prognosis) or positive (= bad prognosis) interim PET scan results on the progression-free survival. Negative interim PET scan results may result in an increase in progression-free survival compared if the adjusted result was measured. Negative interim PET scan results probably result in a large increase in the overall survival compared to those with a positive interim PET scan result.\nCurrent research evaluated whether Nivolumab can be used for the treatment of a Hodgkin's lymphoma. The evidence is very uncertain about the effect of Nivolumab for patients with a Hodgkin's lymphoma on the overall survival, the quality of life, the survival without a progression, the response rate (=complete disappear) and grade 3 or 4 serious adverse events.\nPalliative care.\nPalliative care, a specialized medical care focused on the symptoms, pain, and stress of a serious illness, is recommended by multiple national cancer treatment guidelines as an accompaniment to curative treatments for people with lymphoma. It is used to address both the direct symptoms of lymphoma and many unwanted side effects that arise from treatments. Palliative care can be especially helpful for children who develop lymphoma, helping both children and their families deal with the physical and emotional symptoms of the disease. For these reasons, palliative care is especially important for people requiring bone marrow transplants.\nSupportive treatment.\nAdding physical exercises to the standard treatment for adult patients with haematological malignancies like lymphomas may result in little to no difference in the mortality, the quality of life and the physical functioning. These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression. Furthermore, aerobic physical exercises probably reduce fatigue. The evidence is very uncertain about the effect on anxiety and serious adverse events.\nEpidemiology.\nLymphoma is the most common form of hematological malignancy, or \"blood cancer\", in the developed world.\nTaken together, lymphomas represent 5.3% of all cancers (excluding simple basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers) in the United States and 55.6% of all blood cancers.\nAccording to the U.S. National Institutes of Health, lymphomas account for about 5%, and Hodgkin lymphoma in particular accounts for less than 1% of all cases of cancer in the United States.\nBecause the whole lymphatic system is part of the body's immune system, people with a weakened immune system such as from HIV infection or from certain drugs or medication also have a higher number of cases of lymphoma.\nHistory.\nThomas Hodgkin published the first description of lymphoma in 1832, specifically of the form named after him. Since then, many other forms of lymphoma have been described.\nThe term \"lymphoma\" is from Latin (\"water\") and from Greek \"-oma\" (\"morbid growth, tumor\").\nResearch.\nThe two types of lymphoma research are clinical or translational research and basic research. Clinical/translational research focuses on studying the disease in a defined and generally immediately applicable way, such as testing a new drug in people. Studies may focus on effective means of treatment, better ways of treating the disease, improving the quality of life for people, or appropriate care in remission or after cures. Hundreds of clinical trials are being planned or conducted at any given time.\nBasic science research studies the disease process at a distance, such as seeing whether a suspected carcinogen can cause healthy cells to turn into lymphoma cells in the laboratory or how the DNA changes inside lymphoma cells as the disease progresses. The results from basic research studies are generally less immediately useful to people with the disease, but can improve scientists' understanding of lymphoma and form the foundation for future, more effective treatments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71423", "revid": "46555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71423", "title": "Non-Hodgkins lymphoma", "text": ""}
{"id": "71425", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71425", "title": "Lymphatic system", "text": "Organ system in vertebrates complementary to the circulatory system\nThe lymphatic system, or lymphoid system, is an organ system in vertebrates that is part of the immune system and complementary to the circulatory system. It consists of a large network of lymphatic vessels, lymph nodes, lymphoid organs, lymphatic tissue and lymph. The Latin word for lymph, , refers to the deity of fresh water, \"Lympha\".\nUnlike the circulatory system, which is a closed system, the lymphatic system is open. Lymph originates in the interstitial fluid that leaks from blood in the circulatory system into the tissues of the body. This fluid carries nutrients to the cells and collects waste products, bacteria, and damaged cells, before draining into the lymphatic vessels as lymph. The circulatory system processes an average of of blood per day through capillary filtration, which removes plasma from the blood. Roughly of the filtered blood is reabsorbed directly into the blood vessels, while the remaining are left in the interstitial fluid. The lymphatic system provides an accessory return route to the blood for this remainder.\nThe other main function is that of immune defense. Lymph is very similar to blood plasma, in that it contains waste products and , together with bacteria and proteins. The cells of the lymph are mostly lymphocytes. Associated lymphoid organs are composed of lymphoid tissue, and are the sites either of lymphocyte production or of lymphocyte activation. These include the lymph nodes (where the highest lymphocyte concentration is found), the spleen, the thymus, and the tonsils. Lymphocytes are initially generated in the bone marrow. The lymphoid organs also contain other types of cells such as stromal cells for support. Lymphoid tissue is also associated with mucosas such as mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).\nThese vessels carry the lymph throughout the body, passing through numerous lymph nodes which filter out unwanted materials such as bacteria and damaged cells. Lymph then passes into much larger lymph vessels known as lymph ducts. The right lymphatic duct drains the right side of the region and the much larger left lymphatic duct, known as the thoracic duct, drains the left side of the body. The ducts empty into the subclavian veins to return to the blood circulation. Lymph is moved through the system by muscle contractions. In some vertebrates, a lymph heart is present that pumps the lymph to the veins.\nThe lymphatic system was first described in the 17th century independently by Olaus Rudbeck and Thomas Bartholin.\nStructure.\nThe lymphatic system consists of a conducting network of lymphatic vessels, lymphoid organs, lymphoid tissues, and the circulating lymph.\nPrimary lymphoid organs.\nThe primary (or central) lymphoid organs, including the thymus, bone marrow,fetal liver and yolk sac, are responsible for generating lymphocytes from immature progenitor cells in the absence of antigens. The thymus and the bone marrow constitute the primary lymphoid organs involved in the production and early clonal selection of lymphocyte tissues.\nBird species' primary lymphoid organs include the bone marrow, thymus, bursa of Fabricius, and yolk sac.\nRed bone marrow.\nBone marrow- specifically red bone marrow- is responsible for both the creation of T cell precursors and the production and maturation of B cells, which are known as lymphocytes, important cell types of the immune system. From the red bone marrow, B cells immediately join the circulatory system and travel to secondary lymphoid organs in search of pathogens. T cells, on the other hand, travel from the bone marrow to the thymus, where they where undergo a multistage process to develop immunocompetency. Within the thymic cortex, developing T cells rearrange their T-cell receptor (TCR) genes and are subjected to positive selection, which ensures that only T cells capable of recognizing self-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules survive. Those that bind too weakly die off. Surviving T cells then move to the thymic medulla, where negative selection removes T cells that bind self-antigens with high affinity, preventing autoimmune disorders. Less than 5% of T cells pass both selection tests and reach maturity; these mature T cells then join B cells in search of pathogens.\nThymus.\nThe thymus increases in size from birth in response to postnatal antigen stimulation. It is most active during the neonatal and pre-adolescent periods. The thymus is located between the inferior neck and the superior thorax. At puberty, by the early teens, the thymus begins to atrophy and regress, with adipose tissue mostly replacing the thymic stroma. However, residual T cell lymphopoiesis continues throughout adulthood, providing some immune response. The thymus is where the T lymphocytes mature and become immunocompetent. The loss or lack of the thymus results in severe immunodeficiency and subsequent high susceptibility to infection. In most species, the thymus consists of lobules divided by septa, which are made up of epithelium, which is often considered an epithelial organ. T cells mature from thymocytes, proliferate, and undergo a selection process in the thymic cortex before entering the medulla to interact with epithelial cells.\nResearch on bony fish showed a buildup of T cells in the thymus and spleen of lymphoid tissues in salmon and showed that there are not many T cells in non-lymphoid tissues.\nThe thymus provides an inductive environment for developing T cells from hematopoietic progenitor cells. In addition, thymic stromal cells allow for the selection of a functional and self-tolerant T cell repertoire. Therefore, one of the most important roles of the thymus is the induction of central tolerance. However, the thymus is not where the infection is fought, as the T cells have yet to become immunocompetent.\nSecondary lymphoid organs.\nThe secondary (or peripheral) lymphoid organs, which include lymph nodes and the spleen, maintain mature naive lymphocytes and initiate an adaptive immune response. The secondary lymphoid organs are the sites of lymphocyte activation by antigens. Activation leads to clonal selection and affinity maturation. Mature lymphocytes recirculate between the blood and the secondary lymphoid organs until they encounter their specific antigen.\nSpleen.\nThe main functions of the spleen are:\nThe spleen synthesizes antibodies in its white pulp and removes antibody-coated bacteria and antibody-coated blood cells by way of blood and lymph node circulation. The white pulp of the spleen provides immune function due to the lymphocytes housed there. The spleen also consists of red pulp, which is responsible for getting rid of aged red blood cells and pathogens. This is carried out by macrophages present in the red pulp. A study published in 2009 using mice found that the spleen contains, in its reserve, half of the body's monocytes within the red pulp. These monocytes, upon moving to injured tissue (e.g., the heart), turn into dendritic cells and macrophages while promoting tissue healing. The spleen is a center of activity of the mononuclear phagocyte system and can be considered analogous to a large lymph node, as its absence causes a predisposition to certain infections. Notably, the spleen is essential for a multitude of functions. The spleen removes pathogens and old erythrocytes from the blood (red pulp) and produces lymphocytes for immune response (white pulp). The spleen also is responsible for recycling some erythrocyte components and discarding others. For example, hemoglobin is broken down into amino acids that are reused.\nResearch on bony fish has shown that a high concentration of T cells is found in the spleen's white pulp.\nLike the thymus, the spleen has only efferent lymphatic vessels. Both the short gastric arteries and the splenic artery supply it with blood. The germinal centers are supplied by arterioles called \"penicilliary radicles\".\nIn humans, until the fifth month of prenatal development, the spleen creates red blood cells; after birth, the bone marrow is solely responsible for hematopoiesis. As a major lymphoid organ and a central player in the reticuloendothelial system, the spleen retains the ability to produce lymphocytes. The spleen stores red blood cells and lymphocytes. It can store enough blood cells to help in an emergency. During acute blood loss the spleen contracts to release stored erythrocytes, helping to temporarily maintain blood volume and oxygen delivery. Up to 25% of lymphocytes can be stored at any one time.\nLymph nodes.\nA lymph node is an organized collection of lymphoid tissue through which the lymph passes on its way back to the blood. Lymph nodes are located at intervals along the lymphatic system. Several afferent lymph vessels bring in lymph, which percolates through the substance of the lymph node and is then drained out by an efferent lymph vessel. Of the nearly 800 lymph nodes in the human body, about 300 are located in the head and neck. Many are grouped in clusters in different regions, as in the underarm and abdominal areas. Lymph node clusters are commonly found at the proximal ends of limbs (e.g., groin or armpits) and in the neck, where lymph is collected from body regions likely to sustain pathogen contamination from injuries. Lymph nodes are particularly numerous in the mediastinum in the chest, neck, pelvis, axilla, groin (or inguinal region), and in association with the blood vessels of the intestines.\nThe substance of a lymph node consists of lymphoid follicles in an outer portion called the cortex. The inner portion of the node is called the medulla, which is surrounded by the cortex on all sides except for a portion known as the hilum. The hilum presents as a depression on the surface of the lymph node, causing the otherwise spherical lymph node to be bean-shaped or ovoid. The efferent lymph vessel directly emerges from the lymph node at the hilum. The arteries and veins supplying the lymph node with blood enter and exit through the hilum. The region of the lymph node called the paracortex immediately surrounds the medulla. Unlike the cortex, which has primarily immature T cells (or thymocytes), the paracortex has a mixture of immature and mature T cells. Lymphocytes enter the lymph nodes through specialised high endothelial venules found in the paracortex.\nA lymph follicle is a dense collection of lymphocytes, the number, size, and configuration of which change in accordance with the functional state of the lymph node. For example, the follicles expand significantly when encountering a foreign antigen. The selection of B cells (also known as B lymphocytes) occurs in the germinal centre of the lymph nodes.\nSecondary lymphoid tissue provides the environment for the foreign or altered native molecules (antigens) to interact with the lymphocytes. It is exemplified by the lymph nodes, and the lymphoid follicles in tonsils, Peyer's patches, spleen, adenoids, skin, etc. that are associated with the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).\nIn the gastrointestinal wall, the appendix has mucosa resembling that of the colon, but it is heavily infiltrated with lymphocytes here.\nTertiary lymphoid organs.\nTertiary lymphoid organs (TLOs) are abnormal lymph node-like structures that form in peripheral tissues at sites of chronic inflammation, such as chronic infection, transplanted organs undergoing graft rejection, some cancers, and autoimmune and autoimmune-related diseases. TLOs are often characterized by CD20+ B cell zone, which is surrounded by CD3+ T cell zone, similar to the lymph follicles in secondary lymphoid organs (SLOs) and are regulated differently from the normal process whereby lymphoid tissues are formed during ontogeny, being dependent on cytokines and hematopoietic cells, but still drain interstitial fluid and transport lymphocytes in response to the same chemical messengers and gradients. Mature TLOs often have an active germinal center, surrounded by a network of follicular dendritic cells (FDCs). Although the specific composition of TLOs may vary, within the T cell compartment, the dominant subset of T cells is CD4+ T follicular helper (TFH) cells, but certain number of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, CD4+ T helper 1 (TH1) cells, and regulatory T cells (Tregs) can also be found within the T cell zone. The B cell zone contains two main areas. The mantle is located at the periphery and composed of naive immunoglobulin D (IgD)+ B cells surrounding the germinal centre. The latter is defined by the presence of proliferating Ki67+CD23+ B cells and a CD21+ FDC network, as observed in SLOs. TLOs typically contain far fewer lymphocytes, and assume an immune role only when challenged with antigens that result in inflammation. They achieve this by importing the lymphocytes from blood and lymph.\nAccording to the composition and activation status of the cells within the lymphoid structures, at least three organizational levels of TLOs have been described. The formation of TLOs starts with the aggregating of lymphoid cells and occasional DCs, but FDCs are lacking at this stage. The next stage is immature TLOs, also known as primary follicle-like TLS, which have an increased number of T cells and B cells with distinct T cell and B cell zones and the formation of FDCs network, but without germinal centres. Finally, fully mature (also known as secondary follicle-like) TLOs often have active germinal centres and high endothelial venules (HEVs), demonstrating a functional capacity by promoting T cell and B cell activation and then leading to expansion of TLS through cell proliferation and recruitment. During TLS formation, T and B cells are separated into two different but adjacent zones, with some cells having the ability to migrate from one to the other, which is a crucial step in developing an effective and coordinated immune response.\nTLOs may play a key role in the immune response to cancer and serve as a prognostic marker for immunotherapy. TLOs have been reported to present in different cancer types such as melanoma, non-small-cell lung cancer and colorectal cancer (reviewed by Saut\u00e8s-Fridman and colleagues in 2019), as well as glioma. TLOs are also been seen as a read-out of treatment efficacy. For example, in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), vaccination led to the formation of TLOs in responders. Within these patients, lymphocytes in TLOs displayed an activated phenotype, and in vitro experiments showed their capacity to perform effector functions. Patients with the presence of TLOs tend to have a better prognosis, even though some certain cancer types showed an opposite effect. Besides, TLOs with an active germinal center seem to show a better prognosis than those with TLOs without a germinal center. The reason that these patients tend to live longer is that TLOs can promote an immune response against the tumors. TLOs may also enhance anti-tumor response when patients are treated with immunotherapy such as immune checkpoint blockade treatment.\nOther lymphoid tissue.\nLymphoid tissue associated with the lymphatic system is concerned with immune functions in defending the body against infections and the spread of tumours. It consists of connective tissue formed of reticular fibers, with various types of leukocytes (white blood cells), mostly lymphocytes enmeshed in it, through which the lymph passes. Regions of the lymphoid tissue that are densely packed with lymphocytes are known as \"lymphoid follicles\". Lymphoid tissue can either be structurally well organized as lymph nodes or may consist of loosely organized lymphoid follicles known as the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).\nThe central nervous system also has lymphatic vessels. The search for T cell gateways into and out of the meninges uncovered functional meningeal lymphatic vessels lining the dural sinuses, anatomically integrated into the membrane surrounding the brain.\nLymphatic vessels.\nThe lymphatic vessels, also called lymph vessels, are thin-walled vessels that conduct lymph between different parts of the body. They include the tubular vessels of the lymph capillaries, and the larger collecting vessels \u2013 the right lymphatic duct and the thoracic duct (the left lymphatic duct). The lymph capillaries are mainly responsible for the absorption of interstitial fluid from the tissues, while lymph vessels propel the absorbed fluid forward into the larger collecting ducts, where it ultimately returns to the bloodstream via one of the subclavian veins.\nThe tissues of the lymphatic system are responsible for maintaining the balance of the body fluids. Its network of capillaries and collecting lymphatic vessels efficiently drain and transport extravasated fluid, along with proteins and antigens, back to the circulatory system. Numerous intraluminal valves in the vessels ensure a unidirectional flow of lymph without reflux. Two valve systems, a primary and a secondary valve system, are used to achieve this unidirectional flow. The capillaries are blind-ended, and the valves at the ends of capillaries use specialised junctions together with anchoring filaments to allow a unidirectional flow to the primary vessels. When interstitial fluid increases, it causes swelling that stretches collagen fibers anchored to adjacent connective tissue, opening the unidirectional valves at the ends of these capillaries and facilitating the entry and subsequent drainage of excess lymph fluid. The collecting lymphatics, however, propel the lymph by the combined actions of the intraluminal valves and lymphatic muscle cells.\nDevelopment.\nLymphatic tissues begin to develop by the end of the fifth week of embryonic development. Lymphatic vessels develop from lymph sacs that arise from developing veins, which are derived from mesoderm. The first lymph sacs to appear are the paired jugular lymph sacs at the junction of the internal jugular and subclavian veins. From the jugular lymph sacs, lymphatic capillary plexuses spread to the thorax, upper limbs, neck, and head. Some of the plexuses enlarge and form lymphatic vessels in their respective regions. Each jugular lymph sac retains at least one connection with its jugular vein, the left one developing into the superior portion of the thoracic duct. The spleen develops from mesenchymal cells between layers of the dorsal mesentery of the stomach. The thymus arises as an outgrowth of the third pharyngeal pouch.\nFunction.\nThe lymphatic system has multiple interrelated functions:\nFat absorption.\nLymph vessels called lacteals are at the beginning of the gastrointestinal tract, predominantly in the small intestine. While most other nutrients absorbed by the small intestine are passed on to the portal venous system to drain via the portal vein into the liver for processing, fats (lipids) are passed on to the lymphatic system to be transported to the blood circulation via the thoracic duct. (There are exceptions, for example medium-chain triglycerides are fatty acid esters of glycerol that passively diffuse from the GI tract to the portal system.) The enriched lymph originating in the lymphatics of the small intestine is called chyle. The nutrients that are released into the circulatory system are processed by the liver, having passed through the systemic circulation.\nImmune function.\nThe lymphatic system plays a major role in the body's immune system, as the primary site for cells relating to adaptive immune system including T-cells and B-cells.\nIn addition to carrying waste products, cellular debris, nutrients, and proteins, the lymph may also contain antigens that can interact with naive lymphocytes in the lymph nodes. These cells in the lymphatic system react to antigens presented or found by the cells directly or by other dendritic cells.\nWhen an antigen is recognized, an immunological cascade begins involving the activation and recruitment of more and more cells, the production of antibodies and cytokines and the recruitment of other immunological cells such as macrophages.\nClinical significance.\nThe study of lymphatic drainage of various organs is important in the diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of cancer. The lymphatic system, because of its closeness to many tissues of the body, is responsible for carrying cancerous cells between the various parts of the body in a process called metastasis. The intervening lymph nodes can trap the cancer cells. If they are not successful in destroying the cancer cells the nodes may become sites of secondary tumours.\n The lymphatic system (LS) comprises lymphoid organs and a network of vessels responsible for transporting interstitial fluid, antigens, lipids, cholesterol, immune cells, and other materials throughout the body. Dysfunction or abnormal development of the LS has been linked to numerous diseases, making it critical for fluid balance, immune cell trafficking, and inflammation control. Recent advancements, including single-cell technologies, clinical imaging, and biomarker discovery, have improved the ability to study and understand the LS, providing potential pathways for disease prevention and treatment. Studies have shown that the lymphatic system also plays a role in modulating immune responses, with dysfunction linked to chronic inflammatory and autoimmune conditions, as well as cancer progression.\nEnlarged lymph nodes.\nLymphadenopathy refers to one or more enlarged lymph nodes. Small groups or individually enlarged lymph nodes are generally \"reactive\" in response to infection or inflammation. This is called \"local\" lymphadenopathy. When many lymph nodes in different areas of the body are involved, this is called \"generalised\" lymphadenopathy. Generalised lymphadenopathy may be caused by infections such as infectious mononucleosis, tuberculosis and HIV, connective tissue diseases such as SLE and rheumatoid arthritis, and cancers, including both cancers of tissue within lymph nodes, discussed below, and metastasis of cancerous cells from other parts of the body, that have arrived via the lymphatic system.\nLymphedema.\nLymphedema is the swelling caused by the accumulation of lymph, which may occur if the lymphatic system is damaged or has malformations. It usually affects limbs, though the face, neck and abdomen may also be affected. In an extreme state, called elephantiasis, the edema progresses to the extent that the skin becomes thick with an appearance similar to the skin on elephant limbs.\nCauses are unknown in most cases, but sometimes there is a previous history of severe infection, usually caused by a parasitic disease, such as lymphatic filariasis.\nLymphangiomatosis is a disease involving multiple cysts or lesions formed from lymphatic vessels.\nLymphedema can also occur after surgical removal of lymph nodes in the armpit (causing the arm to swell due to poor lymphatic drainage) or groin (causing swelling of the leg). Conventional treatment is by manual lymphatic drainage and compression garments. Two drugs for the treatment of lymphedema are in clinical trials: Lymfactin and Ubenimex/Bestatin. There is no evidence to suggest that the effects of manual lymphatic drainage are permanent.\nCancer.\nCancer of the lymphatic system can be primary or secondary. Lymphoma refers to cancer that arises from lymphatic tissue. Lymphoid leukaemias and lymphomas are now considered to be tumours of the same type of cell lineage. They are called \"leukaemia\" when in the blood or marrow and \"lymphoma\" when in lymphatic tissue. They are grouped together under the name \"lymphoid malignancy\".\nLymphoma is generally considered as either Hodgkin lymphoma or non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Hodgkin lymphoma is characterised by a particular type of cell, called a Reed\u2013Sternberg cell, visible under microscope. It is associated with past infection with the Epstein\u2013Barr virus, and generally causes a painless \"rubbery\" lymphadenopathy. It is staged, using Ann Arbor staging. Chemotherapy generally involves the ABVD and may also involve radiotherapy. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is a cancer characterised by increased proliferation of B-cells or T-cells, generally occurs in an older age group than Hodgkin lymphoma. It is treated according to whether it is \"high-grade\" or \"low-grade\", and carries a poorer prognosis than Hodgkin lymphoma.\nLymphangiosarcoma is a malignant soft tissue tumour, whereas lymphangioma is a benign tumour occurring frequently in association with Turner syndrome. Lymphangioleiomyomatosis is a benign tumour of the smooth muscles of the lymphatics that occurs in the lungs.\nLymphoid leukaemia is another form of cancer where the host is devoid of different lymphatic cells.\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistory.\nHippocrates, in the 5th century BC, was one of the first people to mention the lymphatic system. In his work \"On Joints\", he briefly mentioned the lymph nodes in one sentence. Rufus of Ephesus, a Roman physician, identified the axillary, inguinal and mesenteric lymph nodes as well as the thymus during the 1st to 2nd century AD. The first mention of lymphatic vessels was in the 3rd century BC by Herophilos, a Greek anatomist living in Alexandria, who incorrectly concluded that the \"absorptive veins of the lymphatics,\" by which he meant the lacteals (lymph vessels of the intestines), drained into the hepatic portal veins, and thus into the liver. The findings of Ruphus and Herophilos were further propagated by the Greek physician Galen, who described the lacteals and mesenteric lymph nodes which he observed in his dissection of apes and pigs in the 2nd century AD.\nIn the mid 16th century, Gabriele Falloppio (discoverer of the fallopian tubes), described what is now known as the lacteals as \"coursing over the intestines full of yellow matter.\" In about 1563 Bartolomeo Eustachi, a professor of anatomy, described the thoracic duct in horses as \"vena alba thoracis.\" The next breakthrough came when in 1622 a physician, Gaspare Aselli, identified lymphatic vessels of the intestines in dogs and termed them \"venae albae et lacteae,\" which are now known as simply the lacteals. The lacteals were termed the fourth kind of vessels (the other three being the artery, vein and nerve, which was then believed to be a type of vessel), and disproved Galen's assertion that chyle was carried by the veins. But, he still believed that the lacteals carried the chyle to the liver (as taught by Galen). He also identified the thoracic duct but failed to notice its connection with the lacteals. This connection was established by Jean Pecquet in 1651, who found a white fluid mixing with blood in a dog's heart. He suspected that fluid to be chyle as its flow increased when abdominal pressure was applied. He traced this fluid to the thoracic duct, which he then followed to a chyle-filled sac he called the \"chyli receptaculum,\" which is now known as the cisternae chyli; further investigations led him to find that lacteals' contents enter the venous system via the thoracic duct. Thus, it was proven convincingly that the lacteals did not terminate in the liver, thus disproving Galen's second idea: that the chyle flowed to the liver. Johann Veslingius drew the earliest sketches of the lacteals in humans in 1641.\nThe idea that blood recirculates through the body rather than being produced anew by the liver and the heart was first accepted as a result of works of William Harvey\u2014a work he published in 1628. In 1652, Olaus Rudbeck (1630\u20131702) discovered certain transparent vessels in the liver that contained clear fluid (and not white), and thus named them \"hepatico-aqueous vessels\". He also learned that they emptied into the thoracic duct and that they had valves. He announced his findings in the court of Queen Christina of Sweden, but did not publish his findings for a year, and in the interim similar findings were published by Thomas Bartholin, who additionally published that such vessels are present everywhere in the body, not just in the liver. He is also the one to have named them \"lymphatic vessels.\" This had resulted in a bitter dispute between one of Bartholin's pupils, Martin Bogdan, and Rudbeck, whom he accused of plagiarism.\nGalen's ideas prevailed in medicine until the 17th century. It was thought that blood was produced by the liver from chyle contaminated with ailments by the intestine and stomach, to which various spirits were added by other organs, and that this blood was consumed by all the organs of the body. This theory required that the blood be consumed and produced many times over. Even in the 17th century, his ideas were defended by some physicians.\nAlexander Monro, of the University of Edinburgh Medical School, was the first to describe the function of the lymphatic system in detail.\nUVA School of Medicine researchers Jonathan Kipnis and Antoine Louveau discovered previously unknown vessels connecting the human brain directly to the lymphatic system. The discovery \"redrew the map\" of the lymphatic system, rewrote medical textbooks, and struck down long-held beliefs about how the immune system functions in the brain. The discovery may help greatly in combating neurological diseases from multiple sclerosis to Alzheimer's disease.\nEtymology.\n\"Lymph\" originates in the Classical Latin word ' \"water\", which is also the source of the English word \"limpid\". The spelling with \"y\" and \"ph\" was influenced by folk etymology with Greek (') \"nymph\".\nThe adjective used for the lymph-transporting system is \"lymphatic\". The adjective used for the tissues where lymphocytes are formed is \"lymphoid\". Lymphatic comes from the Latin word \"\", meaning \"connected to water.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71426", "revid": "1234701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71426", "title": "Intestines", "text": ""}
{"id": "71429", "revid": "41041792", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71429", "title": "CAT scan", "text": ""}
{"id": "71430", "revid": "27089876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71430", "title": "Summer Olympics", "text": ""}
{"id": "71432", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71432", "title": "2000 Summer Olympics", "text": "Multi-sport event in Sydney, Australia\nThe 2000 Summer Olympics, officially the Games of the XXVII Olympiad, officially branded as Sydney 2000, and also known as the Games of the New Millennium, were an international multi-sport event held from 15\u00a0September to 1\u00a0October 2000 in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. It marked the second time the Summer Olympics were held in Australia, and in the Southern Hemisphere, the first being in Melbourne, in 1956.\nTeams from 199 countries participated in the 2000 Games, which were the first to feature at least 300 events in its official sports program. The Games were estimated to have cost A$6.6\u00a0billion. These were the final Olympic Games under the IOC presidency of Juan Antonio Samaranch before the arrival of his successor Jacques Rogge.\nThe final medal tally at the 2000 Summer Olympics was led by the United States, followed by Russia and China with host Australia in fourth place overall. Cameroon, Colombia, Latvia, Mozambique, and Slovenia won a gold medal for the first time in their Olympic histories, while Barbados, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Macedonia, Saudi Arabia, and Vietnam won their first-ever Olympic medals.\nThe 2000 Games received universal acclaim, with the organisation, volunteers, sportsmanship, and Australian public being lauded in the international media. Bill Bryson of \"The Times\" called the Sydney Games \"one of the most successful events on the world stage\", saying that they \"couldn't be better\". James Mossop of the \"Electronic Telegraph\" called the Games \"such a success that any city considering bidding for future Olympics must be wondering how it can reach the standards set by Sydney\", while Jack Todd of the \"Montreal Gazette\" suggested that the \"IOC should quit while it's ahead. Admit there can never be a better Olympic Games, and be done with it,\" as \"Sydney was both exceptional and the best\". These games would provide the inspiration for London's winning bid for the 2012 Olympic Games in 2005; in preparing for the 2012 Games, Lord Coe declared the 2000 Games the \"benchmark for the spirit of the Games, unquestionably\", admitting that the London organizing committee \"attempted in several ways to emulate what the Sydney Organising Committee did.\" This is also the first Olympics to take place fully in Australia because the 1956 Melbourne Olympics had equestrian events take place in Stockholm because of Australia's strict quarantine regulations.\nAustralia will host the Summer Olympics in Brisbane in 2032, making it the first Asia-Pacific country to host the Summer Olympics three times.\nHost city selection.\nSydney won the right to host the Games on 24 September 1993, after being selected over Beijing, Berlin, Istanbul, and Manchester in four rounds of voting, at the 101st IOC Session in Monte Carlo, Monaco. Bras\u00edlia, Milan, and Tashkent made bids before deciding to withdraw during the bidding process. The Australian city of Melbourne which also hosted the 1956 Summer Olympics had lost out to Atlanta for the 1996 Summer Olympics three years earlier. Beijing would later be selected to host the 2008 Summer Olympics eight years later on 13 July 2001 and the 2022 Winter Olympics twenty-two years later on 31 July 2015. Milan would also go on to win the 2026 Winter Olympics along with Cortina d'Ampezzo twenty-six years later on 24 June 2019. Beijing's loss to Sydney was seen as a \"significant blow\" to an \"urgent political priority\" of the Chinese Communist Party leadership having mounted the most intense and expensive candidacy campaign at the date so far (this includes the Summer and Winter Games). Although it is unknown as two members of the International Olympic Committee voted for Sydney over Beijing in 1993, it appears that an important role was played by Human Rights Watch's campaign to \"stop Beijing\" because of China's human rights record and international isolation following the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre. Many in China were angry at what they saw as U.S.-led interference in the vote, and the outcome contributed to rising anti-Western sentiment in China and a new phase in the tensions in Sino-American relations.\nThe Games.\nCosts.\nThe \"Oxford Olympics Study 2016\" estimates the outturn cost of the Sydney 2000 Summer Olympics at US$5 billion in 2015 dollars and cost overrun at 90% in real terms. This includes sports-related costs only; that is, (i) \"operational costs\" incurred by the organising committee to stage the Games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii) \"direct capital costs\" incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build; e.g., the competition venues, the Olympic village, international broadcast centre, and media and press centre, which are required to host the Games. Indirect capital costs are \"not\" included, such as for road, rail, airport infrastructure, hotel upgrades, or other business investments incurred in preparation for the Games but not directly related to staging the Games. The cost for Sydney 2000 compares with a cost of US$4.6 billion for Rio 2016, US$40\u201344 billion for Beijing 2008, and US$51 billion for Sochi 2014, the most expensive Olympics in history. The average cost for the Summer Games since 1960 is US$5.2 billion, average cost overrun is 176%.\nIn 2000, the Auditor-General of New South Wales reported that the Sydney Games cost A$6.6\u00a0billion, with a net cost to the public between A$1.7 and A$2.4\u00a0billion. In the years leading up to the games, funds were shifted from education and health programs to cover Olympic expenses.\nIt has been estimated that the economic impact of the 2000 Olympics was that A$2.1\u00a0billion has been shaved from public consumption. Economic growth was not stimulated to a net benefit, and, in the years after 2000, foreign tourism to NSW grew by less than tourism to Australia as a whole. A \"multiplier\" effect on broader economic development was not realised, as a simple \"multiplier\" analysis fails to capture that resources have to be redirected from elsewhere: the building of a stadium is at the expense of other public works such as extensions to hospitals. Building sporting venues does not add to the aggregate stock of productive capital in the years following the Games: \"Equestrian centers, softball compounds, and man-made rapids are not particularly useful beyond their immediate function.\"\nMany venues that were constructed in Sydney Olympic Park failed financially in the years immediately following the Olympics to meet the expected bookings to meet upkeep expenses. It was only the 2003 Rugby World Cup that reconnected the park back to citizens. In recent years, infrastructure costs for some facilities have been of growing concern to the NSW Government, especially facilities in Western Sydney. Proposed metro and light rail links from Olympic Park to Parramatta have been estimated to cost in the same order of magnitude as the public expenditure on the games. Stadium Australia had been considered for demolition in 2017 by then NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian, citing that the stadium was \"built for an Olympics\" but not for modern spectators. The plan was scrapped in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Dunc Gray Velodrome has also struggled to keep up its $500,000-per-year maintenance costs, although it is still used for track cycling events.\nChronological Summary of the 2000 Summer Olympics.\nAlthough the Opening Ceremony was not scheduled until 15\u00a0September, the football competitions began with preliminary matches on 13\u00a0September. Among the pre-ceremony fixtures, host nation Australia lost 1\u20130 to Italy at the Melbourne Cricket Ground, which was the main stadium for the 1956 Melbourne Olympics.\nDay 1: 15 September.\nCultural display highlights.\nThe opening ceremony began with a tribute to the pastoral heritage of the Australian stockmen and the importance of the stock horse in Australia's heritage. It was produced and filmed by the Sydney Olympic Broadcasting Organisation and the home nation broadcaster Seven Network. This was introduced by lone rider Steve Jefferys and his rearing Australian Stock Horse \"Ammo\". At the cracking of Jefferys' stockwhip, a further 120 riders entered the stadium, their stock horses performing intricate steps, including forming the five Olympic Rings, sounded by a new version of the song that Bruce Rowland had previously composed for the 1982 film \"The Man from Snowy River\".\nThe Australian National Anthem was sung in the first verse by Human Nature and the second by Julie Anthony.\nThe cultural segments of the event take place with many aspects of the land and its people: the affinity of the mainly coastal-dwelling Australians with the sea that surrounds the Island Continent. The Indigenous inhabitation of the land, the coming of the First Fleet, the continued immigration from many nations, and the rural industry on which the economy of the nation was built, including a display representing the harshness of rural life based on the paintings of Sir Sidney Nolan. Two memorable scenes were the representation of the heart of the country by 200 Aboriginal women from Central Australia who danced up \"the mighty spirit of god to protect the Games\" and the overwhelmingly noisy representation of the construction industry by hundreds of tap-dancing teenagers.\nBecause the wife of then-IOC President Juan Antonio Samaranch was seriously ill and unable to accompany her husband to the Olympics, Dawn Fraser, former Australian Olympic Champion swimmer and member of the Parliament of New South Wales, accompanied Samaranch during the Australian cultural segments, explaining to him some of the cultural references that are unfamiliar for the people from outside Australia.\nFormal presentation.\nA record 199 nations entered the stadium, with a record 80 of them winning at least one medal. The only missing IOC member was Afghanistan, who was banned due to the extremist rule of the Taliban's oppression of women and its prohibition of sports. The ceremony featured a unified entrance by the athletes of North and South Korea, using a specially designed unification flag: a white background flag with a blue map of the Korean Peninsula. Four athletes from East Timor also marched in the parade of nations as individual Olympic athletes and marched directly before the host country. Although the country-to-be had no National Olympic Committee then, they were allowed to compete under the Olympic Flag with country code IOA. The Governor-General, Sir William Deane, opened the games.\nThe Olympic Flag was carried around the arena by eight former Australian Olympic champions: Bill Roycroft, Murray Rose, Liane Tooth, Gillian Rolton, Marjorie Jackson, Lorraine Crapp, Michael Wenden and Nick Green. During the raising of the Olympics Flag, the Olympic Hymn was sung by the Millennium Choir of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia in Greek. Following this, Tina Arena sang a purpose-written pop song, \"The Flame\".\nThe opening ceremony concluded with the lighting of the Olympic Flame, which was brought into the stadium by former Australian Olympic champion Herb Elliott. Then, celebrating 100 years of women's participation in the Olympic Games, former Australian women Olympic medalists Betty Cuthbert and Raelene Boyle, Dawn Fraser, Shirley Strickland (later Shirley Strickland de la Hunty), Shane Gould and Debbie Flintoff-King brought the torch through the stadium, handing it over to Cathy Freeman, who lit the flame in the cauldron within a circle of fire. The choice of Freeman, an Aboriginal woman, to light the flame was notable given the history of human rights abuses against Aboriginal people in Australia. Following her lighting, Freeman was the subject of racial abuse from some Australians. The planned spectacular climax to the ceremony was delayed by the technical glitch of a computer switch which malfunctioned, causing the sequence to shut down by giving a false reading. This meant that the Olympic flame was suspended in mid-air for about four minutes rather than immediately rising up a water-covered ramp to the top of the stadium. When the cause of the problem was discovered, the program was overridden and the cauldron continued its course, and the ceremony concluded with a fireworks display.\nDay 2: 16 September.\nThe first medals of the Games were awarded in the women's 10 metre air rifle competition, which was won by Nancy Johnson of the United States.\nThe Triathlon made its Olympic debut with the women's race. Set in the surroundings of the Sydney Opera House, Brigitte McMahon representing Switzerland swam, cycled and ran to the first gold medal in the sport, beating the favoured home athletes such as Michelie Jones who won silver. McMahon only passed Jones in sight of the finish line.\nThe first star of the Games was 17-year-old Australian Ian Thorpe, who first set a new world record in the 400-metre freestyle final before competing in an exciting 4 \u00d7 100 m freestyle final. Swimming the last leg, Thorpe passed the leading American team and arrived in a new world record time, two-tenths of a second ahead of the Americans. In the same event for women, the Americans also broke the world record, finishing ahead of the Netherlands and Sweden.\nSamaranch had to leave for home, as his wife was severely ill. Upon arrival, his wife had already died. Samaranch returned to Sydney four days later. The Olympic flag was flown at half-staff during the period as a sign of respect to Samaranch's wife.\nDay 3: 17 September.\nCanadian Simon Whitfield sprinted away in the last 100 metres of the men's triathlon, becoming the inaugural winner in the event.\nOn the cycling track, Robert Bartko beat fellow German Jens Lehmann in the individual pursuit, setting a new Olympic Record. Leontien Zijlaard-van Moorsel set a world record in the semi-finals the same event for women.\nIn the swimming pool, American Tom Dolan beat the world record in the 400-metre medley, successfully defending the title he won in Atlanta four years prior. Dutchwoman Inge de Bruijn also clocked a new world record, beating her own time in the 100 m butterfly final to win by more than a second.\nDay 4: 18 September.\nThe main event for the Australians on the fourth day of the Games was the 200 m freestyle. Dutchman Pieter van den Hoogenband had broken the world record in the semi-finals, taking it from the new Australian hero Ian Thorpe, who came close to the world record in his semi-final heat. As the final race finished, Van den Hoogenband's time was exactly the same as in the semi-finals, finishing ahead of Thorpe by half a second.\nChina won the gold medal in the men's team all-around gymnastics competition after being the runner-up in the previous two Olympics. The other medals were taken by Ukraine and Russia, respectively.\nZijlaard-van Moorsel lived up to the expectations set by her world record in cycling in the semis by winning the gold medal.\nDay 7: 21 September.\nDuring the Women's Gymnastics All-Around, female athletes suffered damning scores and injuries due to improperly installed gymnastics equipment. Gymnasts performing on the vault gave uncharacteristically poor performances and fell. Officials blamed the series of falls and low scores on performance anxiety. It was not until Australian gymnast Allana Slater and her coach, Peggy Liddick, voiced concerns about the equipment that officials discovered the apparatus was five centimetres, or almost two inches, lower than it should have been. While athletes were given the opportunity to perform again, for some of them, the damage to their mental or physical health caused by the vault was irreparable. Chinese gymnast Kui Yuanyuan and American gymnast Kristen Maloney both injured their legs while attempting to stick their landings, with Kui needing to be carried to an examination area and Maloney damaging a titanium rod that had recently been implanted in her shin. Romanian gymnast Andreea R\u0103ducan ultimately took gold while her teammates, Simona Am\u00e2nar and Maria Olaru took silver and bronze, respectively.\nDay 9: 23 September.\nBy rowing in the winning coxless four, Steve Redgrave of Great Britain became a member of a select group who had won gold medals at five consecutive Olympics.\nThe swimming 4 x 100-metre medley relay of B.J. Bedford, Megan Quann (Jendrick), Jenny Thompson and Dara Torres became the first women's relay under 4-minutes, swimming 3:58 and setting a world record, claiming the gold medal for the United States.\nDay 10: 24 September.\nRulon Gardner, never an NCAA champion or a world medalist, beat Alexander Karelin of Russia to win gold in the super heavyweight class, Greco-Roman wrestling. Karelin had won gold in Seoul, Barcelona and Atlanta. Before this fight, he had never lost in international competition, had been unbeaten in all competitions in 13 years, and had not surrendered a point in a decade.\nDay 11: 25 September.\nAustralian Cathy Freeman won the 400-metre final in front of a jubilant Sydney crowd at the Olympic Stadium, ahead of Lorraine Graham of Jamaica and Katharine Merry of Great Britain. Freeman's win made her the first competitor in Olympic Games history to light the Olympic Flame and then go on to win a Gold Medal. The attendance at the stadium was 112,524 \u2013 the largest attendance for any sport in Olympic Games history.\nIn a men's basketball pool match between the United States and France, the USA's Vince Carter made one of the most famous dunks in basketball history. After getting the ball off a steal, the 6'6\"/1.98 m Carter drove to the basket, with 7'2\"/2.18 m centre Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Weis in his way. Carter jumped, spread his legs in midair, scraped Weis' head on the way up, and dunked. The French media dubbed the feat \"le dunk de la mort\" (\"the dunk of death\").\nDay 14: 28 September.\nThe Canadian flag at the athletes' village was lowered to half-mast as Canadian athletes paid tribute to the former prime minister Pierre Trudeau after hearing of his death in Montreal (because of the time zone difference, it was 29\u00a0September in Sydney when Trudeau died). The Canadian flag was flown at half-mast for the remainder of the Olympics, on orders from both IOC President Juan Antonio Samaranch and Canadian Foreign Affairs Minister Lloyd Axworthy, and as the state funeral did not take place until 3 October, two days after the closing ceremony, so they have enough time to head back to Canada after the Games and attending his funeral.\u00a0\nDay 16: 30 September.\nCameroon won a historic gold medal over Spain in the Men's Olympic Football Final at the Olympic Stadium. The game went to a penalty shootout, which was won by Cameroon 5\u20133.\nDay 17: 1 October.\nThe last event of the games was the Men's Marathon, contested on a course that started in North Sydney. The event was won by Ethiopian Gezahegne Abera, with Kenyan Erick Wainaina second, and Tesfaye Tola, also of Ethiopia, third. It was the first time since the 1968 Olympics that an Ethiopian won the gold medal in this event.\nThe closing ceremony commenced with Christine Anu performing her version of the Warumpi Band's song \"My Island Home\", with several Aboriginal dancers atop the Geodome Stage in the middle of the stadium, around which several hundred umbrella and lamp box kids created an image of Aboriginal Dreamtime. The Geodome Stage was used throughout the ceremony, which was a flat stage mechanically raised into the shape of a Geode.\nIOC President Juan Antonio Samaranch declared at the Closing Ceremony,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am proud and happy to proclaim that you have presented to the world the best Olympic Games ever.\nSubsequent Summer Olympics held in Athens, Beijing and London have been described by Samaranch's successor Jacques Rogge as \"unforgettable, dream Games\", \"truly exceptional\" and \"happy and glorious games\", respectively\u00a0\u2013 the practice of declaring games the \"best ever\" having been retired after the 2000 Games.\nSports.\nThe 2000 Summer Olympic program featured 300 events in the following 28 sports:\nAlthough demonstration sports were abolished following the 1992 Summer Olympics, the Sydney Olympics featured wheelchair racing as exhibition events on the athletics schedule.\nSpecial quarantine conditions were introduced to allow entry of horses into Australia to participate in equestrian events, avoiding the need for such events to take place elsewhere as had happened at the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne.\nCalendar.\n&lt;section begin=\"Calendar\"/&gt;\n\"All dates are in AEDST (UTC+11); the other two cities, Adelaide uses ACST () and Brisbane uses AEST (UTC+10)\"\n&lt;section end=\"Calendar\"/&gt;\nParticipating National Olympic Committees.\n199 National Olympic Committees (NOCs) participated in the Sydney Games, two more than in the 1996 Summer Olympics; in addition, there were four Timorese Individual Olympic Athletes. Eritrea, the Federated States of Micronesia and Palau made their Olympic debut this year.\nDemocratic Republic of the Congo was once again designated under that name, after it participated as Zaire from 1984 to 1996.\nAfghanistan was the only 1996 participant (and the only existing NOC) that did not participate in the 2000 Olympics, having been banned due to the Taliban's totalitarian rule in Afghanistan, their oppression of women, and its prohibition of sports.\nNumber of athletes by National Olympic Committee.\n10,647 athletes from 199 NOCs participated in the 2000 Summer Olympics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sticky table start/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedal table.\nThese are the top ten nations that won medals in the 2000 Games.\nThe ranking in this table is based on information provided by the International Olympic Committee. Some other sources may be inconsistent due to not taking into account all later doping cases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u2021\u00a0 Changes in medal standings (see here)\nOrganisation.\nOrganisations responsible for the Olympics.\nA number of quasi-government bodies were responsible for the construction, organisation and execution of the Sydney Games. These included:\nThese organisations worked closely together and with other bodies such as:\nThese bodies are often collectively referred to as the \"Olympic Family\".\nOrganisation of the Paralympics.\nThe organisation of the 2000 Summer Paralympics was the responsibility of the Sydney Paralympic Organising Committee (SPOC). However, much of the planning and operation of the Paralympic Games was outsourced to SOCOG such that most operational programmes planned both the Olympic and Paralympic Games.\nOther Olympic events.\nThe organisation of the Games included not only the actual sporting events, but also the management (and sometimes construction) of the sporting venues and surrounding precincts, the Olympic torch relay, which began in Greece and travelled to Australia via numerous Oceania island nations, and the Sydney Olympic Arts Festival.\nPhases of the Olympic project.\nThe staging of the Olympics were treated as a project on a vast scale, broken into several broad phases:\nSOCOG organisational design.\nThe internal organisation of SOCOG evolved over the phases of the project and changed, sometimes radically, several times.\nIn late 1998, the design was principally functional. The top two tiers below the CEO Sandy Hollway consisted of five groups (managed by Group General Managers and the Deputy CEO) and twenty divisions (managed by divisional General Managers), which in turn were further broken up into programmes and sub-programmes or projects.\nIn 1999, functional areas (FAs) broke up into geographic precinct and venue teams (managed by Precinct Managers and Venue Managers) with functional area staff reporting to both the FA manager and the venue manager. SOCOG moved to a matrix structure. The Interstate Football division extant in 1998 was the first of these geographically based venue teams.\nVolunteer program.\nThe origins of the volunteer program for Sydney 2000 dates back to the bid, as early as 1992.\nOn 17 December 1992, a group of Sydney citizens interested in the prospect of hosting the 2000 Olympic and Paralympic Games gathered for a meeting at Sports House at Wentworth Park in Sydney.\nIn the period leading up to 1999, after Sydney had won the bid, the small group of volunteers grew from approximately 42 to around 500. These volunteers became known as Pioneer Volunteers. The Pioneer Volunteer program was managed internally by SOCOG's Volunteer Services Department in consultation with prominent peak groups like The Centre for Volunteering (Volunteering and TAFE. Some of the Pioneer Volunteers still meet every four months, an unseen legacy of the games which brought together a community spirit not seen before.\nDuring the Olympic games, tens of thousands of volunteers (the official figure placed at 46,967) helped everywhere at the Olympic venues and elsewhere in the city. They were honoured with a parade like the athletes had a few days before.\nSydney Olympic Arts Festival.\nThe original festivals in Olympia celebrated both cultural events and physical feats. The tradition continued with the first modern Olympics in 1896, and since then various cultural events have accompanied the sporting competition. Starting with the 1996 Summer Olympics, a cycle of four arts festivals have been staged by each host country. The Sydney Olympic Arts Festival was an arts festival that ran before and during the Olympics. The festival event coordinator was David Gallen.\nThe first of the four festivals was the first edition of the Festival of the Dreaming, which was founded by artistic director Rhoda Roberts (who later co-directed segments of the Opening Ceremony), was held in 1997, as the first of four leading up to the Sydney Olympics. Some events were held at the Sydney Opera House, and the festival included an Aboriginal cast performing Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", as well as Samuel Beckett's \"Waiting for Godot\" performed in the Bundjalung language.\nThe second festival was \"A Sea Change\", in which artists and companies from Australia and Oceania explored \"the influence of the sea on Australian life as a means to explore the changing political and cultural climates in Australia\". \nThe third festival, \"Reaching the World\" took the form of an international tour, from November 1998 until January 2000, travelling to all five regions represented by the Olympic rings (Europe, Africa, Asia, the Americas, and Oceania) and showcasing Australian culture by means of exhibitions, performances, and various media. \nThe fourth and final festival, while featuring many international artists and companies, served as a showcase for the diversity and depth of the arts in Australia. Opening four weeks before the Olympic Games, the Sydney 2000 Olympics Arts Festival ran until the last day of athletic competition, from 18 August to 1 October 2000. Starting with an all-day Aboriginal welcoming ceremony, \"Tubowgule\" (\"the Meeting of the Waters\"), choreographed by Stephen Page, began at La Perouse beach near Botany Bay, and concluded at Bennelong Point, in the forecourt of Sydney Opera House. There, contemporary Indigenous dance company Bangarra Dance Theatre performed \"Energy of Australia\". The gala opening event for the festival was the musically pyrotechnical \"Symphony of a Thousand\" by Mahler at the Sydney SuperDome. The festival included many performing arts events, mostly presented at the Sydney Opera House. Concerts were performed by many orchestras, including Sydney Symphony Orchestra, Orchestra Filarmonica della Scala, the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra, the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra, the Australian Chamber Orchestra, the Asian Youth Orchestra, and the Australian Youth Orchestra, and operas were presented. There were also dance, singing, and drama performances, staged mainly at the Opera House but also at Her Majesty's Theatre and the Capitol Theatre.\nMarketing.\nEmblem.\nThe overall branding of the Games was designed by Melbourne-based FHA Image Design; the emblem\u2014nicknamed the \"Millennium Man\"\u2014consists of a stylised, multi-coloured depiction of a torch-bearer in motion, with arms and legs resembling boomerangs, and a smoke trail resembling the roof of the Sydney Opera House (a motif that had also been used in the logo for Sydney's bid). The firm's then-creative director Richard Henderson explained that they aimed for the emblem be simple enough for a child to draw, avoid \"quaint\", overused imagery such as kangaroos and koalas, and \"engender [the] pride in Australian creative quality and optimism for the new millennium that the Games would herald\".\nMascots.\nThe official mascots chosen for the 2000 Summer Olympics were Syd the platypus, Millie the echidna, and Olly the kookaburra, designed by Matthew Hattan and Jozef Szekeres and named by Philip Sheldon of agency Weekes Morris Osborn in response to the original SOCOG recommendation of Murray, Margery, and Dawn after famous Australian athletes.\nAn unofficial alternate mascot\u2014Fatso the Fat-Arsed Wombat\u2014was created by Australian comedians Roy and HG for their miniseries during the Games, \"The Dream\"; the character was conceived as a satire of the increasing commercialisation of the Olympics, with the duo often being critical of the official mascots (whom they jokingly nicknamed \"Olly, Millie and Dickhead\"). Only two plush toys of Fatso were made, one of which was placed in the Olympic Village; the plush was controversially smuggled into a medal ceremony by the Australian men's 4\u00d7200-metre relay team. The character achieved a cult following, with some Australians preferring Fatso to the actual mascots. One of the Fatso plushes was auctioned for charity following the Games (being sold to Kerry Stokes, an executive of the Seven Network, for A$80,450), while a figure of Fatso was included in an display outside Stadium Australia that commemorated the Games' volunteers.\nMedals and bouquets.\nA total of 750 gold, 750 silver and 780 bronze medals were minted for the Games. The gold and silver medals contained 99.99 percent of pure silver. The bronze medals were 99 percent bronze with one percent silver, they were made by melting down Australian one-cent and two-cent coins, which had been removed from circulation from 1992 onward.\nThe bouquets handed to medal recipients incorporated foliage from the Grevillea baileyana, also known as the white oak.\nAwards and commendations.\nThe International Olympic Committee awarded Sydney and its inhabitants with the \"Pierre de Coubertin Trophy\" in recognition of the collaboration and happiness shown by the people of Sydney during the event to all the athletes and visitors around the world.\nAfter the games' end, the New South Wales Police Force was granted use of the Olympic Rings in a new commendation and citation as the IOC consideration after having staged the \"safest\" games ever.\nMo Awards.\nThe Australian Entertainment Mo Awards (commonly known informally as the Mo Awards), were annual Australian entertainment industry awards. They recognise achievements in live entertainment in Australia from 1975 to 2016.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71434", "revid": "197953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71434", "title": "Algorithmic complexity theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "71435", "revid": "50609751", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71435", "title": "Universal Turing machine", "text": "Type of Turing machine\nIn computer science, a universal Turing machine (UTM) is a Turing machine capable of computing any computable sequence, as described by Alan Turing in his seminal paper \"On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem\". Common sense might say that a universal machine is impossible, but Turing proves that it is possible. He suggested that we may compare a human in the process of computing a real number to a machine that is only capable of a finite number of conditions &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;; which will be called \"m-configurations\". He then described the operation of such machine, as described below, and argued:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is my contention that these operations include all those which are used in the computation of a number.\nTuring introduced the idea of such a machine in 1936\u20131937.\nIntroduction.\nMartin Davis makes a persuasive argument that Turing's conception of what is now known as \"the stored-program computer\", of placing the \"action table\"\u2014the instructions for the machine\u2014in the same \"memory\" as the input data, strongly influenced John von Neumann's conception of the first American discrete-symbol (as opposed to analog) computer\u2014the EDVAC. Davis quotes \"Time\" magazine to this effect, that \"everyone who taps at a keyboard\u00a0... is working on an incarnation of a Turing machine\", and that \"John von Neumann [built] on the work of Alan Turing\".\nDavis makes a case that Turing's Automatic Computing Engine (ACE) computer \"anticipated\" the notions of microprogramming (microcode) and RISC processors. Donald Knuth cites Turing's work on the ACE computer as designing \"hardware to facilitate subroutine linkage\"; Davis also references this work as Turing's use of a hardware \"stack\".\nAs the Turing machine was encouraging the construction of computers, the UTM was encouraging the development of the fledgling computer sciences. An early, if not the first, assembler was proposed \"by a young hot-shot programmer\" for the EDVAC. Von Neumann's \"first serious program ... [was] to simply sort data efficiently\". Knuth observes that the subroutine return embedded in the program itself rather than in special registers is attributable to von Neumann and Goldstine. Knuth furthermore states that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first interpretive routine may be said to be the \"Universal Turing Machine\" ... Interpretive routines in the conventional sense were mentioned by John Mauchly in his lectures at the Moore School in 1946 ... Turing took part in this development also; interpretive systems for the Pilot ACE computer were written under his direction. \nDavis briefly mentions operating systems and compilers as outcomes of the notion of program-as-data.\nMathematical theory.\nWith this encoding of action tables as strings, it becomes possible, in principle, for Turing machines to answer questions about the behaviour of other Turing machines. Most of these questions, however, are undecidable, meaning that the function in question cannot be calculated mechanically. For instance, the problem of determining whether an arbitrary Turing machine will halt on a particular input, or on all inputs, known as the Halting problem, was shown to be, in general, undecidable in Turing's original paper. Rice's theorem shows that any non-trivial question about the output of a Turing machine is undecidable.\nA universal Turing machine can calculate any recursive function, decide any recursive language, and accept any recursively enumerable language. According to the Church\u2013Turing thesis, the problems solvable by a universal Turing machine are exactly those problems solvable by an \"algorithm\" or an \"effective method of computation\", for any reasonable definition of those terms. For these reasons, a universal Turing machine serves as a standard against which to compare computational systems, and a system that can simulate a universal Turing machine is called Turing complete.\nAn abstract version of the universal Turing machine is the universal function, a computable function that can be used to calculate any other computable function. The UTM theorem proves the existence of such a function.\nEfficiency.\nWithout loss of generality, the input of Turing machine can be assumed to be in the alphabet {0, 1}; any other finite alphabet can be encoded over {0, 1}. The behavior of a Turing machine \"M\" is determined by its transition function. This function can be easily encoded as a string over the alphabet {0, 1} as well. The size of the alphabet of \"M\", the number of tapes it has, and the size of the state space can be deduced from the transition function's table. The distinguished states and symbols can be identified by their position, e.g. the first two states can by convention be the start and stop states. Consequently, every Turing machine can be encoded as a string over the alphabet {0, 1}. Additionally, we convene that every invalid encoding maps to a trivial Turing machine that immediately halts, and that every Turing machine can have an infinite number of encodings by padding the encoding with an arbitrary number of (say) 1's at the end, just like comments work in a programming language. It should be no surprise that we can achieve this encoding given the existence of a G\u00f6del number and computational equivalence between Turing machines and \u03bc-recursive functions. Similarly, our construction associates to every binary string \"\u03b1\", a Turing machine \"M\u03b1\".\nStarting from the above encoding, in 1966 F. C. Hennie and R. E. Stearns showed that given a Turing machine \"M\u03b1\" that halts on input \"x\" within \"N\" steps, then there exists a multi-tape universal Turing machine that halts on inputs \"\u03b1\", \"x\" (given on different tapes) in \"CN\" log \"N\", where \"C\" is a machine-specific constant that does not depend on the length of the input \"x\", but does depend on \"M\"'s alphabet size, number of tapes, and number of states. Effectively this is an formula_1 simulation, using Donald Knuth's Big O notation. The corresponding result for space-complexity rather than time-complexity is that we can simulate in a way that uses at most \"CN\" cells at any stage of the computation, an formula_2 simulation.\nSmallest machines.\nWhen Alan Turing came up with the idea of a universal machine he had in mind the simplest computing model powerful enough to calculate all possible functions that can be calculated. Claude Shannon first explicitly posed the question of finding the smallest possible universal Turing machine in 1956. He showed that two symbols were sufficient so long as enough states were used (or vice versa), and that it was always possible to exchange states for symbols. He also showed that no universal Turing machine of one state could exist.\nMarvin Minsky discovered a 7-state 4-symbol universal Turing machine in 1962 using 2-tag systems. Other small universal Turing machines have since been found by Yurii Rogozhin and others by extending this approach of tag system simulation. If we denote by (\"m\", \"n\") the class of UTMs with \"m\" states and \"n\" symbols the following tuples have been found: (15, 2), (9, 3), (6, 4), (5, 5), (4, 6), (3, 9), and (2, 18). Rogozhin's (4, 6) machine uses only 22 instructions, and no standard UTM of lesser descriptional complexity is known.\nHowever, generalizing the standard Turing machine model admits even smaller UTMs. One such generalization is to allow an infinitely repeated word on one or both sides of the Turing machine input, thus extending the definition of universality and known as \"semi-weak\" or \"weak\" universality, respectively. Small weakly universal Turing machines that simulate the Rule 110 cellular automaton have been given for the (6, 2), (3, 3), and (2, 4) state\u2013symbol pairs. The proof of universality for Wolfram's 2-state 3-symbol Turing machine further extends the notion of weak universality by allowing certain non-periodic initial configurations. Other variants on the standard Turing machine model that yield small UTMs include machines with multiple tapes or tapes of multiple dimension, and machines coupled with a finite automaton.\nMachines with no internal states.\nIf multiple heads reading successive tape positions are allowed on a Turing machine then no internal states are required; as \"states\" can be encoded in the tape. For example, consider a tape with 6 colours: 0, 1, 2, 0A, 1A, 2A. Consider a tape such as 0,0,1,2,2A,0,2,1 where a 3-headed Turing machine is situated over the triple (2,2A,0). The rules then convert any triple to another triple and move the 3-heads left or right. For example, the rules might convert (2,2A,0) to (2,1,0) and move the head left. Thus in this example, the machine acts like a 3-colour Turing machine with internal states A and B (represented by no letter). The case for a 2-headed Turing machine is very similar. Thus a 2-headed Turing machine without internal states can be universal with 6 colours. It is not known what the smallest number of colours needed for a multi-headed Turing machine is or if a 2-colour universal Turing machine without internal states is possible with multiple heads. It also means that rewrite rules are Turing complete since the triple rules are equivalent to rewrite rules. Extending the tape to two dimensions with a head sampling a letter and its 8 neighbours, only 2 colours are needed, as for example, a colour can be encoded in a vertical triple pattern such as 110.\nAlso, if the distance between the two heads is variable (the tape has \"slack\" between the heads), then it can simulate any Post tag system, some of which are universal.\nExample of coding.\nFor those who would undertake the challenge of designing a UTM exactly as Turing specified see the article by Davies in . Davies corrects the errors in the original and shows what a sample run would look like. He successfully ran a (somewhat simplified) simulation.\nThe following example is taken from . For more about this example, see Turing machine examples.\nTuring used seven symbols { A, C, D, R, L, N, ; } to encode each 5-tuple; as described in the article Turing machine, his 5-tuples are only of types N1, N2, and N3. The number of each \"m\u2011configuration\" (instruction, state) is represented by \"D\" followed by a unary string of A's, e.g. \"q3\" = DAAA. In a similar manner, he encodes the symbols blank as \"D\", the symbol \"0\" as \"DC\", the symbol \"1\" as DCC, etc. The symbols \"R\", \"L\", and \"N\" remain as is.\nAfter encoding each 5-tuple is then \"assembled\" into a string in order as shown in the following table:\nFinally, the codes for all four 5-tuples are strung together into a code started by \";\" and separated by \";\" i.e.:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;;DADDCRDAA;DAADDRDAAA;DAAADDCCRDAAAA;DAAAADDRDA\nThis code he placed on alternate squares\u2014the \"F-squares\" \u2013 leaving the \"E-squares\" (those liable to erasure) empty. The final assembly of the code on the tape for the U-machine consists of placing two special symbols (\"e\") one after the other, then the code separated out on alternate squares, and lastly the double-colon symbol \"::\" (blanks shown here with \".\" for clarity):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;ee.;.D.A.D.D.C.R.D.A.A.;.D.A.A.D.D.R.D.A.A.A.;.D.A.A.A.D.D.C.C.R.D.A.A.A.A.;.D.A.A.A.A.D.D.R.D.A.::...\nThe U-machine's action-table (state-transition table) is responsible for decoding the symbols. Turing's action table keeps track of its place with markers \"u\", \"v\", \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" by placing them in \"E-squares\" to the right of \"the marked symbol\" \u2013 for example, to mark the current instruction z is placed to the right of \";\" x is keeping the place with respect to the current \"m\u2011configuration\" DAA. The U-machine's action table will shuttle these symbols around (erasing them and placing them in different locations) as the computation progresses:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;ee.; .D.A.D.D.C.R.D.A.A. ; zD.A.AxD.D.R.D.A.A.A.;.D.A.A.A.D.D.C.C.R.D.A.A.A.A.;.D.A.A.A.A.D.D.R.D.A.::...\nTuring's action-table for his U-machine is very involved.\nRoger Penrose provides examples of ways to encode instructions for the universal machine using only binary symbols { 0, 1 }, or { blank, mark | }. Penrose goes further and writes out his entire U-machine code. He asserts that it truly is a U-machine code, an enormous number that spans almost 2 full pages of 1's and 0's.\nAsperti and Ricciotti described a multi-tape UTM defined by composing elementary machines with very simple semantics, rather than explicitly giving its full action table. This approach was sufficiently modular to allow them to formally prove the correctness of the machine in the Matita proof assistant.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther works cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71439", "revid": "308199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71439", "title": "Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir", "text": "Norse mythical character\nVaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir (Old Norse \"mighty weaver\") is a wise j\u00f6tunn in Norse mythology. His name comes from \"Vaf\", which means weave or entangle, and \"thrudnir\", which means strong or mighty. Some interpret it to mean \"mighty in riddles\". It may be anglicized Vafthruthnir or Vafthrudnir. In the Poetic Edda poem \"Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nism\u00e1l\", Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir acts as (the disguised) Odin's host and opponent in a deadly battle of wits that results in Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir's defeat.\nCharacterization.\nA small portion of Poetic Edda provides some context and description of Vafthrudnir. While contemplating his visit to the giant, Odin's wife Frigg offers a warning for him to be wary of this particular giant because, \"Amid all the giants an equal in might, To Vafthruthnir know I none.\" At this point however Odin has already insisted,\n&lt;poem&gt;And Vafthruthnir fain would find;\nfit wisdom old with the giant wise\nMyself would I seek to match.&lt;/poem&gt;\nFrom this discussion one can glean that Vafthrudnir is distinguished from other giants as being especially wise and mighty. This is the only description provided of Vafthrudnir in Poetic Edda before his actual encounter with Odin. We know that Vafthrudnir is recognized for his knowledge of the past, present, and future states of the world, which is precisely why Odin decides to pay him a visit in order to test his skill against that of the reputed Vafthrudnir.\nContest of wits with Odin.\nThe contest of wits is found in the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nism\u00e1l\" and is in an answer and response format. Each participant asks the other a series of questions about beings and events in the past, present, and future of the Nine Worlds. Odin defers to Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir, who proceeds to probe his guest's knowledge of the stallions that pull Day and Night across the sky. Odin correctly answers that Skinfaxi pulls Day across the world and Hrimfaxi draws the Night. Odin also offers extra details about the stallions' appearance and characteristics. Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir continues by testing Odin's knowledge of Iving and Ragnar\u00f6k before allowing his guest the chance to question him.\nOdin inquires about the origin of the Earth and heavens. Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir responds correctly that the heavens and Earth were formed from the flesh of Ymir. He demonstrates expertise on the topic by specifically listing which parts of Ymir's body created heaven and Earth. Odin then asks about the origin of the Moon and Sun. The giant correctly answers that the Moon and Sun are the son and daughter of the giant Mundilfari. They were assigned their place in the sky so that men could tell the passing of time. Odin proceeds to ask about many topics including Dellingr, N\u00f3r, the fathers of Winter and Summer, Bergelmir, Aurgelmir, Hraesvelg, Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r, the Einherjar, Niflheim, Ragnar\u00f6k, Fenrir, \u00c1lfr\u00f6\u00f0ull, and what will happen after the world has ended. Both participants exhibit extensive knowledge of their mythological world.\nOdin then breaks the established pattern of questioning and states that Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir, in all his wisdom, should be able to tell his guest what Odin whispered into the ear of his son, Baldr, before he was burned on the funeral pyre. At this point, Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir recognizes his guest for who he really is. He responds that no one except his guest, Odin, would have such knowledge unless Baldr himself reveals the secret. Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir willingly submits to his fate and proclaims that Odin will always be wiser than the wisest.\nParallels to literature and popular culture.\nThe structure of Odin's and Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir's encounter has parallels with the Gestumblindi and King Heidrek incident in the Norse Hervarar saga and \"The Hobbit\u2019s\" \u201cRiddles in the Dark\u201d between Bilbo and Gollum. Many of the riddles in these events are alike and all end with the same type of question. The riddle contest between King Heidrek and Gestumblindi, Odin in disguise yet again, ends with the same question that he posed to Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir about his final words to Baldr. Bilbo\u2019s final question to Gollum is about the contents of his pocket. Odin and Bilbo break the established structure of a riddle contest and ask a virtually impossible yet simply worded question instead of a riddle about an object or mythological event. Gollum and King Heidrek were both angry and frustrated with their opponent. King Heidrek becomes violent and swings his sword, Tyrfing, at Odin. Gollum demands a total of three guesses due to the nature of Bilbo\u2019s question. This is in contrast to how Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir is depicted as being calm and accepting of his fate when bested by Odin. Thus, Odin's riddle contest with Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir influenced not only other works within Norse mythology, but also more modern works of literature such as \"The Hobbit\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71440", "revid": "5326371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71440", "title": "Remake", "text": "New version of a film or TV series\nA remake is a film, television series, video game, song or similar form of entertainment that is based upon and retells the story of an earlier production in the same medium\u2014e.g., a \"new version of an existing film\". A remake tells the same story as the original but uses a different set of casts, and may use actors from the original, alter the theme, or change the flow and setting of the story. In addition, since a remake is released some time after the original work, it may incorporate new technologies, enhancements, and techniques that had not existed or been commonly used when the original work was created. Similar but not synonymous terms are reimagining or reboot, which indicates a greater discrepancy between, for example, a movie and the movie it is based on.\nFilm.\nA film remake uses an earlier movie as its main source material, rather than returning to the earlier movie's source material. The 2001 film \"Ocean's Eleven\" is a remake of 1960's \"Ocean's 11\", while 1989's \"Batman\" is a re-interpretation of the comic book source material which also inspired 1966's \"Batman\". In 1998, Gus Van Sant produced an almost shot-for-shot remake of Alfred Hitchcock's 1960 film \"Psycho\". The 2025 film \"Snow White\" is a live-action remake of the animated 1937 film \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\".\nWith the exception of shot-for-shot remakes, most remakes make significant changes in character, plot, genre, and theme.&lt;ref name=\"digitalcommons.liberty/masters/7\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; For example, the 1968 film \"The Thomas Crown Affair\" is centered on a bank robbery, while its 1999 remake involves the theft of a valuable painting. The 1999 remake of \"The Mummy\" was viewed primarily as a \"reimagining\" in a different genre (adventure). \nSimilarly, when the 1969 film \"The Italian Job\" was remade in 2003, few aspects were carried over. Another example is the 1932 film \"Scarface\" which was remade in 1983 starring Al Pacino; the 1932 version is about the illegal alcohol trade, while the characters in the 1983 version are cocaine smugglers.\nSometimes a remake is made by the same director. For example, Yasujir\u014d Ozu's black-and-white \"A Story of Floating Weeds\" was remade into the color \"Floating Weeds\". Hitchcock remade his 1934 black-and-white \"The Man Who Knew Too Much\" in color in 1956. \"Tick Tock Tuckered\", released in 1944, was a color remake of \"Porky's Badtime Story\", released in 1937 with Daffy Duck in Gabby Goat's role. Cecil B. DeMille managed the same thing with his 1956 remake of his silent 1923 film \"The Ten Commandments\". Sam Raimi directed \"Evil Dead 2\" in 1987, a quasi-remake of his 1981 film \"The Evil Dead\", blending original elements with an emphasis on comedy. In 2007, Michael Haneke' remake \"Funny Games\", was an English-language remake of his original German-language \"Funny Games\" (this is also an example of a shot-for-shot remake), while Martin Campbell, director of the miniseries \"Edge of Darkness\", directed the 2010 film adaptation.\nNot all remakes use the same title as the previously released version; the 1966 film \"Walk, Don't Run\", for example, is a remake of the World War II comedy \"The More the Merrier\". This is particularly true for films that are remade from films produced in another language such as \"Point of No Return\" (from the French '), \"Vanilla Sky\" (from the Spanish '), \"The Magnificent Seven\" (from the Japanese \"Seven Samurai\"), \"A Fistful of Dollars\" (from the Japanese \"Yojimbo\"), \"The Departed\" (from Hong Kong's \"Infernal Affairs\"), \"Secret in Their Eyes\" (from the Argentine '), \"Let Me In\" (from the Swedish \"Let the Right One In\" or '), and \"The Ring\" (from the Japanese \"Ring)\".\nRemakes are rarely sequels to the original film. In this situation, essentially the remake repeats the same basic story of the original film and may even use the same title, but also contains notable plot and storyline elements indicating the two films are set in \"the same universe\". An example of this type of remake is the 2000 film version of \"Shaft,\" which was the second film adaptation of the original novel but was also a canon storyline sequel to the original 1971 film adaptation. The 2013 remake of \"Evil Dead\" was also a storyline sequel, featuring a post-credits cameo from Ash Williams.\nThe Italian film \"Perfect Strangers\" (\"\"; 2016) was included in the Guinness World Records as it became the most remade film in cinema history, with a total of 18 versions of the film.\nTelevision.\nRemakes occur less often on television than in film, because television mostly favours the concept of \"reviving\" a series instead. But some remakes have happened from time to time, especially in the early 21st century. Examples include \"Battlestar Galactica\" (2003), \"He-Man and the Masters of the Universe\" (2002), \"\" (2010), \"V\" (2009), \"Hawaii Five-0\" (2010), and \"Charlie's Angels\" (2011).\nOne area where television remakes are particularly common is remaking British shows for the American market or, less frequently, American shows for the British market. For example, \"Three's Company\" is an American remake of the British \"Man About the House\": not only was the original show re-created (with very few characters or situation changes initially), but both series had spin-offs based on the Ropers (in the United Kingdom, \"George and Mildred\", in the United States, \"The Ropers\"), and both series were eventually re-tooled into series based on the male lead (in the United Kingdom, \"Robin's Nest\", in the United States, \"Three's a Crowd\"). The British sitcom \"Till Death Us Do Part\" inspired the American \"All in the Family,\" while \"All in the Family\"'s spin-off \"Maude\" was remade in the United Kingdom as \"Nobody's Perfect.\"\nAnother example is the long-running American sitcom \"The Office\" (2005\u20132013), which was a remake of the 2001 BBC sitcom of the same name. The American version's pilot episode followed its British counterpart \"nearly verbatim\", though later episodes had their own unique plot. The American television show \"The Killing\" is an investigative crime drama based on the Danish series \"\".\nVideo games.\nIn some cases, only models and environments are remade, while retaining the game's original code. Remakes are produced for the purpose of modernizing a game for newer hardware and new audiences. Typically, a remake of such game software shares its title, fundamental gameplay concepts, and core story elements with the original. With the advent of such notable video game remakes such as \"Resident Evil 2\" in 2019 (followed by \"Resident Evil 3\" in 2020) and \"Final Fantasy VII Remake\" in 2020, these strict notions are being called into question and brought into a broader perspective. This can even be seen as early as 2004 with the release of \"\" as that title features newer gameplay additions and voice acting.\nRemakes are often made by the original developer or copyright holder, although some are made by the fan community. If created by the community, video game remakes are sometimes also called fan games and can be seen as part of the retrogaming phenomenon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71443", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71443", "title": "Watt per meter-kelvin", "text": ""}
{"id": "71447", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71447", "title": "Jeet kune do", "text": ""}
{"id": "71451", "revid": "34553183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71451", "title": "SVC", "text": "SVC or .svc may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "71454", "revid": "50321472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71454", "title": "Moab", "text": "Ancient kingdom East of the Dead Sea\nMoab () was an ancient Levantine kingdom whose territory is today located in southern Jordan. The land is mountainous and lies alongside much of the eastern shore of the Dead Sea. The existence of the Kingdom of Moab is attested to by numerous archaeological findings, most notably the Mesha Stele, which describes the Moabite victory over an unnamed son of King Omri of Israel, an episode also noted in 2 Kings 3. The Moabite capital was Dibon. According to the Hebrew Bible, Moab was often in conflict with its Israelite neighbours to the west.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the word Moab is uncertain. The earliest gloss is found in the Koine Greek Septuagint () which explains the name, in obvious allusion to the account of Moab's parentage, as \u1f10\u03ba \u03c4\u03bf\u1fe6 \u03c0\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03cc\u03c2 \u03bc\u03bf\u03c5 (\"from my father\"). Other etymologies which have been proposed regard it as a corruption of \"seed of a father\", or as a participial form from \"to desire\", thus connoting \"the desirable (land)\".\nRashi explains the word \"Mo'ab\" to mean \"from the father\", since \"ab\" in Hebrew and Arabic and other Semitic languages means \"father\". He writes that as a result of the immodesty of Moab's name, God did not command the Israelites to refrain from inflicting pain upon the Moabites in the manner in which he did with regard to the Ammonites. Fritz Hommel regards \"Moab\" as an abbreviation of \"Immo-ab\" = \"his mother is his father\".\nHistory.\nBronze Age.\nThe existence of the Kingdom of Moab prior to the rise of the Israelite state has been deduced from a colossal statue erected at Luxor by pharaoh Ramesses II, in the 13th century BCE. The statue lists \"Mu'ab\" among a series of nations conquered during a campaign. The nucleus of the early Moabite state appears to have been located in several settlements between Wadi el-Wale and Wadi Mojib which originated in the Late Bronze Age.\nFour inscriptions from the time of Ramesses II mention \"Mw-i-bw\" as a rebellious place that refuses to recognize Egypt's control over Canaan and, together with the Shasu of Mount Seir, conducted raids in Egypt. Pharaoh sent troops to the area and suppressed the rebellion - in the inscriptions of Ramesses II, the inhabitants are shown as having hairstyles identical to those of neighboring Canaanites (long hair collected and arranged) and not a braided hairstyle like the Shasu from later reliefs that contained the name Moab; a possible explanation is that \"Mw-i-bw\", if it was indeed the land of Moab, was at that time inhabited by a pre-Moabite population, whereas the historical Moabites settled in the area only in the 12th century BCE. Na'aman argued, however, that the identification of \"Mw-i-bw\" with the biblical land of Moab can no longer be upheld; the former was more likely well to the north. Kenneth Kitchen later responded to Na'aman, reasserting the identification of \"Mw-i-bw\" with Moab.\nIron Age.\nThe 9th century BCE Mesha Stele recounts that King Mesha built up an open sanctuary in Qeriho (cultic area of Dibon), conquered the Israelite territory north of Wadi el-Wale with the cities of Medeba, Ataroth and Nebo as well as Jahaz (east of Moab) and rebuilt the towns of Baal-meon, Kirjaton, Aroer, Beth-bamoth, Bezer, Medeba, Diblaton and his hometown Dibon.\nAn 8th-century BCE inscription seems to indicate that the Kingdom of Moab expanded into the eastern part of the Jordan Valley after a successful campaign against the Ammonites.\nIn the Nimrud clay inscription of Tiglath-pileser III (r. 745\u2013727 BCE), the Moabite king Salmanu (perhaps the Shalman who sacked Beth-arbel in Hosea ) is mentioned as tributary to Assyria. Sargon II mentions on a clay prism a revolt against him by Moab together with Philistia, Judah, and Edom; but on the Taylor prism, which recounts the expedition against Hezekiah, Kammusu-Nadbi (Chemosh-nadab), King of Moab, brings tribute to Sargon as his suzerain.\nMusuri, King of Moab, paid too a tribute to Assarhaddon at the same time as Manasseh of Judah, Qosgabar of Edom and other kings of the Levant. They send building materials to Nineveh. Moab militarily supported Assurbanipal during his campaign against Egypt and the pharaoh Taharqa. The status of vassal of Assyria allows Moab to benefit in return from the support of Assyria against the nomadic tribes of the Arabian desert, and in particular against the Qedarites. King Kamas-halta seemed to have defeated Ammuladi, king of Qedar.\nDecline.\nAfter the Roman conquest of the Levant by Pompey in 63 BCE, Moab lost its distinct identity through assimilation.\n19th-century travellers.\nEarly modern travellers in the region included Ulrich Jasper Seetzen (1805), Johann Ludwig Burckhardt (1812), Charles Leonard Irby and James Mangles (1818), and Louis F\u00e9licien de Saulcy (1851).\nBiblical narratives.\nAccording to the biblical account, Moab and Ammon were born to Lot and Lot's elder and younger daughters, respectively, in the aftermath of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. The Hebrew Bible refers to both the Moabites and Ammonites as Lot's sons, born of incest with his daughters ().\nThe Moabites first inhabited the rich highlands at the eastern side of the chasm of the Dead Sea, extending as far as Wadi Mujib to Wadi Hasa, from which country they expelled the Emim, the original inhabitants (Deuteronomy ), but they themselves were afterward driven southward by warlike tribes of Amorites, who had crossed the river Jordan. These Amorites, described in the Bible as being ruled by King Sihon, confined the Moabites to the country south of the river Arnon, which formed their northern boundary (Numbers ; Judges ).\nGod renewed his covenant with the Israelites at Moab before the Israelites entered the Promised Land (). Moses died there (), prevented by God from entering the Promised Land. He was buried in an unknown location in Moab and the Israelites spent a period of thirty days there in mourning ().\nAccording to the Book of Judges, the Israelites did not pass through the land of the Moabites (), but conquered Sihon's kingdom and his capital at Heshbon. After the conquest of Canaan the relations of Moab with Israel were of a mixed character, sometimes warlike and sometimes peaceable. With the tribe of Benjamin they had at least one severe struggle, in union with their kindred the Ammonites and the Amalekites (). The Benjaminite shofet Ehud ben Gera assassinated the Moabite king Eglon and led an Israelite army against the Moabites at a ford of the Jordan river, killing many of them.\nThe Book of Ruth testifies to friendly relations between Moab and Bethlehem, one of the towns of the tribe of Judah. By his descent from Ruth, David may be said to have been part Moabite. He committed his parents to the protection of the king of Moab (who may have been his kinsman), when hard pressed by King Saul. (1 Samuel 22:3,4) But here all friendly relations stop forever. The next time the name is mentioned is in the account of David's war, who made the Moabites tributary (2 Samuel ; 1 Chronicles ). Moab may have been under the rule of an Israelite governor during this period; among the exiles who returned to Judea from Babylonia were a clan descended from Pahath-Moab, whose name means \"ruler of Moab\". The Moabite Ruth is regarded as a prototype of a convert to Judaism.\nAt the disruption of the kingdom under the reign of Rehoboam, Moab seems to have been absorbed into the northern realm. It continued in vassalage to the Kingdom of Israel until the death of Ahab which according to Edwin Richard Thiele's reckoning was in about 853 BCE, when the Moabites refused to pay tribute and asserted their independence, making war upon the kingdom of Judah ().\nAfter the death of Ahab in about 853 BCE, the Moabites under Mesha rebelled against Jehoram, who allied himself with Jehoshaphat, King of the Kingdom of Judah, and with the King of Edom. According to the Bible, the prophet Elisha directed the Israelites to dig a series of ditches between themselves and the enemy, and during the night these channels were miraculously filled with water which appeared red as blood in the morning light.\nAccording to the biblical account, the crimson color deceived the Moabites into thinking that the Israelites, and their allies, had attacked one another. Eager to acquire plunder, they were ambushed and defeated by the Israelites (). According to Mesha's inscription on the Mesha Stele, however, he was completely victorious and regained all the territory of which Israel had deprived him. This battle is the last important date in the history of the Moabites as recorded in the Bible. In the year of Elisha's death they invaded Israel () and later aided Nebuchadnezzar in his expedition against Jehoiakim ().\nAllusions to Moab are frequent in the prophetical books (; ; ; ). Two chapters of Isaiah (15 and 16) and one of Jeremiah (48) are devoted to the \"burden of Moab\". Its prosperity and pride, which the Israelites believed incurred the wrath of God, are frequently mentioned (; ; ), and their contempt for Israel is once expressly noted (). Moab would be dealt with during the time of the Messiah's rulership according to the prophets. The book of Zephaniah states that Moab would become \"a permanent desolation\".\nMoab is also made reference to in the 2 Meqabyan, a book considered canonical in the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church. In that text, a Moabite king named Maccabeus joins forces with Edom and Amalek to attack Israel, later repenting of his sins and adopting the Israelite religion.\nIn Jewish tradition.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the Moabites were not hospitable to the Israelites who exited Egypt and hired Balaam to curse them. As a consequence, male Moabites were excluded by Torah law from marrying Jewish women.\nThe term \"tenth generation\" used in connection with that prohibition is considered an idiom, used for an unlimited time, as opposed to the third generation, which allows an Egyptian convert to marry into the community. The Talmud expresses the view that the prohibition applied only to male Moabites, who were not allowed to marry born Jews or legitimate converts. Female Moabites, when converted to Judaism, were permitted to marry with only the normal prohibition of a convert marrying a kohen (priest) applying. However, the prohibition was not followed during the Babylonian captivity, and Ezra and Nehemiah sought to compel a return to the law because men had been marrying women who had not been converted at all (, 12; ). The heir of King Solomon was Rehoboam, the son of an Ammonite woman, Naamah ().\nOn the other hand, the marriages of the Bethlehem Ephrathites (of the tribe of Judah) Mahlon and Chilion to the Moabite women Orpah and Ruth (), and the marriage of the latter, after her husband's death, to Boaz () who by her was the great-grandfather of David, are mentioned with no shade of reproach. The Talmudic explanation, however, is that the language of the law applies only to Moabite and Ammonite \"men\" (Hebrew, like all Semitic languages, has grammatical gender). The Talmud also states that the prophet Samuel wrote the Book of Ruth to settle the dispute as the rule had been forgotten since the time of Boaz. Another interpretation is that the Book of Ruth is simply reporting the events in an impartial fashion, leaving any praise or condemnation to be done by the reader.\nThe Babylonian Talmud in Yevamot 76B explains that one of the reasons was the Ammonites did not greet the Children of Israel with friendship and the Moabites hired Balaam to curse them. The difference in the responses of the two people led to God allowing the Jewish people to harass the Moabites (but not go to war) but forbade them to even harass the Ammonites ().\nJehoash was one of the four men who pretended to be gods. He was persuaded thereto particularly by the princes, who said to him. \"Wert thou not a god thou couldst not come out alive from the Holy of Holies\" (Ex R. viii. 3). He was assassinated by two of his servants, one of whom was the son of an Ammonite woman and the other the offspring of a Moabite (); for God said: \"Let the descendants of the two ungrateful families chastise the ungrateful Joash\" (Yalk., Ex. 262). Moab and Ammon were the two offspring of Lot's incest with his two daughters as described in .\nJehoshaphet subsequently joined Jehoram of Israel in a war against the Moabites, who were under tribute to Israel. The Moabites were subdued, but seeing Mesha's act of offering his own son (and singular heir) as a propitiatory human sacrifice on the walls of Kir of Moab filled Israel with horror, and they withdrew and returned to their own land.\nAccording to the Book of Jeremiah, Moab was exiled to Babylon for his arrogance and idolatry. According to Rashi, it was also due to their gross ingratitude even though Abraham, Israel's ancestor, had saved Lot, Moab's ancestor from Sodom. Jeremiah prophesies that Moab's captivity will be returned in the end of days.\nThe book of Zephaniah states that \"Moab will assuredly be like Sodom, and the sons of Ammon like Gomorrah\u2014Ground overgrown with weeds and full of salt mines, and a permanent desolation.\" (2:9). The prophecy regarding their defeat by the Israelites is linked to the conquests by the Jewish Hasmonean king Alexander Jannaeus. During that period, the Moabites were called the \"Arabian Moabites\".\nBoundaries in the Hebrew Bible.\nIn the boundaries are given as being marked by Beth-jeshimoth (north), Baal-meon (east), and Kiriathaim (south). That these limits were not fixed, however, is plain from the lists of cities given in and Jeremiah , where Heshbon, Elealeh, and Jazer are mentioned to the north of Beth-jeshimoth; Madaba, Beth-gamul, and Mephaath to the east of Baalmeon; and Dibon, Aroer, Bezer, Jahaz, and Kirhareseth to the south of Kiriathaim. The principal rivers of Moab mentioned in the Bible are the Arnon, the Dibon or Dimon, and the Nimrim. In the north are a number of long, deep ravines, and Mount Nebo, famous as the scene of the death of Moses (Deuteronomy ).\nThe territory occupied by Moab at the period of its greatest extent, before the invasion of the Amorites, divided itself naturally into three distinct and independent portions: the enclosed corner or canton south of the Arnon, referred to in the Bible as \"field of Moab\" (Ruth ). The more open rolling country north of the Arnon, opposite Jericho and up to the hills of Gilead, called the \"land of Moab\" (Deuteronomy ) and the district below sea level in the tropical depths of the Jordan valley (Numbers ).\nReligion.\nReferences to the religion of Moab are scant. Most of the Moabites followed the ancient Semitic religion like other ancient Semitic-speaking peoples, and the Book of Numbers says that they induced the Israelites to join in their sacrifices (; ). Their chief god seems to have been Chemosh, and the Bible refers to them as the \"people of Chemosh\" (; ). During the Iron Age, several Moabite cultic sites have been found in places such as Deir Alla, Damiyah, Ataruz or Khirbet al-Mudayna.\nAccording to II Kings, at times, especially in dire peril, human sacrifices were offered to Chemosh, as by Mesha, who gave up his son and heir to him (). Nevertheless, King Solomon built a \"high place\" for Chemosh on the hill before Jerusalem (), which the Bible describes as \"this detestation of Moab\". The altar was not destroyed until the reign of Josiah (). The Moabite Stone also mentions (line 17) a female counterpart of Chemosh, Ashtar-Chemosh.\nLanguage.\nThe Moabite language was spoken in Moab. It was a Canaanite language closely related to Biblical Hebrew, Ammonite and Edomite, and was written using a variant of the Phoenician alphabet. Most of our knowledge of it comes from the Mesha Stele, which is the only known extensive text in this language. In addition, there are the three line El-Kerak Inscription and a few seals.\nList of rulers.\nThe following is a list of rulers of the ancient kingdom of Moab.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71457", "revid": "15996738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71457", "title": "Smith's Bible Dictionary", "text": "Smith's Bible Dictionary, originally named \"A Dictionary of the Bible\", is a 19th-century Bible dictionary containing upwards of four thousand entries that became named after its editor, William Smith. Its popularity was such that condensed dictionaries appropriated the title, \"Smith's Bible Dictionary\".\nOverview.\nThe original dictionary was published as a three-volume set in 1857 in London by J. Murray, followed by a second edition in 1863, in London and Boston, USA. This was followed by \"A Concise Dictionary of the Bible\" (1865), intended for the general reader and students, and \"A Smaller Dictionary of the Bible\" (1866), for use in schools. \"A Comprehensive Dictionary of the Bible\" (1868), was published simultaneously in London and New York, and a four-volume \"Dictionary of the Bible\" (1871), was published in Boston, amongst other things incorporating the appendices of the first edition into the main body of the text.\nIn the UK, a corresponding second edition of the first volume in two parts, edited by Smith and J. M. Fuller, was published in 1893.\nThe original publications are now in the public domain; some derivative, commercial versions are still in copyright.\nNoted contributors to the dictionary include Harold Browne, bishop of Ely; Charles J. Ellicott, bishop of Gloucester and Bristol; and the Cambridge scholars J. B. Lightfoot, William W. Selwyn, and Brooke Foss Westcott, who would later become bishop of Durham.\nOne of the American contributors was George Edward Post, a medical doctor and botanist (of the American University of Beirut (AUB)).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71464", "revid": "1317723039", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71464", "title": "Geoffrey Plantagenet, Count of Anjou", "text": "Count of Anjou (1129\u20131151), Duke of Normandy (1144\u20131151)\nGeoffrey V (24 August 1113 \u2013 7 September 1151), called the Fair (), Plantagenet, and of Anjou, was the count of Anjou and Maine by inheritance from 1129, and also duke of Normandy by his marriage claim and conquest, from 1144. \nGeoffrey married Empress Matilda, daughter of Henry\u00a0I, king of England and duke of Normandy. Geoffrey and Matilda's marriage led, through their son Henry\u00a0II, to the 300-year long reign of the Plantagenet dynasty in England. Although it was never his family name or last name, \"Plantagenet\" was taken for the dynasty from Geoffrey's epithet, long after his death. Geoffrey's ancestral domain of Anjou in north central France gives rise to the name Angevin, and what modern historians name as the Angevin Empire in the 12th century.\nEarly life.\nGeoffrey was the elder son of Fulk V of Anjou and Ermengarde of Maine. The chronicler John of Marmoutier described Geoffrey as handsome, red haired, jovial, and a great warrior. King Henry I of England, having heard reports on Geoffrey's talents and prowess, sent legates to Anjou to negotiate a marriage between his 25-year-old daughter Matilda and Geoffrey. Consent was obtained from both parties, and on 10 June 1128 King Henry, who was also the duke of Normandy, knighted the 15-year-old Geoffrey in preparation for the wedding. Geoffrey of Anjou perhaps received the nickname (much later used for the royal dynasty that resulted from this marriage) from the yellow sprig of broom blossom ( is the French name for the , or broom shrub) he wore in his hat.\nMarriage.\nGeoffrey and Matilda's marriage took place in 1128. The marriage was meant to seal a lasting peace between England, Normandy and Anjou. She was eleven years older than Geoffrey and very proud of her status as dowager empress (as opposed to being a mere countess), which she kept for the remainder of her life. Their relationship was a stormy but happy one with frequent long separations. Matilda returned to her father's court after only a few months. Upon intervention from King Henry I, Matilda returned to Geoffrey, and Matilda became pregnant with their first son, the future King Henry II, not long after. They had three sons Henry, Geoffrey and William.\nCount of Anjou.\nThe year after the marriage, Geoffrey's father, Fulk, left on crusade for Jerusalem (where he was to later become king), leaving Geoffrey behind as count of Anjou.\nWhen his father in law, King Henry I of England, died in 1135, Geoffrey supported Matilda in entering Normandy to claim her inheritance. The border districts submitted to her, but in England her first cousin Stephen of Blois had been crowned king, supported by a number of barons after claims that Henry I had changed his mind on his deathbed in regard to his heir. Barons in Normandy soon followed suit, or were in a large majority the same barons as in England. There were a number that supported Matilda, her claim to the throne, and the two vows that they had taken at the request of Henry, for her to be his heir. The following year, Geoffrey gave Ambrieres, Gorron, and Chatilon-sur-Colmont to Juhel de Mayenne, on condition that he help obtain the inheritance of Geoffrey's wife.\nIn 1139, Matilda landed in England with 140 knights, where she was besieged at Arundel Castle by King Stephen. In the Anarchy which ensued, Stephen was captured at Lincoln in February 1141, and imprisoned at Bristol. A legatine council of the English church held at Winchester in April 1141 declared Stephen deposed and proclaimed Matilda \"Lady of the English\".\nDuring 1142 and 1143, Geoffrey secured all of Normandy west and south of the Seine, and, on 14 January 1144, he crossed the Seine and entered Rouen. He assumed the title of Duke of Normandy in the summer of 1144. In 1144, he founded an Augustine priory at Ch\u00e2teau-l'Hermitage in Anjou. Geoffrey held the duchy until 1149, when he and Matilda conjointly ceded it to their son, Henry, which cession was formally ratified by King Louis VII of France the following year.\nGeoffrey also put down three baronial rebellions in Anjou, in 1129, 1135 and 1145\u20131151. He was often at odds with his younger brother, Elias, whom he had imprisoned (until Elias died in 1151). The threat of rebellion slowed his progress in Normandy, and is one reason he could never assist in England. Geoffrey died later the same year, aged 38, and Henry took his father's place as head of the ducal house. In 1153, the Treaty of Wallingford stipulated that Stephen should remain King of England for life and that Henry, the son of Geoffrey and Matilda should succeed him, beginning the Plantagenet era in English history.\nDeath.\nGeoffrey died suddenly on 7 September 1151. According to John of Marmoutier, Geoffrey was returning from a royal council when he was stricken with fever. He arrived at Ch\u00e2teau-du-Loir, collapsed on a couch, made bequests of gifts and charities, and died. His wife and sons outlived him. He was buried at St Julien's Cathedral in Le Mans, France, and his son Henry succeeded him to by then a substantial part of France.\nChildren.\nGeoffrey and Matilda's children were:\nGeoffrey also had illegitimate children by an unknown mistress (or mistresses):\nEarly heraldry.\nAn enamel effigy (funerary plaque) commissioned by his widow to decorate the tomb of Geoffrey of Anjou is one of the earliest examples of European heraldry. Jean de Marmentier, a late-12th-century chronicler, reported that in 1128 Henry I of England knighted his son-in-law Geoffrey and granted him a badge of gold lions. A gold lion may already have been Henry's own badge, and different lion motifs would later be used by many of his descendants. The enamel shows Geoffrey with a blue shield depicting gold lions, apparently the same motif later used by a grandson of Geoffrey, William Longespee. In addition to being one of the first authentic representations of a coat of arms, according to British historian Jim Bradbury it \"suggests possible evidence for the early use of what became the English royal arms\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71466", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71466", "title": "Cubic meter per mole", "text": ""}
{"id": "71468", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71468", "title": "Joule per mole", "text": "SI derived unit of molar energy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe joule per mole (symbol: J\u00b7mol\u22121 or J/mol) is the unit of molar energy, which is the ratio of energy to amount of substance in the International System of Units (SI).\nThe energy concerned may be thermodynamic energy, enthalpy, etc. For example, the Gibbs free energy of a compound in the area of thermochemistry is often quantified with the unit kilojoule per mole (symbol: kJ\u00b7mol\u22121 or kJ/mol). \nPhysical quantities measured in J\u00b7mol\u22121 usually describe quantities of energy transferred during phase transitions or chemical reactions. Division by the number of moles facilitates comparison between processes involving different quantities of material and between similar processes involving different types of materials. The precise meaning of such a quantity is dependent on the context (what substances are involved, circumstances, etc.), but the unit of measurement is used specifically to describe certain existing phenomena, such as in thermodynamics it is the unit of measurement that describes molar energy. \nSince there are particles (atoms, molecules, ions etc.) per mole, 1 joule per mole is equal to 1 joule multiplied by particles. Because of the typical order of magnitude for energy changes in chemical processes, kJ\u00b7mol\u22121 is normally used instead of J\u00b7mol\u22121. For example, heats of fusion and vaporization are usually of the order of 10\u00a0kJ\u00b7mol\u22121, bond energies are of the order of 100\u00a0kJ\u00b7mol\u22121, and ionization energies of the order of 1000\u00a0kJ\u00b7mol\u22121. For this reason, it is common within the field of chemistry to quantify the enthalpy of reaction with the unit kJ\u00b7mol\u22121.\nOther units sometimes used to describe reaction energetics are the kilocalorie per mole (kcal\u00b7mol\u22121), electronvolt per particle (eV), and wavenumbers in inverse centimeters (cm\u22121). 1\u00a0kJ\u00b7mol\u22121 is approximately equal to per particle, 0.239\u00a0kcal\u00b7mol\u22121, or 83.6\u00a0cm\u22121. At room temperature (25\u00a0\u00b0C, or 298.15\u00a0K) 1\u00a0kJ\u00b7mol\u22121 is approximately equal to 2.479\u00a0\"k\"B\"T\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71469", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71469", "title": "Barn (unit)", "text": "Unit for cross sectional area used in high-energy physics\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA barn (symbol: b) is a non-SI metric unit of area equal to (100\u00a0fm2). This is equivalent to a square that is (10\u00a0fm) each side, or a circle of diameter approximately (11.28\u00a0fm). \nOriginally used in nuclear physics for expressing the cross sectional area of nuclei and nuclear reactions, today it is also used in all fields of high-energy physics to express the cross sections of any scattering process, and is best understood as a measure of the probability of interaction between small particles. A barn is approximately the cross-sectional area of a uranium nucleus. The barn is also the unit of area used in nuclear quadrupole resonance and nuclear magnetic resonance to quantify the interaction of a nucleus with an electric field gradient. While the barn never was an SI unit, the SI standards body acknowledged it in the 8th SI Brochure (superseded in 2019) due to its use in particle physics.\nEtymology.\nDuring Manhattan Project research on the atomic bomb during World War II, American physicists Marshall Holloway and Charles P. Baker were working at Purdue University on a project using a particle accelerator to measure the cross sections of certain nuclear reactions. According to an account of theirs from a couple years later, they were dining in a cafeteria in December 1942 and discussing their work. They \"lamented\" that there was no name for the unit of cross section and challenged themselves to develop one. They initially tried eponyms, names of \"some great men closely associated with the field\" that they could name the unit after, but struggled to find one that was appropriate. They considered \"Oppenheimer\" too long (in retrospect, they considered an \"Oppy\" to perhaps have been allowable), and considered \"Bethe\" to be too easily confused with the commonly used Greek letter beta. They then considered naming it after John Manley, another scientist associated with their work, but considered \"Manley\" too long and \"John\" too closely associated with toilets. But this latter association, combined with the \"rural background\" of one of the scientists, suggested to them the term \"barn\", which also worked because the unit was \"really as big as a barn\". According to the authors, the first published use of the term was in a (secret) Los Alamos report from late June 1943, on which the two originators were co-authors.\nSI prefixes.\nThe unit symbol for the barn (b) is also the IEEE standard symbol for bit, and both are commonly used with SI prefixes, which may give rise to ambiguity.\nConversions.\nCalculated cross sections may be given in terms of inverse squared gigaelectronvolts (GeV\u22122), via the conversion \"\u0127\"2\"c\"2/GeV2 = = .\nIn natural units (where \"\u0127\" = \"c\" = 1), this simplifies to GeV\u22122 = = .\nWith prefix.\nIn the SI, one can use a unit such as the square femtometer (fm2). The most common prefixed form of the barn is the femtobarn, which is equal to a tenth of a square zeptometer. Many scientific papers discussing high-energy physics mention quantities of that are a fraction of a femtobarn.\nInverse femtobarn.\nThe inverse femtobarn (fb\u22121) is the unit typically used to measure the number of particle collision events per femtobarn of target cross-section, and is the conventional unit for time-integrated luminosity. Thus, if a detector has accumulated of integrated luminosity, one expects to find 100 events per femtobarn of cross-section within these data.\nConsider a particle accelerator where two streams of particles, with cross-sectional areas measured in femtobarns, are directed to collide over a period of time. The total number of collisions will be directly proportional to the luminosity of the collisions measured over this time. Therefore, the collision count can be calculated by multiplying the integrated luminosity by the sum of the cross-section for those collision processes. This count is then expressed as inverse femtobarns for the time period (e.g., 100\u00a0fb\u22121 in nine months). Inverse femtobarns are often quoted as an indication of particle collider productivity.\nFermilab produced in the first decade of the 21st century. Fermilab's Tevatron took about 4 years to reach in 2005, while two of CERN's LHC experiments, ATLAS and CMS, reached over of proton\u2013proton data in 2011 alone. In April 2012, the LHC achieved the collision energy of with a luminosity peak of 6760 inverse microbarns per second; by May 2012, the LHC delivered 1 inverse femtobarn of data per week to each detector collaboration. A record of over 23\u00a0fb\u22121 was achieved during 2012. As of November 2016, the LHC had achieved over that year, significantly exceeding the stated goal of . In total, the second run of the LHC has delivered around to both ATLAS and CMS in 2015\u20132018.\nUsage example.\nAs a simplified example, if a beamline runs for 8 hours (28\u00a0800 seconds) at an instantaneous luminosity of \u00a0\n , then it will gather data totaling an integrated luminosity of \u00a0= \u00a0= during this period. If this is multiplied by the cross-section, then a dimensionless number is obtained equal to the number of expected scattering events.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71470", "revid": "49391468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71470", "title": "Two-up", "text": "Traditional Australian gambling game\nTwo-up is a traditional Australian gambling game, involving a designated \"spinner\" throwing two coins, usually Australian pennies, into the air. Players bet on whether the coins will both fall with heads (obverse) up, both with tails (reverse) up, or one of each (known as \"odds\"). The game is traditionally played in pubs and clubs throughout Australia on Anzac Day, in part to mark a shared experience with diggers (soldiers).\nThe game is traditionally played with pennies, because their weight, size, and surface design make them ideal for the game. Weight and size make them stable on the \"kip\" and easy to spin in the air. Decimal coins are generally considered to be too small and light and do not fly as well. The design of pre-1939 pennies had the sovereign's head on the obverse (front) and the reverse was totally covered in writing, making the result very easy and quick to see. However, pennies used in the game are usually now marked with a white cross on the tails side. Pennies being used at games on Anzac Day are brought out specifically for that purpose each year.\nHistory.\nThe exact origins of two-up are obscure, but it seems to have evolved from cross and pile, a gambling game involving tossing a single coin into the air and wagering on the result. Two-up was popular amongst poorer English and Irish citizens in the 18th century. \nThe predilection of the convicts for this game was noted as early as 1798 by New South Wales's first judge advocate, as well as the lack of skill involved and the large losses. By the 1850s, the two-coin form was being played on the goldfields of the eastern colonies, and it spread across the country following subsequent gold rushes.\nTwo-up was played extensively by Australia's soldiers during World War I. Gambling games, to which a blind eye was cast, became a regular part of Anzac Day celebrations for returned soldiers, although two-up was illegal at all other times.\nAs time passed, increasingly elaborate illegal \"two-up schools\" grew around Australia, to the consternation of authorities but with the backing of corrupt police. The legendary Thommo's Two-up School, which operated at various locations in Surry Hills, Sydney, from the early years of the 20th century until at least 1979, was one of Australia's first major illegal gambling operations.\nThe popularity of two-up declined after the 1950s as more sophisticated forms of gambling like baccarat gained popularity in illegal gaming houses as well as when poker machines (slot machines) were legalised in clubs.\nLegal two-up arrived with its introduction as a table game at the new casino in Hobart in 1973, but is now only offered at Crown Perth and Crown Melbourne. Two-up has also been legalised on https://, when it is played in Returned Servicemen's League (RSL) clubs and hotels. Several tourist \"two-up schools\" in the Outback have also been legalised. Under the NSW Gambling (Two-Up) Act 1998, playing two-up in NSW is not unlawful on Anzac Day.\nThe table below show the current bets that can be made at Crown Perth.\nGameplay.\nThe Ringie selects a player as the spinner (generally greeted to loud calls of \"Come in, Spinner!\" from the rest of the players). The spinner tosses the coins in the air using the kip until they win (and continue spinning), lose (and the kip is offered to the next player around the ring), or toss the kip (take their winning wagers and retire).\nThe basic format of the game:\nThe spinner is required to place a bet (usually on heads) before their first throw which must be covered (equaled) by another player. If the spinner wins they keep the bet and cover, minus a commission which the boxer takes out of this bet. If the spinner loses, the entire bet goes to the player who covered the bet. This makes throwing the coins a slight losing proposition compared to a side bet, however this is balanced by the interest of throwing the coins and the chance of adding a personal \"lucky\" touch to the spin. The disadvantage (cost of running the game) is shared about the School by the Kip being passed about the Ring during subsequent spins.\nAs a betting round and subsequent spin takes about a minute, and is resolved win/loss on average every three spins, then the Boxer's commission on wins is paid on average ten times per hour. i.e. If the Spinners' average wager is $20, covered by $20, and the commission is 10% then the Boxer will take $40 an hour in commission. The taking of commission has been made illegal for unlicensed games in most states, even when play is permitted (e.g. Anzac Day).\nThe other members of the school place side bets (bets against each other) on whether the coins will Head or Tail. These bets are offered by shouting the amount and preference (i.e. \"Fifty dollars head!) perhaps while tapping the money on their head, until another player who wishes to bet on the opposite coin approaches them to cover the bet. The combined amount of the bet is traditionally held by the tail-better until the bet resolves (i.e. Heads is thrown, and the combined bet is handed over to the head-better, or Tails is thrown and the combined bet is pocketed by the tail-better.) This usually results in the heavier/wealthier betters taking the \"tails\" bet, allowing them to cover a number of \"heads\" bets on each throw.\nVariations.\nSome variations include:\nPopular culture.\nThe protagonist of C. J. Dennis' 1915 verse novel \"The Songs of a Sentimental Bloke\" suffers from an addiction to playing two-up.\nIn the 1921 Australian silent film \"A Girl of the Bush\", directed by Franklyn Barrett, a school for two-up is shown in detail, including the way bets are placed and how the coins are tossed from the kip as the boxer squares up the play area and one of the players calls out \"fair go\"; the scene ends with a police raid. \nIn the 1940 film \"Forty Thousand Horsemen\", the three leads, played by Grant Taylor, Chips Rafferty, and Pat Twohill, are introduced to us playing two-up in a market place.\nThe 1951 novel \"Come In Spinner\" by Dymphna Cusack and Florence James takes its name from the call. \nIn the 1960 film \"Hell Is a City\" set in Manchester, England, there is a scene in which robbers use stolen money to join in a gang of local men gathered on a hill behind the town to gamble \"the toss\". A thrower balances two pennies on two outstretched fingers and then tosses them high in the air to see how they land. The thrower wins with double heads and loses with double tails. Other men in the crowd cover his bets (bet against him), with a \"boxer\" handling the money and keeping track of the bets. Lookout men with binoculars and whistles sat by upper windows of nearby buildings to warn of police arriving.\nThe 1960 film \"The Sundowners\" contains a sequence in which a group of Australian drovers, including Robert Mitchum's character, play a game of two-up, with appropriate bets. One of the players calls out \"fair go\", which translates roughly as \"play fair\". Appropriately, the action in the game on-screen is rapid and without hesitations or false starts. \nThe 1971 film \"Wake in Fright\" contains scenes where the main protagonist, a schoolteacher named John Grant, staying in a semi fictional mining town based on Broken Hill for one night, initially makes significant winnings in a game of two-up, before subsequently losing everything again.\nIn 1978, the Australian group Little River Band released their fourth album \"Sleeper Catcher\", which featured the band and others on the cover playing the game. In the liner notes it says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sometimes called \"Australia's National Game\", two-up is a form of gambling which, though illegal, has long been a favourite pastime. The \"Sleeper Catcher\", an accepted participant in the game, retrieves bets left on the floor by tardy backers.\nThere is a sequence in the 1987 film \"The Shiralee\" starring Bryan Brown which makes reference to the game.\nThe Australian rock group AC/DC has a song called \"Two's Up\" on their 1988 \"Blow Up Your Video\" album that references the game.\nDuring the broadcast recording of the 'Tin Symphony' segment of the opening ceremony of the 2000 Olympic Games there are two scenes of settlers playing two-up outside a tin home.\nThe Australian-themed 2002 video game \"Ty the Tasmanian Tiger\" features a tutorial area named \"Two-Up\".\nOn 17 November 2004, the Premier of New South Wales remarked in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of the charities most involved in problem gambling, the Wesley Community Legal Service, a body dealing with problem gamblers, has confirmed it has never encountered a problem gambler addicted to two-up. That is an interesting bit of trivia for everyone to take home with them.\u2014\u200a\nIn 2009, the television program \"\" shows men taking part in games of two-up. In one instance the police enter the establishment in which this is taking place and the contestants run and hide the equipment being used and money being gambled.\nIn 2014, the television program \"Peaky Blinders\" depicts a game of two-up, with a car and a horse used for betting.\nOn 20 February 2015, a game of two-up featured in \"The Doctor Blake Mysteries\", series 3, episode 2, titled \"My Brother's Keeper\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71471", "revid": "2044340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71471", "title": "Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l", "text": "Eddic poem\nSk\u00edrnism\u00e1l (Old Norse: 'The Lay of Sk\u00edrnir', but in the Codex Regius known as \"F\u01ebr Sk\u00edrnis\" \u2018Sk\u00edrnir\u2019s journey\u2019) is one of the poems of the \"Poetic Edda\". It is preserved in the 13th-century manuscripts Codex Regius and AM 748 I 4to but may have been originally composed in the early 10th century. Many scholars believe that the poem was acted out, perhaps in a sort of \"hi\u00e9ros gamos\".\nSynopsis.\nThe prose prologue to the poem says that the god Freyr, the son of Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r, sits in Odin's throne, Hli\u00f0skj\u00e1lf and looked over all the worlds. On looking to J\u00f6tunheimr, the land of the giants, Freyr sees a beautiful girl, Ger\u00f0r, and is immediately seized by desire. Fearing that the object of his heart's desire is unattainable, gloom settles upon him.\nThe poem itself starts with the wife of Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r, Ska\u00f0i, bidding Sk\u00edrnir to ask Freyr why he is so sad. Freyr's response is sullen, yet he does confess his feelings and asks Sk\u00edrnir to undertake a journey to woo Ger\u00f0r on Freyr's behalf. Sk\u00edrnir agrees, and Freyr furnishes him with his magical steed and sword.\nSk\u00edrnir makes his way to J\u00f6tunheimr, and eventually arrives at the hall of the giant Gymir. Ger\u00f0r, the daughter of Gymir, greets him; Sk\u00edrnir immediately sets about trying to set up a sexual rendezvous between Ger\u00f0r and Freyr. He tries bribing her first with gifts, but when these are refused, he is quick to turn to coercion, with threats of violence and curses. Ger\u00f0r has no choice but to submit to Sk\u00edrnir's wishes and agree to the rendezvous with Freyr.\nSeest thou, maiden, this keen, bright sword\nThat I hold here in my hand?\nBefore its blade the old giant bends,\u2014\nThy father is doomed to die.\nI strike thee, maid, with my gambantein,\nTo tame thee to work my will;\nThere shalt thou go where never again\nThe sons of men shall see thee.\nIn Snorri Sturluson's version of the tale, Sk\u00edrnir successfully woos Ger\u00f0r without threatening to curse her.\nSk\u00edrnir returns to Asgard and reports to Freyr, who asks him:\nTell me, Sk\u00edrnir, before unsaddling\nOr stepping forth another pace\nIs the news you bring from Jotunheim\nFor better or for worse?\n\"Sk\u00edrnir replies:\"\nIn the woods of Barri, which know we both so well,\nA quiet still and tranquil place\nIn nine nights time to Nj\u00f6rd's son\nWill Gerd give herself.\n\"Freyr responds:\"\nOne night is long enough, yet longer still are two;\nHow then shall I contend with three?\nFor months have passed more quickly\nThan half a bridal eve.\nCurses.\nThere is material evidence that http://\n published a thirteenth-century text which contains a curse that is notably similar to the curse Sk\u00edrnir's threatened Ger\u00f0r with. Liest\u00f8l asserts that the runic inscription is a genuine spell, and was intended to work on a real woman.\nCarolyne Larrington outlines the different elements of the curse Ger\u00f0r is threatened with:\nCultural references.\nSk\u00edrnir's curse has partial parallels in a number of Old Norse texts, including the curse known as \"Buslub\u00e6n\" in \"B\u00f3sa saga\" and the Bergen rune-charm.\nThe Misty Mountains of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Hobbit\" are likely to have been inspired by the \"\u00farig fi\u00f6ll\" in the \"Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l\". Tolkien was familiar with the \"Poetic Edda\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
