{"id": "59493", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59493", "title": "Fireworks", "text": "Low explosive pyrotechnic devices for entertainment\nFireworks are low explosive pyrotechnic devices used for aesthetic and entertainment purposes. They are most commonly used in fireworks displays (also called a fireworks show or pyrotechnics), combining a large number of devices in an outdoor setting. Such displays are the focal point of many cultural and religious celebrations, though mismanagement could lead to fireworks accidents.\nFireworks take many forms to produce four primary effects: noise, light, smoke, and floating materials (confetti most notably). They may be designed to burn with colored flames and sparks including red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple and silver. They are generally classified by where they perform, either 'ground' or 'aerial'. Aerial fireworks may have their own propulsion (skyrocket) or be shot into the air by a mortar (aerial shell).\nMost fireworks consist of a paper or pasteboard tube or casing filled with the combustible material, often pyrotechnic stars. A number of these tubes or cases may be combined so as to make when kindled, a great variety of sparkling shapes, often variously colored.\nA skyrocket is a common form of firework, although the first skyrockets were used in warfare. The aerial shell, however, is the backbone of today's commercial aerial display, and a smaller version for consumer use is known as the festival ball in the United States.\nFireworks were originally invented in China. China remains the largest manufacturer and exporter of fireworks in the world.\nHistory.\nThe earliest fireworks came from China during the Song dynasty (960\u20131279). Fireworks were used to accompany many festivities. In China, pyrotechnicians were respected for their knowledge of complex techniques in creating fireworks and mounting firework displays.\nDuring the Han dynasty (202 BC \u2013 220 AD), people threw bamboo stems into a fire to produce an explosion with a loud sound. In later times, gunpowder packed into small containers was used to mimic the sounds of burning bamboo. Exploding bamboo stems and gunpowder firecrackers were interchangeably known as \"baozhu\" (\u7206\u7af9) or \"baogan\" (\u7206\u7aff). During the Song dynasty, people manufactured the first firecrackers comprising tubes made from rolled sheets of paper containing gunpowder and a fuse. They also strung these firecrackers together into large clusters, known as \"bian\" (lit. \"whip\") or \"bianpao\" (lit. \"whip cannon\"), so the firecrackers could be set off one by one in close sequence. By the 12th and possibly the 11th century, the term \"baozhang\" (\u7206\u4ed7) was used to specifically refer to gunpowder firecrackers. The first usage of the term was in the \"Dreams of the Glories of the Eastern Capital\" (\u6771\u4eac\u5922\u83ef\u9304; about 1148) by Meng Yuanlao.\nDuring the Song dynasty, common folk could purchase fireworks such as firecrackers from market vendors. Grand displays of fireworks were also known to be held. In 1110, according to the \"Dreams of the Glories of the Eastern Capital\", a large fireworks display mounted by the military was held to entertain Emperor Huizong of Song (r. 1100\u20131125). The \"Qidong Yeyu\" (\u9f4a\u6771\u91ce\u8a9e; 1264) states that a rocket-propelled firework called a \"dilaoshu\" (\u5730\u8001\u9f20; lit. \"earth rat\") went off near the Empress Dowager Gong Sheng and startled her during a feast held in her honor by her son Emperor Lizong of Song (r. 1224\u20131264). This type of firework was one of the earliest examples of rocket propulsion. Around 1280, a Syrian named Hasan al-Rammah wrote of rockets, fireworks, and other incendiaries, using terms that suggested he derived his knowledge from Chinese sources, such as his references to fireworks as \"Chinese flowers\".\nColored fireworks were developed from earlier (possibly Han dynasty or soon thereafter) Chinese application of chemical substances to create colored smoke and fire. Such application appears in the \"Huolongjing\" (14th century) and \"Wubeizhi\" (preface of 1621, printed 1628), which describes recipes, several of which used low-nitrate gunpowder, to create military signal smokes with various colors. In the \"Wubei Huolongjing\" (\u6b66\u5099\u706b\u9f8d\u7d93; Ming, completed after 1628), two formulas appears for firework-like signals, the \"sanzhangju\" (\u4e09\u4e08\u83ca) and \"baizhanglian\" (\u767e\u4e08\u84ee), that produces silver sparkles in the smoke. In the \"Huoxil\u00fce\" (\u706b\u6232\u7565; 1753) by Zhao Xuemin (\u8d99\u5b78\u654f), there are several recipes with low-nitrate gunpowder and other chemical substances to tint flames and smoke. These included, for instance, arsenical sulphide for yellow, copper acetate (verdigris) for green, lead carbonate for lilac-white, and mercurous chloride (calomel) for white. The Chinese pyrotechnics were described by the French author Antoine Caillot (1818): \"It is certain that the variety of colours which the Chinese have the secret of giving to flame is the greatest mystery of their fireworks.\" Similarly, the English geographer Sir John Barrow (ca. 1797) wrote \"The diversity of colours indeed with which the Chinese have the secret of cloathing fire seems to be the chief merit of their pyrotechny.\"\nFireworks were produced in Europe by the 14th century, becoming popular by the 17th century. Lev Izmailov, ambassador of Peter the Great, once reported from China: \"They make such fireworks that no one in Europe has ever seen.\" In 1758, the Jesuit missionary Pierre Nicolas le Ch\u00e9ron d'Incarville, living in Beijing, wrote about the methods and composition of Chinese fireworks to the Paris Academy of Sciences, which published the account five years later. Am\u00e9d\u00e9e-Fran\u00e7ois Fr\u00e9zier published his revised work \"Trait\u00e9 des feux d'artice pour le spectacle\" (Treatise on Fireworks) in 1747 (originally 1706), covering the recreational and ceremonial uses of fireworks, rather than their military uses. \"Music for the Royal Fireworks\" was composed by George Frideric Handel in 1749 to celebrate the Peace treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, which had been declared the previous year.\n\"Prior to the nineteenth century and the advent of modern chemistry they [fireworks] must have been relatively dull and unexciting.\" Bertholet in 1786 discovered that oxidations with potassium chlorate resulted in a violet emission. Subsequent developments revealed that oxidations with the chlorates of barium, strontium, copper, and sodium result in intense emission of bright colors. The isolation of metallic magnesium and aluminium marked another breakthrough as these metals burn with an intense silvery light.\nPyrotechnic compounds.\nColors in fireworks are usually generated by pyrotechnic stars\u2014usually just called stars\u2014which produce intense light when ignited. Stars contain four basic types of ingredients.\nSome of the more common color-producing compounds are tabulated here. The color of a compound in a firework will be the same as its color in a flame test (shown at right). Not all compounds that produce a colored flame are appropriate for coloring fireworks, however. Ideal colorants will produce a pure, intense color when present in moderate concentration.\nThe color of sparks is limited to red/orange, yellow/gold and white/silver. This is explained by light emission from an incandescent solid particle in contrast to the element-specific emission from the vapor phase of a flame. Light emitted from a solid particle is defined by black-body radiation. Low boiling metals can form sparks with an intensively colored glowing shell surrounding the basic particle. This is caused by vapor phase combustion of the metal.\nThe brightest stars, often called Mag Stars, are fueled by aluminium. Magnesium is rarely used in the fireworks industry due to its lack of ability to form a protective oxide layer. Often an alloy of both metals called magnalium is used.\nMany of the chemicals used in the manufacture of fireworks are non-toxic, while many more have some degree of toxicity, can cause skin sensitivity, or exist in dust form and are thereby inhalation hazards. Still others are poisons if directly ingested or inhaled.\nCommon elements in pyrotechnics.\nThe following table lists the principal elements used in modern pyrotechnics. Some elements are used in their elemental form such as particles of titanium, aluminium, iron, zirconium, and magnesium. These elements burn in the presence of air (O2) or oxidants (perchlorate, chlorate). Most elements in pyrotechnics are in the form of salts.\nTypes.\nAerial fireworks.\nAerial shell.\nAn aerial fireworks shell is a shell that contains pyrotechnic compounds and is shot upwards by a mortar and explodes high in the sky. Aerial fireworks shells are typically used in public display.\nAirbomb\nCake.\nA cake is a cluster of individual tubes linked by fuse that fires a series of aerial effects. Tube diameters can range in size from , and a single cake can have more than 1,000 shots. The variety of effects within individual cakes is often such that they defy descriptive titles and are instead given cryptic names such as \"Bermuda Triangle\", \"Pyro Glyphics\", \"Waco Wakeup\", and \"Poisonous Spider\", to name a few. Others are simply quantities of shells fused together in single-shot tubes.\nMine.\nA mine (a.k.a. pot \u00e0 feu) is a firework that expels stars and/or other garnitures into the sky. Shot from a mortar like a shell, a mine consists of a canister with the lift charge on the bottom with the effects placed on top. Mines can project small reports, serpents, and small shells, as well as just stars. Although mines up to diameter appear on occasion, they are usually in diameter.\nRoman candle.\nA Roman candle is a long tube containing several large stars which fire at a regular interval. These are commonly arranged in fan shapes or crisscrossing shapes, at a closer proximity to the audience. Some larger Roman candles contain small shells (bombettes) rather than stars.\nA shell containing several large stars that travel a short distance before breaking apart into smaller stars, creating a crisscrossing grid-like effect. Strictly speaking, a crossette star should split into four pieces which fly off symmetrically, making a cross. Once limited to silver or gold effects, colored crossettes such as red, green, or white are now very common.\nA spherical break of colored stars, similar to a peony, but with stars that leave a visible trail of sparks.\nEssentially the same as a peony shell, but with fewer and larger stars. These stars travel a longer-than-usual distance from the shell break before burning out. For instance, if a peony shell is made with a star size designed for a shell, it is then considered a dahlia. Some dahlia shells are cylindrical rather than spherical to allow for larger stars.\nA type of chrysanthemum or peony, with a center cluster of non-moving stars, normally of a contrasting color or effect.\nInserts that propel themselves rapidly away from the shell burst, often resembling fish swimming away.\nNamed for the shape of its break, this shell features heavy long-burning tailed stars that only travel a short distance from the shell burst before free-falling to the ground. Also known as a waterfall shell. Sometimes there is a glittering through the \"waterfall\".\nKamuro is a Japanese word meaning \"boys haircut\", which is what this shell resembles when fully exploded in the air. It is a dense burst of glittering silver or gold stars which leave a heavy glitter trail and shine bright in the night's sky.\nA large shell containing several smaller shells of various sizes and types. The initial burst scatters the shells across the sky before they explode. Also called a bouquet shell. When a shell contains smaller shells of the same size and type, the effect is usually referred to as \"Thousands\". Very large bouquet shells (up to ) are frequently used in Japan.\nA shell containing a relatively few large comet stars arranged in such a way as to burst with large arms or tendrils, producing a palm tree-like effect. Proper palm shells feature a thick rising tail that displays as the shell ascends, thereby simulating the tree trunk to further enhance the \"palm tree\" effect. One might also see a burst of color inside the palm burst (given by a small insert shell) to simulate coconuts.\nA spherical break of colored stars that burn without a tail effect. The peony is the most commonly seen shell type.\nA shell with stars specially arranged so as to create a ring. Variations include smiley faces, hearts, and clovers.\nA shell intended to produce a loud report rather than a visual effect. Salute shells usually contain flash powder, producing a quick flash followed by a very loud report resembling military artillery. Titanium may be added to the flash powder mix to produce a cloud of bright sparks around the flash. Salutes are commonly used in large quantities during finales to create intense noise and brightness. They are often cylindrical in shape to allow for a larger payload of flash powder, but ball shapes are common and cheaper as well. Salutes are also called Maroons.\nA shell containing a fast burning tailed or charcoal star that is burst very hard so that the stars travel in a straight and flat trajectory before slightly falling and burning out. This appears in the sky as a series of radial lines much like the legs of a spider.\nAn effect created by large, slow-burning stars within a shell that leave a trail of large glittering sparks behind and make a sizzling noise. The \"time\" refers to the fact that these stars burn away gradually, as opposed to the standard brocade \"rain\" effect where a large amount of glitter material is released at once.\nA willow is similar to a chrysanthemum, but with long-burning silver or gold stars that produce a soft, dome-shaped weeping willow-like effect.\nFarfalle is an effect in Italian fireworks with spinning silver sprays in the air.\nA tourbillion is similar to a farfalle but has spinning stars.\nThe bang is the most common effect in fireworks and sounds like artillery cannon being fired; technically a \"report\". Silent fireworks have all of the visual effects, however. The \"salute\" effect is even more pronounced and sometimes is banned.\nThe firework produces a crackling sound.\nTiny tube fireworks that are ejected into the air spinning with such force that they shred their outer coating, in doing so they whizz and hum.\nHigh pitched often very loud screaming and screeching created by the resonance of gas. This is caused by a very fast strobing (on/off burning stage) of the fuel. The rapid bursts of gas from the fuel vibrate the air many hundreds of times per second causing the familiar whistling sound. It is not, as is commonly thought, made in the conventional way that musical instruments are using specific tube shapes or apertures. Common whistle fuels contain benzoate or salicylate compounds and a suitable oxidizer such as potassium perchlorate.\nSafety and environmental impact.\nImproper use of fireworks is dangerous, both to the person operating them (risks of burns and wounds) and to bystanders; in addition, they may start fires on landing. To prevent fireworks accidents, the use of fireworks is legally restricted in many countries. In such countries, display fireworks are restricted for use by professionals; smaller consumer versions may or may not be available to the public.\nEffects on animals.\nBirds and animals, both domestic and wild, can be frightened by their noise, leading to them running away, often into danger, or hurting themselves on fences or in other ways in an attempt to escape the perceived danger.\nMajority of dogs experience distress, fear and anxiety during fireworks. In 2016, following a petition signed by more than 100,000 Brits, House of Commons of the United Kingdom debated a motion to restrict firework use.\nFireworks also affect birds, especially larger birds like geese, eagles and others. According to a study by Max Planck Institute and Netherlands Institute of Ecology, many birds abruptly leave their sleeping sites on New Year's Eve, and some fly up to 500\u00a0km non-stop to get away from human settlements. On average, about 1000 times more birds are in flight on New Year's Eve than on other nights. Frightened birds also may abandon nests and not return to complete rearing their young. A scientific study from 2022 indicates that fireworks might have some sort of lasting effect on birds, with many birds spending more time to find food in the weeks after New Year's Eve fireworks.\nPollution.\nFireworks cause significant increases in local particulate matter pollution. In 2023, a team of researchers from NYU Langone Health assessed the effects of the Macy's 4th of July Fireworks on localized air and water pollution. The results of the study showed a sharp rise in airborne particulates, with peak real-time measurements of PM2.5 exceeding 1,000 \u03bcg/m3 at three sampling sites within 30 minutes after the conclusion of the fireworks display, which took several hours to return to pre-event levels. The study also found increased levels of heavy metals in the East River that lasted for one hour after the fireworks ended.\nThese air pollutants from fireworks raise concerns because of potential health risks associated with the products of combustion. For persons with asthma or other respiratory conditions, the smoke from fireworks may aggravate existing health problems.\nFireworks produce smoke and dust that contain residues of metal compounds, sulfur dioxide, and some low concentration toxic chemicals. These by-products of fireworks combustion will vary depending on the mix of ingredients of a particular firework. (The color green, for instance, may be produced by adding the various compounds and salts of barium, some of which are toxic, and some of which are not.) Some fishers have noticed and reported to environmental authorities that firework residues can hurt fish and other water-life because some may contain toxic compounds (such as antimony sulfide or arsenic). This is a subject of much debate due to the fact that large-scale pollution from other sources makes it difficult to measure the amount of pollution that comes specifically from fireworks. The possible toxicity of any fallout may also be affected by the amount of black powder used, type of oxidizer, colors produced and launch method.\nPerchlorate salts, when in solid form, dissolve and move rapidly in groundwater and surface water. Even in low concentrations in drinking water supplies, perchlorate ions are known to inhibit the uptake of iodine by the thyroid gland. As of 2010, there are no federal drinking water standards for perchlorates in the United States, but the\nUS Environmental Protection Agency has studied the impacts of perchlorates on the environment as well as drinking water. Several U.S. states have enacted drinking water standard for perchlorates. Some companies within the U.S. fireworks industry claim they are working with Chinese manufacturers to reduce and ultimately hope to eliminate of the pollutant perchlorate.\nPollution is also a concern because fireworks often contain heavy metals as source of color. However, gunpowder smoke and the solid residues are basic, and as such the cumulative effect of fireworks on acid rain is uncertain. What is not disputed is that most consumer fireworks leave behind a considerable amount of solid debris, including both readily biodegradable components as well as nondegradable plastic items. Concerns over pollution, consumer safety, and debris have restricted the sale and use of consumer fireworks in many countries.\nNoise.\nFireworks are a contributor to noise pollution. The sound of the explosions can cause distress in some individuals with post-traumatic stress disorder such as combat veterans, as well people with hyperacusis (sound sensitivity) such as children with autism. Proximity to fireworks can cause hearing damage including tinnitus. Hearing protection is recommended for fireworks viewers, particularly children, and pyrotechnicians.\nRegulations in the European Union limit fireworks for sale to the public to a maximum noise level of 120 dB.\nSome fireworks displays are designed to be quieter due to concerns that noise effects traumatize pets, wildlife, and some humans. These \"silent\" firework displays, typically intended for smaller events, exclude large, spectacular, noisy fireworks and make greater use of smaller, quieter devices.\nGovernment regulations.\nAustralia.\nFireworks are illegal in most Australian states and territories, unless part of a display by a licensed pyrotechnician and with a permit. However, Tasmania, ACT and Northern Territory allow consumer use with a permit (dependent on calendar date and circumstances). On 1 July for Territory Day one can freely use fireworks without a permit in the Northern Territory.\nSmall novelties such as party poppers and sparklers are legal for consumers across Australia.\nOn 24 August 2009, the ACT Government announced a complete ban on backyard fireworks.\nCanada.\nThe use, storage and sale of commercial-grade fireworks in Canada is licensed by Natural Resources Canada's Explosive Regulatory Division (ERD). Unlike their consumer counterpart, commercial-grade fireworks function differently, and come in a wide range of sizes from up to or more in diameter. Commercial grade fireworks require a Fireworks Operator Certificate (FOC), obtained from the ERD by completing a one-day safety course. There are two categories of FOC: one for pyrotechnics (those used on stage and in movies) and another for display fireworks (those used in dedicated fireworks shows). Each requires completion of its own course, although there are special categories of FOC which allow visiting operators to run their shows with the assistance of a Canadian supervisor.\nThe display fireworks FOC has two levels: assistant, and fully licensed. A fully licensed display fireworks operator can also be further endorsed for marine launch, flying saucers, and other more technically demanding fireworks displays.\nThe pyrotechnician FOC has three levels: pyrotechnician (which allows work under a supervisor), supervising pyrotechnician, and special effects pyrotechnician (which allows the fabrication of certain types of pyrotechnic devices). Additionally, a special effects pyrotechnician can be endorsed for the use of detonating cord.\nSince commercial-grade fireworks are shells which are loaded into separate mortars by hand, there is danger in every stage of the setup. Setup of these fireworks involves the placement and securing of mortars on wooden or wire racks; loading of the shells; and if electronically firing, wiring and testing. The mortars are generally made of FRE (fiber-reinforced epoxy) or HDPE (high-density polyethylene). Older mortars made of sheet steel have been banned by most countries due to the problem of shrapnel produced during a misfire.\nSetup of mortars in Canada for an oblong firing site require that a mortar be configured at an angle of 10 to 15\u00a0degrees down-range with a safety distance of at least down-range and surrounding the mortars, plus distance adjustments for wind speed and direction. In June 2007, the ERD approved circular firing sites for use with vertically fired mortars with a safety distance of at least radius, plus distance adjustments for wind speed and direction.\nLoading of shells is a delicate process, and must be done with caution, and a loader must ensure not only the mortar is clean, but also make sure that no part of their body is directly over the mortar in case of a premature fire. Wiring the shells is a painstaking process; whether the shells are being fired manually or electronically, any \"chain fusing\" or wiring of electrical ignitors, care must be taken to prevent the fuse (an electrical match, often incorrectly called a squib) from igniting. If the setup is wired electrically, the electrical matches are usually plugged into a \"firing rail\" or \"breakout box\" that runs back to the main firing board; from there, the Firing Board is simply hooked up to a car battery, and can proceed with firing the show when ready.\nSince commercial-grade fireworks are so much larger and more powerful, setup, and firing crews are always under great pressure to ensure they safely set up, fire, and clean up after a show.\nChile.\nIn Chile, the manufacture, importation, possession and use of fireworks is prohibited to unauthorized individuals; only certified firework companies can legally use fireworks. As they are considered a type of explosive, offenders can in principle be tried before military courts, although this is unusual in practice.\nEuropean Union.\nThe European Union's policy is aimed at harmonising and standardising the EU member states' policies on the regulation of production, transportation, sale, consumption and overall safety of fireworks across Europe.\nBelgium.\nIn Belgium, each municipality can decide how to regulate fireworks. During New Year's Eve, lighting fireworks without a licence is allowed in 35% of the 308 Flemish municipalities, in around 50% a permit from the burgemeester (mayor) is required, and around 14% of municipalities have banned consumer fireworks altogether.\nFinland.\nIn Finland those under 18 years old haven't been allowed to buy any fireworks since 2009. Safety goggles are required. The use of fireworks is generally allowed on the evening and night of New Year's Eve, 31 December. In some municipalities of Western Finland it is allowed to use fireworks without a fire station's permission on the last weekend of August. With the fire station's permission, fireworks can be used year-round.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, amateurs over 18 years old are allowed to buy and ignite fireworks of Category F2 for several hours on 31 December and 1 January; each German municipality is authorised to limit the number of hours this may last locally. The sale of Category F3 and F4 fireworks to consumers is prohibited. Lighting fireworks is forbidden near churches, hospitals, retirement homes and wooden or thatch-roofed buildings. All major German cities organise professional fireworks shows.\nIn addition to the previously existing regulations, there was a nationwide ban on the sale of category F2 fireworks to consumers on New Year's Eve 2020/2021 during the COVID-19 pandemic, with the aim to relieve the burden on hospitals by reducing the number of emergencies due to injuries caused by fireworks on New Year's Eve. On the 2024\u20132025 New Year's Eve and day, five were killed and 100+ were injured due to unusually intense widespread criminality and negligence.\nItaly.\nIn 2015, the Italian town of Collecchio mandated silent fireworks, being among the first to make the switch without losing the beauty of the visual displays.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, fireworks cannot be sold to anyone under the age of 16. It may only be sold during a period of three days before a new year. If one of these days is a Sunday, that day is excluded from sale and sale may commence one day earlier.\nRepublic of Ireland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland, fireworks are illegal; the maximum punishment for possessing fireworks without a licence, or lighting fireworks in a public place, is a \u20ac10,000 fine and a five-year prison sentence. However, around Halloween a large amount of fireworks are set off, due to the ease of being able to purchase from Northern Ireland.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, fireworks can only be purchased and used by people 18 or older. Firecrackers used to be banned, but are now allowed under European Union fireworks policy.\nIceland.\nIn Iceland, the Icelandic law states that anyone may purchase and use fireworks during a certain period around New Year's Eve. Most places that sell fireworks in Iceland make their own rules about age of buyers, usually it is around 16. The people of Reykjav\u00edk spend enormous sums of money on fireworks, most of which are fired as midnight approaches on 31 December. As a result, every New Year's Eve the city is lit up with fireworks displays.\nNew Zealand.\nFireworks in New Zealand are available from 2 to 5 November, around Guy Fawkes Day, and may be purchased only by those 18 years of age and older (up from 14 years pre-2007). Despite the restriction on when fireworks may be sold, there is no restriction regarding when fireworks may be used. The types of fireworks available to the public are multi-shot \"cakes\", Roman candles, single shot shooters, ground and wall spinners, fountains, cones, sparklers, and various novelties, such as smoke bombs and Pharaoh's serpents. Consumer fireworks are also not allowed to be louder than 90 decibels.\nNorway.\nIn Norway, fireworks can only be purchased and used by people 18 or older. Sale is restricted to a few days before New Year's Eve. Rockets are not allowed.\nUnited Kingdom.\nFireworks in the United Kingdom have become more strictly regulated since 1997. Since 2005, the law has been harmonised gradually, in accordance with other EU member state laws.\nFireworks are mostly used in England, Scotland and Wales around Diwali (late October or early November), on Guy Fawkes Night, 5 November and on New Year's Eve. In the UK, responsibility for the safety of firework displays is shared between the Health and Safety Executive, fire brigades and local authorities. Currently, there is no national system of licensing for fireworks operators, but in order to purchase large display fireworks, operators must have licensed explosives storage and public liability insurance.\nCategory 1 fireworks are restricted to persons aged 16 and over, while the age limit on both Category 2 and 3 fireworks is eighteen, and the sale and possession of Category 4 fireworks is restricted to licensed professionals only. Fireworks are not permitted to be set off between 11pm and 7am with exceptions only for:\nThe maximum legal NEC (net explosive content) of a UK firework available to the public is two kilograms. Jumping jacks, strings of firecrackers, shell firing tubes, bangers and mini-rockets were all banned during the late 1990s. In 2004, single-shot air bombs and bottle rockets were banned, and rocket sizes were limited. From March 2008 any firework with more than 5% flashpowder per tube has been classified 1.3G. The aim of these measures was to eliminate \"pocket money\" fireworks, and to limit the disruptive effects of loud bangs.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, fireworks laws vary widely from state to state or county to county. Federal, state, and local authorities govern the use of display fireworks in the United States. The Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) regulates consumer fireworks at the federal level through the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (FHSA). The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) sets forth a set of codes that give the minimum standards of display fireworks use and safety in the U.S. Both state and local jurisdictions can further add restrictions on the use and safety requirements of display fireworks. There are currently 46 states in the United States in which fireworks are legal for consumer use.\nFireworks celebrations.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, fireworks displays are frequently used in the celebration of public holidays, particularly New Year's Eve and Australia Day. The most famous is the Sydney New Year's Eve \"Midnight Fireworks\". In the Northern Territory, \"Cracker Night\" is celebrated every 1 July on Territory Day, where residents are allowed to buy and use fireworks without a permit.\nCanada.\nFireworks are a popular tradition during Halloween in Vancouver.\nCatalonia.\nFireworks are an essential element of popular festival in Catalonia, especially the patron saint day for each Catalan town or city, usually called Festa Major. Coet (rocket) is the generic term for all kinds of pyrotechnic devices. Professional aerial displays are less common than the use of ground based fireworks by members of ritual crews.\nThe Correfoc (firerun) is an element of many festivals, in which crews of diables (devils) dance through the streets to beating drums, holding maces above their heads upon which are mounted carretilles which spin, producing a shower of sparks culminating in an explosive pop. There are three types, les normals, les xiuladores, which emit a whistling sound, and les Arbo\u00e7, which produce a large umbrella of sparks. Those that emit sparks but do not spin are called francesos and a larger, more potent version are called portuguessos. Those that emit only light are simulators and those that serve to ignite all types of coets are called botafoc, only used by the cap de la colla, or crew chief, who decides when ignition occurs. In many cases, the devils light their carretilles simultaneously by holding all of their maces together and once ignited, begin dancing to the beat of pounding drums. The character of Llucifer carries a larger and more elaborate mace called a ceptrot which is said to \"dominate over all,\" pictured at right. \nPyrotechnics feature in several other Catalan festes:\nNit de San Joan (St. John's Night, June 14) townsfolk set off rockets from all over town and light bonfires.\nParliament de Diables (the infernal parliament) is a ritual performance by crews of devils in which characters such as Lucifer, the Diablessa (portrayed by a man in women's clothes), and other members of the crew declaim satiric verses commenting on current events, punctuated by pyrotechnic dances.\nLa Patum is celebrated in Berga on Corpus Christi, which has featured a ball de diables called Els Plens since 1628. In 2005, UNESCO declared La Patum one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.\nThe correfoc of the festa major of Vilanova i la Geltr\u00fa culminates in a sostre de foc (ceiling of fire) during which a mass of coets attached to wires are strung above the central plaza enabling the assembled multitude to be showered with sparks and explosions from the sky.\nFrance.\nIn France, fireworks are traditionally displayed on the eve of Bastille day (14 July) to commemorate the French revolution and the storming of the Bastille on that same day in 1789. Every city in France lights up the sky for the occasion with a special mention to Paris that offers a spectacle around the Eiffel Tower.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary fireworks are used on 20 August, which is a national celebration day \nIndia.\nIndians throughout the world celebrate with fireworks as part of their popular \"festival of lights\" (Diwali) in Oct-Nov every year.\nIreland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland there are many fireworks displays during Halloween.\nJapan.\nDuring the summer in Japan, are held nearly every day someplace in the country, numbering more than 200 during August alone. The festivals consist of large fireworks shows, the largest of which use between 100,000 and 120,000 rounds (Tondabayashi, Osaka), and can attract more than 800,000 spectators. Street vendors set up stalls to sell various drinks and staple Japanese food (such as yakisoba, okonomiyaki, takoyaki, kakig\u014dri (shaved ice), and traditionally held festival games, such as \"kingyo-sukui\", or goldfish scooping.\nEven today, men and women attend these events wearing the traditional yukata, summer kimono, or jinbei, and gather in large social circles of family or friends to sit picnic-like, eating and drinking, while watching the show.\nThe first fireworks festival in Japan was held in 1733 when Tokugawa Yoshimune, the eight shogun of the Edo Period, decreed a festival be held on the Sumida River on July 9 every year to mourn those who died in famine and other disasters. This event is recognized as the start of the Sumidagawa Fireworks Festival, and is one of the most recognizable fireworks festivals in Japan.\nMalta.\nWhen the islands were ruled by the Order of St John, fireworks were used on special occasions such as the election of a new Grand Master, the appointment of a new Pope or the birth of a prince.\nNowadays, fireworks are used in village feasts throughout the summer. The Malta International Fireworks Festival is also held annually.\nMonte-Carlo International Fireworks Festival.\nPyrotechnics experts from around the world have competed in Monte Carlo, Monaco, since 1966. The festival runs from July to August every year, and the winner returns in 18 November for the fireworks display on the night before the National Day of Monaco. The event is held in Port Hercule, beginning at around 9:30pm every night, depending on the sunset.\nSingapore.\nThe Singapore Fireworks Celebrations (previously the Singapore Fireworks Festival) is an annual event held in Singapore as part of its National Day, New Year's Day and Chinese New Year celebrations. The festival features local and foreign teams which launch displays on different nights. While currently non-competitive in nature, the organizer has plans to introduce a competitive element in the future.\nThe annual festival has grown in magnitude, from 4,000 rounds used in 2004, to 6,000 in 2005, to more than 9,100 in 2006.\nSouth Korea.\nBusan International Fireworks Festival is one of the most significant fireworks festivals in Asia.\nSwitzerland.\nIn Switzerland fireworks are often used on 1 August, which is a national celebration day.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOne of the biggest occasions for fireworks in the UK is Guy Fawkes Night held each year on 5 November, to celebrate the foiling of the Catholic Gunpowder Plot on 5 November 1605, an attempt to kill King James I. \"The Guardian\" newspaper said in 2008 that Britain's biggest Guy Fawkes night events were:\nThe main firework celebrations in the UK are by the public who buy from many suppliers.\nUnited States.\nAmerica's earliest settlers brought their enthusiasm for fireworks to the United States. Fireworks and black ash were used to celebrate important events long before the American Revolutionary War. The first celebration of Independence Day was in 1777, six years before Americans knew whether or not the new nation would survive the war; fireworks were a part of all festivities. In 1789, George Washington's inauguration was accompanied by a fireworks display. George Marshall was an American naval hero during the War of 1812 and other campaigns. He was a Master Gunner and pyrotechnics specialist who wrote \"https://\" in 1822. The book outlines chemical formulas for the composition of fireworks. This early fascination with fireworks' noise and color continues today with fireworks displays commonly included in Independence Day celebrations.\nIn 2004, Disneyland, in Anaheim, California, pioneered the commercial use of aerial fireworks launched with compressed air rather than gunpowder. The display shell explodes in the air using an electronic timer. The advantages of compressed air launch are a reduction in fumes, and much greater accuracy in height and timing. The Walt Disney Company is now the largest consumer of fireworks in the world.\nTwo firework displays on All Hallows' Eve in the United States are the \"Happy Hallowishes\" show at Walt Disney World's Magic Kingdom \"Mickey's Not-So-Scary Halloween Party\" event, which began in 2005, and the \"Halloween Screams\" at Disneyland Park, which began in 2009.\nUses other than public displays.\nIn addition to large public displays, people often buy small quantities of fireworks for their own celebrations. Fireworks on general sale are usually less powerful than professional fireworks. Types include firecrackers, rockets, cakes (multishot aerial fireworks), and smoke balls.\nFireworks can also be used in an agricultural capacity as to frighten away birds.\nFireworks have been used in destructive pranks, such as using them to destroy mailboxes.\nCulture.\nCompetitions.\nPyrotechnical competitions are held in many countries. Among them are the Montreal Fireworks Festival, an annual competition held in Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Le Festival d'Art Pyrotechnique, held in the summer annually at the Bay of Cannes in C\u00f4te d'Azur, France; and the Philippine International Pyromusical Competition, held in Manila, Philippines amongst the top fireworks companies in the world.\nClubs and organizations.\nEnthusiasts in the United States have formed clubs which unite hobbyists and professionals. The groups provide safety instruction and organize meetings and private shoots at remote premises where members shoot commercial fireworks as well as fire pieces of their own manufacture. Clubs secure permission to fire items otherwise banned by state or local ordinances. Competition among members and between clubs, demonstrating everything from single shells to elaborate displays choreographed to music, are held. One of the oldest clubs is Crackerjacks, Inc., organized in 1976 in the Eastern Seaboard region.\nThough based in the US, membership of the Pyrotechnics Guild International, Inc. (PGI) is annual convention founded in 1969, it hosts some the world's biggest fireworks displays occur. Aside from the nightly firework shows, one of the most popular events of the convention is a unique event where individual classes of hand-built fireworks are competitively judged, ranging from simple fireworks rockets to extremely large and complex aerial shells. Some of the biggest, most intricate fireworks displays in the United States take place during the convention week.\nFirework sales.\nAccording to industry data, the purchase of fireworks by American consumers has markedly increased since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the year preceding the pandemic, the consumer fireworks industry reported sales of approximately $1 billion. However, this figure almost doubled in 2020, reaching $2.3 billion. In contrast, commercial fireworks sales amounted to a smaller figure of $400 million. For context, consumer fireworks revenue was significantly lower at $645 million in 2012, indicating a steady growth trend in the market. Industry projections currently anticipate a further increase, forecasting fireworks sales to reach $3.3 billion by 2028.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59494", "revid": "45079649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59494", "title": "Firework", "text": ""}
{"id": "59495", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59495", "title": "Method acting", "text": "Training and rehearsal techniques\nMethod acting, known as the Method, is a group of rehearsal techniques that seek to encourage sincere and expressive performances through identifying with, understanding, and experiencing a character's inner motivation and emotions. Theatre practitioners built these techniques on Stanislavski's system, developed by the Russian and Soviet actor and director Konstantin Stanislavski and captured in his books \"An Actor Prepares\", \"Building a Character\", and \"Creating a Role\".\nThe approach was initially developed by three teachers who worked together at the Group Theatre in New York and later at the Actors Studio: Lee Strasberg, who emphasized the psychological aspects; Stella Adler, the sociological aspects; and Sanford Meisner, the behavioral aspects.\nHistory and development.\n\"The Method\" is an elaboration of the \"system\" of acting developed by the Russian theatre practitioner Konstantin Stanislavski (1863\u20131938). In the first three decades of the 20th century, Stanislavski organized his training, preparation, and rehearsal techniques into a coherent methodology. The \"method\" brought together and built on the director-centred unified aesthetic and disciplined ensemble approach of the Meiningen company; the actor-centred realism of the Maly Theatre; and the naturalistic staging of Andr\u00e9 Antoine and the independent theatre movement.\nThe \"system\" cultivates what Stanislavski calls the \"art of experiencing\", to which he contrasts the \"art of representation\". It mobilizes the actor's conscious thought and will to activate other, less-controllable psychological processes, such as emotional experience and subconscious behavior, sympathetically and indirectly. In rehearsal, the actor searches for inner motives to justify action and the definition of what the character seeks to achieve at any given moment (a \"task\").\nStanislavski later elaborated the \"system\" with a more physically grounded rehearsal process, the \"Method of Physical Action\". Minimizing at-the-table discussions, he began to encourage an \"active analysis\", in which the sequence of dramatic situations are improvised. \"The best analysis of a play\", Stanislavski argued, \"is to take action in the given circumstances.\"\nAnother important influence on the Method were the ideas and techniques of Yevgeny Vakhtongav, a Russian-Armenian student who died in 1922, aged 39. Vakhtangov's \"object exercises\" were developed by Uta Hagen to train actors and maintain their skills. Strasberg attributed to Vakhtangov the distinction between Stanislavski's process of \"justifying\" behavior with the inner motivational forces that prompt that behavior in the character and the \"motivating\" behavior with imagined or recalled experiences relating to the actor and substituted for those relating to the character. Following this distinction, actors ask themselves, \"What would motivate me, the actor, to behave in the way the character does?\" The contrast is the Stanislavskian question, \"Given the particular circumstances of the play, how would I behave, what would I do, how would I feel, how would I react?\"\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the transmission of the earliest phase of Stanislavski's work via the students of the First Studio of the Moscow Art Theatre (MAT) revolutionized acting in the West. When the MAT toured the US in the early 1920s, Richard Boleslawski, one of Stanislavski's students from the First Studio, presented a series of lectures on the \"system\" that were eventually published as \"Acting: The First Six Lessons\" (1933). The interest generated led to a decision by Boleslawski and Maria Ouspenskaya (another student at the First Studio who later became an acting teacher) to emigrate to the US and to establish the American Laboratory Theatre.\nHowever, the version of Stanislavski's practice these students took to the US with them was that developed in the 1910s, rather than the more fully elaborated version of the \"system\" detailed in Stanislavski's acting manuals from the 1930s, \"An Actor's Work\" and \"An Actor's Work on a Role\". The first half of \"An Actor's Work\", which treated the psychological elements of training, was published in a heavily abridged and misleadingly translated version in the US as \"An Actor Prepares\" in 1936. English-language readers often confused the first volume on psychological processes with the \"system\" as a whole. Many of the American practitioners who came to be identified with the Method were taught by Boleslawski and Ouspenskaya at the American Laboratory Theatre. The approaches to acting subsequently developed by their students\u2014including Lee Strasberg, Stella Adler, and Sanford Meisner\u2014are often confused with Stanislavski's \"system\".\nStella Adler, an actress and acting teacher whose students included Marlon Brando, Warren Beatty, and Robert De Niro, also broke with Strasberg after she studied with Stanislavski. Her version of the method is based on the idea that actors should stimulate emotional experience by imagining the scene's \"given circumstances\", rather than recalling experiences from their own lives. Adler's approach also seeks to stimulate the actor's imagination through the use of \"as ifs\", which substitute more personally affecting imagined situations for the circumstances experienced by the character.\nAlfred Hitchcock described his work with Montgomery Clift in \"I Confess\" as difficult \"because you know, he was a method actor\". He recalled similar problems with Paul Newman in \"Torn Curtain\". Lillian Gish quipped: \"It's ridiculous. How would you portray death if you had to experience it first?\" Charles Laughton, who worked closely for a time with Bertolt Brecht, argued that \"Method actors give you a photograph\", while \"real actors give you an oil painting.\"\nDuring the filming of \"Marathon Man\" (1976), Laurence Olivier, who had lost patience with Method acting two decades earlier while filming \"The Prince and the Showgirl\" (1957), was said to have quipped to Dustin Hoffman, after Hoffman stayed up all night to match his character's situation, that Hoffman should \"try acting\u00a0... It's so much easier.\" In an interview on \"Inside the Actors Studio\", Hoffman said that this story had been distorted: he had been up all night at a nightclub for personal rather than professional reasons and Olivier, who understood this, was joking.\nStrasberg's students included many prominent American actors of the latter half of the 20th century, including Paul Newman, Al Pacino, George Peppard, Dustin Hoffman, James Dean, Marilyn Monroe, Jane Fonda, Jack Nicholson, and Mickey Rourke.\nIndia.\nIn Indian cinema, a form of Method acting was developed independently from American cinema. Dilip Kumar, a Hindi cinema actor who debuted in the 1940s and eventually became one of the biggest Indian movie stars of the 1950s and 1960s, was a pioneer of this technique, predating Hollywood Method actors such as Marlon Brando. Kumar inspired many future Indian actors, including Amitabh Bachchan, Naseeruddin Shah, Nawazuddin Siddiqui, Irrfan Khan and many more. Kumar, who pioneered his own form of method acting without any acting school experience, was described as \"the ultimate method actor\" by filmmaker Satyajit Ray.\nIn the south, method acting was extensively practiced at first by Malayalam actor Sathyan and later by Tamil actor Sivaji Ganeshan and later by prominent actors like Mammootty, Mohanlal and Kamal Haasan.\nMethod acting is being discussed more in India with the rise of OTT streaming platforms that feature several popular web series exploring genres seldom featured in Indian cinema. The increasing viewership of these platforms has given space to the next generation of method actors in India, including Rajkumar Rao, Amit Sadh, Ali Fazal and Vicky Kaushal.\nHenry Irving's dual consciousness system.\nThe techniques used by the English actor Henry Irving, who died in 1905, are a precursor to the established ideas about method acting. These were described by Bram Stoker, author of \"Dracula\", in two chapters of his book \"Personal Reminiscences of Henry Irving\", published in 1907. Stoker had worked in close cooperation with Irving as the business manager of \u00a0the Lyceum Theatre in London, which Irving owned.\nIn the book, Stoker wrote in particular:Irving and I were alone together one hot afternoon in August 1889, crossing in the steamer from Southsea to the Isle of Wight, and were talking of that phase of Stage Art which deals with the conception and development of character. In the course of our conversation, whilst he was explaining to me the absolute necessity of an actor's understanding the prime qualities of a character in order that he may make it throughout consistent, he said these words: \"If you do not pass a character through your own mind it can never be sincere\". I was much struck with the phrase... Lest I should forget the exact words I wrote them then and there in my pocket-book. I entered them later in my diary. p. 244\nQuoting Irving: \"It is most important that an actor should learn that he is a figure in a picture, and that the least exaggeration destroys the harmony of the composition. All the members of the company should work toward a common end, with the nicest subordination of their individuality to the general purpose.\" p.252\nAnd quoting Irving again: \"Has not the actor who can... make his feelings a part of his art an advantage over the actor who never feels, but makes his observations solely from the feelings of others? It is necessary to this art that the mind should have, as it were, a double consciousness, in which all the emotions proper to the occasion may have full swing, while the actor is all the time on the alert for every detail of his method... The actor who combines the electric force of a strong personality with a mastery of the resources of his art, must have a greater power over his audiences than the passionless actor who gives a most artistic simulation of the emotions he never experiences.\" p.256\n\"For the purely monkey arts of life there is no future they stand only in the crude glare of the present, and there is no softness for them, in the twilight of either hope or memory. With the true artist the internal force is the first requisite the external appearance being merely the medium through which this is made known to others.\" p.257.\n\"If an actor has to learn of others often primarily through his own emotions, it is surely necessary that he learn first to know himself. He need not take himself as a standard of perfection though poor human nature is apt to lean that way; but he can accept himself as something that he knows. If he cannot get that far he will never know anything. With himself then, and his self-knowledge as a foothold, he may begin to understand others.\" p.258It has been suggested that Bram Stoker used Irving's techniques to help him capture authenticity of tone while writing \"Dracula\".\nTechniques.\nAmong the concepts and techniques of Method acting are substitution, \"as if\", sense memory, affective memory, and animal work (all of which were first developed by Stanislavski). Contemporary Method actors sometimes seek help from psychologists in the development of their roles.\nIn Strasberg's approach, actors make use of experiences from their own lives to bring them closer to the experience of their characters. This technique, which Stanislavski came to call emotion memory (Strasberg tends to use the alternative formulation, \"affective memory\"), involves the recall of sensations involved in experiences that made a significant emotional impact on the actor. Without faking or forcing, actors allow those sensations to stimulate a response and try not to inhibit themselves.\nStanislavski also took great interest in \"Perezhivanie\" (\"re-living,\" particularly emotional experiences) and how it could be utilized to create different characters. \"Perezhivanie\" was a term formerly used in psychology that became popularized when Stanislavski began using it as an acting approach. Stanislavski believed that actors needed to go beyond imitation and encouraged actors to explore their emotions heavily. He defended the idea that the actor needed to experience what the character was experiencing.\nStanislavski's approach rejected emotion memory except as a last resort and prioritized physical action as an indirect pathway to emotional expression. This can be seen in Stanislavki's notes for Leonidov in the production plan for \"Othello\" and in Benedetti's discussion of his training of actors at home and later abroad. Stanislavski confirmed this emphasis in his discussions with Harold Clurman in late 1935.\nIn training, as distinct from rehearsal process, the recall of sensations to provoke emotional experience and the development of a vividly imagined fictional experience remained a central part both of Stanislavski's and the various Method-based approaches that developed out of it.\nA widespread misconception about Method acting\u2014particularly in the popular media\u2014equates Method actors with actors who choose to remain in character even offstage or off-camera for the duration of a project. In his book \"A Dream of Passion\", Strasberg wrote that Stanislavski, early in his directing career, \"require[d] his actors to live 'in character' off stage\", but that \"the results were never fully satisfactory\". Stanislavski did experiment with this approach in his own acting before he became a professional actor and founded the Moscow Art Theatre, though he soon abandoned it. Some Method actors employ this technique, such as Daniel Day-Lewis, but Strasberg did not include it as part of his teachings and it \"is not part of the Method approach\".\nWhile Strasberg focused on the memory-recall aspect of the method, Adler's approach centered on the idea that actors should find truth in the script, inner emotions, experiences, and circumstances of the character. Her teachings have been carried on through Larry Moss, a successor and student of Adler. Moss is the author of the acting textbook \"The Intent to Live\", in which he maintains the basic training of Adler's techniques. The book introduces \"given circumstances\", which are the facts about the character given in the script, and \"interpretation\", which is the truths about the character not given in the script. This constitutes the actor's assumptions about the character they are playing.\nAccording to Moss, there are three things that an actor needs to know about their character to find truth in their performance. These things are objectives, obstacles, and intentions. The \"objective\" is what a character needs to fulfill in a given scene. The \"super objective\" is the character's wishes or dreams throughout the entire story. \"Obstacle\" is what stands in the way of the character's objectives. \"Intention\" comprises the actions a character takes to overcome obstacles and achieve objectives. Moss advocates the position that if an actor understands these facts about their character, they will be able to find truth in their performance, creating a realistic presentation. Moss emphasizes this by claiming that the actor does not want to become the character, rather, the character lives through the actor's justification of the character's truths within themselves.\nPsychological effects.\nMethod acting has been studied for the possible effects it has on the actor's physical and emotional well-being. Oftentimes, method actors delve into previous emotional experiences, be they joyful or traumatic. The psychological effects, like emotional fatigue, come when suppressed or unresolved raw emotions are dredged up to add to the character, not just from employing personal emotions in performance. On the other hand, it has been suggested that actors have stronger emotional regulation. This may be due to the actor's constant need to conjure up certain emotions and have control over them.\nFatigue, or emotional fatigue, comes mainly when actors \"create dissonance between their actions and their actual feelings\". A mode of acting referred to as \"surface acting\" involves only changing one's actions without altering the deeper thought processes. Method acting, when employed correctly, is mainly deep acting, or changing thoughts as well as actions, proven to generally avoid excessive fatigue. Surface acting is statistically \"positively associated with a negative mood and this explains some of the association of surface acting with increased emotional exhaustion\". This negative mood that is created leads to fear, anxiety, feelings of shame and sleep deprivation.\nRaw emotion (unresolved emotions conjured up for acting) may result in sleep deprivation and the cyclical nature of the ensuing side effects. Sleep deprivation alone can lead to impaired function, causing some individuals to have \"acute episodes of psychosis\". Sleep deprivation initiates chemical changes in the brain that can lead to behavior similar to psychotic individuals. These episodes can lead to more lasting psychological damage. In cases where raw emotion that has not been resolved, or traumas have been evoked before closure has been reached by the individual, the emotion can result in greater emotional instability and an increased sense of anxiety, fear or shame.\nHowever, method acting and acting as a whole can also pose a lot of benefits to the actor. Research has found that actors have a strong theory of mind (the capacity to understand other people by ascribing mental states to them), and that acting can improve one's skills in empathy (the capacity to understand other people's emotional states). It has been argued that children trained in the Method can better understand their own emotions and the emotions of others. Actors have also been found to have increased memory skills. A study found that when non-actors were taught the memorization techniques actors used, their memory increased significantly.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59496", "revid": "48734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59496", "title": "Carl Scheele", "text": ""}
{"id": "59497", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59497", "title": "Solubility", "text": "Capacity of a substance to dissolve in a homogeneous way\nIn chemistry, solubility is the ability of a substance, the solute, to form a solution with another substance, the solvent. Insolubility is the opposite property, the inability of the solute to form such a solution.\nThe extent of the solubility of a substance in a specific solvent is generally measured as the concentration of the solute in a saturated solution, one in which no more solute can be dissolved. At this point, the two substances are said to be at the solubility equilibrium. For some solutes and solvents, there may be no such limit, in which case the two substances are said to be \"miscible in all proportions\" (or just \"miscible\").\nThe solute can be a solid, a liquid, or a gas, while the solvent is usually solid or liquid. Both may be pure substances, or may themselves be solutions. Gases are always miscible in all proportions, except in very extreme situations, and a solid or liquid can be \"dissolved\" in a gas only by passing into the gaseous state first.\nThe solubility mainly depends on the composition of solute and solvent (including their pH and the presence of other dissolved substances) as well as on temperature and pressure. The dependency can often be explained in terms of interactions between the particles (atoms, molecules, or ions) of the two substances, and of thermodynamic concepts such as enthalpy and entropy.\nUnder certain conditions, the concentration of the solute can exceed its usual solubility limit. The result is a supersaturated solution, which is metastable and will rapidly exclude the excess solute if a suitable nucleation site appears.\nThe concept of solubility does not apply when there is an irreversible chemical reaction between the two substances, such as the reaction of calcium hydroxide with hydrochloric acid; even though one might say, informally, that one \"dissolved\" the other. The solubility is also not the same as the rate of solution, which is how fast a solid solute dissolves in a liquid solvent. This property depends on many other variables, such as the physical form of the two substances and the manner and intensity of mixing.\nThe concept and measure of solubility are extremely important in many sciences besides chemistry, such as geology, biology, physics, and oceanography, as well as in engineering, medicine, agriculture, and even in non-technical activities like painting, cleaning, cooking, and brewing. Most chemical reactions of scientific, industrial, or practical interest only happen after the reagents have been dissolved in a suitable solvent. Water is by far the most common such solvent.\nThe term \"soluble\" is sometimes used for materials that can form colloidal suspensions of very fine solid particles in a liquid. The quantitative solubility of such substances is generally not well-defined, however.\nQuantification of solubility.\nThe solubility of a specific solute in a specific solvent is generally expressed as the concentration of a saturated solution of the two. Any of the several ways of expressing concentration of solutions can be used, such as the mass, volume, or amount in moles of the solute for a specific mass, volume, or mole amount of the solvent or of the solution.\nPer quantity of solvent.\nIn particular, chemical handbooks often express the solubility as grams of solute per 100 millilitres of solvent (g/(100 mL), often written as g/100 ml), or as grams of solute per decilitre of solvent (g/dL); or, less commonly, as grams of solute per litre of solvent (g/L). The quantity of solvent can instead be expressed in mass, as grams of solute per 100 grams of solvent (g/(100 g), often written as g/100 g), or as grams of solute per kilogram of solvent (g/kg). The number may be expressed as a percentage in this case, and the abbreviation \"w/w\" may be used to indicate \"weight per weight\". (The values in g/L and g/kg are similar for water, but that may not be the case for other solvents.)\nAlternatively, the solubility of a solute can be expressed in moles instead of mass. For example, if the quantity of solvent is given in kilograms, the value is the molality of the solution (mol/kg).\nPer quantity of solution.\nThe solubility of a substance in a liquid may also be expressed as the quantity of solute per quantity of \"solution\", rather than of solvent. For example, following the common practice in titration, it may be expressed as moles of solute per litre of solution (mol/L), the molarity of the latter.\nIn more specialized contexts the solubility may be given by the mole fraction (moles of solute per total moles of solute plus solvent) or by the mass fraction at equilibrium (mass of solute per mass of solute plus solvent). Both are dimensionless numbers between 0 and 1 which may be expressed as percentages (%).\nLiquid and gaseous solutes.\nFor solutions of liquids or gases in liquids, the quantities of both substances may be given volume rather than mass or mole amount; such as litre of solute per litre of solvent, or litre of solute per litre of solution. The value may be given as a percentage, and the abbreviation \"v/v\" for \"volume per volume\" may be used to indicate this choice.\nConversion of solubility values.\nConversion between these various ways of measuring solubility may not be trivial, since it may require knowing the density of the solution \u2014 which is often not measured, and cannot be predicted. While the total mass is conserved by dissolution, the final volume may be different from both the volume of the solvent and the sum of the two volumes.\nMoreover, many solids (such as acids and salts) will dissociate in non-trivial ways when dissolved; conversely, the solvent may form coordination complexes with the molecules or ions of the solute. In those cases, the sum of the moles of molecules of solute and solvent is not really the total moles of independent particles solution. To sidestep that problem, the solubility per mole of solution is usually computed and quoted as if the solute does not dissociate or form complexes\u2014that is, by pretending that the mole amount of solution is the sum of the mole amounts of the two substances.\nQualifiers used to describe extent of solubility.\nThe extent of solubility ranges widely, from infinitely soluble (without limit, i.e. miscible) such as ethanol in water, to essentially insoluble, such as titanium dioxide in water. A number of other descriptive terms are also used to qualify the extent of solubility for a given application. For example, U.S. Pharmacopoeia gives the following terms, according to the mass \"m\"sv of solvent required to dissolve one unit of mass \"m\"su of solute: (The solubilities of the examples are approximate, for water at 20\u201325\u00a0\u00b0C.)\nThe thresholds to describe something as insoluble, or similar terms, may depend on the application. For example, one source states that substances are described as \"insoluble\" when their solubility is less than 0.1 g per 100 mL of solvent.\nMolecular view.\nSolubility occurs under dynamic equilibrium, which means that solubility results from the simultaneous and opposing processes of dissolution and phase joining (e.g. precipitation of solids). A stable state of the solubility equilibrium occurs when the rates of dissolution and re-joining are equal, meaning the relative amounts of dissolved and non-dissolved materials are equal. If the solvent is removed, all of the substance that had dissolved is recovered.\nThe term \"solubility\" is also used in some fields where the solute is altered by solvolysis. For example, many metals and their oxides are said to be \"soluble in hydrochloric acid\", although in fact the aqueous acid irreversibly degrades the solid to give soluble products. Most ionic solids dissociate when dissolved in polar solvents. In those cases where the solute is not recovered upon evaporation of the solvent, the process is referred to as solvolysis. The thermodynamic concept of solubility does not apply straightforwardly to solvolysis.\nWhen a solute dissolves, it may form several species in the solution. For example, an aqueous solution of cobalt(II) chloride can afford , each of which interconverts.\nFactors affecting solubility.\nSolubility is defined for specific phases. For example, the solubility of aragonite and calcite in water are expected to differ, even though they are both polymorphs of calcium carbonate and have the same chemical formula.\nThe solubility of one substance in another is determined by the balance of intermolecular forces between the solvent and solute, and the entropy change that accompanies the solvation. Factors such as temperature and pressure will alter this balance, thus changing the solubility.\nSolubility may also strongly depend on the presence of other species dissolved in the solvent, for example, complex-forming anions (ligands) in liquids. Solubility will also depend on the excess or deficiency of a common ion in the solution, a phenomenon known as the common-ion effect. To a lesser extent, solubility will depend on the ionic strength of solutions. The last two effects can be quantified using the equation for solubility equilibrium.\nFor a solid that dissolves in a redox reaction, solubility is expected to depend on the potential (within the range of potentials under which the solid remains the thermodynamically stable phase). For example, solubility of gold in high-temperature water is observed to be almost an order of magnitude higher (i.e. about ten times higher) when the redox potential is controlled using a highly oxidizing Fe3O4-Fe2O3 redox buffer than with a moderately oxidizing Ni-NiO buffer.\nSolubility (metastable, at concentrations approaching saturation) also depends on the physical size of the crystal or droplet of solute (or, strictly speaking, on the specific surface area or molar surface area of the solute). For quantification, see the equation in the article on solubility equilibrium. For highly defective crystals, solubility may increase with the increasing degree of disorder. Both of these effects occur because of the dependence of solubility constant on the Gibbs energy of the crystal. The last two effects, although often difficult to measure, are of practical importance. For example, they provide the driving force for precipitate aging (the crystal size spontaneously increasing with time).\nTemperature.\nThe solubility of a given solute in a given solvent is function of temperature. Depending on the change in enthalpy (\u0394\"H\") of the dissolution reaction, \"i.e.\", on the endothermic (\u0394\"H\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00) or exothermic (\u0394\"H\"\u00a0&lt;\u00a00) character of the dissolution reaction, the solubility of a given compound may increase or decrease with temperature. The van 't Hoff equation relates the change of solubility equilibrium constant (\"K\"sp) to temperature change and to reaction enthalpy change. \nThe chart shows solubility curves for some typical solid inorganic salts in liquid water (temperature is in degrees Celsius, i.e. kelvins minus 273.15). Many salts behave like barium nitrate and disodium hydrogen arsenate, and show a large increase in solubility with temperature (\u0394\"H\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00). Some solutes (e.g. sodium chloride in water) exhibit solubility that is fairly independent of temperature (\u0394\"H\"\u00a0\u2248\u00a00). A few, such as calcium sulfate (gypsum) and cerium(III) sulfate, become less soluble in water as temperature increases (\u0394\"H\"\u00a0&lt;\u00a00). This is also the case for calcium hydroxide (portlandite), whose solubility at 70\u00a0\u00b0C is about half of its value at 25\u00a0\u00b0C. The dissolution of calcium hydroxide in water is also an exothermic process (\u0394\"H\"\u00a0&lt;\u00a00). As dictated by the van 't Hoff equation and Le Chatelier's principle, low temperatures favor dissolution of Ca(OH)2. Portlandite solubility increases at low temperature. This temperature dependence is sometimes referred to as \"retrograde\" or \"inverse\" solubility. Occasionally, a more complex pattern is observed, as with sodium sulfate, where the less soluble decahydrate crystal (mirabilite) loses water of crystallization at 32\u00a0\u00b0C to form a more soluble anhydrous phase (thenardite) with a smaller change in Gibbs free energy (\u0394\"G\") in the dissolution reaction.\nThe solubility of organic compounds nearly always increases with temperature. The technique of recrystallization, used for purification of solids, depends on a solute's different solubilities in hot and cold solvent. A few exceptions exist, such as certain cyclodextrins.\nPressure.\nFor condensed phases (solids and liquids), the pressure dependence of solubility is typically weak and usually neglected in practice. Assuming an ideal solution, the dependence can be quantified as:\nformula_1\nwhere the index formula_2 iterates the components, formula_3 is the mole fraction of the formula_2-th component in the solution, formula_5 is the pressure, the index formula_6 refers to constant temperature, formula_7 is the partial molar volume of the formula_2-th component in the solution, formula_9 is the partial molar volume of the formula_10-th component in the dissolving solid, and formula_11 is the universal gas constant.\nThe pressure dependence of solubility does occasionally have practical significance. For example, precipitation fouling of oil fields and wells by calcium sulfate (which decreases its solubility with decreasing pressure) can result in decreased productivity with time.\nSolubility of gases.\nHenry's law is used to quantify the solubility of gases in solvents. The solubility of a gas in a solvent is directly proportional to the partial pressure of that gas above the solvent. This relationship is similar to Raoult's law and can be written as:\nformula_12\nwhere formula_13 is a temperature-dependent constant (for example, 769.2 L\u00b7atm/mol for dioxygen (O2) in water at 298 K), formula_14 is the partial pressure (in atm), and formula_15 is the concentration of the dissolved gas in the liquid (in mol/L).\nThe solubility of gases is sometimes also quantified using Bunsen solubility coefficient.\nIn the presence of small bubbles, the solubility of the gas does not depend on the bubble radius in any other way than through the effect of the radius on pressure (i.e. the solubility of gas in the liquid in contact with small bubbles is increased due to pressure increase by \u0394\"p\"\u00a0=\u00a02\u03b3/\"r\"; see Young\u2013Laplace equation).\nHenry's law is valid for gases that do not undergo change of chemical speciation on dissolution. Sieverts' law shows a case when this assumption does not hold.\nThe carbon dioxide solubility in seawater is also affected by temperature, pH of the solution, and by the carbonate buffer. The decrease of solubility of carbon dioxide in seawater when temperature increases is also an important retroaction factor (positive feedback) exacerbating past and future climate changes as observed in ice cores from the Vostok site in Antarctica. At the geological time scale, because of the Milankovich cycles, when the astronomical parameters of the Earth orbit and its rotation axis progressively change and modify the solar irradiance at the Earth surface, temperature starts to increase. When a deglaciation period is initiated, the progressive warming of the oceans releases CO2 into the atmosphere because of its lower solubility in warmer sea water. In turn, higher levels of CO2 in the atmosphere increase the greenhouse effect and carbon dioxide acts as an amplifier of the general warming.\nPolarity.\nA popular aphorism used for predicting solubility is \"\"like dissolves like\" also expressed in the Latin language as \"Similia similibus solventur\"\". This statement indicates that a solute will dissolve best in a solvent that has a similar chemical structure to itself, based on favorable entropy of mixing. This view is simplistic, but it is a useful rule of thumb. The overall solvation capacity of a solvent depends primarily on its polarity. For example, a very polar (hydrophilic) solute such as urea is very soluble in highly polar water, less soluble in fairly polar methanol, and practically insoluble in non-polar solvents such as benzene. In contrast, a non-polar or lipophilic solute such as naphthalene is insoluble in water, fairly soluble in methanol, and highly soluble in non-polar benzene.\nIn even more simple terms a simple ionic compound (with positive and negative ions) such as sodium chloride (common salt) is easily soluble in a highly polar solvent (with some separation of positive (\u03b4+) and negative (\u03b4-) charges in the covalent molecule) such as water, as thus the sea is salty as it accumulates dissolved salts since early geological ages.\nThe solubility is favored by entropy of mixing (\u0394\"S\") and depends on enthalpy of dissolution (\u0394\"H\") and the hydrophobic effect. The free energy of dissolution (Gibbs energy) depends on temperature and is given by the relationship: \u0394\"G\" = \u0394\"H\" \u2013 T\u0394\"S\". Smaller \u0394\"G\" means greater solubility.\nChemists often exploit differences in solubilities to separate and purify compounds from reaction mixtures, using the technique of liquid-liquid extraction. This applies in vast areas of chemistry from drug synthesis to spent nuclear fuel reprocessing.\nRate of dissolution.\nDissolution is not an instantaneous process. The rate of solubilization (in kg/s) is related to the solubility product and the surface area of the material. The speed at which a solid dissolves may depend on its crystallinity or lack thereof in the case of amorphous solids and the surface area (crystallite size) and the presence of polymorphism. Many practical systems illustrate this effect, for example in designing methods for controlled drug delivery. In some cases, solubility equilibria can take a long time to establish (hours, days, months, or many years; depending on the nature of the solute and other factors).\nThe rate of dissolution can be often expressed by the Noyes\u2013Whitney equation or the Nernst and Brunner equation of the form:\nformula_16\nwhere:\nFor dissolution limited by diffusion (or mass transfer if mixing is present), formula_22 is equal to the solubility of the substance. When the dissolution rate of a pure substance is normalized to the surface area of the solid (which usually changes with time during the dissolution process), then it is expressed in kg/m2s and referred to as \"intrinsic dissolution rate\". The intrinsic dissolution rate is defined by the United States Pharmacopeia.\nDissolution rates vary by orders of magnitude between different systems. Typically, very low dissolution rates parallel low solubilities, and substances with high solubilities exhibit high dissolution rates, as suggested by the Noyes-Whitney equation.\nTheories of solubility.\nSolubility product.\nSolubility constants are used to describe saturated solutions of ionic compounds of relatively low solubility (see solubility equilibrium). The solubility constant is a special case of an equilibrium constant. Since it is a product of ion concentrations in equilibrium, it is also known as the solubility product. It describes the balance between dissolved ions from the salt and undissolved salt. The solubility constant is also \"applicable\" (i.e. useful) to precipitation, the reverse of the dissolving reaction. As with other equilibrium constants, temperature can affect the numerical value of solubility constant. While the solubility constant is not as simple as solubility, the value of this constant is generally independent of the presence of other species in the solvent.\nOther theories.\nThe Flory\u2013Huggins solution theory is a theoretical model describing the solubility of polymers. The Hansen solubility parameters and the Hildebrand solubility parameters are empirical methods for the prediction of solubility. It is also possible to predict solubility from other physical constants such as the enthalpy of fusion.\nThe octanol-water partition coefficient, usually expressed as its logarithm (Log P), is a measure of differential solubility of a compound in a hydrophobic solvent (1-octanol) and a hydrophilic solvent (water). The logarithm of these two values enables compounds to be ranked in terms of hydrophilicity (or hydrophobicity).\nThe energy change associated with dissolving is usually given per mole of solute as the enthalpy of solution.\nApplications.\nSolubility is of fundamental importance in a large number of scientific disciplines and practical applications, ranging from ore processing and nuclear reprocessing to the use of medicines, and the transport of pollutants.\nSolubility is often said to be one of the \"characteristic properties of a substance\", which means that solubility is commonly used to describe the substance, to indicate a substance's polarity, to help to distinguish it from other substances, and as a guide to applications of the substance. For example, indigo is described as \"insoluble in water, alcohol, or ether but soluble in chloroform, nitrobenzene, or concentrated sulfuric acid\".\nSolubility of a substance is useful when separating mixtures. For example, a mixture of salt (sodium chloride) and silica may be separated by dissolving the salt in water, and filtering off the undissolved silica. The synthesis of chemical compounds, by the milligram in a laboratory, or by the ton in industry, both make use of the relative solubilities of the desired product, as well as unreacted starting materials, byproducts, and side products to achieve separation.\nAnother example of this is the synthesis of benzoic acid from phenylmagnesium bromide and dry ice. Benzoic acid is more soluble in an organic solvent such as dichloromethane or diethyl ether, and when shaken with this organic solvent in a separatory funnel, will preferentially dissolve in the organic layer. The other reaction products, including the magnesium bromide, will remain in the aqueous layer, clearly showing that separation based on solubility is achieved. This process, known as liquid\u2013liquid extraction, is an important technique in synthetic chemistry. Recycling is used to ensure maximum extraction.\nDifferential solubility.\nIn flowing systems, differences in solubility often determine the dissolution-precipitation driven transport of species. This happens when different parts of the system experience different conditions. Even slightly different conditions can result in significant effects, given sufficient time.\nFor example, relatively low solubility compounds are found to be soluble in more extreme environments, resulting in geochemical and geological effects of the activity of hydrothermal fluids in the Earth's crust. These are often the source of high quality economic mineral deposits and precious or semi-precious gems. In the same way, compounds with low solubility will dissolve over extended time (geological time), resulting in significant effects such as extensive cave systems or Karstic land surfaces.\nSolubility of ionic compounds in water.\nSome ionic compounds (salts) dissolve in water, which arises because of the attraction between positive and negative charges (see: solvation). For example, the salt's positive ions (e.g. Ag+) attract the partially negative oxygen atom in . Likewise, the salt's negative ions (e.g. Cl\u2212) attract the partially positive hydrogens in . Note: the oxygen atom is partially negative because it is more electronegative than hydrogen, and vice versa (see: chemical polarity).\nHowever, there is a limit to how much salt can be dissolved in a given volume of water. This concentration is the solubility and related to the solubility product, \"K\"sp. This equilibrium constant depends on the type of salt ( vs. , for example), temperature, and the common ion effect.\nOne can calculate the amount of that will dissolve in 1 liter of pure water as follows:\n\"K\"sp = [Ag+] \u00d7 [Cl\u2212] / M2 (definition of solubility product; M = mol/L)\n\"K\"sp = 1.8 \u00d7 10\u221210 (from a table of solubility products)\n[Ag+] = [Cl\u2212], in the absence of other silver or chloride salts, so\n[Ag+]2 = 1.8 \u00d7 10\u221210 M2\n[Ag+] = 1.34 \u00d7 10\u22125 mol/L\nThe result: 1 liter of water can dissolve 1.34 \u00d7 10\u22125 moles of at room temperature. Compared with other salts, is poorly soluble in water. For instance, table salt () has a much higher \"K\"sp = 36 and is, therefore, more soluble. The following table gives an overview of solubility rules for various ionic compounds.\nSolubility of organic compounds.\nThe principle outlined above under polarity, that \"like dissolves like\", is the usual guide to solubility with organic systems. For example, petroleum jelly will dissolve in gasoline because both petroleum jelly and gasoline are non-polar hydrocarbons. It will not, on the other hand, dissolve in ethyl alcohol or water, since the polarity of these solvents is too high. Sugar will not dissolve in gasoline, since sugar is too polar in comparison with gasoline. A mixture of gasoline and sugar can therefore be separated by filtration or extraction with water.\nSolid solution.\nThis term is often used in the field of metallurgy to refer to the extent that an alloying element will dissolve into the base metal without forming a separate phase. The solvus or solubility line (or curve) is the line (or lines) on a phase diagram that give the limits of solute addition. That is, the lines show the maximum amount of a component that can be added to another component and still be in solid solution. In the solid's crystalline structure, the 'solute' element can either take the place of the matrix within the lattice (a substitutional position; for example, chromium in iron) or take a place in a space between the lattice points (an interstitial position; for example, carbon in iron).\nIn microelectronic fabrication, solid solubility refers to the maximum concentration of impurities one can place into the substrate.\nIn solid compounds (as opposed to elements), the solubility of a solute element can also depend on the phases separating out in equilibrium. For example, amount of Sn soluble in the ZnSb phase can depend significantly on whether the phases separating out in equilibrium are (Zn4Sb3+Sn(L)) or (ZnSnSb2+Sn(L)). Besides these, the ZnSb compound with Sn as a solute can separate out into other combinations of phases after the solubility limit is reached depending on the initial chemical composition during synthesis. Each combination produces a different solubility of Sn in ZnSb. Hence solubility studies in compounds, concluded upon the first instance of observing secondary phases separating out might underestimate solubility. While the maximum number of phases separating out at once in equilibrium can be determined by the Gibb's phase rule, for chemical compounds there is no limit on the number of such phase separating combinations itself. Hence, establishing the \"maximum solubility\" in solid compounds experimentally can be difficult, requiring equilibration of many samples. If the dominant crystallographic defect (mostly interstitial or substitutional point defects) involved in the solid-solution can be chemically intuited beforehand, then using some simple thermodynamic guidelines can considerably reduce the number of samples required to establish maximum solubility.\nIncongruent dissolution.\nMany substances dissolve congruently (i.e. the composition of the solid and the dissolved solute stoichiometrically match). However, some substances may dissolve incongruently, whereby the composition of the solute in solution does not match that of the solid. This solubilization is accompanied by alteration of the \"primary solid\" and possibly formation of a secondary solid phase. However, in general, some primary solid also remains and a complex solubility equilibrium establishes. For example, dissolution of albite may result in formation of gibbsite.\nIn this case, the solubility of albite is expected to depend on the solid-to-solvent ratio. This kind of solubility is of great importance in geology, where it results in formation of metamorphic rocks.\nIn principle, both congruent and incongruent dissolution can lead to the formation of secondary solid phases in equilibrium. So, in the field of Materials Science, the solubility for both cases is described more generally on chemical composition phase diagrams.\nSolubility prediction.\nSolubility is a property of interest in many aspects of science, including but not limited to: environmental predictions, biochemistry, pharmacy, drug-design, agrochemical design, and protein ligand binding. Aqueous solubility is of fundamental interest owing to the vital biological and transportation functions played by water. In addition, to this clear scientific interest in water solubility and solvent effects; accurate predictions of solubility are important industrially. The ability to accurately predict a molecule's solubility represents potentially large financial savings in many chemical product development processes, such as pharmaceuticals. In the pharmaceutical industry, solubility predictions form part of the early stage lead optimisation process of drug candidates. Solubility remains a concern all the way to formulation. A number of methods have been applied to such predictions including quantitative structure\u2013activity relationships (QSAR), quantitative structure\u2013property relationships (QSPR) and data mining. These models provide efficient predictions of solubility and represent the current standard. The draw back such models is that they can lack physical insight. A method founded in physical theory, capable of achieving similar levels of accuracy at an sensible cost, would be a powerful tool scientifically and industrially.\nMethods founded in physical theory tend to use thermodynamic cycles, a concept from classical thermodynamics. The two common thermodynamic cycles used involve either the calculation of the free energy of sublimation (solid to gas without going through a liquid state) and the free energy of solvating a gaseous molecule (gas to solution), or the free energy of fusion (solid to a molten phase) and the free energy of mixing (molten to solution). These two process are represented in the following diagrams.\nThese cycles have been used for attempts at first principles predictions (solving using the fundamental physical equations) using physically motivated solvent models, to create parametric equations and QSPR models and combinations of the two. The use of these cycles enables the calculation of the solvation free energy indirectly via either gas (in the sublimation cycle) or a melt (fusion cycle). This is helpful as calculating the free energy of solvation directly is extremely difficult. The free energy of solvation can be converted to a solubility value using various formulae, the most general case being shown below, where the numerator is the free energy of solvation, \"R\" is the gas constant and \"T\" is the temperature in kelvins.\nformula_25\nWell known fitted equations for solubility prediction are the general solubility equations. These equations stem from the work of Yalkowsky \"et al\". The original formula is given first, followed by a revised formula which takes a different assumption of complete miscibility in octanol.\nformula_26\nformula_27\nThese equations are founded on the principles of the fusion cycle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59499", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59499", "title": "Solute", "text": ""}
{"id": "59500", "revid": "131355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59500", "title": "Chemical solvent", "text": ""}
{"id": "59501", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59501", "title": "Chemical solute", "text": ""}
{"id": "59502", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59502", "title": "Chemical solution", "text": ""}
{"id": "59503", "revid": "203434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59503", "title": "Bioaccumulation", "text": "Gradual buildup of substances in an organism\nBioaccumulation is the gradual accumulation of substances, such as pesticides or other chemicals, in an organism. Bioaccumulation occurs when an organism absorbs a substance faster than it can be lost or eliminated by catabolism and excretion. Thus, the longer the biological half-life of a toxic substance, the greater the risk of chronic poisoning, even if environmental levels of the toxin are not very high. Bioaccumulation, for example in fish, can be predicted by models. Hypothesis for molecular size cutoff criteria for use as bioaccumulation potential indicators are not supported by data. Biotransformation can strongly modify bioaccumulation of chemicals in an organism.\nToxicity induced by metals is associated with bioaccumulation and biomagnification. Storage or uptake of a metal faster than it is metabolized and excreted leads to the accumulation of that metal. The presence of various chemicals and harmful substances in the environment can be analyzed and assessed with a proper knowledge on bioaccumulation helping with chemical control and usage.\nAn organism can take up chemicals by breathing, absorbing through skin or swallowing. When the concentration of a chemical is higher within the organism compared to its surroundings (air or water), it is referred to as bioconcentration. Biomagnification is another process related to bioaccumulation as the concentration of the chemical or metal increases as it moves up from one trophic level to another. Naturally, the process of bioaccumulation is necessary for an organism to grow and develop; however, the accumulation of harmful substances can also occur.\nExamples.\nTerrestrial examples.\nAn example of poisoning in the workplace can be seen from the phrase \"mad as a hatter\" (18th and 19th century England). Mercury was used in stiffening the felt that was used to make hats. This forms organic species such as methylmercury, which is lipid-soluble (fat-soluble), and tends to accumulate in the brain, resulting in mercury poisoning. Other lipid-soluble poisons include tetraethyllead compounds (the lead in leaded petrol), and DDT. These compounds are stored in the body fat, and when the fatty tissues are used for energy, the compounds are released and cause acute poisoning.\nStrontium-90, part of the fallout from atomic bombs, is chemically similar enough to calcium that it is taken up in forming bones, where its radiation can cause damage for a long time.\nSome animal species use bioaccumulation as a mode of defense: by consuming toxic plants or animal prey, an animal may accumulate the toxin, which then presents a deterrent to a potential predator. One example is the tobacco hornworm, which concentrates nicotine to a toxic level in its body as it consumes tobacco plants. Poisoning of small consumers can be passed along the food chain to affect the consumers later in the chain.\nOther compounds that are not normally considered toxic can be accumulated to toxic levels in organisms. The classic example is vitamin A, which becomes concentrated in livers of carnivores, e.g. polar bears: as a pure carnivore that feeds on other carnivores (seals), they accumulate extremely large amounts of vitamin A in their livers. It was known by the native peoples of the Arctic that the livers of carnivores should not be eaten, but Arctic explorers have suffered hypervitaminosis A from eating the livers of bears; and there has been at least one example of similar poisoning of Antarctic explorers eating husky dog livers. One notable example of this is the expedition of Sir Douglas Mawson, whose exploration companion died from eating the liver of one of their dogs.\nAquatic examples.\nCoastal fish (such as the smooth toadfish) and seabirds (such as the Atlantic puffin) are often monitored for heavy metal bioaccumulation. Methylmercury gets into freshwater systems through industrial emissions and rain. As its concentration increases up the food web, it can reach dangerous levels for both fish and the humans who rely on fish as a food source.\nFish are typically assessed for bioaccumulation when they have been exposed to chemicals that are in their aqueous phases. Commonly tested fish species include the common carp, rainbow trout, and bluegill sunfish. Generally, fish are exposed to bioconcentration and bioaccumulation of organic chemicals in the environment through lipid layer uptake of water-borne chemicals. In other cases, the fish are exposed through ingestion/digestion of substances or organisms in the aquatic environment which contain the harmful chemicals.\nNaturally produced toxins can also bioaccumulate. The marine algal blooms known as \"red tides\" can result in local filter-feeding organisms such as mussels and oysters becoming toxic; coral reef fish can be responsible for the poisoning known as ciguatera when they accumulate a toxin called ciguatoxin from reef algae. In some eutrophic aquatic systems, biodilution can occur. This is a decrease in a contaminant with an increase in trophic level, due to higher concentrations of algae and bacteria diluting the concentration of the pollutant.\nWetland acidification can raise the chemical or metal concentrations, which leads to an increased bioavailability in marine plants and freshwater biota. Plants situated there which includes both rooted and submerged plants can be influenced by the bioavailability of metals.\nStudies of turtles as model species.\nBioaccumulation in turtles occurs when synthetic organic contaminants (i.e., PFAS), heavy metals, or high levels of trace elements enter a singular organism, potentially affecting their health. Although there are ongoing studies of bioaccumulation in turtles, factors like pollution, climate change, and shifting landscape can affect the amounts of these toxins in the ecosystem.\nThe most common elements studied in turtles are mercury, cadmium, lead, and selenium. Heavy metals are released into rivers, streams, lakes, oceans, and other aquatic environments, and the plants that live in these environments will absorb the metals. Since the levels of trace elements are high in aquatic ecosystems, turtles will naturally consume various trace elements throughout various aquatic environments by eating plants and sediments. Once these substances enter the bloodstream and muscle tissue, they will increase in concentration and will become toxic to the turtles, perhaps causing metabolic, endocrine system, and reproductive failure.\nSome marine turtles are used as experimental subjects to analyze bioaccumulation because of their shoreline habitats, which facilitate the collection of blood samples and other data. The turtle species are very diverse and contribute greatly to biodiversity, so many researchers find it valuable to collect data from various species. Freshwater turtles are another model species for investigating bioaccumulation. Due to their relatively limited home-range freshwater turtles can be associated with a particular catchment and its chemical contaminant profile.\nDevelopmental effects of turtles.\nToxic concentrations in turtle eggs may damage the developmental process of the turtle. For example, in the Australian freshwater short-neck turtle (\"Emydura macquarii macquarii\"), environmental PFAS\u00a0concentrations were bioaccumulated by the mother and then offloaded into their eggs that impacted developmental metabolic processes and fat stores. Furthermore, there is evidence PFAS impacted the gut microbiome in exposed turtles.\nIn terms of toxic levels of heavy metals, it was observed to decrease egg-hatching rates in the Amazon River turtle, \"Podocnemis expansa\". In this particular turtle egg, the heavy metals reduce the fat in the eggs and change how water is filtered throughout the embryo; this can affect the survival rate of the turtle egg.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59504", "revid": "802975432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59504", "title": "Bioaccumulate", "text": ""}
{"id": "59506", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59506", "title": "Gemara", "text": "Component of the Talmud\nThe Gemara (also transliterated Gemarah, or in Yiddish Gemore) is an essential component of the Talmud, comprising a collection of rabbinical analyses and commentaries on the Mishnah and presented in 63 books. The term is derived from the Aramaic word &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d2\u05de\u05e8\u05d0\u200e and rooted in the Semitic word \u05d2-\u05de-\u05e8 (gamar), which means \"to finish\" or \"complete\". Initially, the Gemara was transmitted orally and not permitted to be written down. However, after Judah the Prince compiled the Mishnah around 200 CE, rabbis from Babylonia and the Land of Israel extensively studied the work. Their discussions were eventually documented in a series of books, which would come to be known as the Gemara. The Gemara, when combined with the Mishnah, forms the full Talmud.\nThere are two versions of the Gemara: the Babylonian Talmud (Talmud Bavli) and the Jerusalem Talmud (Talmud Yerushalmi). The Babylonian Talmud, compiled by scholars in Babylonia around 500 CE and primarily from the academies of Sura, Pumbedita, and Nehardea, is the more commonly cited version when referring to the \"Gemara\" or \"Talmud\" without further qualification. The main compilers of the Babylonian Talmud were Ravina and Rav Ashi.\nThe Jerusalem Talmud, also known as the Palestinian Talmud, was compiled by Jewish scholars in the Land of Israel, primarily from the academies of Tiberias and Caesarea, around 350\u2013400 CE.\nThe Talmud is organized into six \"sedarim\", or \"orders,\" which include Zeraim, Moed, Nashim, Nezikin, Kodshim, and Taharot.\nIn 1923, Polish Rabbi Meir Shapiro introduced a contemporary practice called \"Daf Yomi,\" or \"daily page,\" wherein participants study one page of the Talmud daily in cycles lasting seven and a half years each. This initiative ensures that both scholars and laypeople across the globe engage in the comprehensive study of the entire Talmud.\nGemara and Mishnah.\nThe Gemara and the Mishnah together make up the Talmud. The Talmud thus comprises two components: the Mishnah \u2013 the core text; and the Gemara \u2013 analysis and commentary which \"completes\" the Talmud (see Structure of the Talmud).\nMaimonides describes the Gemara component as:\nThe rabbis of the Mishnah are known as \"Tannaim\" (sing. \"Tanna\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05e0\u05d0\u200e). The rabbis of the Gemara are referred to as \"Amoraim\" (sing. \"Amora\" \u05d0\u05de\u05d5\u05e8\u05d0). The analysis of the Amoraim, recorded as \"gemara\", is thus focused on clarifying the positions, views, and word choice of the Tannaim.\nBecause there are two Gemaras, as mentioned above, there are in fact two Talmuds: the Jerusalem Talmud (Hebrew: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05dc\u05de\u05d5\u05d3 \u05d9\u05e8\u05d5\u05e9\u05dc\u05de\u05d9\u200e, \"Talmud Yerushalmi\"), and the Babylonian Talmud (Hebrew: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05ea\u05dc\u05de\u05d5\u05d3 \u05d1\u05d1\u05dc\u05d9\u200e, \"Talmud Bavli\"), corresponding to the Jerusalem Gemara and the Babylonian Gemara; both share the same Mishnah. The Gemara is mostly written in Aramaic, the Jerusalem Gemara in Western Aramaic and the Babylonian in Eastern Aramaic, but both contain portions in Hebrew. Sometimes the language changes in the middle of a story.\nOrigins of the word.\nIn a narrow sense, the word refers to the mastery and transmission of existing tradition, as opposed to , which means the deriving of new results by logic. Both activities are represented in the as one literary work.\nThe Aramaic noun \"gemar\" (and \"gemara\") was formed from the verb that means \"learn.\" This substantive noun thus designates what was learned, and the learning transmitted to scholars by tradition, though it connotes in a more limited sense to exposition of the Mishnah. The word therefore gained currency as a designation of the Talmud. In the modern editions, the term \"gemara\" occurs frequently in this sense\u2014but in nearly every case it was substituted at a later time for the objectionable word \"talmud\", which was prohibited by the Christian censors. The only passage in which \"gemara\" occurs with the meaning of \"Talmud\" in the strict sense, and not censored, is \"Eruvin\" 32b, where it is used by Rav Nahman, a Babylonian amora (3rd C.). Later editions of the Talmud frequently substitute for the word \"Gemara\" the Aramaic abbreviation for \"the six orders of the Mishnah,\" pronounced as \"Shas,\" which has become a popular designation for the Babylonian Talmud.\nThe \"Sugya\".\nThe building block of gemara is known as a sugya, \"a self-contained basic unit of Talmudic discussion\" (p.\u00a0203) that often centers on a statement from the mishnah, the amoraic rabbis (memra), or simply independent of these. They vary in size and complexity and, though self-contained, may mention or assume knowledge of other sugiyot.\nThe analysis of the \"Amoraim\" is generally focused on clarifying the positions, words and views of the \"Tannaim\". These debates and exchanges form the \"building-blocks\" of the ; the name for such a passage of Gemara is a (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e1\u05d5\u05d2\u05d9\u05d0\u200e; plural ). A will typically comprise a detailed proof-based elaboration of the . Every aspect of the text is treated as a subject of close investigation. This analysis is aimed at an exhaustive understanding of the full meaning.\nIn the Talmud, a is presented as a series of responsive hypotheses and questions \u2013 with the Talmudic text as a record of each step in the process of reasoning and derivation. The thus takes the form of a dialectical exchange (by contrast, the states concluded legal opinions \u2013 and often differences in opinion between the \"Tannaim\". There is little dialogue). The disputants here are termed the (questioner, \"one who raises a difficulty\") and (answerer, \"one who puts straight\").\nThe records the semantic disagreements between \"Tannaim\" and \"Amoraim\". Some of these debates were actually conducted by the \"Amoraim\", though many of them are hypothetically reconstructed by the Talmud's redactors. (Often imputing a view to an earlier authority as to how he may have answered a question: \"This is what Rabbi X could have argued ...\") Only rarely are debates formally closed.\nArgumentation and debate.\nThe distinctive character of the derives largely from the intricate use of argumentation and debate, described above; \nthese \"back and forth\" analytics are characterized by the Talmudic phrase \"shakla v'tarya\" (\u05e9\u05e7\u05dc\u05d0 \u05d5\u05d8\u05e8\u05d9\u05d0; lit. \"taking and throwing\"). \nIn each , either participant may cite scriptural, and proof to build a logical support for their respective opinions. The process of deduction required to derive a conclusion from a prooftext is often logically complex and indirect. \"Confronted with a statement on any subject, the Talmudic student will proceed to raise a series of questions before he satisfies himself of having understood its full meaning.\" This analysis has been described as \"mathematical\" in approach; Adin Steinsaltz makes the analogy of the \"Amoraim\" as scientists investigating the Halakha, where the Tanakh, Mishnah, Tosefta and midrash are the phenomena studied.\nProoftexts.\nProoftexts quoted to corroborate or disprove the respective opinions and theories will include:\nQuestions addressed.\nThe actual debate will usually centre on the following categories:\nLanguage.\nWhy does the use one word rather than another? If a statement is not clear enough, the seeks to clarify the intention.\nLogic.\nExploring the logical principles underlying the statements, and showing how different understandings of the reasons could lead to differences in their practical application. What underlying principle is entailed in a statement of fact or in a specific instance brought as an illustration? If a statement appears obvious, the seeks the logical reason for its necessity. It seeks to answer under which circumstances a statement is true, and what qualifications are permissible. All statements are examined for internal consistency.\nSee: List of Talmudic principles and \nLegal.\nResolving contradictions, perceived or actual, between different statements in the , or between the and other traditions; e.g., by stating that: two conflicting sources are dealing with differing circumstances; or that they represent the views of different rabbis. Do certain authorities differ or not? If they do, why do they differ? If a principle is presented as a generalization, the clarifies how much is included; if an exception, how much is excluded.\nBiblical exposition.\nDemonstrating how the rulings or disputes derive from interpretations of Biblical texts, the will often ask where in the Torah the derives a particular law. See Talmudic hermeneutics and .\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article\u00a0incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59507", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59507", "title": "Strontium 90", "text": ""}
{"id": "59508", "revid": "50769270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59508", "title": "List of United States federal legislation", "text": "This is a chronological, but still incomplete, list of United States federal legislation. Congress has enacted approximately 200\u2013600 statutes during each of its 119 biennial terms so more than 30,000 statutes have been enacted since 1789.\nAt the federal level in the United States, legislation (i.e., \"statutes\" or \"statutory law\") consists exclusively of Acts passed by the Congress of the United States and its predecessor, the Continental Congress, that were either signed into law by the President or passed by Congress after a presidential veto.\nLegislation is not the only source of regulations with the force of law. However, most executive branch and judicial branch regulations must originate in a congressional grant of power. \"See also\": Executive orders issued by the President; \"Code of Federal Regulations\" for rules issued by executive branch departments and administrative agencies; and the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure of the federal courts.\nPublication of the law.\nStatutes at Large (Stat.).\nActs of Congress are published in the United States Statutes at Large. Volumes 1 through 18, which have all the statutes passed from 1789 to 1875, are available on-line at the Library of Congress, http://. In the list below, statutes are listed by \"X Stat. Y\", where X is the volume of the Statutes at Large and Y is the page number, as well as either the chapter or Public Law number. \"See examples below.\"\nSessions (Sess.) and Chapters (ch.).\nEach Congress has two to four sessions. Under the numbering system used from 1789 until 1957, the Acts in each session are numbered sequentially as Chapters. This numbering included both laws applicable to the general public and laws relating to specific individuals, e.g., to grant pensions to disabled veterans.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "59510", "revid": "50082796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59510", "title": "Russians", "text": "East Slavic ethnic group\nRussians ( ) are an East Slavic ethnic group native to Eastern Europe. Their mother tongue is Russian, the most spoken Slavic language. The majority of Russians adhere to Orthodox Christianity, ever since the Middle Ages. By total numbers, they compose the largest Slavic and European nation.\nGenetic studies show that Russians are closely related to Poles, Belarusians, Ukrainians, as well as Estonians, Latvians, Lithuanians, and Finns. They were formed from East Slavic tribes, and their cultural ancestry is based in Kievan Rus'. The Russian word for the Russians is derived from the people of Rus' and the territory of Rus'. Russians share many historical and cultural traits with other European peoples, and especially with other East Slavic ethnic groups, specifically Belarusians and Ukrainians. \nThe vast majority of Russians live in native Russia, but notable minorities are scattered throughout other post-Soviet states such as Belarus, Kazakhstan, Moldova, Ukraine, and the Baltic states. A large Russian diaspora (sometimes including Russian-speaking non-Russians), estimated at 25 million people, has developed all over the world, with notable numbers in the United States, Germany, Brazil, and Canada.\nEthnonym.\nThere are two Russian words which are commonly translated into English as \"Russians\". One is (\"russkiye\"), which in modern Russia most often means \"ethnic Russians\". The other one is (\"rossiyane\"), derived from (\"Rossiya\", Russia), which denotes \"people of Russia\", regardless of ethnicity or religious affiliation. In daily usage, those terms are often mixed up, and since Vladimir Putin became president, the ethnic term \u0440\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0435 has supplanted the non-ethnic term.\nThe name of the Russians derives from the early medieval Rus' people, a group of Norse merchants and warriors who relocated from across the Baltic Sea and played an important part in the foundation of the first East Slavic state that later became the Kievan Rus'.\nThe idea of a single \"all-Russian nation\" encompassing the East Slavic peoples, or a \"triune nation\" of three brotherly \"Great Russian\", \"Little Russian\" (i.e. Ukrainian), and \"White Russian\" (i.e. Belarusian) peoples became the official doctrine of the Russian Empire from the beginning of the 19th century onwards.\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nThe ancestors of modern Russians are the Slavic tribes, whose original home is thought by some scholars to have been the wooded areas of the Pinsk Marshes, one of the largest wetlands in Europe. The East Slavs gradually settled Western Russia with Moscow included in two waves: one moving from Kiev toward present-day Suzdal and Murom and another from Polotsk toward Novgorod and Rostov. Prior to the Slavic migration in the 6-7th centuries, the Suzdal-Murom and Novgorod-Rostov areas were populated by Finnic peoples, including the Merya, the Muromians, and the Meshchera.\nFrom the 7th century onwards, the East Slavs slowly assimilated the native Finnic peoples, so that by year 1100, the majority of the population in Western Russia was Slavic-speaking. Recent genetic studies confirm the presence of a Finnic substrate in modern Russian population.\nOutside archaeological remains, little is known about the predecessors to Russians in general prior to 859 AD, when the \"Primary Chronicle\" starts its records. By 600 AD, the Slavs are believed to have split linguistically into southern, western, and eastern branches.\nMedieval history.\nThe Rus' state was established in northern Russia in the year 862, which was ruled by the Varangians. Staraya Ladoga and Novgorod became the first major cities of the new union of immigrants from Scandinavia with the Slavs and Finns. In 882, the prince Oleg seized Kiev, thereby uniting the northern and southern lands of the East Slavs under one authority. The state adopted Christianity from the Byzantine Empire in 988. Kievan Rus' ultimately disintegrated as a state as a result of in-fighting between members of the princely family that ruled it collectively.\nAfter the 13th century, Moscow became a political and cultural center. Moscow has become a center for the unification of Russian lands. By the end of the 15th century, Moscow united the northeastern and northwestern Russian principalities, overthrew the \"Mongol yoke\" in 1480, and would be transformed into the Tsardom of Russia after Ivan IV was crowned tsar in 1547.\nModern history.\nIn 1721, Tsar Peter the Great renamed his state as the Russian Empire, hoping to associate it with historical and cultural achievements of ancient Rus' \u2013 in contrast to his policies oriented towards Western Europe. The state now extended from the eastern borders of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth to the Pacific Ocean, and became a great power; and one of the most powerful states in Europe after the victory over Napoleon. Peasant revolts were common, and all were fiercely suppressed. The Emperor Alexander II abolished Russian serfdom in 1861, but the peasants fared poorly and revolutionary pressures grew. In the following decades, reform efforts such as the Stolypin reforms of 1906\u20131914, the constitution of 1906, and the State Duma (1906\u20131917) attempted to open and liberalize the economy and political system, but the Emperors refused to relinquish autocratic rule and resisted sharing their power.\nA combination of economic breakdown, war-weariness, and discontent with the autocratic system of government triggered revolution in Russia in 1917. The overthrow of the monarchy initially brought into office a coalition of liberals and moderate socialists, but their failed policies led to seizure of power by the communist Bolsheviks on 25 October 1917 (7 November New Style). In 1922, Soviet Russia, along with Soviet Ukraine, Soviet Belarus, and the Transcaucasian SFSR signed the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR, officially merging all four republics to form the Soviet Union as a country. Between 1922 and 1991, the history of Russia became essentially the history of the Soviet Union, effectively an ideologically based state roughly conterminous with the Russian Empire before the 1918 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. From its first years, government in the Soviet Union based itself on the one-party rule of the Communists, as the Bolsheviks called themselves, beginning in March 1918. The approach to the building of socialism, however, varied over different periods in Soviet history: from the mixed economy and diverse society and culture of the 1920s through the command economy and repressions of the Joseph Stalin era to the \"era of stagnation\" from the 1960s to the 1980s. The actions of the Soviet government caused the death of millions of citizens in the famine of 1930\u20131933 and the Great Purge. The attack by Nazi Germany and the ensuing war, together with the Holocaust, again claimed millions of lives. Millions of Russian civilians and prisoners of war were killed or starved to death during Nazi Germany's genocidal policies called the Hunger Plan and the Generalplan Ost, including one million civilian casualties during the Siege of Leningrad. After the victory of the Soviet Union and the Western Allies, the Soviet Union became a superpower opposing Western countries during the Cold War.\nBy the mid-1980s, with Soviet economic and political weaknesses becoming acute, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev embarked on major reforms; these culminated in the dissolution of the Soviet Union, leaving Russia again alone and marking the beginning of the post-Soviet Russian period. The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic renamed itself the Russian Federation and became the successor state to the Soviet Union. One of the negative consequences of the collapse of the Soviet Union was the problem of discrimination against the 25 million ethnic Russians living in a number of post-Soviet states.\nGeographic distribution.\nEthnic Russians historically migrated within the areas of the former Russian Empire and Soviet Union, though they were sometimes encouraged to re-settle in borderland areas by the Tsarist and later Soviet government. Sometimes ethnic Russian communities, such as the Lipovans who settled in the Danube delta or the Doukhobors in Canada, emigrated as religious dissidents fleeing the central authority.\nThere are also small Russian communities in the Balkans \u2014 including Lipovans in the Danube delta \u2014 Central European nations such as Germany and Poland, as well as Russians settled in China, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina and Australia. These communities identify themselves to varying degrees as Russians, citizens of these countries, or both.\nSignificant numbers of Russians emigrated to Canada, Australia and the United States. Brighton Beach, Brooklyn and South Beach, Staten Island in New York City are examples of large communities of recent Russian and Russian-Jewish immigrants. Other examples are Sunny Isles Beach, a northern suburb of Miami, and West Hollywood of the Los Angeles area.\nAfter the Russian Revolution in 1917, many Russians who were identified with the White army moved to China\u00a0\u2014 most of them settling in Harbin and Shanghai. By the 1930s, Harbin had 100,000 Russians. Many of these Russians moved back to the Soviet Union after World War II. Today, a large group in northern China still speak Russian as a second language. Russians (\"eluosizu\") are one of the 56 ethnic groups officially recognized by the People's Republic of China (as \"the Russ\"); there are approximately 15,600 Russian Chinese living mostly in northern Xinjiang, and also in Inner Mongolia and Heilongjiang.\nAccording to the 2021 Russian census, the number of ethnic Russians in the Russian Federation decreased by nearly 5.43 million, from roughly 111 million people in 2010 to approximately 105.5 million in 2021.\nEthnographic groups.\nAmong Russians, a number of ethnographic groups stand out, such as: the Northern Russians, the Southern Russians, the Cossacks, the Goryuns, the Kamchadals, the Polekhs, the Pomors, the Russian Chinese, the Siberians (\"Siberiaks\"), Starozhily, some groupings of Old Believers (Kamenschiks, Lipovans, Semeiskie), and others.\nThe main ones are the Northern and Southern Russian groups. At the same time, the proposal of the ethnographer Dmitry Zelenin in his major work of 1927 \"Russian (East Slavic) Ethnography\" to consider them as separate East Slavic peoples did not find support in scientific circles.\nRussia's Arctic coastline had been explored and settled by Pomors, Russian settlers from Novgorod.\nCossacks inhabited sparsely populated areas in the Don, Terek, and Ural river basins, and played an important role in the historical and cultural development of parts of Russia.\nGenetics.\nIn accordance with the 2008 research results of Russian and Estonian geneticists, two groups of Russians are distinguished: the northern and southern populations.\nCentral and Southern Russians, to which the majority of Russian populations belong, according to Y chromosome R1a, are included in the general \"East European\" gene cluster with the rest East and West Slavs (Poles, Czechs and Slovaks), as well as the non-Slavic Hungarians and Aromanians. Genetically, East Slavs are quite similar to West Slavs; such genetic similarity is somewhat unusual for genetics with such a wide settlement of the Slavs, especially Russians. The high unity of the autosomal markers of the East Slavic populations and their significant differences from the neighboring Finnic, Turkic and Caucasian peoples were revealed.\nNorthern Russians, according to mtDNA, Y chromosome and autosomal marker CCR5de132, are included in the \"North European\" gene cluster (the Poles, the Balts, Germanic and Baltic Finnic peoples).\nConsequently, the already existing biologo-genetic studies have made all hypotheses about the mixing of the Russians with non-Slavic ethnic groups or their \"non-Slavism\" obsolete or pseudoscientific. At the same time, the long-standing identification of the Northern Russian and Southern Russian ethnographic groups by ethnologists was confirmed. The previous conclusions of physical anthropologists, historians and linguists (see, in particular, the works of the academician Valentin Yanin) about the proximity of the ancient Novgorod Slavs and their language not to the East, but to west Baltic Slavs. As can be seen from genetic resources, the contemporary Northern Russians also are genetically close of all Slavic peoples only to the Poles and similar to the Balts. However, this does not mean the northern Russians origin from the Balts or the Poles, more likely, that all the peoples of the Nordic gene pool are descendants of Paleo-European population, which has remained around Baltic Sea.\nAt the same time, according to other scholars, the Russians have close genetic affinities to surrounding Northeast and Eastern European populations. They also display evidence for multiple genetic ancestries and admixture events, and high identity-by-descent sharing with the Finnic peoples.\nWhile modern European populations derive most of their ancestry from three major sources: Western hunter-gatherers, Early European Farmers, and Western Steppe Herders (Yamnaya), this three-way model is insufficient to explain the ethnogenesis of northeastern Europeans such as Saami, Russians, Mordovians, Chuvash, Estonians, Hungarians, and Finns. They carry an additional Siberian/Nganasan-related genetic component and increased allele sharing with modern East Asians.\nThe most common human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup is haplogroup R1a (c. 46,7%), followed by haplogroup N-M231 (c. 21,6%), haplogroup I-M170 (c. 17,6%), and haplogroup R1b (c. 5,8%). The remainder (c. 8,3%) are other less frequent haplogroups (E3b, J2, etc.).\nAssimilation and immigration.\nRussians have sometimes found it useful to emphasize their self-perceived ability to assimilate other people to the Russian ethnicity - and as a historic great power with imperial expansionist tendencies the Russian state has sometimes encouraged Russian-centred monoculturalism. Steppe peoples, Tatars, Baltic Germans, Lithuanians and native Siberians in Rus', Muscovy or the Russian Empire could in theory become \"Russians\" () simply by accepting Russian Orthodoxy as their faith.\nThe attitude of ready inclusivity is summed up in the popular phrase (sometimes attributed to Emperor Alexander III of Russia) - \u0425\u043e\u0447\u0435\u0448\u044c \u0431\u044b\u0442\u044c \u0440\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u043c - \u0431\u0443\u0434\u044c \u0438\u043c! (transl.\u2009You want to be Russian - be that!).\nLanguage.\nRussian is the official and the predominantly spoken language in Russia. It is the most-spoken native language in Europe, the most geographically widespread language of Eurasia, as well as the world's most widely spoken Slavic language. Russian is the third-most used language on the Internet after English and Spanish, and is one of two official languages aboard the International Space Station, as well as one of the six official languages of the United Nations.\nCulture.\nLiterature.\nRussian literature is considered to be among the world's most influential and developed. It can be traced to the Middle Ages, when epics and chronicles in vernacular Old East Slavic were composed. By the Age of Enlightenment, literature had grown in importance, with works from Mikhail Lomonosov, Denis Fonvizin, Gavrila Derzhavin, and the Sentimentalist Nikolay Karamzin. From the early 1830s, during the Golden Age of Russian Poetry, literature underwent an astounding golden age in poetry, prose and drama. Romantic literature permitted a flowering of poetic talent: Vasily Zhukovsky and later his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Alexander Pushkin came to the fore. Following Pushkin's footsteps, a new generation of poets were born, including Mikhail Lermontov, Nikolay Nekrasov, Aleksey Konstantinovich Tolstoy, Fyodor Tyutchev and Afanasy Fet.\nThe first great Russian novelist was Nikolai Gogol. Then, during the Age of Realism, came Ivan Turgenev, who mastered both short stories and novels. Fyodor Dostoevsky and Leo Tolstoy soon became internationally renowned. Ivan Goncharov is remembered mainly for his novel Oblomov. Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin wrote prose satire, while Nikolai Leskov is best remembered for his shorter fiction. In the second half of the century Anton Chekhov excelled in short stories and became a leading dramatist. Other important 19th-century developments included the fabulist Ivan Krylov, non-fiction writers such as the critic Vissarion Belinsky, and playwrights such as Aleksandr Griboyedov and Aleksandr Ostrovsky. The beginning of the 20th century ranks as the Silver Age of Russian Poetry. This era had poets such as Alexander Blok, Anna Akhmatova, Boris Pasternak, Konstantin Balmont, Marina Tsvetaeva, Vladimir Mayakovsky, and Osip Mandelstam. It also produced some first-rate novelists and short-story writers, such as Aleksandr Kuprin, Nobel Prize winner Ivan Bunin, Leonid Andreyev, Yevgeny Zamyatin, Dmitry Merezhkovsky and Andrei Bely.\nAfter the Russian Revolution of 1917, Russian literature split into Soviet and white \u00e9migr\u00e9 parts. In the 1930s, Socialist realism became the predominant trend in Russia. Its leading figure was Maxim Gorky, who laid the foundations of this style. Mikhail Bulgakov was one of the leading writers of the Soviet era. Nikolay Ostrovsky's novel How the Steel Was Tempered has been among the most successful works of Russian literature. Influential \u00e9migr\u00e9 writers include Vladimir Nabokov. Some writers dared to oppose Soviet ideology, such as Nobel Prize-winning novelist Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, who wrote about life in the Gulag camps.\nDuring the post-Soviet 1990s writers are already not recognised as very special guides by most Russians. At the beginning of the 21st century, the most discussed figures, postmodernists Victor Pelevin and Vladimir Sorokin remained the leading Russian writers.\nPhilosophy.\nRussian philosophy has been greatly influential. Religious and spiritual philosophy is represented by works of Vladimir Solovyov, Nikolai Berdyaev, Pavel Florensky, Semyon Frank, Nikolay Lossky, Vasily Rozanov, and others. Helena Blavatsky gained international following as the leading theoretician of Theosophy, and co-founded the Theosophical Society.\nSocial and political philosophy is also remarkable. Alexander Herzen is known as one of the fathers of agrarian populism. Mikhail Bakunin is referred to as the father of anarchism. Peter Kropotkin was the most important theorist of anarcho-communism. Mikhail Bakhtin's writings have significantly inspired scholars. Vladimir Lenin, a major revolutionary, developed a variant of communism known as Leninism. Leon Trotsky, on the other hand, founded Trotskyism. Alexander Zinoviev was a prominent philosopher and writer in the second half of the 20th century. Aleksandr Dugin, known for his fascist views, has been regarded as the \"guru of geopolitics\".\nScience.\nMikhail Lomonosov proposed the conservation of mass in chemical reactions, discovered the atmosphere of Venus, and founded modern geology. Since the times of Nikolay Lobachevsky, who pioneered the non-Euclidean geometry, and a prominent tutor Pafnuty Chebyshev, Russian mathematicians became among the world's most influential. Dmitry Mendeleev invented the Periodic table, the main framework of modern chemistry. Sofya Kovalevskaya was a pioneer among women in mathematics in the 19th century. Grigori Perelman was offered the first ever Clay Millennium Prize Problems Award for his final proof of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture in 2002, as well as the Fields Medal in 2006, both of which he declined.\nAlexander Popov was among the inventors of radio, while Nikolai Basov and Alexander Prokhorov were co-inventors of laser and maser. Zhores Alferov contributed significantly to the creation of modern heterostructure physics and electronics. Oleg Losev made crucial contributions in the field of semiconductor junctions, and discovered light-emitting diodes. Vladimir Vernadsky is considered one of the founders of geochemistry, biogeochemistry, and radiogeology. \u00c9lie Metchnikoff is known for his groundbreaking research in immunology. Ivan Pavlov is known chiefly for his work in classical conditioning. Lev Landau made fundamental contributions to many areas of theoretical physics.\nNikolai Vavilov was best known for having identified the centers of origin of cultivated plants. Many famous Russian scientists and inventors were \u00e9migr\u00e9s. Igor Sikorsky was an aviation pioneer. Vladimir Zworykin was the inventor of the iconoscope and kinescope television systems. Theodosius Dobzhansky was the central figure in the field of evolutionary biology for his work in shaping the modern synthesis. George Gamow was one of the foremost advocates of the Big Bang theory.\nKonstantin Tsiolkovsky is called the father of theoretical astronautics, whose works had inspired leading Soviet rocket engineers, such as Valentin Glushko, and many others.\nIn 1961, the first human trip into space was successfully made by Yuri Gagarin. In 1963, Valentina Tereshkova became the first and youngest woman in space, having flown a solo mission on Vostok 6. In 1965, Alexei Leonov became the first human to conduct a spacewalk, exiting the space capsule during Voskhod 2.\nPainting.\nEarly Russian painting is represented in icons and vibrant frescos. In the early 15th century, the master icon painter Andrei Rublev created some of Russia's most treasured religious art. The Russian Academy of Arts, which was established in 1757, to train Russian artists, brought Western techniques of secular painting to Russia. In the 18th century, academicians Ivan Argunov, Dmitry Levitzky, Vladimir Borovikovsky became influential. The early 19th century saw many prominent paintings by Karl Briullov and Alexander Ivanov, both of whom were known for Romantic historical canvases. Ivan Aivazovsky, another Romantic painter, is considered one of the greatest masters of marine art.\nIn the 1860s, a group of critical realists (Peredvizhniki), led by Ivan Kramskoy, Ilya Repin and Vasiliy Perov broke with the academy, and portrayed the many-sided aspects of social life in paintings. The turn of the 20th century saw the rise of symbolism; represented by Mikhail Vrubel and Nicholas Roerich. The Russian avant-garde flourished from approximately 1890 to 1930; and globally influential artists from this era were El Lissitzky, Kazimir Malevich, Natalia Goncharova, Wassily Kandinsky, and Marc Chagall.\nMusic.\nUntil the 18th century, music in Russia consisted mainly of church music and folk songs and dances. In the 19th century, it was defined by the tension between classical composer Mikhail Glinka along with other members of The Mighty Handful, and the Russian Musical Society led by composers Anton and Nikolay Rubinstein. The later tradition of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, one of the greatest composers of the Romantic era, was continued into the 20th century by Sergei Rachmaninoff, one of the last great champions of the Romantic style of European classical music. World-renowned composers of the 20th century include Alexander Scriabin, Alexander Glazunov, Igor Stravinsky, Sergei Prokofiev, Dmitri Shostakovich, Georgy Sviridov and Alfred Schnittke.\nSoviet and Russian conservatories have turned out generations of world-renowned soloists. Among the best known are violinists David Oistrakh and Gidon Kremer, cellist Mstislav Rostropovich, pianists Vladimir Horowitz, Sviatoslav Richter, and Emil Gilels, and vocalist Galina Vishnevskaya.\nDuring the Soviet times, popular music also produced a number of renowned figures, such as the two balladeers\u2014Vladimir Vysotsky and Bulat Okudzhava, and performers such as Alla Pugacheva. Jazz, even with sanctions from Soviet authorities, flourished and evolved into one of the country's most popular musical forms. The Ganelin Trio have been described by critics as the greatest ensemble of free-jazz in continental Europe. By the 1980s, rock music became popular across Russia, and produced bands such as Aria, Aquarium, DDT, and Kino. Pop music in Russia has continued to flourish since the 1960s, with globally famous acts such as t.A.T.u. In the recent times, Little Big, a rave band, has gained popularity in Russia and across Europe.\nCinema.\nRussian and later Soviet cinema was a hotbed of invention, resulting in world-renowned films such as \"The Battleship Potemkin\". Soviet-era filmmakers, most notably Sergei Eisenstein and Andrei Tarkovsky, would go on to become among of the world's most innovative and influential directors. Eisenstein was a student of Lev Kuleshov, who developed the groundbreaking Soviet montage theory of film editing at the world's first film school, the All-Union Institute of Cinematography. Dziga Vertov's \"Kino-Eye\" theory had a huge impact on the development of documentary filmmaking and cinema realism. Many Soviet socialist realism films were artistically successful, including \"Chapaev\", \"The Cranes Are Flying\", and \"Ballad of a Soldier\".\nThe 1960s and 1970s saw a greater variety of artistic styles in Soviet cinema. The comedies of Eldar Ryazanov and Leonid Gaidai of that time were immensely popular, with many of the catchphrases still in use today. In 1961\u201368 Sergey Bondarchuk directed an Oscar-winning film adaptation of Leo Tolstoy's epic \"War and Peace\", which was the most expensive film made in the Soviet Union. In 1969, Vladimir Motyl's \"White Sun of the Desert\" was released, a very popular film in a genre of ostern; the film is traditionally watched by cosmonauts before any trip into space. In 2002, \"Russian Ark\" was the first feature film ever to be shot in a single take. Today, the Russian cinema industry continues to expand.\nArchitecture.\nThe history of Russian architecture begins with early woodcraft buildings of ancient Slavs, and the architecture of Kievan Rus'. Following the Christianization of Kievan Rus', for several centuries it was influenced predominantly by the Byzantine Empire. Due to Mongol occupation cut ties with the Byzantine Empire Russian architecture inreached some original innovations, among them the church altar screen dividing iconostasis. Aristotle Fioravanti and other Italian architects brought Renaissance trends into Russia, especially in reconstruction of Kremlin. The 16th century saw the development of the unique tent-like churches; and the onion dome design, which is a distinctive feature of Russian architecture. In the 17th century, the \"fiery style\" of ornamentation flourished in Moscow and Yaroslavl, gradually paving the way for the Naryshkin baroque of the 1690s. After the reforms of Peter the Great, Russia's architecture became influenced by Western European styles. The 18th-century taste for Rococo architecture led to the splendid works of Bartolomeo Rastrelli and his followers. During the reign of Catherine the Great, Saint Petersburg was transformed into an outdoor museum of Neoclassical architecture. During Alexander I's rule, Empire style became the \"de facto\" architectural style, and Nicholas I opened the gate of Eclecticism to Russia. The second half of the 19th-century was dominated by the Neo-Byzantine and Russian Revival style. In early 20th-century, Russian neoclassical revival became a trend. Prevalent styles of the late 20th-century were the Art Nouveau, Constructivism, and Socialist Classicism.\nReligion.\nMost religious Russians are Eastern Orthodox Christians. According to differing sociological surveys on religious adherence, between 41% to over 80% of the total population of Russia adhere to the Russian Orthodox Church.\nNon-religious Russians may associate themselves with the Orthodox faith for cultural reasons. Some Russian people are Old Believers: a relatively small schismatic group of the Russian Orthodoxy that rejected the liturgical reforms introduced in the 17th century. Other schisms from Orthodoxy include Spiritual Christianity, namely Doukhobors which in the 18th century rejected secular government, the Russian Orthodox priests, icons, all church ritual, the Bible as the supreme source of divine revelation and the divinity of Jesus, and later emigrated into Canada. Another Spiritual Christian movement were Molokans which formed in the 19th century and rejected Czar's divine right to rule, icons, the Trinity as outlined by the Nicene Creed, Orthodox fasts, military service, and practices including water baptism.\nOther world religions have negligible representation among ethnic Russians. The largest of these groups are Islam with over 100,000 followers from national minorities, and Baptists with over 85,000 Russian adherents. Others are mostly Pentecostals, Evangelicals, Seventh-day Adventists, Lutherans, The Salvation Army, and Jehovah's Witnesses.\nSince the fall of the Soviet Union various new religious movements have sprung up and gathered a following among ethnic Russians. The most prominent of these are Rodnovery, the revival of the Slavic native religion also common to other Slavic nations.\nSports.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Russia. The Soviet Union national football team became the first European champions by winning Euro 1960, and reached the finals of Euro 1988. In 1956 and 1988, the Soviet Union won gold at the Olympic football tournament. Russian clubs CSKA Moscow and Zenit Saint Petersburg won the UEFA Cup in 2005 and 2008. The Russian national football team reached the semi-finals of Euro 2008. Russia was the host nation for the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup, and the 2018 FIFA World Cup.\nIce hockey is very popular in Russia. The Soviet Union men's national ice hockey team dominated the sport internationally throughout its existence, and the modern-day Russia men's national ice hockey team is among the most successful teams in the sport. Bandy is Russia's national sport, and it has historically been the highest-achieving country in the sport. The Russian national basketball team won the EuroBasket 2007, and the Russian basketball club PBC CSKA Moscow is among the most successful European basketball teams. The annual Formula One Russian Grand Prix was held at the Sochi Autodrom in the Sochi Olympic Park.\nRussia is the leading nation in rhythmic gymnastics; and Russian synchronized swimming is considered to be the world's best. Figure skating is another popular sport in Russia, especially pair skating and ice dancing. Russia has produced a number of famous tennis players, such as Maria Sharapova and Daniil Medvedev. Chess is also a widely popular pastime in the nation, with many of the world's top chess players being Russian for decades. The 1980 Summer Olympic Games were held in Moscow, and the 2014 Winter Olympics and the 2014 Winter Paralympics were hosted in Sochi.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59511", "revid": "37401930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59511", "title": "Legislatures of the United Kingdom", "text": "Parliamentary bodies of the United Kingdom and its component jurisdictions\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe legislatures of the United Kingdom are derived from a number of different sources. The Parliament of the United Kingdom is the supreme legislative body for the United Kingdom and the British overseas territories with Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland each having their own devolved legislatures. Each of the three major jurisdictions of the United Kingdom (England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland) has its own Laws and legal system.\nUnited Kingdom legislature.\nThe Parliament of the United Kingdom can enact primary legislation for the whole of the United Kingdom. In addition, the General Synod of the Church of England and the Privy Council can do so in certain limited cases.\nParliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nThe Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known as the UK Parliament, the British Parliament, the Westminster Parliament or \"Westminster\", is the supreme legislative body for the United Kingdom and for English Law. It alone possesses legislative supremacy and thereby ultimate power over all other political bodies in the UK and its territories. Its head is the Sovereign of the United Kingdom, currently King Charles III. Its seat is the Palace of Westminster in Westminster, London.\nThe United Kingdom Legislation may take the form of Acts, passed directly by Parliament, or Statutory instruments, made under the authority of an Act of Parliament by either a government minister or by the King-in-Council. The latter are generally subject either to parliamentary approval (affirmative procedure) or parliamentary disallowance (negative procedure). The majority of Acts considered in the UK are defined as public general acts, or 'Acts of Parliament' as they will have progressed and gained approval as a Bill through both House of Commons and House of Lords, and have gained Royal Assent from the Monarch.\nLocal and Personal Acts of Parliament are presented to Parliament as a result of sponsored petitions. These are processed through committees to enable relevant or affected parties to challenge or change the proposed Act. Prerogative instruments, made by the Sovereign under the royal prerogative are another source of UK-wide legislation. The UK Parliament is responsible for all matters relating to defence and all foreign affairs and relations with international organisations, particularly the United Nations, the Commonwealth and the European Union.\nWith there being no devolved legislature in England the UK Parliament is the supreme body for its governance, legislation, public bodies and local government.\nHouse of Commons.\nThe House of Commons is the lower house of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It is an elected chamber consisting of 650 members, known as Members of Parliament (MPs). They are elected using the first past the post system, in single-member constituencies. From the 2024 general election 543 will be elected from England, 57 from Scotland, 32 from Wales and 18 from Northern Ireland.\nThe House of Commons is now considered to be the supreme chamber of Parliament.\nHouse of Lords.\nThe House of Lords is the upper house of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It is an unelected chamber with all members to the House of Lords being appointed. As of August 2018, there are 793 members known as \"Peers\". The House of Lords no longer has the same powers as the House of Commons under the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, especially when it comes to blocking general legislation and the passing of financial legislation.\nDevolved legislatures.\nScottish Parliament.\nThe Scottish Parliament is the national, unicameral legislature of Scotland, located in the Holyrood area of the capital, Edinburgh. The Parliament, informally referred to as \"Holyrood\", is a democratically elected body comprising 129 members known as Members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs). Of these 73 MSPs are elected using first past the post in single member constituencies and a further 56 MSPs are elected using the D'Hondt method, a form of party-list proportional representation in eight additional member regions with each region electing 7 MSPs.\nThe Scottish Parliament was convened by the Scotland Act 1998, which sets out its powers as a devolved legislature. The Act delineates the legislative competence of the Parliament\u00a0\u2013 the areas in which it can make laws\u00a0\u2013 by explicitly specifying powers that are \"reserved\" to the Parliament of the United Kingdom: all matters that are not explicitly reserved are automatically the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament. The British Parliament retains the ability to amend the terms of reference of the Scottish Parliament, and can extend or reduce the areas in which it can make laws. The first meeting of the new Parliament took place on 12 May 1999.\nThe Scottish Statutory Instruments made by the Scottish Government are another source of legislation. As with Statutory Instruments made by the British government, these are generally subject to either approval or disallowance by the Scottish Parliament\nSenedd.\nThe Senedd (Welsh Parliament; ) has the power to make legislation in Wales. The parliament was created by the Government of Wales Act 1998, which followed a referendum in 1997. It is a democratically elected body with 60 members known as Members of the Senedd (MSs). Of these 40 MSs are elected using first past the post in single member constituencies and a further 20 MSs are elected using the D'Hondt method, a form of party-list proportional representation in five additional member regions with each region electing 4 MSs.\nThe Senedd had no powers to initiate primary legislation until limited law-making powers were gained through the Government of Wales Act 2006. Its primary law-making powers were enhanced following a Yes vote in the referendum on 3 March 2011, making it possible for it to legislate in the 20 areas that are devolved without having to consult the UK Parliament, nor the Secretary of State for Wales. The Senedd may delegate authority to enact legislation through Welsh Statutory Instruments. Under the Wales Act 2017 the Senedd came into line with Scotland and Northern Ireland and moved to a reserved powers model.\nNorthern Ireland Assembly.\nThe Northern Ireland Assembly is the devolved legislature of Northern Ireland which is a democratically elected body comprising 90 members known as Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs). The 90 MLAs are elected using the single transferable vote across the 18 Westminster Parliamentary constituencies with each constituency electing 5 MLAs. It was established in 1998 as part of the Good Friday Agreement which was approved by the public in referendums which were held in both Northern Ireland and in the Republic of Ireland.\nIt has power to legislate in a wide range of areas that are not explicitly reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and to appoint the Northern Ireland Executive. It sits at Parliament Buildings at Stormont in Belfast. Legislation of the Assembly empowers the Northern Ireland Executive to issue Statutory Rules in a variety of areas.\nThe Assembly was dissolved on 26 January 2017 owing to a breakdown of trust which brought down both the Assembly and Executive. In January 2020, Arlene Foster resumed her post as First Minister.\nEuropean Union (1973\u20132020).\nThe United Kingdom became a member state of the European Union (EU) when it joined what was originally known as the European Communities on 1 January 1973. By virtue of the European Communities Act 1972, EU law applied in the UK, in effect becoming another source of UK legislation. The UK left the EU on 31 January 2020, though EU law were still applicable in the UK until the end of the implementation period on 31 December 2020.\nThe European Parliament.\nThe European Parliament (EP) is the directly elected parliamentary institution of the European Union. Together with the Council of the European Union (the council) and the European Commission, it exercises the legislative function of the EU. The Parliament is composed of 751 Members of the European Parliament (MEPs), who represent the second-largest democratic electorate in the world (after the Parliament of India) and the largest trans-national democratic electorate in the world (375\u00a0million eligible voters in 2009).\nThe United Kingdom between 1979 and 2020 used to elect members to the European Parliament, of these a number were elected using the D'Hondt method, a form of party-list proportional representation in 11 former regional constituencies in England, Scotland and Wales while in Northern Ireland 3 MEPs were elected using the single transferable vote in a single national constituency. With the exit of the United Kingdom from the EU all legislation that provided for the holding of elections to the European Parliament as well as the position of Member of the European Parliament (MEP) within the UK was repealed by the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59512", "revid": "8212334", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59512", "title": "Serbs", "text": "South Slavic ethnic group\nThe Serbs (, ) are a South Slavic ethnic group native to Southeastern Europe who share a common Serbian ancestry, culture, history, and language. They primarily live in Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Croatia, and Kosovo, with smaller communities in neighboring North Macedonia, Hungary, and Romania. They also constitute a significant diaspora with several communities across Europe, the Americas and Oceania. \nThe Serbs share many cultural traits with the rest of the peoples of Southeast Europe. They are predominantly Eastern Orthodox Christians by religion. The Serbian language (a standardized version of Serbo-Croatian) is official in Serbia, co-official in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, and is spoken by the plurality in Montenegro.\nEthnology.\nThe identity of Serbs is rooted in Eastern Orthodoxy and traditions. In the 19th century, the Serbian national identity was manifested, with awareness of history and tradition, medieval heritage, cultural unity, despite living under different empires. Three elements, together with the legacy of the Nemanji\u0107 dynasty, were crucial in forging identity and preservation during foreign domination: the Serbian Orthodox Church, the Serbian language, and the Kosovo Myth. When the Principality of Serbia gained independence from the Ottoman Empire, Orthodoxy became crucial in defining the national identity, instead of language which was shared by other South Slavs (Croats and Bosniaks). The tradition of \"slava\", the family saint feast day, is an important ethnic marker of Serb identity, and is usually regarded their most significant and most solemn feast day.\nThe origin of the ethnonym is unclear. The most prominent theory considers it of Proto-Slavic origin. Hanna Popowska-Taborska argued native Slavic provenance of the ethnonym, claiming that the theory advances a conclusion that the ethnonym has a meaning of a family kinship or alliance, which was also argued by a number of other scholars.\nGenetic origins.\nAccording to a triple analysis \u2013 autosomal, mitochondrial and paternal \u2014 of available data from large-scale studies on Balto-Slavs and their proximal populations, the whole genome SNP data situates Serbs with Montenegrins in between two Balkan clusters. Y-DNA results show that haplogroups I2a and R1a together stand for the majority of the makeup, with more than 50 percent. \nAccording to several recent studies Serbia's people are among the tallest in the world, with an average male height of .\nHistory.\nArrival of the Slavs.\nEarly Slavs, especially Sclaveni and Antae, including the White Serbs, invaded and settled Southeastern Europe in the 6th and 7th century. Up until the late 560s, their activity was raiding, crossing from the Danube, though with limited Slavic settlement mainly through Byzantine \"foederati\" colonies. The Danube and Sava frontier was overwhelmed by large-scale Slavic settlement in the late 6th and early 7th century. What is today central Serbia was an important geo-strategical province, through which the \"Via Militaris\" crossed. This area was frequently intruded by barbarians in the 5th and 6th centuries. The numerous Slavs mixed with and assimilated the descendants of the indigenous population (Illyrians, Thracians, Dacians, Romans, Celts). White Serbs from White Serbia came to an area near Thessaloniki and then they settled area between Dinaric Alps and Adriatic coast. The region of \"Rascia\" (Ra\u0161ka) was the center of Serb settlement and Serb tribes also occupied parts of modern-day Herzegovina and Montenegro. Prior to their arrival to the Balkans, early Slavs were predominantly involved in agriculture, which is why they settled in areas which were cultivated even during Roman times.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe first Serb states, Serbia (780\u2013960) and Duklja (825\u20131120), were formed chiefly under the Vlastimirovi\u0107 and Vojislavljevi\u0107 dynasties respectively. The other Serb-inhabited lands, or principalities, that were mentioned included the \"countries\" of Paganija, Zahumlje, Travunija. With the decline of the Serbian state of Duklja in the late 11th century, Ra\u0161ka separated from it and replaced it as the most powerful Serbian state. Prince Stefan Nemanja (r. 1169\u201396) conquered the neighbouring territories of Kosovo, Duklja and Zachlumia. The Nemanji\u0107 dynasty ruled over Serbia until the 14th century. Nemanja's older son, Stefan Nemanji\u0107, became Serbia's first recognized king, while his younger son, Rastko, founded the Serbian Orthodox Church in the year 1219, and became known as Saint Sava after his death. Parts of modern-day Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and central Serbia would come under the control of Nemanji\u0107.\nOver the next 140 years, Serbia expanded its borders, from numerous smaller principalities, reaching to a unified Serbian Empire. Its cultural model remained Byzantine, despite political ambitions directed against the empire. The medieval power and influence of Serbia culminated in the reign of Stefan Du\u0161an, who ruled the state from 1331 until his death in 1355. Ruling as Emperor from 1346, his territory included Macedonia, northern Greece, Montenegro, and almost all of modern Albania. When Du\u0161an died, his son Stephen Uro\u0161 V became Emperor.\nWith Turkish invaders beginning their conquest of the Balkans in the 1350s, a major conflict ensued between them and the Serbs, the first major battle was the Battle of Maritsa (1371), in which the Serbs were defeated. With the death of two important Serb leaders in the battle, and with the death of Stephen Uro\u0161 that same year, the Serbian Empire broke up into several small Serbian domains. These states were ruled by feudal lords, with Zeta controlled by the Bal\u0161i\u0107 family, Ra\u0161ka, Kosovo and northern Macedonia held by the Brankovi\u0107 family and Lazar Hrebeljanovi\u0107 holding today's Central Serbia and a portion of Kosovo. Hrebeljanovi\u0107 was subsequently accepted as the titular leader of the Serbs because he was married to a member of the Nemanji\u0107 dynasty. In 1389, the Serbs faced the Ottomans at the Battle of Kosovo on the plain of Kosovo Polje, near the town of Pri\u0161tina. Both Lazar and Sultan Murad I were killed in the fighting. The battle most likely ended in a stalemate, and afterwards Serbia enjoyed a short period of prosperity under despot Stefan Lazarevi\u0107 and resisted falling to the Turks until 1459.\nEarly modern period.\nThe Serbs had taken an active part in the wars fought in the Balkans against the Ottoman Empire, and also organized uprisings; because of this, they suffered persecution and their territories were devastated \u2013 major migrations from Serbia into Habsburg territory ensued. After allied Christian forces had captured Buda from the Ottoman Empire in 1686 during the Great Turkish War, Serbs from Pannonian Plain (present-day Hungary, Slavonia region in present-day Croatia, Ba\u010dka and Banat regions in present-day Serbia) joined the troops of the Habsburg monarchy as separate units known as Serbian Militia. Serbs, as volunteers, massively joined the Austrian side.\nMany Serbs were recruited during the devshirme system, a form of slavery in the Ottoman Empire, in which boys from Balkan Christian families were forcibly converted to Islam and trained for infantry units of the Ottoman army known as the Janissaries. A number of Serbs who converted to Islam occupied high-ranking positions within the Ottoman Empire, such as Grand Vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha and Minister of War field marshal Omar Pasha Latas.\nIn 1688, the Habsburg army took Belgrade and entered the territory of present-day Central Serbia. Louis William, Margrave of Baden-Baden called Serbian Patriarch Arsenije III \u010carnojevi\u0107 to raise arms against the Turks; the Patriarch accepted and returned to the liberated Pe\u0107. As Serbia fell under Habsburg control, Leopold I granted Arsenije nobility and the title of duke. In early November, Arsenije III met with Habsburg commander-in-chief, General Enea Silvio Piccolomini in Prizren; after this talk he sent a note to all Serb bishops to come to him and collaborate only with Habsburg forces.\nA Great Migration of the Serbs (1690) to Habsburg lands was undertaken by Patriarch Arsenije III. The large community of Serbs concentrated in Banat, southern Hungary and the Military Frontier included merchants and craftsmen in the cities, but mainly refugees that were peasants. Smaller groups of Serbs also migrated to the Russian Empire, where they occupied high positions in the military circles.\nThe Serbian Revolution for independence from the Ottoman Empire lasted eleven years, from 1804 until 1815. The revolution comprised two separate uprisings which gained autonomy from the Ottoman Empire that eventually evolved towards full independence (1835\u20131867). During the First Serbian Uprising, led by Duke Kara\u0111or\u0111e Petrovi\u0107, Serbia was independent for almost a decade before the Ottoman army was able to reoccupy the country. Shortly after this, the Second Serbian Uprising began. Led by Milo\u0161 Obrenovi\u0107, it ended in 1815 with a compromise between Serbian revolutionaries and Ottoman authorities. Likewise, Serbia was one of the first nations in the Balkans to abolish feudalism. Serbs are among the first ethnic groups in Europe to form a nation and a clear sense of national identity.\nModern period.\nIn the early 1830s, Serbia gained autonomy and its borders were recognized, with Milo\u0161 Obrenovi\u0107 being recognized as its ruler. Serbia is the fourth modern-day European country, after France, Austria and the Netherlands, to have a codified legal system, as of 1844. The last Ottoman troops withdrew from Serbia in 1867, although Serbia's and Montenegro's independence was not recognized internationally until the Congress of Berlin in 1878.\nSerbia fought in the Balkan Wars of 1912\u201313, which forced the Ottomans out of the Balkans and doubled the territory and population of the Kingdom of Serbia. In 1914, a young Bosnian Serb student named Gavrilo Princip assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, which directly contributed to the outbreak of World War I. In the fighting that ensued, Serbia was invaded by Austria-Hungary. Despite being outnumbered, the Serbs defeated the Austro-Hungarians at the Battle of Cer, which marked the first Allied victory over the Central Powers in the war. Further victories at the battles of Kolubara and the Drina meant that Serbia remained unconquered as the war entered its second year. However, an invasion by the forces of Germany, Austria-Hungary and Bulgaria overwhelmed the Serbs in the winter of 1915, and a subsequent withdrawal by the Serbian Army through Albania took the lives of more than 240,000 Serbs. Serb forces spent the remaining years of the war fighting on the Salonika front in Greece, before liberating Serbia from Austro-Hungarian occupation in November 1918. Serbia suffered the biggest casualty rate in World War I.\nFollowing the victory in WWI, Serbs subsequently formed the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes with other South Slavic peoples. The country was later renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, and was led from 1921 to 1934 by King Alexander I of the Serbian Kara\u0111or\u0111evi\u0107 dynasty. During World War II, Yugoslavia was invaded by the Axis powers in April 1941. The country was subsequently divided into many pieces, with Serbia being directly occupied by the Germans. Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (NDH) were targeted for extermination as part of genocide by the Croatian ultra-nationalist, fascist Usta\u0161e. The Usta\u0161e view of national and racial identity, as well as the theory of Serbs as an inferior race, was under the influence of Croatian nationalists and intellectuals from the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century. Jasenovac camp was notorious for the barbaric practices which occurred in it. Sisak and Jastrebarsko concentration camp were specially formed for children. Serbs in the NDH suffered among the highest casualty rates in Europe during the World War II, while the NDH was one of the most lethal regimes in the 20th century. Diana Budisavljevi\u0107, a humanitarian of Austrian descent, carried out rescue operations from Usta\u0161e camps and saved more than 15,000 children, mostly Serbs.\nMore than half a million Serbs were killed in the territory of Yugoslavia during World War II. Serbs in occupied Yugoslavia subsequently formed a resistance movement known as the Yugoslav Army in the Homeland, or the Chetniks. The Chetniks had the official support of the Allies until 1943, when Allied support shifted to the Communist Yugoslav Partisans, a multi-ethnic force, formed in 1941, which also had a large majority of Serbs in its ranks in the first two years of war. Over the entirety of the war, the ethnic composition of the Partisans was 53 percent Serb. During the entire course of the WWII in Yugoslavia, 64.1% of all Bosnian Partisans were Serbs. Later, after the fall of Italy in September 1943, other ethnic groups joined Partisans in larger numbers.\nAt the end of the war, the Partisans, led by Josip Broz Tito, emerged victorious. Yugoslavia subsequently became a Communist state. Tito died in 1980, and his death saw Yugoslavia plunge into economic turmoil. Yugoslavia disintegrated in the early 1990s, and a series of wars resulted in the creation of five new states. The heaviest fighting occurred in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose Serb populations rebelled and declared independence. The war in Croatia ended in August 1995, with a Croatian military offensive known as Operation Storm put a stop to the Croatian Serb rebellion and causing as many as 200,000 Serbs to flee the country. The Bosnian War ended that same year, with the Dayton Agreement dividing the country along ethnic lines. In 1998\u201399, a conflict in Kosovo between the Yugoslav Army and Albanians seeking independence erupted into full-out war, resulting in a 78-day-long NATO bombing campaign which effectively drove Yugoslav security forces from Kosovo. Subsequently, more than 200,000 Serbs and other non-Albanians fled the province. On 5 October 2000, Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevi\u0107 was overthrown in a bloodless revolt after he refused to admit defeat in the 2000 Yugoslav general election.\nDemographics.\nModern demographic distribution of ethnic Serbs throughout homeland and native regions, as well as in Serbian ethnic diaspora, represents an outcome of several historical and demographic processes, shaped both by economic migrations and forced displacements during the recent Yugoslav Wars (1991\u20131999).\nBalkans.\nAccording to most recent census conducted in Serbia, Croatia and Montenegro, there are nearly 7\u00a0million Serbs living in their native homelands, within the geographical borders of former Yugoslavia. In Serbia itself, around 5.5\u00a0million people identify themselves as ethnic Serbs, and constitute about 83% of the population. More than a million live in Bosnia and Herzegovina (predominantly in the Republika Srpska), where they are one of the three constituent ethnic groups. Serbs in Croatia, Montenegro and North Macedonia also have recognized collective rights, and number some 186,000, 178,000 and 39,000 people, respectively, while another estimated 96,000 live in the disputed area of Kosovo. Smaller minorities exist in Slovenia, some 36,000 people, respectively.\nOutside of the former Yugoslavia, but within their historical and migratory areal, Serbs are officially recognized as national minority in Albania, Romania (18,000), Hungary (7,000), as well as in the Czech Republic and Slovakia.\nDiaspora.\nThere are over 2\u00a0million Serbs in diaspora throughout the world; some sources put that figure as high as 4\u00a0million. There is a large diaspora in Western Europe, particularly in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, France, Italy, Sweden and United Kingdom. Outside Europe, there are significant Serb communities in the United States, Canada, Australia, South America and Southern Africa. The existence of a large diaspora is mainly a consequence of either economic or political (coercion or expulsions) reasons. \nThere were several waves of Serb emigration. The first wave took place since the end of the 19th century and lasted until World War II and was caused by economic reasons; particularly large numbers of Serbs (mainly from peripheral ethnic areas such as Herzegovina, Montenegro, Dalmatia, and Lika) emigrated to the United States. The second wave of emigration took place after the end of World War II. At this time, members of royalist Chetniks and other political opponents of communist regime fled the country mainly going overseas (United States and Australia) and, to a lesser degree, United Kingdom. The third wave of Serb emigration, by far the largest, consisted of economic emigration beginning in the 1960s when several Western European countries signed bilateral agreements with Yugoslavia, allowing the recruitment of industrial workers to those countries; this lasted until the end of the 1980s. The major destinations for migrants were West Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, and to a lesser extent France and Sweden. That generation of diaspora is collectively known as \"gastarbajteri\", after German \"gastarbeiter\" (\"guest-worker\"), since most of the emigrants headed for German-speaking countries. These migrations left some parts of Serbia sparsely populated. Later emigration took place during the 1990s, and was caused by both political and economic reasons. The Yugoslav wars caused many Serbs from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to leave their countries in the first half of the 1990s. The economic sanctions imposed on Serbia caused an economic collapse with an estimated 300,000 people leaving Serbia during that period, 20% of which had a higher education.\nLanguage.\nSerbs speak Serbian, a member of the South Slavic group of languages, specifically the Southwestern group. Standard Serbian is a standardized variety of Serbo-Croatian, and therefore mutually intelligible with Standard Croatian, Standard Montenegrin, and Standard Bosnian (see Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian), which are all based on the Shtokavian dialect.\nSerbian is an official language in Serbia and Bosnia-Herzegovina and is a recognized minority language in Montenegro (although spoken by a plurality of population), Croatia, North Macedonia, Romania, Hungary, Czech Republic and Slovakia. Older forms of literary Serbian are Church Slavonic of the Serbian recension, which is still used for ecclesiastical purposes, and Slavonic-Serbian\u2014a mixture of Serbian, Church Slavonic and Russian used from the mid-18th century to the first decades of the 19th century.\nSerbian has active digraphia, using both Cyrillic and Latin alphabets. Serbian Cyrillic was devised in 1814 by Serbian linguist Vuk Karad\u017ei\u0107, who created the alphabet on phonemic principles. Serbian Latin was created by Ljudevit Gaj and published in 1830. His alphabet mapped completely on Serbian Cyrillic which had been standardized by Vuk Karad\u017ei\u0107 a few years before.\nLoanwords in the Serbian language besides common internationalisms are mostly from Greek, German and Italian, while words of Hungarian origin are present mostly in the north.\nThe Ottoman conquest began a linguistical contact between Ottoman Turkish and South Slavic; Ottoman Turkish influence grew stronger after the 15th century. Besides Turkish loanwords, also many Arabic (such as \"alat\", \"tool\", \"sat\", \"hour, clock\") and Persian (\"\u010darape\", \"socks\", \"\u0161e\u0107er\", \"sugar\") words entered via Turkish, called \"Orientalisms\" (\"orijentalizmi\"). Also, many Greek words entered via Turkish. Words for hitherto unknown sciences, businesses, industries, technologies and professions were brought by the Ottoman Empire. Christian villagers brought urban vocabulary from their travels to Islamic culture cities. Many Turkish loanwords are no longer considered loanwords.\nThere is considerable usage of French words as well, especially in military related terms. One Serbian word that is used in many of the world's languages is \"vampire\" (\"vampir\").\nCulture.\nLiterature, icon painting, music, dance and medieval architecture are the artistic forms for which Serbia is best known. Traditional Serbian visual art (specifically frescoes, and to some extent icons), as well as ecclesiastical architecture, are highly reflective of Byzantine traditions, with some Mediterranean and Western influence.\nMany Serbian monuments and works of art have been lost forever due to various wars, thievery and peacetime marginalizations.\nIn modern times (since the 19th century) Serbs also have a noteworthy classical music and works of philosophy. Notable philosophers include Svetozar Markovi\u0107, Branislav Petronijevi\u0107, Ksenija Atanasijevi\u0107, Radomir Konstantinovi\u0107, Nikola Milo\u0161evi\u0107, Mihailo Markovi\u0107, Justin Popovi\u0107 and Mihailo \u0110uri\u0107.\nArt, music, theatre, and cinema.\nDuring the 12th and 13th centuries, many icons, wall paintings and manuscript miniatures came into existence, as many Serbian Orthodox monasteries and churches such as Hilandar, \u017di\u010da, Studenica, Sopo\u0107ani, Mile\u0161eva, Gra\u010danica and Visoki De\u010dani were built. The architecture of some of these monasteries is world-famous. Prominent architectural styles in the Middle Ages were Ra\u0161ka architectural school, Morava architectural school and Serbo-Byzantin architectural style. During the same period UNESCO protected Ste\u0107ak monumental medieval tombstones were built. The Independence of Serbia in the 19th century was soon followed with Serbo-Byzantine Revival in architecture.\nBaroque and rococo trends in Serbian art emerged in the 18th century and are mostly represented in icon painting and portraits. Most of the Baroque authors were from the territory of Austrian Empire, such as Nikola Ne\u0161kovi\u0107, Teodor Kra\u010dun, Teodor Ili\u0107 \u010ce\u0161ljar, Zaharije Orfelin and Jakov Orfelin. Serbian painting showed the influence of Biedermeier and Neoclassicism as seen in works by Konstantin Danil and Pavel \u0110urkovi\u0107. Many painters followed the artistic trends set in the 19th century Romanticism, notably \u0110ura Jak\u0161i\u0107, Stevan Todorovi\u0107, Katarina Ivanovi\u0107 and Novak Radoni\u0107. Since the mid-1800s, Serbia has produced a number of famous painters who are representative of general European artistic trends. One of the most prominent of these was Paja Jovanovi\u0107, who painted massive canvases on historical themes such as the \"Migration of the Serbs\" (1896). Painter Uro\u0161 Predi\u0107 was also prominent in the field of Serbian art, painting the \"Kosovo Maiden\" and \"Happy Brothers\". While Jovanovi\u0107 and Predi\u0107 were both realist painters, artist Nade\u017eda Petrovi\u0107 was an impressionist and fauvist and Sava \u0160umanovi\u0107 was an accomplished cubist. Painters Petar Lubarda, Vladimir Veli\u010dkovi\u0107 and Ljubomir Popovi\u0107 were famous for their surrealism. Marina Abramovi\u0107 is a world-renowned performance artist, writer, and art filmmaker.\nTraditional Serbian music includes various kinds of bagpipes, flutes, horns, trumpets, lutes, psalteries, drums and cymbals. The kolo is the traditional collective folk dance, which has a number of varieties throughout the regions. The first Serbian composers started working in the 14th and 15th century, like Kir Stefan the Serb. Composer and musicologist Stevan Stojanovi\u0107 Mokranjac is considered one of the most important founders of modern Serbian music. Other noted classical composers include Kornelije Stankovi\u0107, Stanislav Bini\u010dki, Petar Konjovi\u0107, Miloje Milojevi\u0107, Stevan Hristi\u0107, Josif Marinkovi\u0107, Luigi von Kunits, Ljubica Mari\u0107 and Vasilije Mokranjac. Well-known musicians include Zdravko \u010coli\u0107, Arsen Dedi\u0107, Predrag Gojkovi\u0107-Cune, Toma Zdravkovi\u0107, Milan Mladenovi\u0107, Radomir Mihailovi\u0107 To\u010dak, Bora \u0110or\u0111evi\u0107, Mom\u010dilo Bajagi\u0107 Bajaga, \u0110or\u0111e Bala\u0161evi\u0107, Ceca and others.\nSerbia has produced many talented filmmakers, the most famous of whom are Slavko Vorkapi\u0107, Du\u0161an Makavejev, \u017divojin Pavlovi\u0107, Slobodan \u0160ijan, Goran Markovi\u0107, Goran Paskaljevi\u0107, Emir Kusturica, \u017delimir \u017dilnik, Sr\u0111an Dragojevi\u0107, Srdan Golubovi\u0107 and Mila Turajli\u0107. \u017dilnik and Stefan Arsenijevi\u0107 won the Golden Bear award at Berlinale, while Mila Turajli\u0107 won the main award at IDFA. Kusturica became world-renowned after winning the Palme d'Or twice at the Cannes Film Festival, numerous other prizes, and is a UNICEF National Ambassador for Serbia. Several Americans of Serb origin have been featured prominently in Hollywood. The most notable of these are Academy Award winners Karl Malden, Steve Tesich, Peter Bogdanovich, Tony-winning theatre director Darko Tresnjak, Emmy-winning director Marina Zenovich and actors Iv\u00e1n Petrovich, Brad Dexter, Lolita Davidovich, Milla Jovovich and Stana Katic.\nLiterature.\nMost literature written by early Serbs was about religious themes. The founders of the Serbian Orthodox Church wrote various gospels, psalters, menologies, hagiographies, along with essays and sermons. At the end of the 12th century, two of the most important pieces of Serbian medieval literature were created\u2013 the Miroslav Gospels and the Vukan Gospels, which combined handwritten Biblical texts with painted initials and small pictures. The Crnojevi\u0107 printing house was the first printing house in Southeastern Europe and is considered an important part of Serbian cultural history.\nNotable Baroque-influenced authors were Andrija Zmajevi\u0107, Gavril Stefanovi\u0107 Venclovi\u0107, Jovan Raji\u0107, Zaharije Orfelin and others. Dositej Obradovi\u0107 was the most prominent figure of the Age of Enlightenment, while the most notable Classicist writer was Jovan Sterija Popovi\u0107, although his works also contained elements of Romanticism. Modern Serbian literature began with Vuk Karad\u017ei\u0107's collections of folk songs in the 19th century, and the writings of Njego\u0161 and Branko Radi\u010devi\u0107. The first prominent representative of Serbian literature in the 20th century was Jovan Skerli\u0107, who wrote in pre\u2013World War I Belgrade and helped introduce Serbian writers to literary modernism. The most important Serbian writer in the inter-war period was Milo\u0161 Crnjanski.\nThe first Serb authors who appeared after World War II were Mihailo Lali\u0107 and Dobrica \u0106osi\u0107. Other notable post-war Yugoslav authors such as Ivo Andri\u0107 and Me\u0161a Selimovi\u0107 were assimilated to Serbian culture, and both identified as Serbs. Andri\u0107 went on to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1961. Danilo Ki\u0161, another popular Serbian writer, was known for writing \"A Tomb for Boris Davidovich\", as well as several acclaimed novels. Amongst contemporary Serbian writers, Milorad Pavi\u0107 stands out as being the most critically acclaimed, with his novels \"Dictionary of the Khazars\", \"Landscape Painted with Tea\" and \"The Inner Side of the Wind\" bringing him international recognition. Highly revered in Europe and in South America, Pavi\u0107 is considered one of the most intriguing writers from the beginning of the 21st century. Charles Simic is a notable contemporary Serbian-American poet, former United States Poet Laureate and a Pulitzer Prize winner. Contemporary writer Zoran \u017divkovi\u0107 authored more than 20 prose books and is best-known for his SF works which have been published in 23 countries.\nEducation and science.\nMany Serbs have contributed to the field of science and technology. There are more Serbian scientists and scholars working abroad than in the Balkans. At least 7000 Serbs who have a PhD are working abroad. Medical specialists from Serbia have performed a number of operations which have been described as pioneer works.\nSerbian American mechanical and electrical engineer Nikola Tesla is regarded as one of the most important inventors in history. He is renowned for his contributions to the discipline of electricity and magnetism in the late 19th and early 20th century. Seven Serbian American engineers and scientists known as \"Serbo 7\" took part in construction of the Apollo spaceship. Physicist and physical chemist Mihajlo Pupin is best known for his landmark theory of modern electrical filters as well as for his numerous patents, while Milutin Milankovi\u0107 is best known for his theory of long-term climate change caused by changes in the position of the Earth in comparison to the Sun, now known as Milankovitch cycles. Gordana Vunjak-Novakovic is a Serbian American biomedical engineer focusing on engineering human tissues for regenerative medicine, stem cell research and modeling of disease. She is one of the most highly cited scientists of all times.\nNotable Serb mathematicians include Mihailo Petrovi\u0107, Jovan Karamata and \u0110uro Kurepa. Mihailo Petrovi\u0107 is known for having contributed significantly to differential equations and phenomenology, as well as inventing one of the first prototypes of an analog computer. Roger Joseph Boscovich was a Ragusan physicist, astronomer, mathematician and polymath of paternal Serbian origin (although there are competing claims for Bo\u0161kovi\u0107's nationality) who produced a precursor of atomic theory and made many contributions to astronomy and also discovered the absence of atmosphere on the Moon. Jovan Cviji\u0107 founded modern geography in Serbia and made pioneering research on the geography of the Balkan Peninsula, Dinaric race and karst. Josif Pan\u010di\u0107 made contributions to botany and discovered a number of new floral species including the Serbian spruce. Biologist and physiologist Ivan \u0110aja performed research in the role of the adrenal glands in thermoregulation, as well as pioneering work in hypothermia.\nValtazar Bogi\u0161i\u0107 is considered to be a pioneer in the sociology of law and sociological jurisprudence.\nNames.\nThere are several different layers of Serbian names. Serbian given names largely originate from Slavic roots:\ne.g., Vuk, Bojan, Goran, Zoran, Dragan, Milan, Miroslav, Vladimir, Slobodan, Du\u0161an, Milica, Nevena, Vesna, Radmila. Other names are of Christian origin, originating from the Bible (Hebrew, through Greek), such as Lazar, Mihailo, Ivan, Jovan, Ilija, Marija, Ana, Ivana. Along similar lines of non-Slavic Christian names are Greek ones such as: Stefan, Nikola, Aleksandar, Filip, \u0110or\u0111e, Andrej, Jelena, Katarina, Vasilije, Todor, while those of Latin origin include: Marko, Antonije, Sr\u0111an, Marina, Petar, Pavle, Natalija, Igor (through Russian).\nMost Serbian surnames are paternal, maternal, occupational or derived from personal traits. It is estimated that over two thirds of all Serbian surnames have the suffix \"-i\u0107\" (-\u0438\u045b) (), a Slavic diminutive, originally functioning to create patronymics. Thus the surname Petrovi\u0107 means the \"son of Petar\" (from a male progenitor, the root is extended with possessive \"-ov\" or \"-ev\"). Due to limited use of international typewriters and unicode computer encoding, the suffix may be simplified to \"-ic\", historically transcribed with a phonetic ending, \"-ich\" or \"-itch\" in foreign languages. Other common surname suffixes found among Serbian surnames are \"-ov\", \"-ev\", \"-in\" and \"-ski\" (without \"-i\u0107\") which is the Slavic possessive case suffix, thus Nikola's son becomes Nikolin, Petar's son Petrov, and Jovan's son Jovanov. Other, less common suffices are \"-alj/olj/elj\", \"-ija\", \"-ica\", \"-ar/ac/an\". The ten most common surnames in Serbia, in order, are Jovanovi\u0107, Petrovi\u0107, Nikoli\u0107, Markovi\u0107, \u0110or\u0111evi\u0107, Stojanovi\u0107, Ili\u0107, Stankovi\u0107, Pavlovi\u0107 and Milo\u0161evi\u0107.\nReligion.\nSerbs are predominantly Orthodox Christians. The autocephaly of the Serbian Orthodox Church, was established in 1219, as an Archbishopric, and raised to the Patriarchate in 1346. It is led by the Serbian Patriarch, and consists of three archbishoprics, six metropolitanates and thirty-one eparchies, having around 10\u00a0million adherents. Followers of the church form the largest religious group in Serbia and Montenegro, and the second-largest in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia. The church has an archbishopric in North Macedonia and dioceses in Western Europe, North America, South America and Australia.\nThe identity of ethnic Serbs was historically largely based on Orthodox Christianity and on the Serbian Church in particular. The conversion of the South Slavs from paganism to Christianity took place before the Great Schism of 1054. During the time of the Great Schism, Serbian rulers including Mihailo Vojislavljevi\u0107 and Stefan Nemanja were Roman Catholics, with the former being a vassal of the Papal States. In 1217, the Serbian ruler Stefan Nemanja II was crowned by Pope Honorius III of the Roman Catholic Church. However in 1219, Nemanja II was crowned once again by the newly independent Serbian Orthodox Church. This shift solidified the Christian Orthodox religion in Serbia.\nWith the arrival of the Ottoman Empire, some Serbs converted to Islam. This was particularly, but not wholly, the case in Bosnia. Since the second half of the 19th century, a small number of Serbs converted to Protestantism, while historically some Serbs were Roman Catholics (especially in Bay of Kotor and Dalmatia; e.g. Serb-Catholic movement in Dubrovnik). In a personal correspondence with author and critic dr. Milan \u0160evi\u0107 in 1932, Marko Murat complained that Orthodox Serbs are not acknowledging the Roman Catholic Serb community on the basis of their faith. The remainder of Serbs remain predominantly Serbian Orthodox Christians.\nSymbols.\nAmong the most notable national and ethnic symbols are the flag of Serbia and the coat of arms of Serbia. The flag consists of a red-blue-white tricolour, rooted in Pan-Slavism, and has been used since the 19th century. Apart from being the national flag, it is also used officially in Republika Srpska (by Bosnian Serbs) and as the official ethnic Flag of Serbs of Croatia. The coat of arms, which includes both the Serbian eagle and Serbian cross, has also been officially used since the 19th century, its elements dating back to the Middle Ages, showing Byzantine and Christian heritage. These symbols are used by various Serb organisations, political parties and institutions. The Three-finger salute, also called the \"Serb salute\", is a popular expression for ethnic Serbs and Serbia, originally expressing Serbian Orthodoxy and today simply being a symbol for ethnic Serbs and the Serbian nation, made by extending the thumb, index, and middle fingers of one or both hands.\nTraditions and customs.\nTraditional clothing varies due to diverse geography and climate of the territory inhabited by the Serbs. The traditional footwear, \"opanci\", is worn throughout the Balkans. The most common folk costume of Serbia is that of \u0160umadija, a region in central Serbia, which includes the national hat, the \u0160ajka\u010da. Older villagers still wear their traditional costumes. The traditional dance is the circle dance, called \"kolo\". Zmijanje embroidery is a specific technique of embroidery practised by the women of villages in area Zmijanje on mountain Manja\u010da and as such is a part of the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. Pirot carpet is a variety of flat tapestry woven rug traditionally produced in Pirot, a town in southeastern Serbia.\n\"Slava\" is the family's annual ceremony and veneration of their patron saint, a social event in which the family is together at the house of the patriarch. The tradition is an important ethnic marker of Serb identity. Serbs usually regard the Slava as their most significant and most solemn feast day.\nSerbs have their own customs regarding Christmas, which includes the sacral tree, the \"badnjak\", a young oak. On Orthodox Easter, Serbs have the tradition of Slavic Egg decorating. \u010cuvari Hristovog groba is a religious/cultural practice of guarding a representation of Christ's grave on Good Friday in the Church of St. Nicholas by the Serbian Orthodox inhabitants in the town of Vrlika.\nCuisine.\nSerbian cuisine is largely heterogeneous, with heavy Oriental, Central European and Mediterranean influences. Despite this, it has evolved and achieved its own culinary identity. Food is very important in Serbian social life, particularly during religious holidays such as Christmas, Easter and feast days, i.e., \"slava\". Staples of the Serbian diet include bread, meat, fruits, vegetables, and dairy products. Traditionally, three meals are consumed per day. Breakfast generally consists of eggs, meat and bread. Lunch is considered the main meal, and is normally eaten in the afternoon. Traditionally, Domestic or turkish coffee is prepared after a meal, and is served in small cups. Bread is the basis of all Serbian meals, and it plays an important role in Serbian cuisine and can be found in religious rituals. A traditional Serbian welcome is to offer bread and salt to guests, and also \"slatko\" (fruit preserve). Meat is widely consumed, as is fish. Serbian specialties include \"kajmak\" (a dairy product similar to clotted cream), \"proja\" (cornbread), \"ka\u010damak\" (corn-flour porridge), and \"gibanica\" (cheese and kajmak pie). \u0106evap\u010di\u0107i, caseless grilled and seasoned sausages made of minced meat, is the national dish of Serbia.\n\u0160ljivovica (Slivovitz) is the national drink of Serbia in domestic production for centuries, and plum is the national fruit. The international name \"Slivovitz\" is derived from Serbian. Plum and its products are of great importance to Serbs and part of numerous customs. A Serbian meal usually starts or ends with plum products and \u0160ljivovica is served as an aperitif. A saying goes that the best place to build a house is where a plum tree grows best. Traditionally, \u0160ljivovica (commonly referred to as \"rakija\") is connected to Serbian culture as a drink used at all important rites of passage (birth, baptism, military service, marriage, death, etc.), and in the Serbian Orthodox patron saint celebration (\"slava\"). It is used in numerous folk remedies, and is given certain degree of respect above all other alcoholic drinks. The fertile region of \u0160umadija in central Serbia is particularly known for its plums and \u0160ljivovica. Serbia is the largest exporter of Slivovitz in the world, and second largest plum producer in the world. Winemaking tradition in modern-day Serbia dates back to the Roman times in the 3rd century, while Serbs have been involved in winemaking since the 8th century.\nSport.\nSerbs are known for their sporting achievements, and have produced a number of talented athletes.\nThe Hungarian citizen Mom\u010dilo Tapavica was the first Slav and Serb to win an Olympic medal, in the 1896 Summer Olympics.\nOver the years Serbia has been home to many internationally successful football players such as Dragan D\u017eaji\u0107 (officially recognized as \"the best Serbian footballer of all times\" by Football Association of Serbia; 1968 Ballon d'Or third place), Rajko Miti\u0107, Dragoslav \u0160ekularac and more recent likes of Dragan Stojkovi\u0107, Dejan Stankovi\u0107, Nemanja Vidi\u0107 (two-time Premier League Player of the Season and member of FIFPro World XI), Branislav Ivanovi\u0107 (Serbia's most capped player) and Nemanja Mati\u0107. Radomir Anti\u0107 is a notable football coach, best known for his work with the national team, Real Madrid C.F. and FC Barcelona. Serbia has developed a reputation as one of the world's biggest exporters of expat footballers.\nA total of 22 Serbian players have played in the NBA in the last two decades, including three-time NBA All-Star Predrag \"Peja\" Stojakovi\u0107, as well as NBA All-Star and both FIBA and NBA Hall of Fame inductee Vlade Divac. The most notable is Nikola Joki\u0107, the 2020\u201321\u20132022 NBA Most Valuable Player Award winner and 2023 NBA finals MVP recipient. Serbian players that made a great impact in Europe include four members of the FIBA Hall of Fame from the 1960s and 1970s \u2013 Dragan Ki\u0107anovi\u0107, Dra\u017een Dalipagi\u0107, Radivoj Kora\u0107, and Zoran Slavni\u0107 \u2013 as well as recent stars such as Dejan Bodiroga (2002 All-Europe Player of the Year), Aleksandar \u0110or\u0111evi\u0107 (1994 and 1995 Mr. Europa), Milo\u0161 Teodosi\u0107 (2009\u201310 Euroleague MVP), Nemanja Bjelica (2014\u201315 Euroleague MVP), and Vasilije Mici\u0107 (2020\u201321 Euroleague MVP). The \"Serbian coaching school\" produced many of the most successful European coaches of all times, such as \u017deljko Obradovi\u0107 (a record nine Euroleague titles), Bo\u017eidar Maljkovi\u0107 (four Euroleague titles), Aleksandar Nikoli\u0107 (three Euroleague titles), Du\u0161an Ivkovi\u0107 (two Euroleague titles), and Svetislav Pe\u0161i\u0107 (one Euroleague title).\nOne of the most notable Serbian athletes is tennis player Novak Djokovic. He has won an all-time record 24 Grand Slam men's singles titles, and has been year-end World No. 1 on a record eight occasions. Djokovic is regarded by many to be the greatest men's tennis player of all time. Other notable tennis players include Ana Ivanovic (champion of 2008 French Open) and Jelena Jankovi\u0107, who were both ranked No. 1 in the WTA rankings, while Nenad Zimonji\u0107 and Slobodan \u017divojinovi\u0107 were ranked No. 1 in doubles.\nNotable water polo players are Vladimir Vujasinovi\u0107, Aleksandar \u0160api\u0107, Vanja Udovi\u010di\u0107, Andrija Prlainovi\u0107 and Filip Filipovi\u0107.\nOther noted Serbian athletes, including Olympic and world champions and medalists, are: swimmer Milorad \u010cavi\u0107, volleyball player Nikola Grbi\u0107, handball player Svetlana Kiti\u0107, long-jumper Ivana \u0160panovi\u0107, shooter Jasna \u0160ekari\u0107, sprint canoer Marko Tomi\u0107evi\u0107, judoka Nemanja Majdov and taekwondoist Milica Mandi\u0107.\nA number of sportspeople of Serb origin represented other nations, such as tennis players Daniel Nestor, Jelena Dokic, Milos Raonic and Kristina Mladenovic, NHL player Milan Lucic, basketball players NBA All-star Pete Maravich, Nikola Vu\u010devi\u0107, Goran Dragi\u0107, Luka Don\u010di\u0107, wrestler Jim Trifunov, sprint canoer Natasa Dusev-Janics, soccer player Miodrag Belodedici, artistic gymnast Lavinia Milo\u0219ovici, racquetball player Rhonda Rajsich and racing driver Bill Vukovich.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59514", "revid": "21479757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59514", "title": "Senator", "text": ""}
{"id": "59517", "revid": "31387962", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59517", "title": "European Communities Act 1972 (UK)", "text": "Act of the UK Parliament\nThe European Communities Act 1972 (c. 68), also known as the ECA 1972, was an act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom which made legal provision for the accession of the United Kingdom as a member state to the three European Communities (EC)\u00a0\u2013 the European Economic Community (EEC, the 'Common Market'), European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom), and the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC, which became defunct in 2002); the EEC and ECSC subsequently became the European Union. \nThe Act also incorporated Community Law (later European Union Law), along with its , its treaties, regulations, directives, decisions, the Community Customs Union (later European Union Customs Union), the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), the Common Fisheries Policy (FCP) together with judgments of the European Court of Justice into the domestic law of the United Kingdom.\nThe Treaty of Accession was signed by the then Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath and the then President of the European Commission Franco Maria Malfatti in Brussels on 22 January 1972; the UK's accession into the Communities was subsequently ratified via the Act to have full legal force from 1 January 1973.\nAlthough not specifically stated within the legislation but due to the principle of Community Law (subsequently European Union Law) having primacy over the domestic national laws of the member states which was first established though the Costa v ENEL European Court of Justice ruling in 1964 as a consequence it also became binding on all legislation passed by the UK Parliament (and also upon the UK's devolved administrations\u2014the Northern Ireland Assembly, Scottish Parliament and the Welsh Parliament (Senedd Cymru) although none of these institutions existed at the time of the passing of the Act). It was the most significant constitutional statute to be passed by the Heath government of 1970\u20131974, and one of the most significant UK constitutional statutes to ever be passed by the UK Parliament.\nThe Act was at the time of its repeal significantly amended from its original form, incorporating the changes wrought by the Single European Act, the Maastricht Treaty, the Amsterdam Treaty, the Nice Treaty, and the Lisbon Treaty.\nOn 13 July 2017, the then Brexit Secretary, David Davis, introduced what became the European Union (Withdrawal) Act to Parliament, which made provision for repealing the 1972 Act on \"exit day\", which was when enacted defined as 29 March 2019 at 11 p.m.(London time, GMT), but later postponed by EU decision first to either 22 May 2019 or 12 April 2019, later to 31 October 2019, and then again to 31 January 2020.\nThe Act was repealed on 31 January 2020 by the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018, although its effect was 'saved' under the provisions of the European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020. This provision was in effect from 31 January 2020 (when the United Kingdom formally left the European Union) until the end of the Brexit implementation period on 31 December 2020, when the \"saving\" provisions were automatically repealed.\nThe repeal of these last remaining provisions ended the automatic incorporation into UK law of all future EU laws (with all previous EU laws being retained and transferred into UK law under the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018), and most future judgments of the ECJ as well as the regulations of the European Union Customs Union, the European Single Market, the Common Agricultural Policy and the Common Fisheries Policy, after 48 years on the statute book (with the exception to Northern Ireland under the terms of the Northern Ireland protocol), bringing to an end decades of political debate and discussions about the constitutional significance of the Act and its effect on the principle of Parliamentary sovereignty.\nOrigin and background.\nWhen the European Communities (EC) came into being in 1958, the UK chose to remain aloof and instead join the alternative bloc, EFTA. Almost immediately the British government regretted its decision, and in 1961, along with Denmark, Ireland and Norway, the UK applied to join the three Communities. However, President Charles de Gaulle saw British membership as a Trojan Horse for US influence, and vetoed it; all four applications were suspended. The four countries resubmitted their applications in 1967, and the French veto was lifted upon Georges Pompidou succeeding de Gaulle in 1969. In 1970, accession negotiations took place between the UK Government, led by Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath, the European Communities and various European leaders. Despite disagreements over the CAP and the UK's relationship with the Commonwealth, terms were agreed. In October 1971, after a lengthy six day Commons debate on a white paper motion on the principle of accession, MPs voted 356\u2013244 in favour of joining the EC.\nFor the Treaty to take effect upon entry into the Communities on 1 January 1973, and for the UK to embrace the EEC Institutions and Community law, an Act of Parliament was required. Only three days after the signing of the Treaty, a European Communities Bill of just 12 clauses, was presented to the House of Commons by Geoffrey Rippon. The European Communities Act came into being, and Edward Heath signed the Treaty of Accession in Brussels on 22 January 1972. Denmark and Ireland also joined the Communities on the same day, 1 January 1973, as the UK; the Norwegian people had rejected membership in a referendum in 1972.\nFirst Reading (House of Commons).\nThe European Communities Bill was introduced the House of Commons for its first reading by Geoffrey Rippon, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster on 26 January 1972.\nSecond Reading (House of Commons).\nOn 17 February 1972, the House of Commons voted narrowly by 309\u2013301 in favour of the Bill at its second reading, after three days of intense debate. The Bill then passed on to Committee Stage before its third reading.\nThird Reading (House of Commons).\nDuring this discussion in the House of Commons, MPs pointed out that the Government had structured the European Communities Bill so that Parliament could debate the technical issues about how the treaty enactment would occur (how the UK would join the European Communities) but could not debate the treaty of accession itself and decried this sacrifice of Parliament's sovereignty to the Government's desire to join the European project.\nOn 13 July 1972, the House of Commons voted 301\u2013284 in favour of the Bill in its third and final reading before passing on to the House of Lords. The Bill then passed to the House of Lords.\nRoyal assent, Ratification, and Taking Effect.\nThe Act received Royal Assent on 17 October, and the UK's instrument of ratification of the Treaty of Accession was deposited the next day with the Italian government (the traditional European Communities treaty records holder) as required by the Treaty. Since the Treaty specified its effective date as 1 January 1973 (in Article 2) and the Act specified only \"entry date\" for its actions, the Act and the Treaty took effect 1 January 1973, when the United Kingdom officially became a member state of the European Communities (subsequently the European Union) along with Denmark and Ireland.\nThe Act.\nThe European Communities Act was the instrument whereby the UK Parliament effected the changes required by the Treaty of Accession by which the UK joined the European Union (then known as the European Communities). The Act as passed in its original form was, given its constitutional significance, surprisingly short and contained just twelve clauses.\nCommunity Law (EU Law).\nThe Act made the historic legal provision by incorporating and binding Community Law (subsequently European Union Law) and rulings from the European Court of Justice into the domestic law of the United Kingdom along with its and its regulations and directives. In effect this legislation made \"Community Law (EU Law) \" another form of UK Law. The provisions for this was laid out in Section 2 of the Act.\nIt enabled, under section 2(2), UK government ministers to make regulations to transpose EU Directives (then Community law) and rulings of the European Court of Justice into UK law. The Treaty itself says the member states will conform themselves to the European Communities existing and future decisions. The Act and the Treaty of Accession have been interpreted by UK courts as granting EU law primacy over domestic UK legislation.\nEuropean Economic Community (EEC).\nThe Act legislated for the United Kingdom's accession to the European Economic Community (EEC), which was at the time the main international organisation of the three Communities (more commonly known at the time as the Common Market) and incorporated its rules and regulations into the domestic law of the United Kingdom.\nEuropean Coal and Steel Community (ECSC).\nThe Act legislated for the United Kingdom's accession to the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) and incorporated its rules and regulations into the domestic law of the United Kingdom.\nEuropean Atomic Energy Community (EAEC or Euratom).\nThe Act legislated for the United Kingdom's accession to the European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC or Euratom) and incorporated its rules and regulations into the domestic law of the United Kingdom.\nThe European Treaties.\nThe Act incorporated the following treaties into the domestic law of the United Kingdom.\nThe following treaties were added to the act though subsequent amendments.\nCommon Agricultural Policy.\nThe Act legislated for the full participation of the United Kingdom in the Common Agricultural Policy and fully incorporated the policy into UK domestic law. It established the Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce. It repealed previous pieces of UK domestic legislation to allow for this.\nCommon Fisheries Policy.\nThe Act legislated for the full participation of the United Kingdom in the Common Fisheries Policy and fully incorporates the policy into UK domestic law.\nCustoms Union.\nThe Act legislated for the incorporation and full participation of the United Kingdom within the European Union Customs Union (then the Community Customs Union) into domestic law, as well as the application of the European common external tariff to all goods which come into the UK from outside the European Communities. The Act repealed large sections of previous UK domestic legislation to allow for this.\nEffect and primacy of EC/EU law.\nThe primacy and direct effect of EU law has no formal basis in the founding treaties of the union, but was developed by the European Court of Justice (ECJ), long before UK accession, on the grounds that the purpose of the treaties would be thwarted if EU law were subordinate to national law. The view of the ECJ is that any norm of EU law takes precedence over national law, including national constitutions. Most national courts, including the United Kingdom's, do not accept this monist perspective. The primacy of EU law in the United Kingdom during the time of its membership was derived from the European Communities Act in Section 2 (4).\nThe British constitution is based on Parliamentary sovereignty and has a dualist view of international law: international treaties do not become part of UK domestic law unless they are incorporated into UK law by an Act of Parliament. This means that if the Act were repealed, any EU law (unless it has been transposed into British legislation) would, in practice, become unenforceable in the United Kingdom and Gibraltar, and the powers delegated by the Act to the EU institutions would return to the Parliament of the United Kingdom. This was attempted to made clear to be the law in the United Kingdom by the Conservative\u2013Liberal Democrat Coalition with the inclusion of the \"sovereignty clause\" in the EU Act 2011 which was passed by the UK Parliament when the UK was still an EU member state.\n\"Factortame\".\nIn the House of Lords \"Factortame\" case, Lord Bridge confirmed that section 2(4) of the ECA effectively automatically inserts a virtual (implied) clause into all UK statutes, that they are to be automatically disapplied wherever they come into conflict with European law. This is seen by the legal scholar William Wade as a departure from the English constitutional doctrine of Westminster parliamentary sovereignty as it was and had been traditionally understood.\nRepeal.\nThe United Kingdom voted for withdrawal from the European Union in the referendum held on 23 June 2016, and afterwards there was speculation that the act would be either repealed or amended. In October 2016, Prime Minister Theresa May promised a \"Great Repeal Bill\" which would repeal the 1972 Act and import its regulations into UK law, with effect from the date of British withdrawal; the regulations could then be amended or repealed on a case-by-case basis.\nThe European Union (Withdrawal) Bill was introduced in the House of Commons on 13 July 2017. It was passed by Parliament on 20 June 2018, and received royal assent on 26 June 2018. The European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 provides for the repeal of the European Communities Act 1972 at the time the United Kingdom exits the EU, on 29 March 2019 at 11:00 pm. However, in a July 2018 white paper, the government announced its intention to amend the Withdrawal Act to provide for the continued effect of the ECA until the end of the \"transition period\" (31 December 2020, as of July 2018), therefore allowing EU law to continue to apply in that period. This was achieved when the European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020 was passed in January 2020 which \"saved\" the effect of the ECA until the end of the implementation period which was scheduled for 31 December 2020 before it was automatically repealed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59521", "revid": "49239263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59521", "title": "Preadditive category", "text": "Mathematical category whose hom sets form Abelian groups\nIn mathematics, specifically in category theory, a preadditive category is \nanother name for an Ab-category, i.e., a category that is enriched over the category of abelian groups, Ab.\nThat is, an Ab-category C is a category such that\nevery hom-set Hom(\"A\",\"B\") in C has the structure of an abelian group, and composition of morphisms is bilinear, in the sense that composition of morphisms distributes over the group operation.\nIn formulas:\nformula_1\nand\nformula_2\nwhere + is the group operation.\nSome authors have used the term \"additive category\" for preadditive categories, but this page reserves that term for certain special preadditive categories (see below).\nExamples.\nThe most obvious example of a preadditive category is the category Ab itself. More precisely, Ab is a closed monoidal category. Note that commutativity is crucial here; it ensures that the sum of two group homomorphisms is again a homomorphism. In contrast, the category of all groups is not closed. See Medial category.\nOther common examples:\nFor more examples, see .\nElementary properties.\nBecause every hom-set Hom(\"A\",\"B\") is an abelian group, it has a zero element 0. This is the zero morphism from \"A\" to \"B\". Because composition of morphisms is bilinear, the composition of a zero morphism and any other morphism (on either side) must be another zero morphism. If you think of composition as analogous to multiplication, then this says that multiplication by zero always results in a product of zero, which is a familiar intuition. Extending this analogy, the fact that composition is bilinear in general becomes the distributivity of multiplication over addition.\nFocusing on a single object \"A\" in a preadditive category, these facts say that the endomorphism hom-set Hom(\"A\",\"A\") is a ring, if we define multiplication in the ring to be composition. This ring is the endomorphism ring of \"A\". Conversely, every ring (with identity) is the endomorphism ring of some object in some preadditive category. Indeed, given a ring \"R\", we can define a preadditive category R to have a single object \"A\", let Hom(\"A\",\"A\") be \"R\", and let composition be ring multiplication. Since \"R\" is an abelian group and multiplication in a ring is bilinear (distributive), this makes R a preadditive category. Category theorists will often think of the ring \"R\" and the category R as two different representations of the same thing, so that a particularly perverse category theorist might define a ring as a preadditive category with exactly one object (in the same way that a monoid can be viewed as a category with only one object\u2014and forgetting the additive structure of the ring gives us a monoid).\nIn this way, preadditive categories can be seen as a generalisation of rings. Many concepts from ring theory, such as ideals, Jacobson radicals, and factor rings can be generalized in a straightforward manner to this setting. When attempting to write down these generalizations, one should think of the morphisms in the preadditive category as the \"elements\" of the \"generalized ring\".\nAdditive functors.\nIf formula_3 and formula_4 are preadditive categories, then a functor formula_5 is additive if it too is enriched over the category formula_6. That is, formula_7 is additive if and only if, given any objects formula_8 and formula_9 of formula_3, the function formula_11 is a group homomorphism. Most functors studied between preadditive categories are additive.\nFor a simple example, if the rings formula_12 and formula_13 are represented by the one-object preadditive categories formula_14 and formula_15, then a ring homomorphism from formula_12 to formula_13 is represented by an additive functor from formula_14 to formula_15, and conversely.\nIf formula_3 and formula_4 are categories and formula_4 is preadditive, then the functor category formula_23 is also preadditive, because natural transformations can be added in a natural way.\nIf formula_3 is preadditive too, then the category formula_25 of additive functors and all natural transformations between them is also preadditive.\nThe latter example leads to a generalization of modules over rings: If formula_3 is a preadditive category, then formula_27 is called the module category over formula_3. When formula_3 is the one-object preadditive category corresponding to the ring formula_12, this reduces to the ordinary category of (left) formula_12-modules. Again, virtually all concepts from the theory of modules can be generalised to this setting.\nR-linear categories.\nMore generally, one can consider a category C enriched over the monoidal category of modules over a commutative ring R, called an R-linear category. In other words, each hom-set formula_32 in C has the structure of an R-module, and composition of morphisms is R-bilinear.\nWhen considering functors between two R-linear categories, one often restricts to those that are R-linear, so those that induce R-linear maps on each hom-set.\nBiproducts.\nAny finite product in a preadditive category must also be a coproduct, and conversely. In fact, finite products and coproducts in preadditive categories can be characterised by the following \"biproduct condition\":\nThe object \"B\" is a biproduct of the objects \"A\"1, ..., \"An\" if and only if there are \"projection morphisms\" \"p\"\"j\":\u00a0\"B\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"A\"\"j\" and \"injection morphisms\" \"i\"\"j\":\u00a0\"A\"\"j\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"B\", such that (\"i\"1\u2218\"p\"1)\u00a0+ \u00b7\u00b7\u00b7\u00a0+ (\"in\"\u2218\"pn\") is the identity morphism of \"B\", \"pj\"\u2218\"ij\" is the identity morphism of Aj, and \"p\"\"j\"\u2218\"ik\" is the zero morphism from \"A\"\"k\" to \"Aj\" whenever \"j\" and \"k\" are distinct.\nThis biproduct is often written \"A\"1\u2009\u2295\u2009\u00b7\u00b7\u00b7\u2009\u2295\u2009\"An\", borrowing the notation for the direct sum. This is because the biproduct in well known preadditive categories like Ab \"is\" the direct sum. However, although infinite direct sums make sense in some categories, like Ab, infinite biproducts do \"not\" make sense (see ).\nThe biproduct condition in the case \"n\"\u2009=\u20090 simplifies drastically; \"B\" is a \"nullary biproduct\" if and only if the identity morphism of \"B\" is the zero morphism from \"B\" to itself, or equivalently if the hom-set Hom(\"B\",\"B\") is the trivial ring. Note that because a nullary biproduct will be both terminal (a nullary product) and initial (a nullary coproduct), it will in fact be a zero object.\nIndeed, the term \"zero object\" originated in the study of preadditive categories like Ab, where the zero object is the zero group.\nA preadditive category in which every biproduct exists (including a zero object) is called \"additive\". Further facts about biproducts that are mainly useful in the context of additive categories may be found under that subject.\nKernels and cokernels.\nBecause the hom-sets in a preadditive category have zero morphisms,\nthe notion of kernel and cokernel\nmake sense. That is, if \"f\":\u00a0\"A\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"B\" is a\nmorphism in a preadditive category, then the kernel of \"f\" is the\nequaliser of \"f\" and the zero morphism from \"A\" to \"B\", while the cokernel of \"f\" is the coequaliser of \"f\" and this zero morphism. Unlike with products and coproducts, the kernel and cokernel of \"f\" are generally not equal in a preadditive category. \nWhen specializing to the preadditive categories of abelian groups or modules over a ring, this notion of kernel coincides with the ordinary notion of a kernel of a homomorphism, if one identifies the ordinary kernel \"K\" of \"f\":\u00a0\"A\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"B\" with its embedding \"K\"\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\"A\". However, in a general preadditive category there may exist morphisms without kernels and/or cokernels.\nThere is a convenient relationship between the kernel and cokernel and the abelian group structure on the hom-sets. Given parallel morphisms \"f\" and \"g\", the equaliser of \"f\" and \"g\" is just the kernel of \"g\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"f\", if either exists, and the analogous fact is true for coequalisers. The alternative term \"difference kernel\" for binary equalisers derives from this fact.\nA preadditive category in which all biproducts, kernels, and cokernels exist is called \"pre-abelian\". Further facts about kernels and cokernels in preadditive categories that are mainly useful in the context of pre-abelian categories may be found under that subject.\nSpecial cases.\nMost of these special cases of preadditive categories have all been mentioned above, but they're gathered here for reference.\nThe preadditive categories most commonly studied are in fact abelian categories; for example, Ab is an abelian category."}
{"id": "59522", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59522", "title": "Hom-set", "text": ""}
{"id": "59523", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59523", "title": "Finitely generated Abelian group", "text": ""}
{"id": "59524", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59524", "title": "Next-Generation Secure Computing Base", "text": "Software architecture by Microsoft\nThe Next-Generation Secure Computing Base (NGSCB; codenamed \"Palladium\" and also known as Trusted Windows) is a software architecture designed by Microsoft which claimed to provide users of the Windows operating system with better privacy, security, and system integrity. It was an initiative to implement Trusted Computing concepts to Windows. NGSCB was the result of years of research and development within Microsoft to create a secure computing solution that equaled the security of closed platforms such as set-top boxes while simultaneously preserving the backward compatibility, flexibility, and openness of the Windows operating system. Microsoft's primary stated objective with NGSCB was to \"protect software from software.\"\nPart of the Trustworthy Computing initiative when unveiled in 2002, NGSCB was to be integrated with Windows Vista, then known as \"Longhorn.\" NGSCB relied on hardware designed by the Trusted Computing Group to produce a parallel operation environment hosted by a new hypervisor (referred to as a sort of kernel in documentation) called the \"Nexus\" that existed alongside Windows and provided new applications with features such as hardware-based process isolation, data encryption based on integrity measurements, authentication of a local or remote machine or software configuration, and encrypted paths for user authentication and graphics output. NGSCB would facilitate the creation and distribution of digital rights management (DRM) policies pertaining the use of information.\nNGSCB was subject to much controversy during its development, with critics contending that it would impose restrictions on users, enforce vendor lock-in, prevent running open-source software, and undermine fair use rights. It was first demonstrated by Microsoft at WinHEC 2003 before undergoing a revision in 2004 that would enable earlier applications to benefit from its functionality. Reports indicated in 2005 that Microsoft would change its plans with NGSCB so that it could ship Windows Vista by its self-imposed deadline year, 2006; instead, Microsoft would ship only part of the architecture, BitLocker, which can optionally use the Trusted Platform Module to validate the integrity of boot and system files prior to operating system startup. Development of NGSCB spanned approximately a decade before its cancellation, the lengthiest development period of a major feature intended for Windows Vista.\nNGSCB differed from technologies Microsoft billed as \"pillars of Windows Vista\"\u2014Windows Presentation Foundation, Windows Communication Foundation, and WinFS\u2014during its development in that it was not built with the .NET Framework and did not focus on managed code software development. NGSCB has yet to fully materialize; however, aspects of it are available in features such as BitLocker of Windows Vista, Measured Boot and UEFI of Windows 8, Certificate Attestation of Windows 8.1, Device Guard of Windows 10. and Device Encryption in Windows 11 Home editions, with TPM 2.0 mandatory for installation.\nHistory.\nEarly development.\nDevelopment of NGSCB began in 1997 after Peter Biddle conceived of new ways to protect content on personal computers. Biddle enlisted assistance from members from the Microsoft Research division and other core contributors eventually included Blair Dillaway, Brian LaMacchia, Bryan Willman, Butler Lampson, John DeTreville, John Manferdelli, Marcus Peinado, and Paul England. Adam Barr, a former Microsoft employee who worked to secure the remote boot feature during development of Windows 2000 was approached by Biddle and colleagues during his tenure with an initiative tentatively known as \"Trusted Windows,\" which aimed to protect DVD content from being copied. To this end, Lampson proposed the use of a hypervisor to execute a limited operating system dedicated to DVD playback alongside Windows 2000. Patents for a DRM operating system were later filed in 1999 by England, DeTreville and Lampson; Lampson noted that these patents were for NGSCB. Biddle and colleagues realized by 1999 that NGSCB was more applicable to privacy and security than content protection, and the project was formally given the green-light by Microsoft in October, 2001.\nDuring WinHEC 1999, Biddle discussed intent to create a \"trusted\" architecture for Windows to leverage new hardware to promote confidence and security while preserving backward compatibility with previous software. On October 11, 1999, the Trusted Computing Platform Alliance, a consortium of various technology companies including Compaq, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Intel, and Microsoft was formed in an effort to promote personal computing confidence and security. The TCPA released detailed specifications for a trusted computing platform with focus on features such as code validation and encryption based on integrity measurements, hardware-based key storage, and machine authentication; these features required a new hardware component designed by the TCPA called the \"Trusted Platform Module\" (referred to as a \"Security Support Component\", \"Security CoProcessor\", or \"Security Support Processor\" in early NGSCB documentation).\nAt WinHEC 2000, Microsoft released a technical presentation on the topics of protection of privacy, security, and intellectual property titled \"Privacy, Security, and Content in Windows Platforms\", which focused on turning Windows into a \"platform of trust\" for computer security, user content, and user privacy. Notable in the presentation is the contention that \"there is no difference between privacy protection, computer security, and content protection\"\u2014\"assurances of trust must be universally true\". Microsoft reiterated these claims at WinHEC 2001. NGSCB intended to protect all forms of content, unlike traditional rights management schemes which focus only on the protection of audio tracks or movies instead of users they have the potential to protect which made it, in Biddle's words, \"egalitarian\".\nAs \"Palladium\".\nMicrosoft held its first design review for the NGSCB in April 2002, with approximately 37 companies under a non-disclosure agreement. NGSCB was publicly unveiled under its codename \"Palladium\" in a June 2002 article by Steven Levy for \"Newsweek\" that focused on its design, feature set, and origin. Levy briefly described potential features: access control, authentication, authorization, DRM, encryption, as well as protection from junk mail and malware, with example policies being email accessible only to an intended recipient and Microsoft Word documents readable for only a week after their creation; Microsoft later release a guide clarifying these assertions as being hyperbolic; namely, that NGSCB would not intrinsically enforce content protection, or protect against junk mail or malware. Instead, it would provide a platform on which developers could build new solutions that did not exist by isolating applications and store secrets for them. Microsoft was not sure whether to \"expose the feature in the Control Panel or present it as a separate utility,\" but NGSCB would be an opt-in solution\u2014disabled by default.\nMicrosoft PressPass later interviewed John Manferdelli, who restated and expanded on many of the key points discussed in the article by \"Newsweek\". Manferdelli described it as evolutionary platform for Windows in July, articulating how \"'Palladium' will not require DRM, and DRM will not require 'Palladium'. Microsoft sought a group program manager in August to assist in leading the development of several Microsoft technologies including NGSCB. Paul Otellini announced Intel's support for NGSCB with a set of chipset, platform, and processor codenamed \"LaGrande\" at Intel Developer Forum 2002, which would provide an NGSCB hardware foundation and preserve backward compatibility with previous software.\nAs NGSCB.\nNGSCB was known as \"Palladium\" until January 24, 2003 when Microsoft announced it had been renamed as \"Next-Generation Secure Computing Base.\" Project manager Mario Juarez stated this name was chosen to avoid legal action from an unnamed company which had acquired the rights to the \"Palladium\" name, as well as to reflect Microsoft's commitment to NGSCB in the upcoming decade. Juarez acknowledged the previous name was controversial, but denied it was changed by Microsoft to dodge criticism.\nThe Trusted Computing Platform Alliance was superseded by the Trusted Computing Group in April 2003. A principal goal of the new consortium was to produce a Trusted Platform Module (TPM) specification compatible with NGSCB; the previous specification, TPM 1.1 did not meet its requirements. TPM 1.2 was designed for compliance with NGSCB and introduced many features for such platforms. The first TPM 1.2 specification, Revision 62 was released in 2003.\nBiddle emphasized in June 2003 that hardware vendors and software developers were vital to NGSCB. Microsoft publicly demonstrated NGSCB for the first time at WinHEC 2003, where it protected data in memory from an attacker; prevented access to\u2014and alerted the user of\u2014an application that had been changed; and prevented a remote administration tool from capturing an instant messaging conversation. Despite Microsoft's desire to demonstrate NGSCB on hardware, software emulation was required for as few hardware components were available. Biddle reiterated that NGSCB was a set of evolutionary enhancements to Windows, basing this assessment on preserved backward compatibility and employed concepts in use before its development, but said the capabilities and scenarios it would enable would be revolutionary. Microsoft also revealed its multi-year roadmap for NGSCB, with the next major development milestone scheduled for the Professional Developers Conference, indicating that subsequent versions would ship concurrently with pre-release builds of Windows Vista; however, news reports suggested that NGSCB would not be integrated with Windows Vista when release, but it would instead be made available as separate software for the operating system.\nMicrosoft also announced details related to adoption and deployment of NGSCB at WinHEC 2003, stating that it would create a new value proposition for customers without significantly increasing the cost of computers; NGSCB adoption during the year of its introductory release was not anticipated and immediate support for servers was not expected. On the last day of the conference, Biddle said NGSCB needed to provide users with a way to differentiate between secured and unsecured windows\u2014that a secure window should be \"noticeably different\" to help protect users from spoofing attacks; Nvidia was the earliest to announce this feature. WinHEC 2003 represented an important development milestone for NGSCB. Microsoft dedicated several hours to presentations and released many technical whitepapers, and companies including Atmel, Comodo Group, Fujitsu, and SafeNet produced preliminary hardware for the demonstration. Microsoft also demonstrated NGSCB at several U.S. campuses in California and in New York in June 2003.\nNGSCB was among the topics discussed during Microsoft's PDC 2003 with a pre-beta software development kit, known as the Developer Preview, being distributed to attendees. The Developer Preview was the first time that Microsoft made NGSCB code available to the developer community and was offered by the company as an educational opportunity for NGSCB software development. With this release, Microsoft stated that it was primarily focused on supporting business and enterprise applications and scenarios with the first version of the NGSCB scheduled to ship with Windows Vista, adding that it intended to address consumers with a subsequent version of the technology, but did not provide an estimated time of delivery for this version. At the conference, Jim Allchin said that Microsoft was continuing to work with hardware vendors so that they would be able to support the technology, and Bill Gates expected a new generation of central processing units (CPUs) to offer full support. Following PDC 2003, NGSCB was demonstrated again on prototype hardware during the annual RSA Security conference in November.\nMicrosoft announced at WinHEC 2004 that it would revise NSCB in response to feedback from customers and independent software vendors who did not desire to rewrite their existing programs in order to benefit from its functionality; the revision would also provide more direct support for Windows with protected environments for the operating system, its components, and applications, instead of it being an environment to itself and new applications. The NGSCB secure input feature would also undergo a significant revision based on cost assessments, hardware requirements, and usability issues of the previous implementation. There were subsequent reports that Microsoft would cease developing NGSCB; Microsoft denied these reports and reaffirmed its commitment to delivery. Additional reports published later that year suggested that Microsoft would make even additional changes based on feedback from the industry.\nMicrosoft's absence of continual updates on NGSCB progress in 2005 had caused industry insiders to speculate that NGSCB had been cancelled. At the Microsoft Management Summit event, Steve Ballmer said that the company would build on the security foundation it had started with the NGSCB to create a new set of virtualization technologies for Windows, which were later Hyper-V. Reports during WinHEC 2005 indicated Microsoft scaled back its plans for NGSCB, so that it could to ship Windows Vista\u2014which had already been beset by numerous delays and even a \"development reset\"\u2014within a reasonable timeframe; instead of isolating components, NGSCB would offer \"Secure Startup\" (\"BitLocker Drive Encryption\") to encrypt disk volumes and validate both pre-boot firmware and operating system components. Microsoft intended to deliver other aspects of NGSCB later. Jim Allchin stated NGSCB would \"marry hardware and software to gain better security\", which was instrumental in the development of BitLocker.\nArchitecture and technical details.\nA complete Microsoft-based Trusted Computing-enabled system will consist not only of software components developed by Microsoft but also of hardware components developed by the Trusted Computing Group. The majority of features introduced by NGSCB are heavily reliant on specialized hardware and so will not operate on PCs predating 2004.\nIn current Trusted Computing specifications, there are two hardware components: the Trusted Platform Module (TPM), which will provide secure storage of cryptographic keys and a secure cryptographic co-processor, and a curtained memory feature in the CPU. In NGSCB, there are two software components, the Nexus, a security kernel that is part of the Operating System that provides a secure environment (Nexus mode) for trusted code to run in, and Nexus Computing Agents (NCAs), trusted modules which run in Nexus mode within NGSCB-enabled applications.\nSecure storage and attestation.\nAt the time of manufacture, a cryptographic key is generated and stored within the TPM. This key is never transmitted to any other component, and the TPM is designed in such a way that it is extremely difficult to retrieve the stored key by reverse engineering or any other method, even to the owner. Applications can pass data encrypted with this key to be decrypted by the TPM, but the TPM will only do so under certain strict conditions. Specifically, decrypted data will only ever be passed to authenticated, trusted applications, and will only ever be stored in curtained memory, making it inaccessible to other applications and the Operating System. Although the TPM can only store a single cryptographic key securely, secure storage of arbitrary data is by extension possible by encrypting the data such that it may only be decrypted using the securely stored key.\nThe TPM is also able to produce a cryptographic signature based on its hidden key. This signature may be verified by the user or by any third party, and so can therefore be used to provide remote attestation that the computer is in a secure state.\nCurtained memory.\nNGSCB also relies on a curtained memory feature provided by the CPU. Data within curtained memory can only be accessed by the application to which it belongs, and not by any other application or the Operating System. The attestation features of the TPM can be used to confirm to a trusted application that it is genuinely running in curtained memory; it is therefore very difficult for anyone, including the owner, to trick a trusted application into running outside of curtained memory. This in turn makes reverse engineering of a trusted application extremely difficult.\nApplications.\nNGSCB-enabled applications are to be split into two distinct parts, the NCA, a trusted module with access to a limited Application Programming Interface (API), and an untrusted portion, which has access to the full Windows API. Any code which deals with NGSCB functions must be located within the NCA.\nThe reason for this split is that the Windows API has developed over many years and is as a result extremely complex and difficult to audit for security bugs. To maximize security, trusted code is required to use a smaller, carefully audited API. Where security is not paramount, the full API is available.\nUses and scenarios.\nNGSCB enables new categories of applications and scenarios. Examples of uses cited by Microsoft include decentralized access control policies; digital rights management services for consumers, content providers, and enterprises; protected instant messaging conversations and online transactions; and more secure forms of machine health compliance, network authentication, and remote access. NGSCB-secured virtual private network access was one of the earliest scenarios envisaged by Microsoft. NGSCB can also strengthen software update mechanisms such as those belonging to antivirus software or Windows Update.\nAn early NGSCB privacy scenario conceived of by Microsoft is the \"wine purchase scenario,\" where a user can safely conduct a transaction with an online merchant without divulging personally identifiable information during the transaction. With the release of the NGSCB Developer Preview during PDC 2003, Microsoft emphasized the following enterprise applications and scenarios: document signing, secured data viewing, secured instant messaging, and secured plug-ins for emailing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; \"The concept of machine identity actually gives you the ability to do things like strengthen antivirus updates because you can start creating circumstances where you sort of create a little secure partition, or secure space within the PC, and that can let you do things like work around rootkits. [...] A lot of what is happening in the arms race of security today is an attempt to subvert an operating system so that the operating system is no longer behaving in the manner in which it was either designed or the user wants\u2014without the user knowing\u2014right? And in other cases, it's about creating a fake user which then does things on your behalf\u2014which are not really on your behalf: spends your money, gives away your data, gives away personally identifiable information. So anything that lets you create a stronger, more immutable identity combination like: \"this is the \"machine\", this is the \"software\", this is the \"operating system\", this is the \"service\", this is the \"user\"\" is something that can benefit users because things that work on chiseling into those spaces are less effective.\" \u2014\u200a\nWinHEC 2004 scenarios.\nDuring WinHEC 2004, Microsoft revealed two features based on its revision of NGSCB, Cornerstone and Code Integrity Rooting:\nBitLocker is the combination of these features; \"Cornerstone\" was the codename of BitLocker, and BitLocker validates pre-boot firmware and operating system components before boot, which protects SYSKEY from unauthorized access; an unsuccessful validation prohibits access to a protected system.\nReception.\nReaction to NGSCB after its unveiling by \"Newsweek\" was largely negative. While its security features were praised, critics contended that NGSCB could be used to impose restrictions on users; lock-out competing software vendors; and undermine fair use rights and open source software such as Linux. Microsoft's characterization of NGSCB as a security technology was subject to criticism as its origin focused on DRM. NGSCB's announcement occurred only a few years after Microsoft was accused of anti-competitive practices during the \"United States v. Microsoft Corporation\" antitrust case, a detail which called the company's intentions for the technology into question\u2014NGSCB was regarded as an effort by the company to maintain its dominance in the personal computing industry. The notion of a \"Trusted Windows\" architecture\u2014one that implied Windows itself was untrustworthy\u2014would also be a source of contention within the company itself.\nAfter NGSCB's unveiling, Microsoft drew frequent comparisons to Big Brother, an oppressive dictator of a totalitarian state in George Orwell's dystopian novel \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". The Electronic Privacy Information Center legislative counsel, Chris Hoofnagle, described Microsoft's characterization of the NGSCB as \"Orwellian.\" Big Brother Awards bestowed Microsoft with an award because of NGSCB. Bill Gates addressed these comments at a homeland security conference by stating that NGSCB \"can make our country more secure and prevent the nightmare vision of George Orwell at the same time.\" Steven Levy\u2014the author who unveiled the existence of the NGSCB\u2014claimed in a 2004 front-page article for \"Newsweek\" that NGSCB could eventually lead to an \"information infrastructure that encourages censorship, surveillance, and suppression of the creative impulse where anonymity is outlawed and every penny spent is accounted for.\" However, Microsoft outlined a scenario enabled by NGSCB that allows a user to conduct a transaction without divulging personally identifiable information.\nRoss Anderson of Cambridge University was among the most vocal critics of NGSCB and of Trusted Computing. Anderson alleged that the technologies were designed to satisfy federal agency requirements; enable content providers and other third-parties to remotely monitor or delete data in users' machines; use certificate revocation lists to ensure that only content deemed \"legitimate\" could be copied; and use unique identifiers to revoke or validate files; he compared this to the attempts by the Soviet Union to \"register and control all typewriters and fax machines.\" Anderson also claimed that the TPM could control the execution of applications on a user's machine and, because of this, bestowed to it a derisive \"Fritz Chip\" name in reference to United States Senator Ernest \"Fritz\" Hollings, who had recently proposed DRM legislation such as the Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act for consumer electronic devices. Anderson's report was referenced extensively in the news media and appeared in publications such as BBC News, \"The New York Times\", and \"The Register\". David Safford of IBM Research stated that Anderson presented several technical errors within his report, namely that the proposed capabilities did not exist within any specification and that many were beyond the scope of trusted platform design. Anderson later alleged that BitLocker was designed to facilitate DRM and to lock out competing software on an encrypted system, and, in spite of his allegation that NGSCB was designed for federal agencies, advocated for Microsoft to add a backdoor to BitLocker. Similar sentiments were expressed by Richard Stallman, founder of the GNU Project and Free Software Foundation, who alleged that Trusted Computing technologies were designed to enforce DRM and to prevent users from running unlicensed software. In 2015, Stallman stated that \"the TPM has proved a total failure\" for DRM and that \"there are reasons to think that it will not be feasible to use them for DRM.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We are not going to use Palladium to make our customers\u2014our favorite people\u2014angry at us.\"\nPeter Biddle\nAfter the release of Anderson's report, Microsoft stated in an NGSCB FAQ that \"enhancements to Windows under the NGSCB architecture have no mechanism for filtering content, nor do they provide a mechanism for proactively searching the Internet for 'illegal' content [...] Microsoft is firmly opposed to putting 'policing functions' into nexus-aware PCs and does not intend to do so\" and that the idea was in direct opposition with the design goals set forth for NGSCB, which was \"built on the premise that no policy will be imposed that is not approved by the user.\" Concerns about the NGSCB TPM were also raised in that it would use what are essentially unique machine identifiers, which drew comparisons to the Intel Pentium III processor serial number, a unique hardware identification number of the 1990s viewed as a risk to end-user privacy. NGSCB, however, mandates that disclosure or use of the keys provided by the TPM be based solely on user discretion; in contrast, Intel's Pentium III included a unique serial number that could potentially be revealed to any application. NGSCB, also unlike Intel's Pentium III, would provide optional features to allow users to indirectly identify themselves to external requestors.\nIn response to concerns that NGSCB would take control away from users for the sake of content providers, Bill Gates stated that the latter should \"provide their content in easily accessible forms or else it ends up encouraging piracy.\" Bryan Willman, Marcus Peinado, Paul England, and Peter Biddle\u2014four NGSCB engineers\u2014realized early during the development of NGSCB that DRM would ultimately fail in its efforts to prevent piracy. In 2002, the group released a paper titled \"The Darknet and the Future of Content Distribution\" that outlined how content protection mechanisms are demonstrably futile. The paper's premise circulated within Microsoft during the late 1990s and was a source of controversy within Microsoft; Biddle stated that the company almost terminated his employment as a result of the paper's release. A 2003 report published by Harvard University researchers suggested that NGSCB and similar technologies could facilitate the secure distribution of copyrighted content across peer-to-peer networks.\nNot all assessments were negative. Paul Thurrott praised NGSCB, stating that it was \"Microsoft's Trustworthy Computing initiative made real\" and that it would \"form the basis of next-generation computer systems.\" Scott Bekker of \"Redmond Magazine\" stated that NGSCB was misunderstood because of its controversy and that it appeared to be a \"promising, user-controlled defense against privacy intrusions and security violations.\" In February 2004, In-Stat/MDR, publisher of the Microprocessor Report, bestowed NGSCB with its Best Technology award. Malcom Crompton, Australian Privacy Commissioner, stated that \"NGSCB has great privacy enhancing potential [...] Microsoft has recognised there is a privacy issue [...] we should all work with them, give them the benefit of the doubt and urge them to do the right thing.\" When Microsoft announced at WinHEC 2004 that it would be revising NGSCB so that previous applications would not have to be rewritten, Martin Reynolds of Gartner praised the company for this decision as it would create a \"more sophisticated\" version of NGSCB that would simplify development. David Wilson, writing for \"South China Morning Post\", defended NGSCB by saying that \"attacking the latest Microsoft monster is an international blood sport\" and that \"even if Microsoft had a new technology capable of ending Third World hunger and First World obesity, digital seers would still lambaste it because they view Bill Gates as a grey incarnation of Satan.\" Microsoft noted that negative reaction to NGSCB gradually waned after events such as the USENIX Annual Technical Conference in 2003, and several Fortune 500 companies also expressed interest in it.\nWhen reports announced in 2005 that Microsoft would scale back its plans and incorporate only BitLocker with Windows Vista, concerns pertaining digital rights management, erosion of user rights, and vendor lock-in remained. In 2008, Biddle stated that negative perception was the most significant contributing factor responsible for the cessation of NGSCB's development.\nVulnerability.\nIn a 2003 article, Dan Boneh and David Brumley indicated that projects like NGSCB may be vulnerable to timing attacks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59529", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59529", "title": "Solubility equilibrium", "text": "Thermodynamic equilibrium between a solid and a solution of the same compound\nSolubility equilibrium is a type of dynamic equilibrium that exists when a chemical compound in the solid state is in chemical equilibrium with a solution of that compound. The solid may dissolve unchanged, with dissociation, or with chemical reaction with another constituent of the solution, such as acid or alkali. Each solubility equilibrium is characterized by a temperature-dependent \"solubility product\" which functions like an equilibrium constant. Solubility equilibria are important in pharmaceutical, environmental and many other scenarios.\nDefinitions.\nA solubility equilibrium exists when a chemical compound in the solid state is in chemical equilibrium with a solution containing the compound. This type of equilibrium is an example of dynamic equilibrium in that some individual molecules migrate between the solid and solution phases such that the rates of dissolution and precipitation are equal to one another. When equilibrium is established and the solid has not all dissolved, the solution is said to be saturated. The concentration of the solute in a saturated solution is known as the solubility. Units of solubility may be molar (mol\u00a0dm\u22123) or expressed as mass per unit volume, such as \u03bcg\u00a0mL\u22121. Solubility is temperature dependent. A solution containing a higher concentration of solute than the solubility is said to be supersaturated. A supersaturated solution may be induced to come to equilibrium by the addition of a \"seed\" which may be a tiny crystal of the solute, or a tiny solid particle, which initiates precipitation.\nThere are three main types of solubility equilibria.\nIn each case an equilibrium constant can be specified as a quotient of activities. This equilibrium constant is dimensionless as activity is a dimensionless quantity. However, use of activities is very inconvenient, so the equilibrium constant is usually divided by the quotient of activity coefficients, to become a quotient of concentrations. See for details. Moreover, the activity of a solid is, by definition, equal to 1 so it is omitted from the defining expression.\nFor a chemical equilibrium\nformula_1\nthe solubility product, \"K\"sp for the compound A\"p\"B\"q\" is defined as follows\nformula_2\nwhere [A] and [B] are the concentrations of A and B in a saturated solution. A solubility product has a similar functionality to an equilibrium constant though formally \"K\"sp has the dimension of (concentration)\"p\"+\"q\".\nEffects of conditions.\nTemperature effect.\nSolubility is sensitive to changes in temperature. For example, sugar is more soluble in hot water than cool water. It occurs because solubility products, like other types of equilibrium constants, are functions of temperature. In accordance with Le Chatelier's Principle, when the dissolution process is endothermic (heat is absorbed), solubility increases with rising temperature. This effect is the basis for the process of recrystallization, which can be used to purify a chemical compound. When dissolution is exothermic (heat is released) solubility decreases with rising temperature.\nSodium sulfate shows increasing solubility with temperature below about 32.4\u00a0\u00b0C, but a decreasing solubility at higher temperature. This is because the solid phase is the decahydrate (Na2SO4\u00b710H2O) below the transition temperature, but a different hydrate above that temperature.\nThe dependence on temperature of solubility for an ideal solution (achieved for low solubility substances) is given by the following expression containing the enthalpy of melting, \u0394\"m\"\"H\", and the mole fraction formula_3 of the solute at saturation:\nformula_4\nwhere formula_5 is the partial molar enthalpy of the solute at infinite dilution and formula_6 the enthalpy per mole of the pure crystal.\nThis differential expression for a non-electrolyte can be integrated on a temperature interval to give:\nformula_7\nFor nonideal solutions activity of the solute at saturation appears instead of mole fraction solubility in the derivative with respect to temperature:\nformula_8\nCommon-ion effect.\nThe common-ion effect is the effect of decreased solubility of one salt when another salt that has an ion in common with it is also present. For example, the solubility of silver chloride, AgCl, is lowered when sodium chloride, a source of the common ion chloride, is added to a suspension of AgCl in water.\nformula_9\nThe solubility, \"S\", in the absence of a common ion can be calculated as follows. The concentrations [Ag+] and [Cl\u2212] are equal because one mole of AgCl would dissociate into one mole of Ag+ and one mole of Cl\u2212. Let the concentration of [Ag+(aq)] be denoted by \"x\". Then\nformula_10\nformula_11\n\"K\"sp for AgCl is equal to at 25\u00a0\u00b0C, so the solubility is .\nNow suppose that sodium chloride is also present, at a concentration of 0.01\u00a0mol dm\u22123 = 0.01 M. The solubility, ignoring any possible effect of the sodium ions, is now calculated by\nformula_12\nThis is a quadratic equation in \"x\", which is also equal to the solubility.\nformula_13\nIn the case of silver chloride, \"x\"2 is very much smaller than 0.01 M \"x\", so the first term can be ignored. Therefore\nformula_14\na considerable reduction from . In gravimetric analysis for silver, the reduction in solubility due to the common ion effect is used to ensure \"complete\" precipitation of AgCl.\nParticle size effect.\nThe thermodynamic solubility constant is defined for large monocrystals. Solubility will increase with decreasing size of solute particle (or droplet) because of the additional surface energy. This effect is generally small unless particles become very small, typically smaller than 1 \u03bcm. The effect of the particle size on solubility constant can be quantified as follows:\nformula_15\nwhere *\"KA\" is the solubility constant for the solute particles with the molar surface area \"A\", *\"K\"\"A\"\u21920 is the solubility constant for substance with molar surface area tending to zero (i.e., when the particles are large), \"\u03b3\" is the surface tension of the solute particle in the solvent, \"A\"m is the molar surface area of the solute (in m2/mol), \"R \"is the universal gas constant, and \"T\" is the absolute temperature.\nSalt effects.\nThe salt effects (salting in and salting-out) refers to the fact that the presence of a salt which has no ion in common with the solute, has an effect on the ionic strength of the solution and hence on activity coefficients, so that the equilibrium constant, expressed as a concentration quotient, changes.\nPhase effect.\nEquilibria are defined for specific crystal phases. Therefore, the solubility product is expected to be different depending on the phase of the solid. For example, aragonite and calcite will have different solubility products even though they have both the same chemical identity (calcium carbonate). Under any given conditions one phase will be thermodynamically more stable than the other; therefore, this phase will form when thermodynamic equilibrium is established. However, kinetic factors may favor the formation the unfavorable precipitate (e.g. aragonite), which is then said to be in a metastable state.\nIn pharmacology, the metastable state is sometimes referred to as amorphous state. Amorphous drugs have higher solubility than their crystalline counterparts due to the absence of long-distance interactions inherent in crystal lattice. Thus, it takes less energy to solvate the molecules in amorphous phase. The effect of amorphous phase on solubility is widely used to make drugs more soluble.\nPressure effect.\nFor condensed phases (solids and liquids), the pressure dependence of solubility is typically weak and usually neglected in practice. Assuming an ideal solution, the dependence can be quantified as:\nformula_16\nwhere formula_3 is the mole fraction of the formula_18-th component in the solution, formula_19 is the pressure, formula_20 is the absolute temperature, formula_21 is the partial molar volume of the formula_18th component in the solution, formula_23 is the partial molar volume of the formula_18th component in the dissolving solid, and formula_25 is the universal gas constant.\nThe pressure dependence of solubility does occasionally have practical significance. For example, precipitation fouling of oil fields and wells by calcium sulfate (which decreases its solubility with decreasing pressure) can result in decreased productivity with time.\nQuantitative aspects.\nSimple dissolution.\nDissolution of an organic solid can be described as an equilibrium between the substance in its solid and dissolved forms. For example, when sucrose (table sugar) forms a saturated solution\nformula_26\nAn equilibrium expression for this reaction can be written, as for any chemical reaction (products over reactants):\nformula_27\nwhere \"K\"o is called the thermodynamic solubility constant. The braces indicate activity. The activity of a pure solid is, by definition, unity. Therefore\nformula_28\nwhere formula_29 is the thermodynamic equilibrium constant and braces indicate activity. The activity of a pure solid is, by definition, equal to one.\nWhen the solubility of the salt is very low the activity coefficients of the ions in solution are nearly equal to one. By setting them to be actually equal to one this expression reduces to the solubility product expression:\nformula_30\nFor 2:2 and 3:3 salts, such as CaSO4 and FePO4, the general expression for the solubility product is the same as for a 1:1 electrolyte\nformula_31\nformula_32 (electrical charges are omitted in general expressions, for simplicity of notation)\nWith an unsymmetrical salt like Ca(OH)2 the solubility expression is given by\nformula_33\nformula_34\nSince the concentration of hydroxide ions is twice the concentration of calcium ions this reduces to formula_35\nIn general, with the chemical equilibrium\nformula_36\nformula_37\nand the following table, showing the relationship between the solubility of a compound and the value of its solubility product, can be derived.\nSolubility products are often expressed in logarithmic form. Thus, for calcium sulfate, with \"K\"sp = mol2 dm\u22126, log \"K\"sp = \u22124.32. The smaller the value of \"K\"sp, or the more negative the log value, the lower the solubility.\nSome salts are not fully dissociated in solution. Examples include MgSO4, famously discovered by Manfred Eigen to be present in seawater as both an inner sphere complex and an outer sphere complex. The solubility of such salts is calculated by the method outlined in dissolution with reaction.\nHydroxides.\nThe solubility product for the hydroxide of a metal ion, M\"n\"+, is usually defined, as follows:\nformula_38\nformula_39\nHowever, general-purpose computer programs are designed to use hydrogen ion concentrations with the alternative definitions.\nformula_40\nformula_41\nFor hydroxides, solubility products are often given in a modified form, \"K\"*sp, using hydrogen ion concentration in place of hydroxide ion concentration. The two values are related by the self-ionization constant for water, \"K\"w.\nformula_42\nformula_43\nformula_44\nFor example, at ambient temperature, for calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2, lg \"K\"sp is ca. \u22125 and lg \"K\"*sp \u2248 \u22125 + 2 \u00d7 14 \u2248 23.\nDissolution with reaction.\nA typical reaction with dissolution involves a weak base, B, dissolving in an acidic aqueous solution.\nformula_45\nThis reaction is very important for pharmaceutical products. Dissolution of weak acids in alkaline media is similarly important.\nformula_46\nThe uncharged molecule usually has lower solubility than the ionic form, so solubility depends on pH and the acid dissociation constant of the solute. The term \"intrinsic solubility\" is used to describe the solubility of the un-ionized form in the absence of acid or alkali.\nLeaching of aluminium salts from rocks and soil by acid rain is another example of dissolution with reaction: alumino-silicates are bases which react with the acid to form soluble species, such as Al3+(aq).\nFormation of a chemical complex may also change solubility. A well-known example is the addition of a concentrated solution of ammonia to a suspension of silver chloride, in which dissolution is favoured by the formation of an ammine complex.\nformula_47\nWhen sufficient ammonia is added to a suspension of silver chloride, the solid dissolves. The addition of water softeners to washing powders to inhibit the formation of soap scum provides an example of practical importance.\nExperimental determination.\nThe determination of solubility is fraught with difficulties. First and foremost is the difficulty in establishing that the system is in equilibrium at the chosen temperature. This is because both precipitation and dissolution reactions may be extremely slow. If the process is very slow solvent evaporation may be an issue. Supersaturation may occur. With very insoluble substances, the concentrations in solution are very low and difficult to determine. The methods used fall broadly into two categories, static and dynamic.\nStatic methods.\nIn static methods a mixture is brought to equilibrium and the concentration of a species in the solution phase is determined by chemical analysis. This usually requires separation of the solid and solution phases. In order to do this the equilibration and separation should be performed in a thermostatted room. Very low concentrations can be measured if a radioactive tracer is incorporated in the solid phase.\nA variation of the static method is to add a solution of the substance in a non-aqueous solvent, such as dimethyl sulfoxide, to an aqueous buffer mixture. Immediate precipitation may occur giving a cloudy mixture. The solubility measured for such a mixture is known as \"kinetic solubility\". The cloudiness is due to the fact that the precipitate particles are very small resulting in Tyndall scattering. In fact the particles are so small that the particle size effect comes into play and kinetic solubility is often greater than equilibrium solubility. Over time the cloudiness will disappear as the size of the crystallites increases, and eventually equilibrium will be reached in a process known as precipitate ageing.\nDynamic methods.\nSolubility values of organic acids, bases, and ampholytes of pharmaceutical interest may be obtained by a process called \"Chasing equilibrium solubility\". In this procedure, a quantity of substance is first dissolved at a pH where it exists predominantly in its ionized form and then a precipitate of the neutral (un-ionized) species is formed by changing the pH. Subsequently, the rate of change of pH due to precipitation or dissolution is monitored and strong acid and base titrant are added to adjust the pH to discover the equilibrium conditions when the two rates are equal. The advantage of this method is that it is relatively fast as the quantity of precipitate formed is quite small. However, the performance of the method may be affected by the formation supersaturated solutions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nA number of computer programs are available to do the calculations. They include:"}
{"id": "59531", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59531", "title": "Lake Teletskoye", "text": "Lake in Russia\nLake Teletskoye (; ) is the largest lake in the Altai Mountains and the Altai Republic, Russia, and has depth up to 325 meters.\nSituated at a height of above the sea level, the lake is long and wide and lies between the mountain ridges Korbu and Al-tyntu, on the junction of the Sailughem Mountains and the Western Sayans. Its surface area is ; however, due to its considerable depth (), the lake contains no less than of fresh water. Annual water level fluctuations are estimated at some 348 sm. The lake transparency is high, with the visibility of the lake water ranging from six to fourteen meters.\nAbout 70 rivers and 150 temporary streams flow into the lake, the largest of them, Chulyshman River, supplying more than half of the lake's water. The lake is drained through a single outlet, the Biya River, which, after its confluence with the Katun River, forms one of Siberia's largest rivers, the Ob River.\nThe lake is surrounded by mountains of 600\u20131,300 m in the northern part and about in the southern part. Lake Teletskoe is included into Altaisky Nature Reserve. That reserve along with the Katun Nature Reserve and the Ukok Plateau Nature Refuge were listed as one of UNESCO World Natural Heritage Sites under the name \"Golden Mountains of Altai\".\nThe Altai people have a legend about the name of the lake in their language, which means Golden Lake. According to this story, once, a rich man had an ingot of gold, which he wanted to use to buy food. He travelled around Altai, but could not find anyone who would sell him any food. Eventually, he threw the gold into the lake. This legend is the origin of the name.\nResearch.\nThere is a field base of Institute of Taxonomy and Ecology of Animals () by the Siberian Division of the Russian Academy of Sciences () at the northwest part of the lake, about 6\u00a0km from head water of Biya River. Therein studies are performed of the insect-eaters and rodents of Altai Republic, helminthofauna of vertebrates in biocenoses of taiga, ichthyocenose and animal plankton of Lake Teletskoye. Near the base there is located the research-and-production sport-and-sanitary base of Gorno-Altaisk State University. Tomsk State University has been conducting scientific research in the area for more than 50 years. Ecologists, geologists, and archeologists from Institute of Water and Ecological Problems () the Siberian Division of the Russian Academy of Sciences from the Institute of Water and Ecological Problems spend many years working here to study the lake and surrounding area. Geomorphologists and geologists scrutinize geological structure of Lake Teletskoye, its paleogeography, age, and origin.\nIt has been known for a long time that there are gold in placers and bedrock deposits in the Altai. The Geomorphologists from Tomsk State University works in the Teletskoye geology-prospecting detachment searching for gold-placers. They managed to establish a new search criterion for a placer. The base for the discovery were the palaeoglaciological studies during the last few years and theoretical models of the diluvial morpholithogenesis. The content of the precious component is everywhere much higher than the lowest accepted industrial standard, sometimes it's tremendous.\nThe investigators carried out large-scale exploration routes on vast territories near watersheds of the upper reaches of all the rivers in the northern and western parts of the Teletskoye Lake basin. These explorations included studies of exposures, boring of prospect-holes, pits and hollow wells (up to 15 m deep). The results of these investigations let us speak about the regularity and reliability of the new criterion. The first 14C-method data for the layered clays on the flat watersheds showed the age of 15 thousand years and younger. This important fact leads to an unavoidable conclusion about the youth of the Teletskoje Lake depression \u2013 the post-glacial age of \u201cthe last cutting\u201d during the pre-glacial (Late Quaternary) peneplain.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59533", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59533", "title": "Lou Reed", "text": "American rock musician (1942\u20132013)\nLewis Allan Reed (March 2, 1942\u00a0\u2013 October 27, 2013) was an American musician and songwriter. He was the guitarist, singer, and principal songwriter for the rock band the Velvet Underground and had a solo career that spanned five decades. Although not commercially successful during its existence, the Velvet Underground came to be regarded as one of the most influential bands in the history of underground and alternative rock music. Reed's distinctive deadpan voice, poetic and transgressive lyrics, and experimental guitar playing were trademarks throughout his long career.\nReed, John Cale, Sterling Morrison, and Angus MacLise formed the Velvet Underground in 1965. After building a reputation in the avant garde music scene, the Velvet Underground gained the attention of Andy Warhol, who became the band's manager. The Velvet Underground became something of a fixture at The Factory, Warhol's art studio, and served as his \"house band\" for various projects. The band released its first album, now with drummer Moe Tucker and featuring German singer Nico, in 1967, and parted ways with Warhol shortly thereafter. Following several lineup changes and three more little-heard albums, Reed quit the band in 1970.\nAfter leaving the Velvet Underground, Reed embarked on a successful solo career, releasing twenty solo studio albums. His second album, \"Transformer\" (1972), was produced by David Bowie and arranged by Mick Ronson; it brought him mainstream recognition. The album is considered an influential landmark of the glam rock genre, anchored by Reed's most successful single, \"Walk on the Wild Side\". The less commercial but critically acclaimed \"Berlin\" peaked at No. 7 on the UK Albums Chart. \"Rock 'n' Roll Animal\" (a live album released in 1974) sold strongly, and \"Sally Can't Dance\" (1974) peaked at No. 10 on the \"Billboard\" 200. When Reed's work ceased to sell well, his drug addiction and alcoholism intensified. Reed achieved sobriety in the early 1980s, gradually returning to prominence with \"The Blue Mask\" (1982) and \"New Sensations\" (1984). He reached a critical and commercial career peak with his 1989 album \"New York\".\nReed participated in the re-formation of the Velvet Underground in the 1990s. He also made several more albums, including a collaboration album with John Cale titled \"Songs for Drella\" which was a tribute to their former mentor Andy Warhol. \"Magic and Loss\" (1992) would become Reed's highest-charting album on the UK Albums Chart, peaking at No. 6. He contributed music to two theatrical interpretations of 19th-century writers, one of which he developed into an album titled \"The Raven\". Reed was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of the Velvet Underground in 1996 and as a solo act in 2015.\nBiography.\n1942\u20131957: Early life.\nLewis Allan Reed was born on March 2, 1942, at Beth-El Hospital (later Brookdale) in Brooklyn and grew up in Freeport, New York. Reed was the son of Toby (n\u00e9e Futterman) (1920\u20132013) and Sidney Joseph Reed (1913\u20132005), an accountant. His family was Jewish and his grandparents were Russian Jews who had fled antisemitism; his father had changed his name from Rabinowitz to Reed.\nReed attended Atkinson Elementary School in Freeport and went on to Freeport Junior High School. His sister Merrill, born Margaret Reed, said that as an adolescent, he suffered panic attacks, became socially awkward and \"possessed a fragile temperament\" but was highly focused on things that he liked, mainly music. Having learned to play the guitar from the radio, he developed an early interest in rock and roll and rhythm and blues, and during high school played in several bands.\nReed was dyslexic. He began using drugs at the age of 16.\n1958\u20131964: Early recordings and education.\nReed's first recording was as a member of a doo-wop three-piece group called the Jades, with Reed providing guitar accompaniment and backing vocals. After participating at a talent show at Freeport Junior High School in early 1958, and receiving an enthusiastic response from the audience, the group was given the chance to record an original single \"So Blue\" with the B-side \"Leave Her for Me\" later that year. While the single did not reach any music hit parade, notable saxophonist King Curtis was brought in as a session musician by the producer Bob Shad to play on both songs, and the single was played by a substitute DJ during the Murray the K radio show, which gave Reed his first-ever airplay. Reed's love for playing music and his desire to play gigs brought him into confrontation with his anxious and unaccommodating parents.\nHis sister recalled that during his first year in college, at New York University, he was brought home one day, having had a mental breakdown, after which he remained \"depressed, anxious, and socially unresponsive\" for a time, and that his parents were having difficulty coping. Visiting a psychologist, Reed's parents were made to feel guilty as inadequate parents, and they consented to giving him electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). Reed appeared to blame his father for the treatment to which he had been subjected. He wrote about the experience in his song \"Kill Your Sons\" from the album \"Sally Can't Dance\" (1974). Reed later recalled the experience as having been traumatic and leading to memory loss. He believed that he was treated to dispel his homosexual feelings. After Reed's death, his sister denied the ECT treatments were intended to suppress his \"homosexual urges\", asserting that their parents were not homophobic but had been told by his doctors that ECT was necessary to treat Reed's mental and behavioral issues.\nUpon his recovery from his illness and associated treatment, Reed resumed his education at Syracuse University in 1960, studying journalism, film directing, and creative writing. He was a platoon leader in ROTC; he said he was later expelled from the program for holding an unloaded gun to his superior's head.\nReed played music on campus under numerous band names (one being L.A. and the Eldorados) and played throughout Central New York. Per his bandmates, they were routinely kicked out of fraternity parties for their brash personalities and insistence on performing their own material. In 1961, he began hosting a late-night radio program on WAER called \"Excursions on a Wobbly Rail\". Named after a song by pianist Cecil Taylor, the program typically featured doo wop, rhythm and blues, and jazz, particularly the free jazz developed in the mid-1950s. Reed said that when he started out he was inspired by such musicians as Ornette Coleman, who had \"always been a great influence\" on him; he said that his guitar on \"European Son\" was his way of trying to imitate the jazz saxophonist.\nReed's sister said that during her brother's time at Syracuse, the university authorities had tried unsuccessfully to expel him because they did not approve of his extracurricular activities. At Syracuse University, he studied under poet Delmore Schwartz, who he said was \"the first great person I ever met\", and they became friends. He credited Schwartz with showing him how \"with the simplest language imaginable, and very short, you can accomplish the most astonishing heights.\" One of Reed's fellow students at Syracuse in the early 1960s (who also studied under Schwartz) was the musician Garland Jeffreys; they remained close friends until the end of Reed's life.\nJeffreys recalled Reed's time at Syracuse: \"At four in the afternoon we'd all meet at [the bar] The Orange Grove. Me, Delmore and Lou. That would often be the center of the crew. And Delmore was the leader \u2013 our quiet leader.\" While at Syracuse, Reed was also introduced to intravenous drug use for the first time, and quickly contracted hepatitis. Reed later dedicated the song \"European Son\", from the first Velvet Underground album, to Schwartz. In 1982, Reed recorded \"My House\" from his album \"The Blue Mask\" as a tribute to his late mentor. He later said that his goals as a writer were \"to bring the sensitivities of the novel to rock music\" or to write the Great American Novel in a record album. Reed met Sterling Morrison, a student at City University of New York, while the latter was visiting mutual friend, and fellow Syracuse student, Jim Tucker. Reed graduated from Syracuse University's College of Arts and Sciences with a BA \"cum laude\" in English in June 1964.\n1964\u20131970: Pickwick and the Velvet Underground.\nReed moved to New York City in 1964 to work as an in-house songwriter for Pickwick Records. He can be heard singing lead on two cuts on \"The Surfsiders Sing The Beach Boys Songbook\". For Pickwick, Reed also wrote and recorded the single \"The Ostrich\", a parody of popular dance songs of the time, which included lines such as \"put your head on the floor and have somebody step on it\". His employers felt that the song had hit potential, and assembled a supporting band to help promote the recording. The \"ad hoc\" band, called the Primitives, consisted of Reed; Welsh musician John Cale, who had recently moved to New York to study music and was playing viola in composer La Monte Young's Theatre of Eternal Music, on bass; Tony Conrad, violinist in the Theatre of Eternal Music, on guitar; and sculptor Walter De Maria on percussion. Cale and Conrad were surprised to find that for \"The Ostrich\", Reed tuned each string of his guitar to the same note, which they began to call \"ostrich guitar\" tuning. This technique created a drone effect similar to their experimentation in Young's avant-garde ensemble. Disappointed with Reed's performance, Cale was nevertheless impressed by Reed's early repertoire (including \"Heroin\"), and a partnership began to evolve.\nReed and Cale (who played viola, keyboards and bass guitar) lived together on the Lower East Side, and invited Reed's college acquaintance Sterling Morrison and Cale's neighbor and Theatre of Eternal Music bandmate Angus MacLise to join the band on guitar and drums respectively, thus forming the Velvet Underground. When the opportunity came to play their first paying gig at Summit High School in Summit, New Jersey, MacLise quit because he believed that accepting money for art was selling out and did not want to participate in a structured gig. He was replaced by Moe Tucker, the sister of Reed and Morrison's mutual friend Jim Tucker. Initially a fill-in for that one show, she soon became a full-time member with her drumming an integral part of the band's sound, despite Cale's initial objections. Though it had little commercial success, the band is considered one of the most influential in rock history. Reed was the main singer and songwriter in the band.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHad he accomplished nothing else, his work with the Velvet Underground in the late sixties would assure him a place in anyone's rock &amp; roll pantheon; those remarkable songs still serve as an articulate aural nightmare of men and women caught in the beauty and terror of sexual, street and drug paranoia, unwilling or unable to move. The message is that urban life is tough stuff\u2014it will kill you; Reed, the poet of destruction, knows it but never looks away and somehow finds holiness as well as perversity in both his sinners and his quest. ... [H]e is still one of a handful of American artists capable of the spiritual home run.\n \u2014\"Rolling Stone\", 1975\nThe band soon came to the attention of Andy Warhol. One of Warhol's first contributions was to integrate them into the Exploding Plastic Inevitable. Warhol's associates inspired many of Reed's songs as he fell into a thriving, multifaceted artistic scene. Reed rarely gave an interview without paying homage to Warhol as a mentor. Warhol pushed the band to take on a chanteuse, the German former model and singer Nico. Despite his initial resistance, Reed wrote several songs for Nico to sing, and the two were briefly lovers.\n\"The Velvet Underground &amp; Nico\" was released in March 1967 and peaked at No. 171 on the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200. Much later, \"Rolling Stone\" listed it as the 13th greatest album of all time; musician Brian Eno once stated that although few people bought the album at the time of its release, most of those who did were inspired to form their own bands. V\u00e1clav Havel credited the album, which he bought while visiting the U.S., with inspiring him to become president of Czechoslovakia.\nBy the time the band recorded \"White Light/White Heat\", Nico had quit the band and Warhol had been fired, both against Cale's wishes. Warhol's replacement as manager was Steve Sesnick. In September 1968, Reed told Morrison and Tucker that he would dissolve the band if they did not let him fire Cale; they agreed, and Reed had Morrison inform Cale of his firing. Morrison and Tucker were discomfited by Reed's tactics but remained in the band. Cale's replacement was Boston-based musician Doug Yule, who played bass guitar and keyboards and would soon share lead vocal duties with Reed. The band now took on a more pop-oriented sound and acted more as a vehicle for Reed to develop his songwriting craft. They released two studio albums with this lineup: 1969's \"The Velvet Underground\" and 1970's \"Loaded\". Reed left the Velvet Underground in August 1970. The band disintegrated after Morrison and Tucker departed in 1971, and their final album \"Squeeze\" was almost entirely Yule's work.\n1970\u20131975: Glam rock and commercial breakthrough.\nAfter leaving the Velvet Underground, Reed moved to his parents' home on Long Island and took a job at his father's tax accounting firm as a typist, by his own account earning $40 a week ($ in 2024 dollars). He began writing poetry, which was published later in 2018 by Anthology Editions through the Lou Reed Estate. He signed a recording contract with RCA Records in 1971 and recorded his first solo album at Morgan Studios in Willesden, London with session musicians including Steve Howe and Rick Wakeman from the band Yes. The album, \"Lou Reed\", contained versions of unreleased Velvet Underground songs, some of which had originally been recorded for \"Loaded\" but shelved. This album was overlooked by most pop music critics and did not sell well, although music critic Stephen Holden, in \"Rolling Stone\", called it an \"almost perfect album. ... which embodied the spirit of the Velvets.\" Holden went on to compare Reed's voice with those of Mick Jagger and Bob Dylan and praise the poetic quality of his lyrics.\nReed's commercial breakthrough album, \"Transformer\", was released in November 1972. \"Transformer\" was co-produced by David Bowie and Mick Ronson, and it introduced Reed to a wider audience, especially in the UK. The single \"Walk on the Wild Side\" was a salute to the misfits and hustlers who once surrounded Andy Warhol in the late '60s and appeared in his films. Each of the song's five verses describes a person who had been a fixture at The Factory during the mid-to-late 1960s. The five individuals described in the song are Holly Woodlawn (verse one), Candy Darling (verse two), \"Little Joe\" Dallesandro (verse three), \"Sugar Plum Fairy\" Joe Campbell (verse four), and Jackie Curtis (verse five). The song's transgressive lyrics evaded radio censorship. Though the jazzy arrangement (courtesy of bassist Herbie Flowers and saxophonist Ronnie Ross) was musically atypical for Reed, it eventually became his signature song. It came about as a result of a commission to compose a soundtrack to a theatrical adaptation of Nelson Algren's novel of the same name; the play failed to materialize. \"Walk on the Wild Side\" was Reed's only entry in the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 singles chart, at No. 16.\nRonson's arrangements brought out new aspects of Reed's songs. \"Perfect Day\", for example, features delicate strings and soaring dynamics. It was rediscovered in the 1990s and allowed Reed to drop \"Walk on the Wild Side\" from his concerts.\nIn 1979, Bowie and Reed fell out during a late-night meeting which led to Reed hitting Bowie. Bowie had reportedly told Reed that he would have to \"clean up his act\" if they were to work together again.\nReed hired a local New York bar-band, the Tots, to tour in support of \"Transformer\" and spent much of 1972 and early 1973 on the road with them. Though they improved over the months, Reed (with producer Bob Ezrin's encouragement) decided to recruit a new backing band in anticipation of the upcoming \"Berlin\" album. He chose keyboardist Moogy Klingman to come up with a new five-member band on barely a week's notice.\n\"Berlin\" (July 1973) was a concept album about two speed-freaks in love in the city. The songs variously concern domestic violence (\"Caroline Says I\", \"Caroline Says II\"), drug addiction (\"How Do You Think It Feels\"), adultery and prostitution (\"The Kids\"), and suicide (\"The Bed\"). Reed's late 1973 European tour, featuring lead guitarists Steve Hunter and Dick Wagner, mixed his \"Berlin\" material with older numbers. Response to \"Berlin\" at the time of its release was generally negative, with \"Rolling Stone\" pronouncing it \"a disaster\". Reed found the poor reviews it received very disheartening. Since then the album has been critically reevaluated, and in 2003 \"Rolling Stone\" included it in their list of the 500 greatest albums of all time. \"Berlin\" peaked at No. 7 on the UK Albums Chart.\nFollowing the commercial disappointment of \"Berlin\", Reed befriended Steve Katz of Blood, Sweat &amp; Tears (brother of his then-manager Dennis Katz), who suggested Reed put together a \"great live band\" and release a live album of Velvet Underground songs. Katz would come on board as producer, and the album \"Rock 'n' Roll Animal\" (February 1974) contained live performances of the Velvet Underground songs \"Sweet Jane\", \"Heroin\", \"White Light/White Heat\", and \"Rock and Roll\". Wagner's live arrangements, and Hunter's intro to \"Sweet Jane\" which opened the album, gave Reed's songs the live rock sound he was looking for, and the album peaked at No. 45 on the \"Billboard\" 200 for 28 weeks and soon became Reed's biggest selling album. It went gold in 1978, with 500,000 certified sales.\n\"Sally Can't Dance\" which was released later that year (in August 1974), became Reed's highest-charting album in the United States, peaking at No. 10 during a 14-week stay on the \"Billboard\" 200 album chart in October 1974.\nIn October 2019, an audio tape of publicly unknown music by Reed, based on Warhol's 1975 book, \"The Philosophy of Andy Warhol: From A to B and Back Again\", was reported to have been discovered in an archive at The Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.\n1975\u20131979: Addiction and creative work.\nThroughout the 1970s, Reed was a heavy user of methamphetamine and alcohol. In the summer of 1975, he was booked to headline Startruckin' 75 in Europe, a touring rock festival organized by Miles Copeland. However, Reed's drug addiction made him unreliable and he never performed on the tour, causing Copeland to replace him with Ike &amp; Tina Turner.\nReed's double album \"Metal Machine Music\" (1975) was an hour of modulated feedback and guitar effects. Described by \"Rolling Stone\" as the \"tubular groaning of a galactic refrigerator\", many critics interpreted it as a gesture of contempt, an attempt to break his contract with RCA or to alienate his less sophisticated fans. Reed claimed that the album was a genuine artistic effort inspired by the drone music of La Monte Young, and suggesting that references to classical music could be found buried in the feedback, but he also said, \"Well, anyone who gets to side four is dumber than I am.\" Lester Bangs declared it \"genius\", though also psychologically disturbing. The album, now regarded as a visionary textural guitar masterpiece by some music critics, was reportedly returned to stores by the thousands and was withdrawn after a few weeks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLou Reed doesn't just write about squalid characters, he allows them to leer and breathe in their own voices, and he colors familiar landscapes through their own eyes. In the process, Reed has created a body of music that comes as close to disclosing the parameters of human loss and recovery as we're likely to find. That qualifies him, in my opinion, as one of the few real heroes rock &amp; roll has raised.\n\u2014Mikal Gilmore, \"Rolling Stone\", (1979)\n1975's \"Coney Island Baby\" was dedicated to Reed's then-partner Rachel Humphreys, a transgender woman Reed dated and lived with for three years. Humphreys also appears in the photos on the cover of Reed's 1977 \"best of\" album, \"\". \"Rock and Roll Heart\" was his 1976 debut for his new record label Arista, and \"Street Hassle\" (1978) was released in the midst of the punk rock scene he had helped to inspire. Reed took on a watchful, competitive and sometimes dismissive attitude towards punk. Aware that he had inspired the scene, he regularly attended shows at CBGB to track the artistic and commercial development of numerous punk bands, and a cover illustration and interview of Reed appeared in the first issue of \"Punk\" magazine by Legs McNeil.\nReed released his third live album, \"\", in 1978; some critics thought it was his \"bravest work yet\", while others considered it his \"silliest\". \"Rolling Stone\" described it as \"one of the funniest live albums ever recorded\" and compared Reed's monologs with those of Lenny Bruce. Reed felt it was his best album to date. \"The Bells\" (1979) featured jazz trumpeter Don Cherry. During 1979 Reed toured extensively in Europe and throughout the United States performing a wide range of songs, including a suite of core songs from his \"Berlin\" album and the title track from \"The Bells\" featuring Chuck Hammer on guitar-synth. Around this time Reed also appeared as a record producer in Paul Simon's film \"One-Trick Pony\". From around 1979 Reed began to wean himself off drugs.\n1980\u20131989: Mid-period.\nReed's 1980 marriage to designer Sylvia Morales inspired Reed to write several songs, particularly \"Think It Over\" from 1980's \"Growing Up in Public\" and \"Heavenly Arms\" from 1982's \"The Blue Mask\". The latter album was enthusiastically received by critics such as \"Rolling Stone\" writer Tom Carson, whose review began, \"Lou Reed's \"The Blue Mask\" is a great record, and its genius is at once so simple and unusual that the only appropriate reaction is wonder. Who expected anything like this from Reed at this late stage of the game?\" In the \"Village Voice\", Robert Christgau called \"The Blue Mask\" \"his most controlled, plainspoken, deeply felt, and uninhibited album.\" After \"Legendary Hearts\" (1983) and \"New Sensations\" (1984), Reed was sufficiently reestablished as a public figure to become a spokesman for Honda scooters. In the early 1980s, Reed worked with guitarists including Chuck Hammer on \"Growing Up in Public\", and Robert Quine on \"The Blue Mask\" and \"Legendary Hearts\".\nReed's 1984 album \"New Sensations\" marked the first time that Reed had charted within the US Top 100 since 1978's \"Street Hassle\", and the first time that Reed had charted in the UK altogether since 1976's \"Coney Island Baby\". Although its lead single \"I Love You, Suzanne\" only charted at No. 78 on the UK Singles Chart it did receive light rotation on MTV. Two more singles were released from the album: \"My Red Joystick\" and the Dutch-only release \"High in the City\" but they both failed to chart.\nIn 1998, \"The New York Times\" observed that in the 1970s, Reed had a distinctive persona: \"Back then he was publicly gay, pretended to shoot heroin onstage, and cultivated a 'Dachau panda' look, with cropped peroxide hair and black circles painted under his eyes.\" The newspaper wrote that in 1980, \"Reed renounced druggy theatrics, even swore off intoxicants themselves, and became openly heterosexual, openly married.\"\nOn September 22, 1985, Reed performed at the first Farm Aid concert in Champaign, Illinois. He performed \"Doin' the Things That We Want To\", \"I Love You, Suzanne\", \"New Sensations\" and \"Walk on the Wild Side\" as his solo set. In June 1986, Reed released \"Mistrial\" (co-produced with bassist Fernando Saunders). To support the album, he released two music videos: \"No Money Down\" and \"The Original Wrapper\". In the same year, he joined Amnesty International's A Conspiracy of Hope short tour and was outspoken about New York City's political issues and personalities. He also appeared on Steven Van Zandt's 1985 anti-Apartheid song \"Sun City\", pledging not to play at that resort.\nThe 1989 album \"New York\", which commented on crime, AIDS, civil rights activist Jesse Jackson, then-President of Austria Kurt Waldheim, and Pope John Paul II, became his second gold-certified work when it passed 500,000 sales in 1997. Reed was nominated for a Grammy Award for best male rock vocal performance for the album.\n1990\u20131999: Velvet Underground reunion and various projects.\nReed met John Cale for the first time in several years at Warhol's funeral in 1987. They worked together on the album \"Songs for Drella\" (April 1990), a song cycle about Warhol. On the album, Reed sings of his love for his late friend, and criticizes both the doctors who were unable to save Warhol's life and Warhol's would-be assassin, Valerie Solanas. In 1990, the first Velvet Underground lineup reformed for a Fondation Cartier benefit show in France. In June and July 1993, the Velvet Underground again reunited and toured Europe, including an appearance at the Glastonbury Festival; plans for a North American tour were canceled following a dispute between Reed and Cale.\nReed had released his sixteenth solo album, \"Magic and Loss\", in January 1992. The album is focused on mortality, inspired by the death of two close friends from cancer. In 1994, he appeared in \"\". In 1995, Reed made a cameo appearance in the unreleased video game \"Penn &amp; Teller's Smoke and Mirrors\". If the player selects the \"impossible\" difficulty setting, Reed appears shortly after the game begins as an unbeatable boss who murders the player with his laser beam eyes. Reed then pops up on the screen and says to the player, \"This is the impossible level, boys. Impossible doesn't mean very difficult, very difficult is winning the Nobel Prize, impossible is eating the sun.\"\nThe Velvet Underground were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996. At the ceremony, Reed, Cale and Tucker performed a song titled \"Last Night I Said Goodbye to My Friend\", dedicated to Sterling Morrison, who had died the previous August. In February 1996 Reed released \"Set the Twilight Reeling\", and later that year, Reed contributed songs and music to \"Time Rocker\", a theatrical interpretation of H. G. Wells' \"The Time Machine\" by experimental director Robert Wilson. The piece premiered in the Thalia Theater, Hamburg, and was later also shown at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in New York.\nIn 1997, the BBC created a version of Perfect Day which featured many artists, including Reed. Initially created for advertising purposes, it was later released as a charity single for Children in Need and became a UK no.1 single.\n2000\u20132012: Rock and ambient experimentation.\nIn February 2000, Reed worked with Robert Wilson at the Thalia Theater again, on POEtry, another production inspired by the works of a 19th-century writer, this time Edgar Allan Poe. In April 2000, Reed released \"Ecstasy\". In January 2003, Reed released a 2-CD set, \"The Raven\", based on POEtry. The album consists of songs written by Reed and spoken-word performances of reworked and rewritten texts of Edgar Allan Poe by actors, set to electronic music composed by Reed. It features Willem Dafoe, David Bowie, Steve Buscemi, and Ornette Coleman. A single disc CD version of the album, focusing on the music, was also released.\nIn May 2000, Reed performed before Pope John Paul II at the Great Jubilee Concert in Rome. In 2001, Reed made a cameo appearance in the movie adaptation of \"Prozac Nation\". On October 6, 2001, \"the New York Times\" published a Reed poem called \"Laurie Sadly Listening\" in which he reflects on the September 11 attacks (also referred to as 9/11). Incorrect reports of Reed's death were broadcast by numerous US radio stations in 2001, caused by a hoax email (purporting to be from Reuters) which said he had died of a drug overdose. In April 2003, Reed began a world tour featuring the cellist Jane Scarpantoni and singer Anohni.\nIn 2003, Reed released a book of photographs, \"Emotions in Action\". This comprised an A4-sized book called \"Emotions\" and a smaller one called \"Actions\" laid into its hard cover. In January 2006, he released a second book of photographs, \"Lou Reed's New York\". A third volume, \"Romanticism\", was released in 2009.\nIn 2004, a Groovefinder remix of his song \"Satellite of Love\", called \"Satellite of Love '04\", was released. It peaked at No. 10 on the UK Singles Chart.\nIn October 2006, Reed appeared at Hal Willner's Leonard Cohen tribute show \"Came So Far for Beauty\" in Dublin, along with Laurie Anderson, Nick Cave, Anohni, Jarvis Cocker, and Beth Orton. He played a heavy metal version of Cohen's \"The Stranger Song\".\nIn December that year, Reed played a series of shows at St. Ann's Warehouse, Brooklyn, based on \"Berlin\". Reed played with guitarist Steve Hunter, who played on the original album and \"Rock 'n' Roll Animal\", and was joined by singers Anohni and Sharon Jones. The show was produced by Bob Ezrin, who also produced the original album, and Hal Willner. The show played at the Sydney Festival in January 2007 and in Europe during June and July 2007. The album version of the concert, entitled \"\", and a live film recording of these concerts were both released in 2008. In April 2007, he released \"Hudson River Wind Meditations\", an album of ambient meditational music. It was released on the Sounds True record label. In June 2007, he performed at the Traffic Festival 2007 in Turin, Italy, a five-day free event organized by the city. In the same month \"Pale Blue Eyes\" was included in the soundtrack of the French-language film, \"The Diving Bell and the Butterfly.\" In August 2007, Reed recorded \"Tranquilize\" with The Killers in New York City, a duet with Brandon Flowers for the B-side/rarities album \"Sawdust\".\nOn October 2 and 3, 2008, he introduced his new group, which was later named Metal Machine Trio, at the Walt Disney Concert Hall Complex in Los Angeles. The trio featured Ulrich Krieger (saxophone) and Sarth Calhoun (electronics), and played improvised instrumental music inspired by \"Metal Machine Music\". Recordings of the concerts were released under the title \"The Creation of the Universe\". The trio played at New York's Gramercy Theatre in April 2009, and appeared as part of Reed's band at the 2009 Lollapalooza.\nReed provided the voice of Maltazard, the villain in the 2009 Luc Besson animated/live-action feature film \"Arthur and the Revenge of Maltazard\" and appeared as himself in Wim Wenders' 2008 film \"Palermo Shooting\".\nReed played \"Sweet Jane\" and \"White Light/White Heat\" with Metallica at Madison Square Garden during the twenty-fifth anniversary celebration of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on October 30, 2009. In 2010, Reed featured on the song \"Some Kind of Nature\" with virtual band Gorillaz, from their third studio album \"Plastic Beach\". In October 2011, Metallica and Reed released the collaboration album \"Lulu\". It was based on the \"Lulu\" plays by the German playwright Frank Wedekind (1864\u20131918). The album received mixed and mainly negative reviews from music critics. Reed joked that he had no fans left after Metal Machine Music. The album debuted at No. 36 on the \"Billboard\" 200 with first-week sales of 13,000 copies, and went on to sell 280,000 copies worldwide.\nIn 2012, Reed collaborated with indie rock band Metric on \"The Wanderlust\", the tenth track on their fifth studio album \"Synthetica\". This was to be the last original composition he worked on.\nPersonal life.\nReed married Bettye Kronstad in 1973. She later said he had been a violent drunk when on tour. From 1973 through early 1978, Reed was in a relationship with Rachel Humphreys, a trans woman he met at Club 82. Reed married British designer Sylvia Morales in 1980. In 1994, they divorced. From 1992 on, Reed was romantically linked to musician and artist Laurie Anderson, and the two worked together on several recordings. They married on April 12, 2008.\nReed said that despite his Jewish background, his \"real god was rock 'n' roll\". He practiced tai chi during the last part of his life. He studied meditation with Tibetan Buddhist teacher Yongey Mingyur Rinpoche, and described himself as \"a student of Buddhist philosophy.\"\nDeath, legacy, and honors.\nReed had hepatitis and diabetes for several years. He was treated with interferons but developed liver cancer. In May 2013, he underwent a liver transplant at the Cleveland Clinic. Afterward, he wrote on his website of feeling \"bigger and stronger\" than ever. On October 27, 2013, however, he died from liver disease at his home in East Hampton, New York, at the age of 71. He was cremated and the ashes were given to his family.\nHis widow, Laurie Anderson, said his last days were peaceful, and described him as a \"prince and a fighter\". David Byrne, Patti Smith, David Bowie, Morrissey, Miley Cyrus, Iggy Pop, Courtney Love, Lenny Kravitz, and many others also paid tribute to Reed. Former Velvet Underground members Moe Tucker and John Cale made statements on Reed's death, and those from outside the music industry paid their respects such as Cardinal Gianfranco Ravasi.\nOn October 27, 2013, the day of Reed's death, Pearl Jam dedicated their song \"Man of the Hour\" to him at their show in Baltimore and then played \"I'm Waiting for the Man\". On the same day, The Killers dedicated their rendition of \"Pale Blue Eyes\" to Reed at the Life Is Beautiful festival in Las Vegas. My Morning Jacket performed a cover of \"Oh! Sweet Nuthin'\" in California, while Arctic Monkeys performed \"Walk on the Wild Side\" in Liverpool. That same night, Phish opened their show in Hartford, Connecticut, with the Velvet Underground's \"Rock &amp; Roll\". Lana Del Rey has said that Reed was supposed to record backing vocals on her single, \"Brooklyn Baby\", on the day of his death. On November 14, 2013, a three-hour public memorial was held near Lincoln Center's Paul Milstein Pool and Terrace. Billed as \"New York: Lou Reed at Lincoln Center\", the ceremony featured favorite Reed recordings selected by family and friends. On March 14, 2014, Richard Barone and Alejandro Escovedo produced and hosted the first full-scale tribute to Lou Reed at the SXSW Music Festival in Austin, Texas, with over twenty international acts performing Reed's music.\nReed's estate was valued at $30\u00a0million, $20\u00a0million of which accrued after his death. He left everything to his wife and his sister.\nReed's induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a solo artist was announced on December 16, 2014. He was inducted by Patti Smith at a ceremony in Cleveland on April 18, 2015. In 2017, \"Lou Reed: A Life\" was published by the \"Rolling Stone\" critic Anthony DeCurtis.\nAsteroid 270553 Loureed, discovered by Maik Meyer at Palomar Observatory in 2002, was named in his honor. The official was published by the Minor Planet Center on June 2, 2015 (M.P.C. 94391). A spider discovered in Spain, in 2019, was named \"Loureedia\" in his honor. It has a velvet body and lives underground.\nAn archive of his letters and other personal effects was donated to the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, where it can be viewed by members of the public. In June 2022, the Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center hosted the \"Lou Reed: Caught Between the Twisted Stars\", the first exhibition drawn from Reed's archive.\nIn 2015, writer Howard Sounes, in the unofficial biography \"Notes From The Velvet Underground\" and in interviews, said many of Reed's intimates referred to him as \"a prick\u2014[...] that exact word, independently of each other\". Sounes described Reed as misogynistic and violent toward women he was in relationships with; as having called Donna Summer a racial slur and sometimes using that word in conversation \"to project a bad boy image\"; and as referring to (his fellow Jew) Bob Dylan as \"a pretentious kike\".\nIn 2023, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Reed at number 107 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.\nIn 2023, Laurie Anderson edited \"The Art of the Straight Line: My Tai Chi\". The critically acclaimed book covers Reed's deep love and commitment to tai chi and meditation, as told by Reed and his friends and family.\nPosthumous release.\nIn June 2022, \"Lou Reed Archive Series\" was announced by Light in the Attic Records with Laurie Anderson. The collection has released previously unreleased material with an album called \"Words &amp; Music, May 1965\", along with a reissue of his final solo studio album \"Hudson River Wind Meditations\".\nArtistry.\nReed's songwriting style has been described as \"unusually literate\" and often contained themes considered to be transgressive during the 1960s, namely drugs and sex. Reed was heavily influenced by literature and poetry, and strived to apply creative autonomy allowed in literature to rock music. He was known for the noisy nature of his lead guitar style.\nEquipment.\nGuitars.\nReed's main guitar during the Velvet Underground era was a 1964 Gretsch Country Gentleman, which he modified extensively, to the extent that it became unplayable. Modifications included the addition of Stratocaster pick ups, a repeater effect with speed and tremolo controls taken from a Vox pedal, stereo outputs, and a battery powered pre-amp. He later played various stock Fender Telecasters, favoring models that were built specifically for him, such as the Rick Kelly 'Lou Reed's T' Custom Telecaster and the Fender Custom Shop Danny Gatton Telecaster. He played various other electric guitars throughout his career:\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Velvet Underground\nSolo\nCollaborations\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59534", "revid": "25970361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59534", "title": "Papal States", "text": "Italian state ruled by the pope (756\u20131870)\nThe Papal States ( ; ; ), officially the State of the Church, were a conglomeration of territories on the Italian peninsula under the direct sovereign rule of the pope from 756 to 1870. They were among the major states of Italy from the 8th century until the unification of Italy, which took place between 1859 and 1870, culminating in their demise.\nThe state was legally established in the 8th century when Pepin the Short, king of the Franks, gave Pope Stephen II, as a temporal sovereign, lands formerly held by Arian Christian Lombards, adding them to lands and other real estate formerly acquired and held by the bishops of Rome as landlords from the time of Constantine onward. This donation came about as part of a process whereby the popes began to turn away from the Byzantine emperors as their foremost temporal guardians for reasons such as increased imperial taxes, disagreement with respect to iconoclasm, and failure of the emperors, or their exarchs in Italy, to protect Rome and the rest of the peninsula from barbarian invasion and pillage.\nDuring the Renaissance, the papal territory expanded greatly, and the pope became one of Italy's most important rulers as well as the head of Western Christianity. At their zenith, the Papal States covered most of the modern Italian regions of Lazio (which includes Rome), Marche, Umbria, Romagna, and portions of Emilia. The popes' reign over these lands was an exemplification of their temporal powers as secular rulers, as opposed to their ecclesiastical primacy.\nBy 1860, much of the Papal States' territory had been conquered by the Kingdom of Italy, except Lazio, which remained under the pope's control. By 1870, only the Leonine City within Rome was retained, the Italian kingdom refraining from occupying it militarily, despite its annexation. In 1929, the Italian fascist leader Benito Mussolini, the head of the Italian government, ended the \"Prisoner in the Vatican\" period by negotiating the Lateran Treaty, signed by the two parties. This treaty acknowledged the sovereignty of the Holy See over a newly created territorial entity, a city-state within Rome limited to a token territory, the Vatican City, with the pope as its sovereign.\nName.\nThe Papal States were also known as the \"Papal State\"; although the plural is usually preferred, the singular is equally correct as the polity was more than a mere personal union. The territories were referred to variously as the \"State(s) of the Church\", the \"Pontifical States\", the \"Ecclesiastical States\", the \"Patrimony of St Peter\" or the \"Roman States\" (, also ', ', ', and '; , also \"\" \"papal rule\"). To some extent, the name used varied with the preferences and habits of the European languages in which it was expressed.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nFor its first 300 years, within the Roman Empire, the Church was persecuted and unable to hold or transfer property. Early congregations met in rooms set aside for the purpose in the homes of wealthy adherents, and a number of titular churches located on the outskirts of Rome were held as property by individuals, rather than by any corporate body. Nonetheless, the property held nominally or actually by individual members of the Roman churches would usually be treated as a common patrimony handed over successively to the legitimate \"heir\" of that property, often its senior deacons, who were, in turn, assistants to the local bishop. This common patrimony became quite considerable, including as it did not only houses etc. in Rome or nearby but also landed estates, such as latifundia, whole or in part, across Italy and beyond.\nA law of Constantine the Great, promulgated in 321, allowed the Christian Church to possess property and restored to it any property formerly confiscated; in the larger cities of this empire the property restored would have been quite considerable, the Roman patrimony not least among them. The Lateran Palace was gifted to the patrimony, most probably from Constantine himself.\nOther donations followed, primarily in mainland Italy but also in the provinces of the Roman Empire. However, the Roman Church held all of these lands as a private landowner, not as a sovereign entity. Following the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the papacy found itself increasingly placed in a precarious and vulnerable position. As central Roman authority disintegrated throughout the late 5th century, control over the Italian peninsula repeatedly changed hands, falling under the Arian suzerainty of Odoacer in 473, and in 493, Theodoric, king of the Ostrogoths. The Ostrogothic kings would continue to rule much of Italy until 554. The Roman Church submitted of necessity to their sovereign authority, while asserting its spiritual primacy over the whole of Christendom.\nBeginning in 535, the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I launched a series of campaigns to wrest Italy from the Ostrogoths which continued until 554 and devastated Italy's political and economic structures. The Byzantines established the Exarchate of Ravenna of which the Duchy of Rome, an area roughly coterminous with modern day Lazio, was an administrative division. In 568 the Lombards entered the peninsula from the north, establishing their own Italian kingdom, and over the next two centuries would conquer most of the Italian territory recently regained by Byzantium. By the 7th century, Byzantine authority was largely limited to a diagonal band running roughly from Ravenna, where the emperor's governor, or \"exarch\", was located, to Rome and south to Naples, plus coastal exclaves. North of Naples, the band of Byzantine control contracted, and the borders of the \"Rome-Ravenna corridor\" became extremely narrow.\nWith effective Byzantine power weighted at the northeast end of this territory, the pope, as the largest landowner and most prestigious figure in Italy, began by default to take on much of the ruling authority that the Byzantines were unable to exercise in the areas surrounding the city of Rome. While the popes legally remained \"Roman subjects\" under Byzantine authority, in practice the Duchy of Rome became an independent state.\nPopular support for the popes in Italy enabled several to defy the will of the Byzantine emperor: Pope Gregory II excommunicated Emperor Leo III during the Iconoclastic Controversy. Nevertheless, the Pope and the exarch still worked together to limit the rising power of the Lombards in Italy. As Byzantine power weakened, though, the papacy assumed an ever-larger role in protecting Rome from the Lombards, but lacking direct control over sizable military assets, the pope relied mainly on diplomacy to achieve as much. In practice, these papal efforts served to focus Lombard aggrandizement on the exarch and Ravenna. A climactic moment in the founding of the Papal States was the agreement over boundaries contained in the Lombardic King Liutprand's \"Donation of Sutri\" (728) to Pope Gregory II.\nDonation of Pepin.\nWhen the Exarchate of Ravenna finally fell to the Lombards in 751, the Duchy of Rome was completely cut off from the Byzantine Empire, of which it was theoretically still a part. The popes renewed earlier attempts to secure the support of the Franks. In 751, Pope Zachary had Pepin the Short crowned king in place of the powerless Merovingian figurehead King Childeric III. Zachary's successor, Pope Stephen II, later granted Pepin the title \"Patrician of the Romans\". Pepin led a Frankish army into Italy in 754 and 756, defeated the Lombards, thus taking control of northern Italy, and made a gift of the lands formerly constituting the Exarchate of Ravenna to the pope.\nSome later claimed that in 781, Charlemagne extended the regions over which the pope would be temporal sovereign: the Duchy of Rome, Ravenna, the Duchy of the Pentapolis, parts of the Duchy of Benevento, Tuscany, Corsica, Lombardy, and a number of Italian cities. The cooperation between the papacy and the Carolingian dynasty climaxed in 800 when Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne 'Emperor of the Romans'.\nRelationship with the Holy Roman Empire.\nFrom the 9th century to the 12th century, the precise nature of the relationship between the popes and emperors \u2013 and between the Papal States and the Empire \u2013 was disputed. It was unclear whether the Papal States were a separate realm with the Pope as their sovereign ruler, or a part of the Frankish Empire over which the popes had administrative control, as suggested in the late-9th-century treatise \"Libellus de imperatoria potestate in urbe Roma\", or whether the Holy Roman emperors were vicars of the Pope ruling Christendom, with the Pope directly responsible only for the environs of Rome and spiritual duties.\nThe Holy Roman Empire in its Frankish form collapsed when it was subdivided among Charlemagne's grandchildren. Imperial power in Italy waned and the papacy's prestige declined. This led to a rise in the power of the local Roman nobility, and the control of the Papal States during the early 10th century passed to a powerful and corrupt aristocratic family, the Theophylacti. This period was later dubbed the (\"dark age\"), and sometimes as the \"rule by harlots\".\nIn practice, the popes were unable to exercise effective sovereignty over the extensive and mountainous territories of the Papal States, and the region preserved its old system of government, with many small countships and marquisates, each centred upon a fortified \"rocca\".\nOver several campaigns in the mid-10th century, the German ruler Otto I conquered northern Italy; Pope John XII crowned him emperor (the first so crowned in more than forty years) and the two of them ratified the Diploma Ottonianum, by which the emperor became the guarantor of the independence of the Papal States. Yet over the next two centuries, popes and emperors squabbled over a variety of issues, and the German rulers routinely treated the Papal States as part of their realms on those occasions when they projected power into Northern and Central Italy. As the Gregorian Reform worked to free the administration of the church from imperial interference, the independence of the Papal States increased in importance. After the extinction of the Hohenstaufen dynasty, the German emperors rarely interfered in Italian affairs. In response to the struggle between the Guelphs and Ghibellines, the Treaty of Venice was signed in 1177. In the treaty, the rights of the Crown in Rome and in the Patrimony of Saint Peter were left vague, while papal rights of possession, including the Prefecture of the City of Rome, were recognized but \"saving all the rights of the empire\". By 1300, the Papal States, along with the rest of the Italian principalities, were effectively independent.\nAvignon Papacy.\nFrom 1305 to 1378, the popes lived in the papal enclave of Avignon, surrounded by Provence and under the influence of the French kings. This period was known as the \"Avignonese\" or \"Babylonian Captivity\". During this period the city of Avignon itself and the surrounding Comtat Venaissin was added to the Papal States; it remained a papal possession for some 400 years even after the popes returned to Rome, until it was seized and incorporated into the French state during the French Revolution.\nDuring the Avignon Papacy, local despots took advantage of the absence of the popes to establish themselves in nominally papal cities: the Pepoli in Bologna, the Ordelaffi in Forl\u00ec, the Manfredi in Faenza, and the Malatesta in Rimini all gave nominal acknowledgment to their papal overlords and were declared vicars of the Church.\nIn Ferrara, the death of Azzo VIII d'Este without legitimate heirs (1308) encouraged Pope Clement V to bring Ferrara under his direct rule: however, it was governed by his appointed vicar, King Robert of Naples, for only nine years before the citizens recalled the Este from exile (1317). Interdiction and excommunications were in vain because in 1332, John XXII was obliged to name three Este brothers as his vicars in Ferrara.\nIn Rome itself, the Orsini and the Colonna struggled for supremacy, dividing the city's \"rioni\" between them. The resulting aristocratic anarchy in the city provided the setting for the fantastic dreams of universal democracy of Cola di Rienzo, who was acclaimed Tribune of the People in 1347, and met a violent death in early October 1354 as he was assassinated by supporters of the Colonna family. To many, rather than an ancient Roman tribune reborn, he had become just another tyrant using the rhetoric of Roman renewal and rebirth to mask his grab for power. As Guido Ruggiero states, \"even with the support of Petrarch, his return to first times and the rebirth of ancient Rome was one that would not prevail.\"\nThe Rienzo episode engendered renewed attempts from the absentee papacy to re-establish order in the dissolving Papal States, resulting in the military progress of Cardinal Gil \u00c1lvarez Carrillo de Albornoz, who was appointed papal legate, and his condottieri heading a small mercenary army. Having received the support of the archbishop of Milan, Giovanni Visconti, he defeated Giovanni di Vico, lord of Viterbo, moving against Galeotto Malatesta of Rimini and the Ordelaffi of Forl\u00ec, the Montefeltro of Urbino and the da Polenta of Ravenna, and against the cities of Senigallia and Ancona. The last holdouts against full Papal control were Giovanni Manfredi of Faenza and Francesco II Ordelaffi of Forl\u00ec. Albornoz, at the point of being recalled, in a meeting with all the Papal vicars on 29 April 1357, promulgated the \"Constitutiones Sanct\u00e6 Matris Ecclesi\u00e6\", which replaced the mosaic of local law and accumulated traditional 'liberties' with a uniform code of civil law. These \"Constitutiones Aegidianae\" (as they are informally known) mark a watershed in the legal history of the Papal States; they remained in effect until 1816. Pope Urban V ventured a return to Italy in 1367 that proved premature; he returned to Avignon in 1370 just before his death.\nRenaissance.\nDuring the Renaissance, the Papal territory expanded greatly, notably under Popes Alexander VI and Julius II. The Pope became one of Italy's most important secular rulers as well as the head of the Church, signing treaties with other sovereigns and fighting wars. In practice, though, most of the Papal States were still only nominally controlled by the Pope, and much of the territory was ruled by minor princes. Control was always contested; indeed it took until the 16th century for the Pope to have any genuine control over all his territories.\nPapal responsibilities were often in conflict. The Papal States were involved in at least three wars in the first two decades of the 16th century. Julius II, the \"Warrior Pope\", fought on their behalf.\nReformation.\nThe Reformation began in 1517. In 1527, before the Holy Roman Empire fought the Protestants, troops loyal to Emperor Charles V brutally sacked Rome and imprisoned Pope Clement VII, as a side effect of battles over the Papal States. Thus Clement VII was forced to give up Parma, Modena, and several smaller territories. A generation later the armies of King Philip II of Spain defeated those of Pope Paul IV in the Italian War of 1551\u20131559, fought to prevent growing Spanish dominance in Italy.\nThis period saw a gradual revival of the pope's temporal power in the Papal States. Throughout the 16th century, virtually independent fiefs such as Rimini (a possession of the Malatesta family) were brought back under Papal control. In 1512 the state of the church annexed Parma and Piacenza, which in 1545 became an independent duchy under an illegitimate son of Pope Paul III, albeit as a Papal fief. This process culminated in the reclaiming of the Duchy of Ferrara in 1598, and the Duchy of Urbino in 1631.\nIn 1649, after the annexation of the Duchy of Castro, the Papal States reached their greatest extent, including most of central Italy \u2013 Latium, Umbria, Marche, and the legations of Ravenna, Ferrara, and Bologna extending north into the Romagna. It also included the small enclaves of Benevento and Pontecorvo in southern Italy and the larger Comtat Venaissin around Avignon in southern France.\nRoman Republic, Napoleonic era.\nThis surface was maintained until 1791, when the French Revolution affected the temporal territories of the Papacy as well as the Roman Church in general. In 1791 a referendum in Comtat Venaissin and Avignon was followed by occupation by Revolutionary France. Later, with the French invasion of Italy in 1796, the Legations (the Papal States' northern territories) were seized and became part of the Cispadane Republic.\nTwo years later, French forces invaded the remaining area of the Papal States, and in February 1798 General Louis-Alexandre Berthier declared a Roman Republic. Pope Pius VI fled from Rome to Siena and died in exile in Valence in 1799. \nIn October 1799, Neapolitan troops under King Ferdinand invaded the newfound republic and restored Papal States, ending the republic. The French quickly drove the Neapolitans out and reoccupied the Papal States, but didn't bother restoring the republic, as they continued their invasion to Naples, where they established another republic. In June 1800, French Consulate formally concluded the occupation and restored the Papal States, with the newly elected Pope Pius VII taking residence in Rome. Yet, in 1808 the French Empire under Napoleon invaded again. Then on 2 April 1808, Napoleon decreed that the Papal territories of Urbino, Ancona, Macerata, and Camerino (essentially the region known as the Marches) were to be annexed to the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy. Approximately 13 months later on 17 May 1809, the remainder of the Papal States (including Rome) was annexed to the First French Empire, forming the \"d\u00e9partements\" of \"Tibre\" and \"Trasim\u00e8ne\".\nFollowing the fall of the First French Empire in 1814, the Congress of Vienna formally restored the Italian territories of the Papal States, but not the Comtat Venaissin or Avignon, to Vatican control.\nUpon restitution of sovereignty to the Papal States, Pius VII decided to abolish feudalism, transforming all the noble titles (temporarily abolished during the Napoleonic occupation) into honorifics disconnected from territorial privileges. In 1853, Pope Pius IX put an end to the centuries-old duality between the Papal nobility and the Roman baronial families by equating the civic patriciate of the city of Rome with the nobility created by the Pope.\nFrom 1814 until the death of Pope Gregory XVI in 1846, the popes followed a reactionary policy in the Papal States. For instance, the city of Rome maintained the last Jewish ghetto in Western Europe.\nItalian unification.\nItalian nationalism had been stoked during the Napoleonic period but dashed by the settlement of the Congress of Vienna (1814\u201315), which sought to restore the pre-Napoleonic conditions: most of northern Italy was under the rule of junior branches of the Habsburgs and the Bourbons. The Papal States in central Italy and the Bourbon Kingdom of the Two Sicilies in the south were both restored. Popular opposition to the reconstituted and corrupt clerical government led to revolts in 1830 and in 1848, which were suppressed by the intervention of the Austrian army.\nThe nationalist and liberal revolutions of 1848 affected much of Europe. In February 1849 a Roman Republic was declared, and the hitherto liberally-inclined Pope Pius IX had to flee the city. The revolution was suppressed with French help in 1849 and Pius IX switched to a conservative line of government. Until his return to Rome in 1850, the Papal States were governed by a group of cardinals known as the Red Triumvirate.\nAs a result of the Second Italian War of Independence, Piedmont-Sardinia annexed Lombardy, while Giuseppe Garibaldi overthrew the Bourbon monarchy in the south. Afraid that Garibaldi would set up a republican government, the Piedmontese government petitioned French Emperor Napoleon III for permission to send troops through the Papal States to gain control of the south. This was granted on the condition that Rome be left undisturbed.\nIn 1860, with much of the region already in rebellion against Papal rule, Piedmont-Sardinia invaded and conquered the eastern two-thirds of the Papal States, cementing its hold on the south. Bologna, Ferrara, Umbria, the Marches, Benevento and Pontecorvo were all formally annexed by November of the same year. While considerably reduced, the Papal States nevertheless still covered the Latium and large areas northwest of Rome.\nA unified Kingdom of Italy was declared and in March 1861 the first Italian parliament, which met in Turin, the old capital of Piedmont, declared Rome the capital of the new kingdom. However, the Italian government could not take possession of the city because a French garrison in Rome protected Pope Pius IX.\nItalian invasion of Rome, 1870.\nThe opportunity for the Kingdom of Italy to eliminate the Papal States came in 1870; the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War in July prompted Napoleon III to recall his garrison from Rome and the collapse of the Second French Empire at the Battle of Sedan deprived Rome of its French protector.\nKing Victor Emmanuel II at first aimed at a peaceful conquest of the city and proposed sending troops into Rome, under the guise of offering protection to the Pope. When the Pope refused, Italy declared war on 10 September 1870, and the Royal Italian Army, commanded by General Raffaele Cadorna, crossed the frontier of the Papal territory on September 11 and advanced slowly toward Rome.\nThe Italian Army reached the Aurelian Walls on September 19 and placed Rome under a state of siege. Although the Pope's tiny army was incapable of defending the city, Pius IX ordered it to put up more than token resistance to emphasize that Italy was acquiring Rome by force and not consent. This incidentally served the purposes of the Italian State and gave rise to the myth of the Breach of Porta Pia, in reality, a tame affair involving a cannonade at close range that demolished a 1600-year-old wall in poor repair. The defence of Rome was not however bloodless, with 12 dead and 47 wounded amongst the Papal forces and 32 dead plus 145 wounded of the Italian troops.\nPope Pius IX ordered the commander of the Papal forces to limit the defence of the city in order to avoid bloodshed. The city was captured on 20 September 1870. Rome and what was left of the Papal States were annexed to the Kingdom of Italy as a result of a plebiscite the following October. This marked the definitive end of the Papal States.\nDespite the fact that the traditionally Catholic powers did not come to the Pope's aid, the papacy rejected the 1871 \"Law of Guarantees\" and any substantial accommodation with the Italian kingdom, especially any proposal which required the Pope to become an Italian subject. Instead, the papacy confined itself (see Prisoner in the Vatican) to the Apostolic Palace and adjacent buildings in the loop of the ancient fortifications known as the Leonine City, on Vatican Hill. From there it maintained a number of features pertaining to sovereignty, such as diplomatic relations since in canon law these were inherent in the papacy.\nIn the 1920s, the papacy \u2013 then under Pius XI \u2013 renounced the bulk of the Papal States. The Lateran Treaty with Italy (then ruled by the National Fascist Party under Benito Mussolini) was signed on 11 February 1929, creating the State of the Vatican City, forming the sovereign territory of the Holy See, which was also indemnified to some degree for loss of territory.\nRegional governors.\nAs the plural name Papal States indicates, the various regional components retained their identity under papal rule. The Pope was represented in each province by a governor, who bore one of a number of titles. These included \"papal legate\", as in the former principality of Benevento, or at Bologna, in Romagna, and the March of Ancona; and \"papal delegate\", as in the former Duchy of Pontecorvo and in the Campagne and Maritime Province. Other titles like \"Papal Vicar\", \"Vicar General\", and also several titles of nobility, such as \"count\" or even \"prince\" were used. However, throughout the history of the Papal States, many warlords and even bandit chieftains controlled cities and small duchies without having received any title from the Pope of the day.\nMiddle Ages to 17th century.\nUntil the 17th century, the administrative organization of the Papal States was based on the Egidian Constitutions, which divided the territory in 5 traditional provinces or legations:\nThe provinces were financially self-sufficient; Rome only exercised coordination. The supreme authority of each individual province was the Papal Legate, who operated with full powers in the name of the Pontiff. The legate governed together with the Rector. The territorial physiognomy of the various provinces remained uncertain for a long time. Only under Pope Pius IV (1559\u20131565) was a certain and specific identification established for each province.\nUntil 1540 all the northern territories (\"Romagna\") were administered by a single papal legation. The Cardinal Legate, head of the local government, resided in Bologna, the largest city in the region which became \"de facto\" capital. In 1540, Pope Paul III decided to nominate an apostolic Legate to Ravenna, splitting the Provincia of Romagna into two: one legate in Bologna and other in Ravenna.\nFollowing the incorporation of some important territories such as the Duchy of Ferrara, the Duchy of Urbino and the Duchy of Castro, which took place between 1598 and 1649, the Holy See created two new legations: that of Ferrara (during the pontificate of Pope Clement VIII, (1592\u20131605) and that of Urbino (strongly desired by Pope Urban VIII). The territory of Castro, although dependent on Viterbo, continued to enjoy a broad autonomy. In those same years some dioceses of Lazio and Umbria asked for the creation of a new province, Sabina, with Collevecchio as its capital (1605).\nIn 1627, a Congregation for Borders\nwas created. This body was responsible for preventing abuses and mediating frequent disputes regarding territorial jurisdiction between the various provinces and, within these, between dioceses or municipalities. During the 17th century, the Egidian Constitutions, although still formally in use, proved increasingly inadequate to the new times.\n18th century.\nAt the beginning of the eighteenth century, Clement XI and his successor, Innocent XIII, acknowledging the changes that had occurred in the previous century, gave further and more decisive impetus to the process of reforming the political and administrative structure of the state, with the creation of new provinces and the reorganization of the various constituencies on a more homogeneous territorial basis. The aim was to achieve more widespread control over the territory and mitigate the harmful effects of the many aristocratic and municipal privileges that impeded the proper functioning of the state.\nThe new and more detailed provincial division, not yet drawn up in 1701, at the time of the first (partial) census of the 18th century, would find full implementation in the twenty years that followed and would be entirely reflected in the subsequent census (1767\u20131769). This division was composed of:\nThey were further subdivided into:\nPapal military.\nHistorically the Papal States maintained military forces composed of volunteers, mercenaries (including Corsican Guard) and Catholic military orders. It was a notable regional military power from the High Middle Ages to the mid 17th century Wars of Castro.\nAfter 1600 and especially after 1644, the Papal military became a much lower priority for the state and fell into disrepair. There were various reasons for this. Chief among them were the decline of the Ottoman Empire in the east (especially after their defeat at the hands of the Holy Roman Empire in the Great Turkish War) and the rise of Holy Roman/Austrian and Spanish power in Italy after the end of the Italian Wars. The former lessened the need for pan-European expeditionary warfare, while the latter established a much more stable regional order, both disincentivizing investment in the military. Despite ruling a relatively large and rich territory the papacy's military strength was effectively irrelevant in its regional context; threats that could plausibly threaten the local hegemon (or a threat from said hegemon itself) would be one that the papacy would be powerless against no matter what preparations it made. The foreign policy issues of Rome - such as the independence of national churches - were thus resolved via diplomacy and spiritual authority rather than military force. The Papal military from the mid 17th century onward was limited to maintaining order within its own borders. By 1796, the Papal States' military was probably the worst one in Europe, and not expected to see any serious combat.\nIn 1792 the Papal army had a mere 5,000 regular soldiers for a state that controlled most of Central Italy. In theory this could be augmented by 80,000 reserves and citizen-militia, though nowhere near as many were actually called up at any point. Control over the military was divided among the Commissioner of Arms (most troops), the Treasurer General (the customs guards and garrisons beyond Lazio), the Secretary of the Consulta (a handful of personnel), and the Master of the Apostolic Palace (the palace guard). Each commander jealously guarded his powers, and the army was restricted to performing the duties of ceremonial honor guard, fortress garrison, border patrol, customs police, coastal surveillance, and law enforcement. Beyond actions against corsairs, bandits, and marauders, the most recent military action had been in 1739, when a papal estate in Romagna had utilized 500 men to invade San Marino over a legal dispute. The navy consisted of only three galleys, two coastal corvettes, and a handful of lighter vessels. When Napoleon's Army of Italy launched its first invasion of papal territory in 1796, units in their path surrendered or deserted at the first appearance of the French, and Romagna was ceded to the French Republic without a fight. At the emperor's encouragement, the Papal States revoked the cession and attempted to force the issue with a newly-built army of 10,000 men, thinking the French would be too busy fighting the Imperials to respond. Imperial officer Michelangelo Alessandro Colli-Marchi was also made commander-in-chief of the Papal army in hopes he could restore quality. Instead, the French invaded again in 1797\u20131798 after defeating the Imperial (Austrian and Piedmontese) armies in the Italian campaign of 1796\u20131797. The Papal troops, who never expected to actually fight a serious French presence, were quickly routed and the entire territory of the papacy was occupied by the French Republic.\nBetween 1860 and 1870 the Papal Army (\"Esercito Pontificio\" in Italian) comprised two regiments of locally recruited Italian infantry, two Swiss regiments and a battalion of Irish volunteers, plus artillery and dragoons. In 1861 an international Catholic volunteer corps, called Papal Zouaves after a kind of French colonial native Algerian infantry, and imitating their uniform type, was created. Predominantly made up of Belgian, French and Dutch volunteers, this corps saw service against Garibaldi's Redshirts, Italian patriots, and finally the forces of the newly united Italy. The Captain General of the Church () was the \"de facto\" commander-in-chief of the Papal States' armed forces. Similarly to 1797, the ossified Papal army provided very little resistance when the Piedmontese-Sardinians invaded various times during the Unification of Italy.\nThe Papal Army was disbanded in 1870, leaving only the Palatine Guard, which was itself disbanded on 14 September 1970 by Pope Paul VI; the Noble Guard, which also disbanded in 1970; and the Swiss Guard, which continues to serve both as a ceremonial unit at the Vatican and as the Pope's protective force.\nA small Papal Navy was also maintained, based at Civitavecchia on the west coast and Ancona on the east. With the fall of the Papal States in 1870, the last ships of the flotilla were sailed to France, where they were sold after the death of Pius IX.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59535", "revid": "421426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59535", "title": "Coterminal object", "text": ""}
{"id": "59536", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59536", "title": "Nico (singer)", "text": "German singer and actress (1938\u20131988)\nChrista P\u00e4ffgen (; 16 October 1938 \u2013 18 July 1988), known by her stage name Nico, was a German singer, songwriter, actress and model. \nNico had roles in films including Federico Fellini's \"La Dolce Vita\" (1960) and Andy Warhol's \"Chelsea Girls\" (1966). At the insistence of Warhol, she sang lead on three songs of the Velvet Underground's debut album, \"The Velvet Underground &amp; Nico\" (1967). At the same time, she released her debut album, \"Chelsea Girl\" (1967), composed of songs written by other musicians. At the suggestion of her friend Jim Morrison, she started writing her own material, using a harmonium, not traditionally a rock instrument. John Cale of the Velvet Underground became her musical arranger and produced \"The Marble Index\" (1968), \"Desertshore\" (1970), \"The End...\" (1974) and other albums.\nIn the 1980s, Nico toured extensively in Europe, United States, Australia and Japan. After a concert in Berlin in June 1988, she went on holiday in Ibiza, where she died from a cerebral haemorrhage following a bicycling accident.\nEarly life.\nNico was born Christa P\u00e4ffgen in Cologne to Wilhelm and Margarete \"Grete\" P\u00e4ffgen (n\u00e9e Schulz, 1910\u20131970). Wilhelm was born into the wealthy P\u00e4ffgen K\u00f6lsch master brewer family dynasty in Cologne and was Catholic, while Grete came from a lower-class background and was Protestant. According to some sources, her parents were of Spanish and Yugoslavian descent. But according to other sources, Nico also used to falsely claim her father was Turkish or even partly Arab, when in fact her father was a wealthy German brewer. Richard Witts notes in his book \"Nico: The Life and Lies of an Icon\" that Nico used to give differing accounts about her background.\nWhen Nico was two years old, she moved with her mother and grandfather to the Spreewald forest outside Berlin to escape the World War II bombardments of Cologne.\nHer father was conscripted into the \"Wehrmacht\" at the onset of the war, but there are several conflicting accounts as to when and how he died. According to biographer Richard Witts in his 1995 book \"Nico: The Life and Lies of an Icon\", Wilhelm P\u00e4ffgen was gravely wounded in 1942 after having been shot in the head by a French sniper. With no certainty that he would survive, his commanding officer, following standing orders, ended P\u00e4ffgen's life by gunshot. Another story is that he sustained head injuries that caused severe brain damage, and spent the rest of his life in a psychiatric institution. According to unproven rumours, he was variously said to have died in a concentration camp, or to have faded away as a result of shell shock.\nIn 1946, Nico and her mother relocated to Berlin, where Grete worked as a seamstress. Nico attended school until the age of 13, and began selling lingerie in the exclusive department store KaDeWe, eventually getting modelling jobs in Berlin. At , and with chiseled features and pale skin, Nico rose to prominence as a fashion model when still a teenager.\nCareer.\nActing and modelling (1955\u20131964).\nNico was discovered at 16 by photographer Herbert Tobias while both were working at a KaDeWe fashion show in Berlin. He gave her the name \"Nico\" after a man he had fallen in love with, filmmaker Nikos Papatakis, and she used it for the rest of her life. She moved to Paris and began working for \"Vogue\", \"Tempo\", \"Vie Nuove\", \"Mascotte Spettacolo\", \"Camera\", \"Elle\", and other fashion magazines. Around this time, she dyed her brown hair blonde, later claiming she was inspired to do so by Ernest Hemingway. At age 17, she was contracted by Coco Chanel to promote their products, but she fled to New York City and abandoned the job. Through her travels, she learned to speak English, Spanish, and French.\nIn 1959 she had an uncredited speaking part in Mario Lanza's last film \"For the First Time\". In the same year she was invited to the set of Federico Fellini's \"La Dolce Vita\", where she attracted the attention of the acclaimed director, who gave her a minor role in the film as herself. By that time, she was living in New York and taking acting classes with Lee Strasberg.\nAfter a role in the 1961 Jean Paul Belmondo film \"A Man Named Rocca\", she appeared as the cover model on jazz pianist Bill Evans' 1962 album, \"Moon Beams\". After splitting her time between New York and Paris, she got the lead role in Jacques Poitrenaud's \"Strip-Tease\" (1963). She recorded the title track, which was written by Serge Gainsbourg but not released until 2001, when it was included in the compilation \"Le Cin\u00e9ma de Serge Gainsbourg\".\nEarly singing work.\nIn New York, Nico first met Greek filmmaker Nico Papatakis, whose name she had adopted as her stage name several years earlier. The two lived together between 1959 and 1961. After noticing her singing around the apartment, Papatakis asked her if she had ever considered a career in music and ended up enrolling her in her first singing lessons.\nIn 1965, Nico met the Rolling Stones guitarist Brian Jones and recorded her first single, \"I'm Not Sayin'\", with the B-side \"The Last Mile\", produced by Jimmy Page for Andrew Loog Oldham's Immediate label. Actor Ben Carruthers introduced her to Bob Dylan in Paris that summer. In 1967, Nico recorded his song \"I'll Keep It with Mine\" for her first album, \"Chelsea Girl\".\nThe Velvet Underground (1966\u201367).\nAfter being introduced by Brian Jones, she began working in New York with Andy Warhol and Paul Morrissey on their experimental films, including \"Chelsea Girls\", \"The Closet\", \"Sunset\" and \"Imitation of Christ\". Warhol began managing the Velvet Underground, a New York City rock band and he proposed that the group take on Nico as a \"chanteuse\", an idea to which they consented, reluctantly for both personal and musical reasons.\nThe group became the centerpiece of Warhol's \"Exploding Plastic Inevitable\", a multimedia performance featuring music, lighting, film and dance. Nico sang lead vocals on three songs (\"Femme Fatale\", \"All Tomorrow's Parties\", \"I'll Be Your Mirror\"), and backing vocal on \"Sunday Morning\", on the band's debut album, \"The Velvet Underground &amp; Nico\" (1967). Reviewer Richard Goldstein describes Nico as \"half goddess, half icicle\" and writes that her Velvet Underground vocal \"sounds something like a cello getting up in the morning\".\nNico's tenure with the Velvet Underground was marked by personal and musical difficulties. Multi-instrumentalist John Cale wrote that Nico's long dressing room preparations, and pre-performance ritual of burning a candle, often held up performances, which especially irritated songwriter Lou Reed. Nico's partial deafness sometimes caused her to veer off key, for which she was ridiculed by other band members. The album became a classic, ranked 13th on \"Rolling Stone\"'s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, though it was poorly received at the time of its release.\nEarly solo career (1967\u20131977).\nImmediately following her musical work with the Velvet Underground, Nico began work as a solo artist, performing regularly at The Dom in New York City. At these shows, she was accompanied by a revolving cast of guitarists, including members of the Velvet Underground, Tim Hardin, Tim Buckley, Ramblin' Jack Elliott and Jackson Browne.\nFor her debut album, 1967's \"Chelsea Girl\", she recorded songs by Bob Dylan, Tim Hardin, and Jackson Browne, among others. Velvet Underground members Lou Reed, John Cale and Sterling Morrison contributed to the album, with Nico, Reed and Cale co-writing one song, \"It Was a Pleasure Then.\" \"Chelsea Girl\" is a traditional chamber-folk album, with strings and flute arrangements added by producer Tom Wilson. Nico had little say in its production, and was disappointed with the result; she said in 1981: \"I still cannot listen to it, because everything I wanted for that record, they took it away. I asked for drums, they said no. I asked for more guitars, they said no. And I asked for simplicity, and they covered it in flutes! ... They added strings, and\u2014 I didn't like them, but I could live with them. But the flute! The first time I heard the album, I cried and it was all because of the flute.\" In California, Nico spent time with Jim Morrison of the Doors, who encouraged her to write her own songs.\nFor \"The Marble Index\", released in 1968, Nico wrote the lyrics and music. Nico's harmonium anchored the accompaniment, and harmonium became her signature instrument for the rest of her career. John Cale arranged the album, adding an array of folk and classical instruments. The album has a European \u201cclassical\u201d avant-garde sound, often described as bleak, difficult or frightening. The album also marked a radical change in Nico's appearance and image. She once again dyed her hair, this time from blonde to red, and began dressing mostly in black, a look that would be considered a visual prototype for the gothic rock scene that would emerge in subsequent years.\nA promotional film for the song \"Evening of Light\" was filmed by Francois de Menil. This video featured the now red-haired Nico and Iggy Pop of the Stooges.\nReturning to live performance in the early 1970s, Nico (accompanying herself on harmonium) gave concerts in Amsterdam as well as London, where she and John Cale opened for Pink Floyd. 1972 saw a one-off live reunion of Nico, Cale and Lou Reed at the Bataclan in Paris.\nNico released two more solo albums in the 1970s, \"Desertshore\" (1970) and \"The End...\" (1974). She wrote the music, sang, and played the harmonium. Cale produced and played most of the other instruments on both albums. \"The End...\" featured Brian Eno on synthesizer and Phil Manzanera on guitar, both from Roxy Music. She appeared at the Rainbow Theatre, in London, with Cale, Eno, and Kevin Ayers. The album \"June 1, 1974\" resulted from this concert. Nico performed a version of the Doors' \"The End\", which was the catalyst for \"The End...\" later that year.\nBetween 1970 and 1979, Nico made about seven films with French director Philippe Garrel. She met Garrel in 1969 and contributed the song \"The Falconer\" to his film \"Le Lit de la Vierge\". Soon after, she was living with Garrel and became a central figure in his cinematic and personal circles. Nico's first acting appearance with Garrel occurred in his 1972 film, \"La Cicatrice Int\u00e9rieure\". Nico also supplied the music for this film and collaborated closely with the director. She also appeared in the Garrel films \"Athanor\" (1972); the silent Jean Seberg feature \"Les Hautes Solitudes\", released in 1974; \"Un ange passe\" (1975); \"Le Berceau de cristal\" (1976), starring Pierre Cl\u00e9menti, Nico and Anita Pallenberg; and \"Voyage au jardin des morts\" (1978). His 1991 film \"J'entends Plus la Guitare\" is dedicated to Nico.\nOn 13 December 1974, Nico opened for Tangerine Dream's concert at Reims Cathedral in Reims, France. Around this time, Nico became involved with Berliner musician Lutz Ulbrich, guitarist for Ash Ra Tempel. Ulbrich would accompany Nico on guitar at many of her subsequent concerts through the rest of the decade. Also in this time period, Nico let her hair return to its natural brown color but continued wearing mostly black. This would be her public image from then on. Nico and Island Records allegedly had many disputes during this time, and in 1975 Island dropped her from their roster.\nLater solo career (1978\u20131988).\nIn September 1978, Nico performed at the Canet Roc '78 festival in Spain. Also performing at this event were Blondie, Kevin Ayers, and Ultravox. She made a vocal contribution to Neuronium's second album, \"Vuelo Qu\u00edmico\", as she was at the studio, by chance, while it was being recorded in Barcelona in 1978 by Michel Huygen, Carlos Guirao and Albert Gimenez. She read excerpts from \"Ulalume\" by Edgar Allan Poe. She said that the music deeply moved her, so she could not help but make a contribution. During the same year, Nico briefly toured as supporting act for Siouxsie and the Banshees, one of many post-punk bands who namechecked her. In Paris, Patti Smith bought a new harmonium for Nico after her original was stolen.\nNico returned to New York in 1979 where her comeback concert at CBGB (accompanied by John Cale and Lutz Ulbrich) was reviewed positively in \"The New York Times\". She began playing regularly at the Squat Theatre and other venues with Jim Tisdall accompanying her on harp and Gittler guitar. They played together on a sold-out tour of twelve cities in the East and Midwest. At some shows, she was accompanied on guitar by Cheetah Chrome (the Dead Boys).\nIn France, Nico was introduced to photographer Antoine Giacomoni. Giacomoni's photos of Nico would be used for her next album, and would eventually be featured in a book (\"Nico: Photographies\", Horizon Illimite, Paris, 2002). Through Antoine Giacomoni, she met Corsican bassist Philippe Quilichini. Nico recorded her next studio album, \"Drama of Exile\", in 1981. produced by Philippe Quilichini. Mahamad Hadi aka Mad Sheer Khan played oriental rock guitar and wrote all the oriental production. It was a departure from her earlier work with John Cale, featuring a mixture of rock and Middle Eastern arrangements. For this album, in addition to originals like \"Genghis Khan\" and \"Sixty Forty\", Nico recorded covers of the Velvet Underground's \"I'm Waiting for the Man\" and David Bowie's \"'Heroes'\". \"Drama of Exile\" was released twice, in two different versions, the second appearing in 1983.\nAfter relocating to Manchester, England, in the early 1980s, Nico acquired a manager, Factory Records executive and promoter Alan Wise, and began working with a variety of backing bands for her many live performances. These bands chronologically included Blue Orchids, the Bedlamites and the Faction.\nIn 1981, Nico released the Philippe Quilichini-produced single \"Saeta\"/\"Vegas\" on Flicknife Records. The following year saw another single, \"Procession\", produced by Martin Hannett and featuring the Invisible Girls. Included on the \"Procession\" single was a new version of the Velvet Underground's \"All Tomorrow's Parties\".\nNico toured in 1982 with post-punk band Blue Orchids as her backing band. At the time, her work impacted the emerging gothic rock scene. At Salford University in 1982, she joined Bauhaus for a performance of \"I'm Waiting for the Man\". That same year, Nico's supporting acts included the Sisters of Mercy and Gene Loves Jezebel. In September 1982, Nico performed at the Deeside Leisure Centre for the Futurama Festival. The line-up for this show also included the Damned, Dead or Alive, Southern Death Cult, Danse Society and the Membranes. After the end of her work with the Blue Orchids, she hired musical arranger James Young and his band the Faction for her concerts.\nThe live compilations \"1982 Tour Diary\" and \"En Personne En Europe\" were released in November 1982 on the 1/2 Records cassette label in France; the ROIR cassette label reissued the former under the revised title \"Do Or Die!\" in 1983. These releases were followed by more live performances throughout Europe over the next few years.\nShe recorded her final solo album, \"Camera Obscura\", in 1985, with the Faction (James Young and Graham \"Dids\" Dowdall). Produced by John Cale, it featured Nico's version of the Richard Rodgers/Lorenz Hart song \"My Funny Valentine\". The album's closing song was an updated version of \"K\u00f6nig\", which she had previously recorded for \"La cicatrice interieure\". This was the only song on the album to feature only Nico's voice and harmonium. A music video for \"My Heart Is Empty\" was filmed at The Fridge in Brixton.\nThe next few years saw frequent live performances by Nico, with tours of Europe, Japan and Australia (usually with the Faction or the Bedlamites). A number of Nico's performances towards the end of her life were recorded and released, including 1982's \"Heroine\", \"Nico in Tokyo\", and \"Behind the Iron Curtain\".\nIn March 1988, she and Young hired new guitarist Henry Olsen: together, they composed new songs to be premiered at a festival organized by Lutz Ulbrich at the Berlin Planetarium in June. Nico was then inspired by Egyptian music and Egyptian singer and diva Oum Kalthoum. Young stated that the new material was \"good enough to be a springboard to a new record\" with an Egyptian orchestra. The Berlin concert ended with a song from \"The End...\", \"You Forget to Answer\".\nA duet called \"Your Kisses Burn\" with singer Marc Almond was her last studio recording (about a month before her death). It was released a few months after her death on Almond's album \"The Stars We Are\". The recording of the 1988 Berlin concert, was later released with the title \"\".\nPersonal life.\nOn 11 August 1962, she gave birth to her son, Christian Aaron Boulogne, whom she called Ari. She contacted Nikos Papatakis, with whom she shared a mostly platonic relationship, according to her friend Carlos De Maldonado-Bostock. Papatakis was filming in Paris. She told him that Alain Delon was the father of her child. Delon always denied it, claiming it wasn't his because they only did it once, he always refused to take a DNA test. Unable to raise her child, she left Ari to be raised by Delon's mother and his stepfather. Ari became a photographer and actor. He died of a heroin overdose, aged 60, in Paris in 2023.\nNico saw herself as part of a tradition of bohemian artists, which she traced back to the Romanticism of the early 19th century. She led a nomadic life, living in different countries. Apart from Germany, where she grew up, and Spain, where she died, Nico lived in Italy and France in the 1950s, spent most of the 1960s in the US, and lived in London in the early 1960s and again in the 1980s, when she moved between London and Manchester. In 1965, Nico became pregnant during a three-month affair with Brian Jones and had an abortion. The event prompted her to seek a closer relationship with her son Ari.\nNico was a heroin addict for over 15 years. In the book \"Songs They Never Play on the Radio\", James Young, a member of her band in the 1980s, recalls many examples of her troubling behaviour due to her \"overwhelming\" addiction \u2013 and that Nico claimed never to have taken the drug while in the Velvets/Factory scene but only began using during her relationship with French film director Philippe Garrel in the 1970s.\nNico spent most of the final years of her life in the Prestwich and Salford areas of Greater Manchester. Although she was still struggling with addiction, she became interested in music again. For a few months in the 1980s, she shared an apartment in Brixton, London, with the punk poet John Cooper Clarke but not as a couple. In his autobiography, musician Cheetah Chrome depicted his friendship with a strung-out Nico in the 1980s and their mutual dependence. Shortly before her death, Nico stopped using heroin and began methadone replacement therapy as well as a regimen of bicycle exercise and healthy eating.\nNico's friend Danny Fields, the American journalist who helped her sign to Elektra Records, described her as \"Nazi-esque\", saying, \"Every once in a while there'd be something about Jews and I'd be, 'But Nico, I'm Jewish,' and she was like 'Yes, yes, I don't mean you.'\" According to Fields, in the early 1970s, Nico attacked a mixed-race woman at the Chelsea Hotel with a smashed wine glass, sticking it in her eye while saying, \"I hate black people.\" Island Records dropped Nico after she told an interviewer that she did not like \"Negroes\" and that they had \"features like animals\". Nico said she had been raped at the age of thirteen by a black American soldier who had been court-martialed and executed; the biographer Richard Witts could find no record of this, even when similar incidents were \"assiduously documented.\" The biographer Jennifer Otter Bickerdike claims that \"personal documents\" have been uncovered that support the story but does not supply details or proof. According to Witts, Nico had misogynistic tendencies, describing women as poison.\nIn 2019, Nigel Bagley, Nico's co-manager and promoter in Manchester, said he never saw Nico express racist views and said she lived in a multicultural city and was friendly with their American-Jamaican doorman. Her drummer, Graham Dowdall, noted that Nico had used Indian instruments and worked with north Africans. He said she was \"certainly capable of very casual racism\" about her promoter, Alan Wise, who was Jewish, but that this was her way of \"having a go\" at him.\nDeath and funeral.\nOn 18 July 1988, during a holiday with Ari on the Spanish island of Ibiza, Nico hit her head when she fell off her bicycle. A passing taxi driver found her unconscious, but had difficulty getting her admitted to local hospitals. She was misdiagnosed as suffering from heat exposure and was declared dead at 20:00. X-rays later revealed a severe cerebral hemorrhage as the cause of death. Her son later said of the incident:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the late morning of July 17, 1988, my mother told me she needed to go downtown to buy marijuana. She sat down in front of the mirror and wrapped a black scarf around her head. My mother stared at the mirror and took great care to wrap the scarf appropriately. Down the hill on her bike: \"I'll be back soon.\" She left in the early afternoon on the hottest day of the year.\nNico's cremated remains are buried in her mother's plot in Grunewald, a forest cemetery in Berlin. Friends played a tape of \"M\u00fctterlein\", a song from \"Desertshore\", at her funeral.\nLegacy.\nNico directly inspired many musicians, including Siouxsie and the Banshees, the Cure, Morrissey, Elliott Smith, and Bj\u00f6rk. Siouxsie and the Banshees invited her as special guest on their first major UK tour in 1978; they also later covered \"All Tomorrow's Parties\". The Cure's leader Robert Smith has cited \"Desertshore\" as one of his favourite records, as has Bj\u00f6rk. Joy Division and New Order's Peter Hook cited \"Chelsea Girl\" as one of his favourite albums. Bauhaus singer, Peter Murphy, considered that \"Nico recorded the first truly Gothic album, \"Marble lndex\" or \"The End\". Nico was Gothic, but she was Mary Shelley to everyone else's Hammer Horror. They both did \"Frankenstein\", but Nico's was real.\" Morrissey cited Nico when asked to name artists who had a lasting influence on him: \"The royal three remain the same: the New York Dolls, Frank Sinatra, Elvis Presley, with Nico standing firm as first reserve.\" Morrissey also said of the song \"Innocent and Vain\", \"This is my youth in one piece of music.\" Elliott Smith covered \"Chelsea Girls\" and \"These Days\" in Portland, Oregon in October 1999; he also cited \"The Marble Index\" as one of his perfect 2.45am albums. Marc Almond recorded a cover version of \"The Falconer\": she was one of the \"things I was obsessed about at school\" due to her \"wonderful intriguing voice, icy and remote yet warm at the same time.\" Marianne Faithfull recorded \"Song For Nico\" on her LP \"Kissin' Time\" in 2002. Michael Gira also recorded an homonymous song for the Angels of Light album How I Loved You, and cited \"Desertshore\" and \"The Marble Index\" among his favorite albums. Patti Smith did a concert tribute to Nico in 2014 in which she covered \"I Will Be Seven\". Low wrote a song titled \"Those Girls (Song For Nico)\" and Neko Case covered \"Afraid\" in 2013.\nTwo of Nico's songs from \"Chelsea Girl\", \"The Fairest of the Seasons\" and \"These Days\", both written by Jackson Browne, were featured in Wes Anderson's film \"The Royal Tenenbaums\".\nSeveral biographical works on Nico have appeared, both in print and film. The first, in 1992, was \"Songs They Never Play on the Radio\", a book by James Young that draws on his association with Nico in her last years. In 1993, \"Nico: The Life and Lies of an Icon\" by musicologist Richard Witts covered Nico's entire life and career. The 1995 documentary \"Nico Icon\" by Susanne Ofteringer examined the many facets of Nico's life with contributions from people who knew her, including her colleagues Reed and Cale. In 2015, Lutz Graf-Ulbrich, Nico's former partner and accompanist in the late 1970s, published \"Nico: In the Shadow of the Moon Goddess\", an account of his time with Nico. In the 2018 biopic \"Nico, 1988\" directed by Susanna Nicchiarelli, Trine Dyrholm portrays Nico on a journey across Europe during her last tour.\nIn 2019, Manchester International Festival put on a production called \"The Nico Project\". It was a theatrical re-telling of Nico's 1968 album \"The Marble Index\" starring Maxine Peake.\nTributes.\nSeveral concerts to honour Nico's career were organized over the years with multiple singers revisiting her repertoire. In 1981 Texas punk band Really Red released an original song in tribute to Nico. In 2005, alternative rock band Anberlin released their second studio album, Never Take Friendship Personal, which includes the song \"Dance, Dance Christa P\u00e4ffgen\", inspired by Nico, whose given name was Christa P\u00e4ffgen. The song references her struggle with drugs and unrelated death. Two Nico tribute concerts took place in Europe in the autumn of 2008 to commemorate the 70th anniversary of Nico's birth and the 20th anniversary of her death. On 11 October 2008, John Cale, James Dean Bradfield (of Manic Street Preachers), Fyfe Dangerfield of the Guillemots, Mark Linkous (of Sparklehorse), Peter Murphy (of Bauhaus), Lisa Gerrard of Dead Can Dance, and Mark Lanegan appeared on stage at the Royal Festival Hall in London. On 17 October 2008 at the Volksbuehne in Berlin, Nico's ex-boyfriend Lutz Ulbrich, who was her musical collaborator in the late 1970s, presented another tribute concert, which featured Marianne Rosenberg, Soap&amp;Skin, Marianne Enzensberger, and James Young, the keyboardist from The Faction, Nico's last band.\nShearwater's 2006 album \"Palo Santo\" was dedicated to Nico, and was loosely based on her life.\nPerformance artist Tammy Faye Starlite (Tammy Lang) enjoyed success in 2011 with her one-woman show \"Nico: Chelsea M\u00e4dchen\", in which she impersonated the singer and delivered spoken material based on an interview Nico gave in the mid-Eighties, during an Australian tour.\nIn 2012, X-TG (featuring members of industrial band Throbbing Gristle) released a re-interpretation of the \"Desertshore\" album.\nIn January 2013, John Cale organized a tribute \"A Life Along the Borderline\" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in New York City. Performers included Cale, Kim Gordon with Bill Nace, Sharon Van Etten, Meshell Ndegeocello, Stephin Merritt, Peaches, Alison Mosshart, Joan As Police Woman, Greg Dulli, Yeasayer, and Mercury Rev.\nThe song \"Last Ride\" on Beach House's 2018 album \"7\" \"was inspired by\" Nico, according to lead singer Victoria Legrand.\nDiscography.\nAccording to \"The Great Rock Discography\":\nUnofficial releases.\nIn 2002, Faust Records released two collections of obscure Nico tracks, \"Reich der Tr\u00e4ume\" (Realm of Dreams) and \"Walpurgis-Nacht\" (Walpurgis Night).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59537", "revid": "300949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59537", "title": "Hutu", "text": "Ethnic group of the African Great Lakes region\nThe Hutu (), also known as the Abahutu, are a Bantu ethnic group native to the African Great Lakes region. They mainly live in Rwanda, Burundi, and Uganda where they form one of the principal ethnic groups alongside the Tutsi and the Great Lakes Twa. \nDemographics.\nThe Hutu is the largest of the three main population divisions in Burundi and Rwanda. Prior to 2017, the CIA World Factbook stated that 84% of Rwandans and 85% of Burundians are Hutu, with Tutsis being the second largest ethnic group at 15% and 14% of residents of Rwanda and Burundi, respectively. However, these figures were omitted in 2017 and no new figures have been published since then.\nEtymology.\nThe idea that Hutu is etymologically derived from a word that signifies slave was advanced by Ernest Viaene (1910, p.1047) and contradicted by Ren\u00e9 Bourgeois, who suggested that it originally meant \"lords\" in relation to the subordinate Twa pygmies. Ren\u00e9 Bourgeois reported that among the Mongo people of the DRC, Bantu people governing on the local Twa were called \"Bahoto\" or \"Bawoto\", terms cognate to the \u201cBahutu\u201d of Rwanda and Burundi, and which meant \u201clords\u201d in the local language (not serfs) because they governed over the Pygmies.\nOrigins.\n \nThe Hutu are believed to have first emigrated to the Great Lake region from Central Africa in the great Bantu expansion. Various theories have emerged to explain the purported physical differences between them and their fellow Bantu-speaking neighbors, the Tutsi. The Tutsi were pastoralists and are believed to have established aristocratic control over the sedentary Hutu and Twa. Through intermarriage with the Hutu, the Tutsi were gradually assimilated, culturally, linguistically, and racially.\nOthers suggest that the two groups are related but not identical, and they also suggest that the differences between them were exacerbated by Europeans, or they were exacerbated by a gradual, natural split, as those who owned cattle became known as the Tutsi and those who did not own cattle became known as the Hutu. Mahmood Mamdani states that the Belgian colonial power designated people as Tutsi or Hutu on the basis of cattle ownership, physical measurements and church records.\nThe debate over the ethnic origins of the Hutu and Tutsi within Rwandan politics predates the Rwandan genocide, and it continues to the present day, with the government of Rwanda no longer using the distinction.\nGenetics.\nY-DNA (paternal lineages).\nModern-day genetic studies of the Y-chromosome suggest that the Hutu, like the Tutsi, are largely of Bantu extraction (83% E1b1a, 8% E2). Paternal genetic influences associated with the Horn of Africa and North Africa are few (3% E1b1b and 1% R1b), and are ascribed to much earlier inhabitants who were assimilated. However, the Hutu have considerably fewer Nilo-Saharan paternal lineages (4.3% B) than the Tutsi (14.9% B).\nAutosomal DNA (overall ancestry).\nIn general, the Hutu appear to share a close genetic kinship with neighboring Bantu populations, particularly the Tutsi. However, it is unclear whether this similarity is primarily due to extensive genetic exchanges between these communities through intermarriage or whether it ultimately stems from common origins:\n[...] generations of gene flow obliterated whatever clear-cut physical distinctions may have once existed between these two Bantu peoples \u2013 renowned to be height, body build, and facial features. With a spectrum of physical variation in the peoples, Belgian authorities legally mandated ethnic affiliation in the 1920s, based on economic criteria. Formal and discrete social divisions were consequently imposed upon ambiguous biological distinctions. To some extent, the permeability of these categories in the intervening decades helped to reify the biological distinctions, generating a taller elite and a shorter underclass, but with little relation to the gene pools that had existed a few centuries ago. The social categories are thus real, but there is little if any detectable genetic differentiation between Hutu and Tutsi.\nTishkoff et al. (2009) found their mixed Hutu and Tutsi samples from Rwanda to be predominately of Bantu origin, with minor gene flow from Afro-Asiatic communities (17.7% Afro-Asiatic genes found in the mixed Hutu\u2013Tutsi population).\nLanguage.\nHutus speak Rwanda-Rundi as their native tongue, which is a member of the Bantu subgroup of the Niger\u2013Congo language family. Rwanda-Rundi is subdivided into the Kinyarwanda and Kirundi dialects, which have been standardized as official languages of Rwanda and Burundi, respectively. It is also spoken as a mother tongue by the Tutsi and Twa.\nAdditionally, a small portion of Hutu speak French, the other official language of Rwanda and Burundi, as a lingua franca, although the population is dwindling given the poor relations between Rwanda and France.\nPost-colonial history.\nThe Belgian-sponsored Tutsi monarchy survived until 1959 when Kigeli V was exiled from the colony (then called Ruanda-Urundi). In Burundi, Tutsis, who are the minority, maintained control of the government and military. In Rwanda, the political power was transferred from the minority Tutsi to the majority Hutu.\nIn Rwanda, this led to the \"Social revolution\" and Hutu and Tutsis conflicts. Tens of thousands of Tutsis were killed, and many others fled to neighboring countries, such as Burundi, Uganda, and forming the Banyamulenge Tutsi ethnic group in the South Kivu region of the Belgian Congo. Later, exiled Tutsis from Burundi invaded Rwanda, prompting Rwanda to close its border to Burundi.\nIn Burundi, a campaign of genocide was conducted against the Hutu population in 1972, and an estimated 100,000 Hutus died. In 1993, Burundi's first democratically elected president, Melchior Ndadaye, who was Hutu, was believed to be assassinated by Tutsi officers, as was the person constitutionally entitled to succeed him. This sparked a counter-genocide in Burundi between Hutu political structures and the Tutsi military, in which an estimated 500,000 Burundians died. There were many mass killings of Tutsis and moderate Hutus; these events were deemed to be a genocide by the United Nations International Commission of Inquiry for Burundi.\nWhile Tutsis remained in control of Burundi, the conflict resulted in genocide in Rwanda as well. A Tutsi rebel group, the Rwandan Patriotic Front, came back to Rwanda (their country of origin) from Uganda, which started hatred against the Tutsi people in 1990. A peace agreement was signed, but violence erupted again, culminating in the Rwandan genocide of 1994, when Hutu extremists killed an estimated 1,000,000 Rwandan Tutsis.\nAbout 30% of the Twa pygmy population of Rwanda were also killed by the Hutu extremists. At the same time, the Rwandan Patriotic Front took control of the country and is still the ruling party as of 2020[ [update]]. Burundi is also currently governed by a former rebel group, the Hutu CNDD\u2013FDD.\nAs of 2006[ [update]], violence between the Hutu and Tutsi had subsided. However, the situation in both Rwanda and Burundi was still tense, with tens of thousands of Rwandans still living outside the country (see Great Lakes refugee crisis).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59538", "revid": "228772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59538", "title": "Monomorphism", "text": "Injective homomorphism\nIn the context of abstract algebra or universal algebra, a monomorphism is an injective homomorphism. A monomorphism from X to Y is often denoted with the notation formula_1.\nIn the more general setting of category theory, a monomorphism (also called a monic morphism or a mono) is a left-cancellative morphism. That is, an arrow \"f\" : \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\" such that for all objects \"Z\" and all morphisms \"g\"1, \"g\"2: \"Z\" \u2192 \"X\",\n formula_2\nMonomorphisms are a categorical generalization of injective functions (also called \"one-to-one functions\"); in some categories the notions coincide, but monomorphisms are more general, as in the examples below.\nIn the setting of posets intersections are idempotent: the intersection of anything with itself is itself. Monomorphisms generalize this property to arbitrary categories. A morphism is a monomorphism if it is idempotent with respect to pullbacks.\nThe categorical dual of a monomorphism is an epimorphism, that is, a monomorphism in a category \"C\" is an epimorphism in the dual category \"C\"op. Every section is a monomorphism, and every retraction is an epimorphism.\nRelation to invertibility.\nLeft-invertible morphisms are necessarily monic: if \"l\" is a left inverse for \"f\" (meaning \"l\" is a morphism and formula_3), then \"f\" is monic, as\n formula_4\nA left-invertible morphism is called a split mono or a section. \nHowever, a monomorphism need not be left-invertible. For example, in the category Group of all groups and group homomorphisms among them, if \"H\" is a subgroup of \"G\" then the inclusion \"f\" : \"H\" \u2192 \"G\" is always a monomorphism; but \"f\" has a left inverse in the category if and only if \"H\" has a normal complement in \"G\". \nA morphism \"f\" : \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\" is monic if and only if the induced map \"f\"\u2217 : Hom(\"Z\", \"X\") \u2192 Hom(\"Z\", \"Y\"), defined by \"f\"\u2217(\"h\") = \"f\" \u2218 \"h\" for all morphisms \"h\" : \"Z\" \u2192 \"X\", is injective for all objects \"Z\".\nExamples.\nEvery morphism in a concrete category whose underlying function is injective is a monomorphism; in other words, if morphisms are actually functions between sets, then any morphism which is a one-to-one function will necessarily be a monomorphism in the categorical sense. In the category of sets the converse also holds, so the monomorphisms are exactly the injective morphisms. The converse also holds in most naturally occurring categories of algebras because of the existence of a free object on one generator. In particular, it is true in the categories of all groups, of all rings, and in any abelian category.\nIt is not true in general, however, that all monomorphisms must be injective in other categories; that is, there are settings in which the morphisms are functions between sets, but one can have a function that is not injective and yet is a monomorphism in the categorical sense. For example, in the category Div of divisible (abelian) groups and group homomorphisms between them there are monomorphisms that are not injective: consider, for example, the quotient map \"q\" : Q \u2192 Q/Z, where Q is the rationals under addition, Z the integers (also considered a group under addition), and Q/Z is the corresponding quotient group. This is not an injective map, as for example every integer is mapped to 0. Nevertheless, it is a monomorphism in this category. This follows from the implication \"q\" \u2218 \"h\" = 0 \u21d2 \"h\" = 0, which we will now prove. If \"h\" : \"G\" \u2192 Q, where \"G\" is some divisible group, and \"q\" \u2218 \"h\" = 0, then \"h\"(\"x\") \u2208 Z, \u2200 \"x\" \u2208 \"G\". Now fix some \"x\" \u2208 \"G\". Without loss of generality, we may assume that \"h\"(\"x\") \u2265 0 (otherwise, choose \u2212\"x\" instead). Then, letting \"n\" = \"h\"(\"x\") + 1, since \"G\" is a divisible group, there exists some \"y\" \u2208 \"G\" such that \"x\" = \"ny\", so \"h\"(\"x\") = \"n\" \"h\"(\"y\"). From this, and 0 \u2264 \"h\"(\"x\") &lt; \"h\"(\"x\") + 1 = \"n\", it follows that\nformula_5\nSince \"h\"(\"y\") \u2208 Z, it follows that \"h\"(\"y\") = 0, and thus \"h\"(\"x\") = 0 = \"h\"(\u2212\"x\"), \u2200 \"x\" \u2208 \"G\". This says that \"h\" = 0, as desired. \nTo go from that implication to the fact that \"q\" is a monomorphism, assume that \"q\" \u2218 \"f\" = \"q\" \u2218 \"g\" for some morphisms \"f\", \"g\" : \"G\" \u2192 Q, where \"G\" is some divisible group. Then \"q\" \u2218 (\"f\" \u2212 \"g\") = 0, where (\"f\" \u2212 \"g\") : \"x\" \u21a6 \"f\"(\"x\") \u2212 \"g\"(\"x\"). (Since (\"f\" \u2212 \"g\")(0) = 0, and (\"f\" \u2212 \"g\")(\"x\" + \"y\") = (\"f\" \u2212 \"g\")(\"x\") + (\"f\" \u2212 \"g\")(\"y\"), it follows that (\"f\" \u2212 \"g\") \u2208 Hom(\"G\", Q)). From the implication just proved, \"q\" \u2218 (\"f\" \u2212 \"g\") = 0 \u21d2 \"f\" \u2212 \"g\" = 0 \u21d4 \u2200 \"x\" \u2208 \"G\", \"f\"(\"x\") = \"g\"(\"x\") \u21d4 \"f\" = \"g\". Hence \"q\" is a monomorphism, as claimed.\nRelated concepts.\nThere are also useful concepts of \"regular monomorphism\", \"extremal monomorphism\", \"immediate monomorphism\", \"strong monomorphism\", and \"split monomorphism\". \nTerminology.\nThe companion terms \"monomorphism\" and \"epimorphism\" were originally introduced by Nicolas Bourbaki; Bourbaki uses \"monomorphism\" as shorthand for an injective function. Early category theorists believed that the correct generalization of injectivity to the context of categories was the cancellation property given above. While this is not exactly true for monic maps, it is very close, so this has caused little trouble, unlike the case of epimorphisms. Saunders Mac Lane attempted to make a distinction between what he called \"monomorphisms\", which were maps in a concrete category whose underlying maps of sets were injective, and \"monic maps\", which are monomorphisms in the categorical sense of the word. This distinction never came into general use.\nAnother name for monomorphism is \"extension\", although this has other uses too.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59539", "revid": "228772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59539", "title": "Epimorphism", "text": "Surjective homomorphism\nIn category theory, an epimorphism is a morphism \"f\" : \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\" that is right-cancellative in the sense that, for all objects \"Z\" and all morphisms \"g\"1, \"g\"2: \"Y\" \u2192 \"Z\",\n formula_1\nSome authors use the adjective epi (an epimorphism is a morphism which is epi). Epimorphisms are categorical analogues of onto or surjective functions (and in the category of sets the concept corresponds exactly to the surjective functions), but they may not exactly coincide in all contexts. The dual of an epimorphism is a monomorphism (i.e. an epimorphism in a category \"C\" is a monomorphism in the dual category \"C\"op).\nEpimorphism can be a subtly weaker condition than surjectivity. For example, in the category of rings, the inclusion formula_2 of integers into rational numbers is an epimorphism, since the images of integers under a homomorphism also determine the images of quotients of integers. In the category of Hausdorff spaces, an epimorphism is precisely a continuous function with dense image, since the image of a Cauchy sequence determines the image of its limit point: for example the inclusion formula_3 of the metric space of rational numbers into the real number line. \nMany authors in abstract algebra and universal algebra define an epimorphism simply as an \"onto\" or surjective homomorphism. Every epimorphism in this algebraic sense is an epimorphism in the sense of category theory, but the converse is not true in all categories. In this article, the term \"epimorphism\" will be used in the sense of category theory given above. For more on this, see below.\nExamples.\nIn a concrete category (in which each object has an underlying set), if the underlying function of a morphism is surjective, then the morphism is epi. In many concrete categories of interest the converse is also true. For example, in the following categories, the epimorphisms are exactly those morphisms that are surjective on the underlying sets:\nHowever, there are also many concrete categories of interest where epimorphisms fail to be surjective. A few examples are:\nThe above differs from the case of monomorphisms where it is more frequently true that monomorphisms are precisely those whose underlying functions are injective.\nAs for examples of epimorphisms in non-concrete categories:\nProperties.\nEvery isomorphism is an epimorphism; indeed only a right-sided inverse is needed: suppose there exists a morphism \"j\" : \"Y\" \u2192 \"X\" such that \"fj\" = id\"Y\". For any morphisms formula_8 where formula_9, you have that formula_10. A map with such a right-sided inverse is called a split epi. In a topos, a map that is both a monic morphism and an epimorphism is an isomorphism.\nThe composition of two epimorphisms is again an epimorphism. If the composition \"fg\" of two morphisms is an epimorphism, then \"f\" must be an epimorphism.\nAs some of the above examples show, the property of being an epimorphism is not determined by its behavior as a function, but also by the category of context. If \"D\" is a subcategory of \"C\", then every morphism in \"D\" that is an epimorphism when considered as a morphism in \"C\" is also an epimorphism in \"D\". However the converse need not hold; the smaller category can (and often will) have more epimorphisms.\nAs for most concepts in category theory, epimorphisms are preserved under equivalences of categories: given an equivalence \"F\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\", a morphism \"f\" is an epimorphism in the category \"C\" if and only if \"F\"(\"f\") is an epimorphism in \"D\". A duality between two categories turns epimorphisms into monomorphisms, and vice versa.\nThe definition of epimorphism may be reformulated to state that \"f\" : \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\" is an epimorphism if and only if the induced maps\nformula_11\nare injective for every choice of \"Z\". This in turn is equivalent to the induced natural transformation\nformula_12\nbeing a monomorphism in the functor category Set\"C\".\nEvery coequalizer is an epimorphism, a consequence of the uniqueness requirement in the definition of coequalizers. It follows in particular that every cokernel is an epimorphism. The converse, namely that every epimorphism be a coequalizer, is not true in all categories.\nIn many categories it is possible to write every morphism as the composition of an epimorphism followed by a monomorphism. For instance, given a group homomorphism \"f\" : \"G\" \u2192 \"H\", we can define the group \"K\" = im(\"f\") and then write \"f\" as the composition of the surjective homomorphism \"G\" \u2192 \"K\" that is defined like \"f\", followed by the injective homomorphism \"K\" \u2192 \"H\" that sends each element to itself. Such a factorization of an arbitrary morphism into an epimorphism followed by a monomorphism can be carried out in all abelian categories and also in all the concrete categories mentioned above in (though not in all concrete categories).\nRelated concepts.\nAmong other useful concepts are \"regular epimorphism\", \"extremal epimorphism\", \"immediate epimorphism\", \"strong epimorphism\", and \"split epimorphism\". \nThere is also the notion of homological epimorphism in ring theory. A morphism \"f\": \"A\" \u2192 \"B\" of rings is a homological epimorphism if it is an epimorphism and it induces a full and faithful functor on derived categories:\nD(\"f\") : D(\"B\") \u2192 D(\"A\").\nA morphism that is both a monomorphism and an epimorphism is called a bimorphism. Every isomorphism is a bimorphism but the converse is not true in general. For example, the map from the half-open interval [0,1) to the unit circle S1 (thought of as a subspace of the complex plane) that sends \"x\" to exp(2\u03c0i\"x\") (see Euler's formula) is continuous and bijective but not a homeomorphism since the inverse map is not continuous at 1, so it is an instance of a bimorphism that is not an isomorphism in the category Top. Another example is the embedding Q \u2192 R in the category Haus; as noted above, it is a bimorphism, but it is not bijective and therefore not an isomorphism. Similarly, in the category of rings, the map Z \u2192 Q is a bimorphism but not an isomorphism.\nEpimorphisms are used to define abstract quotient objects in general categories: two epimorphisms \"f\"1 : \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\"1 and \"f\"2 : \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\"2 are said to be \"equivalent\" if there exists an isomorphism \"j\" : \"Y\"1 \u2192 \"Y\"2 with \"j\" \"f\"1 = \"f\"2. This is an equivalence relation, and the equivalence classes are defined to be the quotient objects of \"X\".\nTerminology.\nThe companion terms \"epimorphism\" and \"monomorphism\" were first introduced by Bourbaki. Bourbaki uses \"epimorphism\" as shorthand for surjective function. Early category theorists believed that epimorphisms were the correct analogue of surjections in an arbitrary category, similar to how monomorphisms are a near analogue of injections. Unfortunately this is incorrect; strong or regular epimorphisms behave much more like surjections than do ordinary epimorphisms. \nSaunders Mac Lane attempted to create a distinction between \"epimorphisms\", which were maps in a concrete category whose underlying set maps were surjective, and \"epic morphisms\", which are epimorphisms in the categorical sense. However, this distinction never caught on.\nIt is a common misconception that epimorphism is a better concept than surjectivity. Unfortunately, this is rarely the case; epimorphisms can be very mysterious and have unexpected behavior. It is very difficult, for example, to classify all the epimorphisms of rings. In general, epimorphism is an unruly concept, related to surjectivity but fundamentally different.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59540", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59540", "title": "Azo", "text": "Azo or AZO may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59541", "revid": "41631743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59541", "title": "Vajrayana", "text": "Buddhist tantric tradition\nVajray\u0101na (), otherwise known as Mantray\u0101na (\"Mantra Vehicle\"), Guhyamantray\u0101na (\"Secret Mantra Vehicle\"), Tantray\u0101na (\"Tantra Vehicle\"), Indo-Tibetan Buddhism, Tantric Buddhism, and Esoteric Buddhism, is a Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhist tradition that emphasizes esoteric practices and rituals aimed at rapid spiritual awakening. Emerging between the 5th and 7th centuries CE in medieval India, Vajray\u0101na Buddhism incorporates a range of techniques, including the use of mantras (sacred sounds), dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012bs (mnemonic codes), mudr\u0101s (symbolic hand gestures), mandal\u0101s (spiritual diagrams), and the visualization of deities and Buddhas. These practices are designed to transform ordinary experiences into spiritual paths toward enlightenment and liberation, often by engaging with aspects of desire and aversion in a ritualized context. \nA distinctive feature of Vajray\u0101na Buddhism is its emphasis on esoteric transmission, where teachings are passed directly from teacher (guru or vajr\u0101c\u0101rya) to student through initiation ceremonies. Tradition asserts that these teachings have been passed down through an unbroken lineage going back to the historical Buddha (c.\u2009the 5th century BCE), sometimes via other Buddhas or bodhisattvas (e.g., Vajrapani). This lineage-based transmission ensures the preservation of the purity and effectiveness of the teachings. Practitioners often engage in deity yoga, a meditative practice where one visualizes oneself as a deity embodying enlightened qualities to transform one's perception of reality. The tradition also acknowledges the role of feminine energy, venerating female Buddhas and \u1e0d\u0101ki\u1e47\u012bs (spiritual beings), and sometimes incorporates practices that challenge conventional norms to transcend dualistic thinking. \nVajray\u0101na has given rise to various sub-traditions across Asia. In Tibet, it evolved into Tibetan Buddhism, which became the dominant spiritual tradition, integrating local beliefs and practices. In Japan, it influenced Shingon Buddhism, established by K\u016bkai, emphasizing the use of mantras and rituals. Chinese Esoteric Buddhism also emerged, blending Vajray\u0101na practices with existing Chinese Buddhist traditions, however this is no longer a separate sect and has mostly mixed in with normal exoteric Buddhism. Each of these traditions adapted Vajray\u0101na principles to its cultural context while maintaining core esoteric practices aimed at achieving enlightenment.\nCentral to Vajray\u0101na symbolism is the vajra, a ritual implement representing indestructibility and irresistible force, embodying the union of transcendental wisdom and compassion. Practitioners often use the vajra in conjunction with a bell during rituals, symbolizing the integration of male and female principles. The tradition also employs rich visual imagery, including mudr\u0101s, complex mandal\u0101s, and depictions of wrathful deities that serve as meditation aids to help practitioners internalize spiritual concepts and confront inner obstacles on the path to enlightenment.\nTerminology.\nIn medieval India, the initial terms that were used to refer to the tantric Buddhist tradition were \"Mantran\u0101ya\" (\"Path of Mantras\") and \"Mantray\u0101na\" (\"Mantra Vehicle\"). Later, other terms were adopted, like \"Vajray\u0101na\" (\"Diamond Vehicle\" or \"Thunderbolt Vehicle\").\nIn Tibetan Buddhism practiced in the Himalayan regions of India, Nepal, Tibet, and Bhutan, Buddhist Tantra is most often termed \"Vajray\u0101na\" (Tib. \u0f62\u0fa1\u0f7c\u0f0b\u0f62\u0f97\u0f7a\u0f0b\u0f50\u0f7a\u0f42\u0f0b\u0f54\u0f0b, \"dorje tekpa\", Wyl. \"rdo rje theg pa\") and \"Secret mantra\" (Skt. \"Guhyamantra\", Tib. \u0f42\u0f66\u0f44\u0f0b\u0f66\u0f94\u0f42\u0f66\u0f0b, \"sang ngak\", Wyl. \"gsang sngags\"). The \"vajra\" is a mythical weapon associated with Indra that was said to be indestructible and unbreakable (like a diamond) and extremely powerful (like a thunder). Thus, the term is variously translated as Diamond Vehicle, Thunderbolt Vehicle, Indestructible Vehicle, and so on.\nThe vajra, or diamond, is an adamantine symbol. A diamond has two qualities: it has the power to shatter all ordinary stones, and conversely, no stone can break a diamond. The actual vajra is the mind that has the realization of the ultimate truth inseparably merged with a special kind of tantric bliss. [...] That is why the vajra, or diamond, is the symbol of the tantric path and its result: the wisdom of nondual emptiness and bliss.\nIn Chinese Esoteric Buddhism, it is generally known by terms such as \"Zh\u0113ny\u00e1n\" (Chinese: \u771f\u8a00, literally \"true word\", referring to mantra), \"T\u00e1ngm\u00ec\" or \"Hanm\u00ec\" (\u5510\u5bc6 - \u6f22\u5bc6, \"Tang Esotericism\" or \"Han Esotericism\")\", M\u00ecz\u014dng\" (\u5bc6\u5b97, \"Esoteric Sect\"), or \"M\u00ecjiao\" (Chinese: \u5bc6\u6559; Esoteric Teaching). The Chinese term \"m\u00ec\" \u5bc6 (\"secret, esoteric\") is a translation of the Sanskrit term \"Guhya\" (\"secret, hidden, profound, abstruse\").\nIn Japan, Buddhist esotericism is known as or by the term Shingon (a Japanese rendering of \"Zh\u0113ny\u00e1n\"), which also refers to a specific school of .\nThe term \"Esoteric Buddhism\" is first used by Western occultist writers, such as Helena Blavatsky and Alfred Percy Sinnett, to describe theosophical doctrines passed down from \"supposedly initiated Buddhist masters.\"\nOrigins.\nAccording to David B. Gray, Vajrayana originated from pre-existing Tantric traditions, also known as 'Tantrism', which emerged within Hinduism during the first millennium CE. These early Hindu tantric practices had a profound influence on South Asian Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhism, leading to the development of distinct Buddhist tantric traditions, which arose in the 7th century CE, rapidly spread across Southeast, East, and Central Asia, giving rise to distinct traditions in East Asia and Tibet.\nHistory.\nMahasiddhas and the tantric movement.\nTantric Buddhism is associated with groups of wandering yogis called mahasiddhas in medieval India. According to Robert Thurman, these tantric figures thrived during the latter half of the first millennium CE. According to John Myrdhin Reynolds, the mahasiddhas date to the medieval period in North India and used methods radically different from those used in Buddhist monasteries, including practicing on charnel grounds.\nSince Tantra focuses on the transformation of poisons into wisdom, the yogic circles came together in \"tantric feasts\", often in sacred sites (\"pitha\") and places (\"ksetra\"), which included dancing, singing, consort practices, and the ingestion of taboo substances like alcohol, urine, and meat. At least two of the mahasiddhas cited in the Buddhist literature are comparable with the Shaiva Nath saints (Gorakshanath and Matsyendranath) who practiced Hatha Yoga.\nAccording to Schumann, a movement called \"Sahaja-siddhi\" developed in the 8th century in Bengal. It was dominated by long-haired, wandering mahasiddhas who openly challenged and ridiculed the Buddhist establishment. The mahasiddhas pursued \"siddhis\", magical powers such as flight and extrasensory perception as well as spiritual liberation.\nTantras.\nMah\u0101y\u0101na sutras contain \"proto-tantric\" material, such as the \"Gandavyuha\" and the \"Dasabhumika\", which might have served as a central source of visual imagery for Tantric texts. Later Mah\u0101y\u0101na texts like the \"K\u0101ra\u1e47\u1e0davy\u016bha S\u016btra\" (c.\u20094th\u20135th century CE) expound the use of mantras such as Om mani padme hum, associated with vastly powerful beings like Avalokiteshvara. The Heart Sutra also includes a mantra.\nVajray\u0101na Buddhists developed a large corpus of texts, the Buddhist Tantras, some of which can be traced to at least the 7th century CE but might be older. The dating of the tantras is \"a difficult, indeed an impossible task\", according to David Snellgrove.\nSome of the earliest of these texts, Kriya tantras such as the \"Ma\u00f1ju\u015br\u012b-m\u016bla-kalpa\" (c.\u20096th century), teach the use of mantras and dharanis for mostly worldly ends, including curing illness, controlling the weather and generating wealth. The \"Tattvasa\u1e43graha Tantra\" (\"Compendium of Principles\"), classed as a \"Yoga tantra\", is one of the first Buddhist tantras that focuses on liberation as opposed to worldly goals. In another early tantra, the \"Vajrasekhara\" (Vajra Peak), the influential schema of the five Buddha families is developed. Other early tantras include the \"Mah\u0101vairocana Abhisa\u1e43bodhi\" and the \"Guhyasam\u0101ja\" (Gathering of Secrets).\nThe Guhyasam\u0101ja is a Mahayoga class of Tantra, which features forms of ritual practice considered \"left-hand\" (\"vamachara\"), such as use of taboo substances like alcohol, consort practices, and charnel ground practices that evoke wrathful deities. Ryujun Tajima divides the tantras into those that were \"a development of Mah\u0101y\u0101nist thought\" and those \"formed in a rather popular mould toward the end of the eighth century and declining into the esoterism of the left\". This \"left esoterism\" mainly refers to the Yogini tantras and later works associated with wandering yogis. This practice survives in Tibetan Buddhism, but it is rare for this to be done with an actual person. It is more common for a yogi or yogini to use an imagined consort (a buddhist tantric deity, i.e. a yidam).\nLater tantras such as the \"Hevajra Tantra\" and the \"Chakrasamvara\" are classed as \"Yogini tantras\" and represent the final form of development of Indian Buddhist tantras in the ninth and tenth centuries. The \"Kalachakra tantra\" developed in the 10th century. It is farthest removed from the earlier Buddhist traditions, and incorporates concepts of messianism and astrology not present elsewhere in Buddhist literature.\nAccording to Ronald M. Davidson, the rise of Tantric Buddhism was a response to the feudal structure of Indian society in the early medieval period (ca. 500\u20131200 CE), which saw kings divinized as manifestations of gods. Likewise, tantric yogis reconfigured their practice through the metaphor of being consecrated (\"abhi\u015beka\") as the overlord (\"r\u0101j\u0101dhir\u0101ja\") of a mandala palace of divine vassals, an imperial metaphor symbolizing kingly fortresses and their political power.\nRelationship to Shaivism.\nThe question of the origins of early Vajray\u0101na has been taken up by various scholars. David Seyfort Ruegg has suggested that Buddhist tantra employed various elements of a \"pan-Indian religious substrate\" that is not specifically Buddhist, Shaiva or Vaishnava.\nAccording to Alexis Sanderson, various classes of Vajray\u0101na literature developed as a result of royal courts sponsoring both Buddhism and Shaivism. The relationship between the two systems can be seen in texts like the \"Ma\u00f1jusrimulakalpa\", which later came to be classified under Kriya tantra, and states that mantras taught in the Shaiva, Garuda, and Vaishnava tantras will be effective if applied by Buddhists since they were all taught originally by Manjushri.\nSanderson notes that the Vajray\u0101na Yogini tantras draw extensively from the material also present in Shaiva Bhairava tantras classified as \"Vidyapitha\". Sanderson's comparison of them shows similarity in \"ritual procedures, style of observance, deities, mantras, mandalas, ritual dress, Kapalika accouterments like skull bowls, specialized terminology, secret gestures, and secret jargons. There is even direct borrowing of passages from Shaiva texts.\" Sanderson gives numerous examples, such as the \"Guhyasiddhi\" of Padmavajra, a work associated with the Guhyasamaja tradition, which prescribes acting as a Shaiva guru and initiating members into Saiva Siddhanta scriptures and mandalas. Sanderson says that the Samvara tantra texts adopted the pitha list from the Shaiva text \"Tantrasadbh\u0101va\", introducing a copying error where a deity was mistaken for a place.\nDavidson argues that Sanderson's arguments for direct influence from Shaiva \"Vidyapitha\" texts are problematic because \"the chronology of the \"Vidyapitha\" tantras is by no means so well established\" and \"the available evidence suggests that received Saiva tantras come into evidence sometime in the ninth to tenth centuries with their affirmation by scholars like Abhinavagupta (c. 1000 c.e.)\" Davidson also notes that the list of pithas or sacred places is \"certainly not particularly Buddhist, nor are they uniquely Kapalika venues, despite their presence in lists employed by both traditions.\" He adds that, like the Buddhists, the Shaiva tradition was involved in the appropriation of Hindu and non-Hindu deities, texts, and traditions, an example being \"village or tribal divinities like Tumburu\".\nDavidson adds that Buddhists and Kapalikas as well as other ascetics (possibly Pasupatas) mingled and discussed their paths at various pilgrimage places and that there were conversions between the different groups. Thus he concludes:\nThe Buddhist-Kapalika connection is more complex than a simple process of religious imitation and textual appropriation. There can be no question that the Buddhist tantras were heavily influenced by Kapalika and other Saiva movements, but the influence was apparently mutual. Perhaps a more nuanced model would be that the various lines of transmission were locally flourishing and that in some areas they interacted, while in others they maintained concerted hostility. Thus the influence was both sustained and reciprocal, even in those places where Buddhist and Kapalika siddhas were in extreme antagonism.\nDavidson also argues for the influence of non-Brahmanical and outcaste tribal religions and their feminine deities (such as Parnasabari and Janguli).\nTraditional legends.\nAccording to several Buddhist tantras as well as traditional Tibetan Buddhist sources, the Vajrayana tantras were taught by the Buddha Shakyamuni, but only to some individuals. There are several stories and versions of how the tantras were disseminated. The \"J\u00f1ana Tilaka Tantra\", for example, has the Buddha say that the tantras will be explained by the bodhisattva Vajrapani. One of the most famous legends is that of king Indrabhuti (also known as King Ja) of Oddiyana (a figure related to Vajrapani, in some cases said to be an emanation of him).\nOther accounts attribute the revelation of Buddhist tantras to Padmasambhava, saying that he was an emanation of Amitabha and Avalokiteshvara and that the Buddha predicted his arrival. Some accounts also maintain Padmasambhava is a direct reincarnation of Buddha Shakyamuni.\nPhilosophical background.\nAccording to Alex Wayman, the philosophical view of Vajrayana is based on Mahayana Buddhist philosophy, mainly the Madhyamaka and Yogacara schools. The major difference seen by Vajrayana thinkers is the superiority of Tantric methods, which provide a faster vehicle to liberation and contain many more skillful means (\"upaya\").\nThe importance of the theory of emptiness is central to the Tantric Buddhist view and practice. The Buddhist emptiness view sees the world as fluid, without an ontological foundation or inherent existence, but ultimately a fabric of constructions. Because of this, tantric practice such as self-visualization as the deity is seen as no less real than everyday reality, but a process of transforming reality itself, including the practitioner's identity as the deity. Stephan Beyer notes, \"In a universe where all events dissolve ontologically into Emptiness, the touching of Emptiness in the ritual is the re-creation of the world in actuality\".\nThe doctrine of Buddha-nature, as outlined in the \"Ratnagotravibh\u0101ga\" of Asanga, was also an important theory that became the basis for Tantric views. As explained by the Tantric commentator Lilavajra, this \"intrinsic secret [behind] diverse manifestation\" is Tantra's utmost secret and aim. According to Wayman, this \"Buddha embryo\" (\"tath\u0101gatagarbha\") is a \"non-dual, self-originated Wisdom (jnana), an effortless fount of good qualities\" that resides in the mindstream but is \"obscured by discursive thought\". This doctrine is often associated with the idea of inherent or natural luminosity (Skt: \"prak\u1e5bti-prabh\u0101svara-citta\", T. \"\u2019od gsal gyi sems\") or purity of the mind (\"prakrti-parisuddha\").\nAnother fundamental theory of Tantric practice is that of transformation. In Vajray\u0101na, negative mental factors such as desire, hatred, greed, and pride are used as part of the path. As French Indologist Madeleine Biardeau notes, the tantric doctrine is \"an attempt to place \"kama\", desire, in every meaning of the word, in the service of liberation.\" This view is outlined in the following passage from the \"Hevajra tantra\":\nThose things by which evil men are bound, others turn into means and gain thereby release from the bonds of existence. By passion the world is bound, by passion too it is released, but by heretical Buddhists this practice of reversals is not known.\nThe \"Hevajra\" further states that \"one knowing the nature of poison may dispel poison with poison.\" As Snellgrove notes, this idea is already present in Asanga's \"Mahayana-sutra-alamkara-karika\" and therefore it is possible that he was aware of Tantric techniques, including sexual yoga.\nAccording to Buddhist Tantra, there is no strict separation of the profane or \"samsara\" and the sacred or \"nirvana\"; rather, they exist in a continuum. Everyone is seen as containing the seed of enlightenment, which is covered over by defilements. Douglas Duckworth notes that Vajrayana sees Buddhahood not as something outside or an event in the future, but as immanently present.\nIndian Tantric Buddhist philosophers such as Buddhaguhya, Vimalamitra, Ratn\u0101kara\u015b\u0101nti, and Abhayakaragupta continued the tradition of Buddhist philosophy and adapted it to their commentaries on the major Tantras. Abhayakaragupta's \"Vajravali\" is a key source in the theory and practice of tantric rituals. After monks such as Vajrabodhi and \u015aubhakarasi\u1e43ha brought Tantra to Tang China (716 to 720), tantric philosophy continued to be developed in Chinese and Japanese by thinkers such as Yi Xing and K\u016bkai.\nLikewise in Tibet, Sakya Pandita (1182\u201328 \u2013 1251), as well as later thinkers like Longchenpa (1308\u20131364) expanded on these philosophies in their tantric commentaries and treatises. The status of the tantric view continued to be debated in medieval Tibet. Tibetan Buddhist Rongzom Chokyi Zangpo (1012\u20131088) held that the views of sutra such as Madhyamaka were inferior to that of tantra, which was based on basic purity of ultimate reality. Tsongkhapa (1357\u20131419), on the other hand, held that there is no difference between Vajray\u0101na and other forms of Mahayana in terms of \"prajnaparamita\" (perfection of insight) itself, only that Vajray\u0101na works faster.\nPlace within Buddhist tradition.\nVarious classifications distinguish Vajray\u0101na from other Buddhist traditions. Vajray\u0101na can be seen as a third \"yana\", next to \u015ar\u0101vakay\u0101na and Mahayana. Vajray\u0101na can be distinguished from Sutrayana. Sutrayana is the method of perfecting good qualities, where Vajray\u0101na is the method of taking the intended outcome of Buddhahood as the path. Vajray\u0101na can also be distinguished from the paramitayana. According to this schema, Indian Mahayana revealed two vehicles (\"yana\") or methods for attaining enlightenment: the method of the perfections (\"Paramitayana\") and the method of mantra (\"Mantrayana\").\nThe Paramitayana consists of the six or ten \"paramitas\", of which the scriptures say that it takes three incalculable aeons to lead one to Buddhahood. The tantra literature, on the other hand, says that Mantrayana leads one to Buddhahood in a single lifetime. According to the literature, the mantra is an easy path without the difficulties of Paramitayana. Mantrayana is sometimes portrayed as a method for those of inferior abilities, but the practitioner of mantra must still adhere to the Bodhisattva vow.\nCharacteristics.\nGoal.\nThe goal of spiritual practice in the Mahayana and Vajray\u0101na traditions is to become a \"Samm\u0101sambuddha\" (fully awakened Buddha); those on this path are termed Bodhisattvas. As with the Mahayana, motivation is a vital component of Vajray\u0101na practice. The Bodhisattva-path is an integral part of Vajray\u0101na, which teaches that all practices are to be undertaken with the motivation to achieve Buddhahood for the benefit of all sentient beings.\nIn the vehicle of Sutra Mahayana, the \"path of the cause\" is taken whereby a practitioner starts with his or her potential Buddha-nature and nurtures it to produce the fruit of Buddhahood. In Vajray\u0101na, the \"path of the fruit\" is taken whereby the practitioner takes his or her innate Buddha-nature as the means of practice. Experiencing ultimate truth is said to be the purpose of all the various tantric techniques practiced in Vajrayana.\nEsoteric transmission.\nVajray\u0101na Buddhism is esoteric in the sense that the transmission of certain teachings occurs only from teacher to student during an empowerment (\"abhi\u1e63eka\"), and their practice requires initiation in a ritual space containing the mandala of the deity. Because of their role in giving access to the practices and guiding the student through them, the Vajracharya Lama is considered indispensable in Vajray\u0101na.\nThe secrecy of teachings was often protected through the use of allusive, indirect, symbolic, and metaphorical language (twilight language) that required interpretation and guidance from a teacher. The teachings may also be considered \"self-secret\", meaning that even if they were to be told directly to a person, that person would not necessarily understand the teachings without proper context. In this way, the teachings are \"secret\" to the minds of those who are not following the path with more than simple curiosity.\nEsler points out that while secrecy is presented as necessary to prevent the teachings from falling into the hands of unworthy recipients, it also serves to demarcate a kind of religious in-group. He observes that from an anthropological perspective, allowing reference to the secret to \"remain close to the social surface\" through veiled allusions plays a more important role in some ways than the secret content itself, as it mobilizes the secret as a kind of symbolic capital.\nAffirmation of the feminine, antinomian and taboo.\nSome Vajray\u0101na rituals traditionally included the use of certain taboo substances, such as blood, semen, alcohol, and urine, as ritual offerings and sacraments, though some of these are often replaced with less taboo substances such as yogurt. Tantric feasts and initiations sometimes employed substances like human flesh, as noted by Kahha's \"Yogaratnamala\".\nThe use of these substances is related to the non-dual (\"advaya\") nature of a Buddha's wisdom (\"buddhaj\u00f1ana\"). Since the ultimate state is in some sense non-dual, a practitioner can approach that state by \"transcending attachment to dual categories such as pure and impure, permitted and forbidden\". As the \"Guhyasamaja Tantra\" states, \"the wise man who does not discriminate achieves Buddhahood\".\nVajray\u0101na rituals also include sexual yoga, union with a physical consort as part of advanced practices. Some tantras go further: the \"Hevajra tantra\" states, \"You should kill living beings, speak lying words, take what is not given, consort with the women of others\". While some of these statements were taken literally as part of ritual practice, others, such as killing, were interpreted metaphorically. In the Hevajra, \"killing\" is defined as developing concentration by killing the life-breath of discursive thoughts. Likewise, while actual sexual union with a physical consort is practiced, it is also common to use a visualized consort.\nWayman points out that the symbolic meaning of tantric sexuality is ultimately rooted in \"bodhicitta\" and the bodhisattva's quest for enlightenment is likened to a lover seeking union with the mind of the Buddha. Judith Simmer-Brown notes the importance of the psycho-physical experiences arising in sexual yoga, termed \"great bliss\" (\"mahasukha\"): \"Bliss melts the conceptual mind, heightens sensory awareness, and opens the practitioner to the naked experience of the nature of mind.\" This tantric experience is not the same as ordinary self-gratifying sexual passion since it relies on tantric meditative methods using the illusory body and visualizations as well as the motivation for enlightenment. The \"Hevajra tantra\" says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This practice [of sexual union with a consort] is not taught for the sake of enjoyment, but for the examination of one's own thought, whether the mind is steady or waving.\nFeminine deities and forces are a major element of Vajray\u0101na. In the Yogini tantras in particular, women and female yoginis are given high status as the embodiment of female deities such as the wild and nude Vajrayogini. The \"Candamaharosana Tantra\" (\"viii:29\u201330\") states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn India, there is evidence that women participated in tantric practice alongside men and were also teachers, adepts, and authors of tantric texts.\nVows and behaviour.\nPractitioners of Vajray\u0101na must abide by various tantric vows or pledges called \"samaya\". These are extensions of the rules of the Pr\u0101timok\u1e63a and Bodhisattva vows for the lower levels of tantra, and are taken during initiations into the empowerment for a particular Unsurpassed Yoga Tantra. The special tantric vows vary depending on the specific mandala practice for which the initiation is received and on the level of initiation. Ngagpas of the Nyingma school keep a special non-celibate ordination.\nA tantric guru, or teacher, is expected to keep his or her \"samaya\" vows in the same way as his students. Proper conduct is considered especially necessary for a qualified Vajrayana guru. For example, the \"Ornament for the Essence\" of Manjushrikirti states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTantra techniques.\nWhile all Vajray\u0101na Buddhist traditions include all the traditional practices used in Mahayana Buddhism, such as developing bodhicitta, practicing the \"paramitas,\" and meditations, they also make use of unique tantric methods and Dzogchen meditation, which are seen as more advanced. These include mantras, mandalas, mudras, deity yoga, other visualization-based meditations, illusory body yogas like tummo, and rituals like the goma fire ritual. Vajrayana teaches that these techniques provide a faster path to Buddhahood.\nA central feature of tantric practice is the use of mantras and seed syllables (\"bijas\"). Mantras are words, phrases, or a collection of syllables used for various meditative, magical, and ritual ends. Mantras are usually associated with specific deities or Buddhas, and are seen as their manifestations in sonic form. They are traditionally believed to have spiritual power, which can lead to enlightenment as well as supramundane abilities (\"siddhis\").\nAccording to Indologist Alex Wayman, Buddhist esotericism centers on what is known as \"the three mysteries\" or \"secrets\": the tantric adept affiliates his body, speech, and mind with the body, speech, and mind of a Buddha through mudra, mantras, and samadhi, respectively. Padmavajra (c.\u20097th century) explains in his \"Tantrarthavatara\" Commentary, the secret Body, Speech, and Mind of the Buddhas are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThese elements are brought together in the practice of tantric deity yoga, which involves visualizing the deity's body and mandala, reciting the deity's mantra, and gaining insight into the nature of things based on this contemplation. Advanced tantric practices such as deity yoga are taught in the context of an initiation ceremony by tantric gurus or vajracharyas (vajra-masters) to the tantric initiate, who also takes on formal commitments or vows (\"samaya\"). In Tibetan Buddhism, advanced practices like deity yoga are usually preceded by or coupled with \"preliminary practices\" called \"ngondro\", consisting of five to seven accumulation practices and includes prostrations and recitations of the 100 syllable mantra.\nVajrayana is a system of tantric lineages, and thus only those who receive an empowerment or initiation (\"abhiseka\") may practice the more advanced esoteric methods. In tantric deity yoga, mantras, or bijas are used during the ritual evocation of deities that are said to arise out of the uttered and visualized mantric syllables. After the deity's image and mandala has been established, heart mantras are visualized as part of the contemplation in different points of the deity's body.\nMost Tantric Buddhists believe nirvana is achievable in a single lifetime with \"vigorous study and meditation\".\nDeity yoga.\nThe fundamental practice of Buddhist Tantra is \"deity yoga\" (\"devatayoga\"), meditation on a chosen deity or \"cherished divinity\" (Skt. \"I\u1e63\u1e6da-devat\u0101,\" Tib. \"yidam\"), which involves the recitation of mantras and prayers and visualization of the deity, the associated mandala of the deity's Buddha field, along with consorts and attendant Buddhas and bodhisattvas. According to the Tibetan scholar Tsongkhapa, deity yoga separates Tantra from Sutra practice.\nIn the Unsurpassed Yoga Tantras, the most widespread tantric form in Indo-Tibetan Buddhism, this method is divided into two stages, generation (\"utpatti-krama\") and completion (\"nispanna-krama\"). In the generation stage, one dissolves one's reality into emptiness and meditates on the deity-mandala, resulting in identification with this divine reality. During deity visualization, the deity is to be imagined as not solid or tangible, as \"empty yet apparent\", with the character of a mirage or a rainbow.\nThis visualization is to be combined with \"divine pride\", which is \"the thought that one is oneself the deity being visualized.\" Divine pride is different from common pride because it is based on compassion for others and an understanding of emptiness. The divine image along with the illusory body is then dissolved into luminous emptiness. This dissolution into emptiness is then followed by the visualization of the deity and the yogi's re-emergence as the deity. This practice is repeated over a number of daily sessions. The practitioner proceeds to the completion state after completing a requisite number of mantra repetitions, either defined in the text or given by the empowering lama.\nThe Tibetologist David Germano outlines two main types of completion practice: a formless and image-less contemplation on the ultimate empty nature of the mind and various yogas that make use of the illusory body to produce energetic sensations of bliss and warmth. The illusory body yogas systems like the Six Dharmas of Naropa and the Six Yogas of Kalachakra make use of energetic schemas of human psycho-physiology composed of \"energy channels\" (Skt. nadi, Tib. \"rtsa\"), \"winds\" or currents (Skt. \"vayu\", Tib. \"rlung\"), \"drops\" or charged particles (Skt. \"bindu\", Tib. \"thig le\"), and chakras (\"wheels\"). These subtle energies are seen as \"mounts\" for consciousness, the physical component of awareness. They are engaged by various means such as pranayama (breath control) to produce blissful experiences that are then applied to the realization of ultimate reality.\nOther methods associated with the completion stage in Tibetan Buddhism include dream yoga (which relies on lucid dreaming), practices associated with the bardo (the interim state between death and rebirth), transference of consciousness (\"phowa\"), and Ch\u00f6d, in which the yogi ceremonially offers their body to be eaten by tantric deities in a ritual feast.\nOther practices.\nAnother form of Vajrayana practice are certain meditative techniques associated with Mah\u0101mudr\u0101 and Dzogchen, often termed \"formless practices\" or the path of self-liberation. These techniques do not rely on deity visualization per se but on direct pointing-out instruction from a master, and are often seen as the most advanced and direct methods.\nAnother distinctive feature of Tantric Buddhism is its unique and often elaborate rituals. They include pujas (worship rituals), prayer festivals, protection rituals, death rituals, tantric feasts (\"ganachakra\"), tantric initiations (\"abhiseka\") and the goma fire ritual (common in East Asian Esotericism).\nAn important element in some of these rituals (particularly initiations and tantric feasts) seems to have been the practice of ritual sex or sexual yoga (\"karmamudra,\" \"desire seal\", also called \"consort observance\", \"vidyavrata,\" and euphemistically as \"puja\"), as well as the sacramental ingestion of \"power substances\" such as the mingled sexual fluids and uterine blood (often performed by licking these substances off the vulva, a practice termed \"yonipuja\").\nThe practice of ingestion of sexual fluids is mentioned by numerous tantric commentators, sometimes euphemistically referring to the penis as the \"vajra\" and the vagina as the \"lotus\". The \"Cakrasamvara Tantra\" commentator Kambala, writing about this practice, states:\nThe seats are well-known on earth to be spots within the lotus mandala; by abiding within it there is great bliss, the royal nature of nondual joy. Therefore the lotus seat is supreme: filled with a mixture of semen and uterine blood, one should especially kiss it, and lolling with the tongue take it up. Unite the vajra and lotus, with the rapture of drinking [this] liquor.\nAccording to David Gray, these sexual practices probably originated in a non-monastic context and were later adopted by monastic establishments (such as Nalanda and Vikramashila). He notes that the anxiety of figures like Atisa about these practices, and the stories of Vir\u016bpa and Maitripa being expelled from their monasteries for performing them, shows that supposedly celibate monastics were undertaking these sexual rites.\nBecause of its adoption by the monastic tradition, sexual yoga slowly became either done with an imaginary consort visualized by the yogi instead of an actual person, or reserved to a small group of the \"highest\" or elite practitioners. Likewise, the drinking of sexual fluids was also reinterpreted by later commentators to refer to illusory body anatomy of the perfection stage practices.\nSymbols and imagery.\nVajray\u0101na uses a rich variety of symbols, terms, and images that have multiple meanings according to a complex system of analogical thinking. In Vajray\u0101na, symbols, and terms are multi-valent, reflecting the microcosm and the macrocosm as in the phrase \"As without, so within\" (\"yatha bahyam tatha \u2019dhyatmam iti\") from Abhayakaragupta's \"Nispannayogavali\".\nThe vajra.\nThe Sanskrit term \"vajra\" denoted a thunderbolt like a legendary weapon and divine attribute that was made from an adamantine, or an indestructible substance which could, therefore, pierce and penetrate any obstacle or obfuscation. It is the weapon of choice of Indra, the King of the Devas. As a secondary meaning, \"vajra\" symbolizes the ultimate nature of things which is described in the tantras as translucent, pure and radiant, but also indestructible and indivisible. It is also symbolic of the power of tantric methods to achieve its goals.\nA vajra is also a scepter-like ritual object ( \"dorje\"), which has a sphere (and sometimes a gankyil) at its centre, and a variable number of spokes, 3, 5 or 9 at each end (depending on the sadhana), enfolding either end of the rod. The vajra is often traditionally employed in tantric rituals in combination with the bell or ghanta; symbolically, the vajra may represent method as well as great bliss and the bell stands for wisdom, specifically the wisdom realizing emptiness. The union of the two sets of spokes at the center of the wheel is said to symbolize the unity of wisdom (praj\u00f1a) and compassion (karuna) as well as the sexual union of male and female deities.\nImagery and ritual in deity yoga.\nRepresentations of the deity, such as statues (\"murti\"), paintings (\"thangka\"), or mandala, are often employed as an aid to visualization, in deity yoga. The use of visual aids, particularly microcosmic/macrocosmic diagrams, known as \"mandalas\", is another unique feature of Buddhist Tantra. Mandalas are symbolic depictions of the sacred space of the awakened Buddhas and Bodhisattvas as well as of the inner workings of the human person. The macrocosmic symbolism of the mandala then, also represents the forces of the human body. The explanatory tantra of the \"Guhyasamaja tantra\", the \"Vajramala\", states: \"The body becomes a palace, the hallowed basis of all the Buddhas.\"\nMandalas are also sacred enclosures, sacred architecture that house and contain the uncontainable essence of a central deity or \"yidam\" and their retinue. In the book \"The World of Tibetan Buddhism\", the Dalai Lama describes mandalas thus: \"This is the celestial mansion, the pure residence of the deity.\" The Five Tathagatas or 'Five Buddhas', along with the figure of the Adi-Buddha, are central to many Vajrayana mandalas as they represent the \"five wisdoms\", which are the five primary aspects of primordial wisdom or Buddha-nature.\nAll ritual in Vajrayana practice can be seen as aiding in this process of visualization and identification. The practitioner can use various hand implements such as a \"vajra\", bell, hand-drum (\"damaru\") or a ritual dagger (\"phurba\"), but also ritual hand gestures (\"mudras\") can be made, special chanting techniques can be used, and in elaborate offering rituals or initiations, many more ritual implements and tools are used, each with an elaborate symbolic meaning to create a special environment for practice. Vajrayana has thus become a major inspiration in traditional Tibetan art.\nTexts.\nThere is an extended body of texts associated with Buddhist Tantra, including the \"tantras\" themselves, tantric commentaries and \"shastras\", \"sadhanas\" (liturgical texts), ritual manuals (Chinese: \u5100\u8ecc; Pinyin: \"Y\u00edgu\u01d0\"; R\u014dmaji: \"Giki\"), dharanis, poems or songs (\"dohas\"), termas and so on. According to Harunaga Isaacson,\nThough we do not know precisely at present just how many Indian tantric Buddhist texts survive today in the language in which they were written, their number is certainly over one thousand five hundred; I suspect indeed over two thousand. A large part of this body of texts has also been translated into Tibetan, and a smaller part into Chinese. Aside from these, there are perhaps another two thousand or more works that are known today only from such translations. We can be certain as well that many others are lost to us forever, in whatever form. Of the texts that survive a very small proportion has been published; an almost insignificant percentage has been edited or translated reliably.\nVajray\u0101na texts exhibit a wide range of literary characteristics\u2014usually a mix of verse and prose, almost always in a Sanskrit that \"transgresses frequently against classical norms of grammar and usage,\" although also occasionally in various Middle Indic dialects or elegant classical Sanskrit.\nIn Chinese Mantrayana (\"Zhenyan\"), and Japanese Shingon, the most influential esoteric texts are the \"Mahavairocana Tantra\" and the \"Vajra\u015bekhara S\u016btra\".\nIn Tibetan Buddhism, a large number of tantric works are widely studied and different schools focus on the study and practice of different cycles of texts. According to Geoffrey Samuel,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the Sakyapa specialize in the \"Hevajra Tantra\", the Nyingmapa specialize in the various so called Old Tantras and terma cycles, and the most important Kagyudpa and Gelugpa tantras are \"Guhyasam\u0101ja, Cakrasa\u1e43vara\" and \"K\u0101lacakra\".\nDunhuang manuscripts.\nThe Dunhuang manuscripts also contain Tibetan Tantric manuscripts. Dalton and Schaik (2007, revised) provide an excellent online catalogue listing 350 Tibetan Tantric Manuscripts] from Dunhuang in the Stein Collection of the British Library which is currently fully accessible online in discrete digitized manuscripts. With the Wylie transcription of the manuscripts they are to be made discoverable online in the future. These 350 texts are just a small portion of the vast cache of the Dunhuang manuscripts.\nTraditions.\nAlthough there is historical evidence for Vajray\u0101na Buddhism in Southeast Asia and elsewhere (see History of Vajray\u0101na above), today Vajray\u0101na exists primarily in the form of the two major traditions of Indo-Tibetan Buddhism (in Tibet and other parts of the PRC, Bhutan, India and also internationally) and Japanese Esoteric Buddhism (mostly in Japan), which is found in the Shingon (literally \"True Speech\", i.e. \"mantra\") and Tendai schools.\nOther traditions like contemporary Chinese Buddhism, Japanese Zen, Korean Buddhism, and Vietnamese Buddhism also make use of esoteric (Chinese: mijiao, Japanese: mikkyo) or mantrayana methods to a lesser extent. In many Asian Mahayana Buddhist traditions, esoteric methods are used as a complement, not as the central practice. This mainly involves the recitation of mantras (like the ten small mantras) and various popular dharanis. However, certain revival movements have attempted to establish new esoteric schools in mainland East Asia such as http:// (in China) and the South Korean Jingak Order.\nThere was strong connection between the Palas in Bengal, Srivijaya in Nusantara, and the kingdoms in East Asia through the sea route. Medieval monks were a prime factor in the spread of esoteric Buddhism.\nThe distinction between mantrayana traditions is not always rigid. For example, the tantra sections of the Tibetan Buddhist canon of texts sometimes include material not usually thought of as tantric outside the Tibetan Buddhist tradition, such as the widely recited \"Heart Sutra\" and even versions of some material found in the \"Pali Canon\".\nChinese Esoteric Buddhism.\nEsoteric and Tantric teachings followed the same route into northern China as Buddhism itself, arriving via the Silk Road and Southeast Asian Maritime trade routes sometime during the first half of the 7th century, during the Tang dynasty and received sanction from the emperors of the Tang dynasty. During this time, three great masters came from India to China: \u015aubhakarasi\u1e43ha, Vajrabodhi, and Amoghavajra who translated key texts and founded the \"Zhenyan\" (\u771f\u8a00, \"true word\", \"mantra\") tradition.\n\"Zhenyan\" was also brought to Japan as Shingon during this period. This tradition focused on tantras like the Mahavairocana tantra, and unlike Tibetan Buddhism, it does not employ the antinomian and radical tantrism of the \"Anuttarayoga Tantras.\" The prestige of this tradition eventually influenced other schools of Chinese Buddhism such as Chan and Tiantai to adopt various esoteric practices over time, leading to a merging of teachings between the various schools. During the Yuan dynasty, the Mongol emperors made Tibetan Buddhism the official religion of China, and Tibetan lamas were given patronage at the court. Imperial support of Tibetan Vajrayana continued into the Ming and Qing dynasties.\nToday, esoteric traditions are deeply embedded in mainstream Chinese Buddhism and expressed through various rituals which make use of tantric mantra and dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012b and the veneration of certain tantric deities like Cundi and Acala. One example of esoteric teachings still practiced in many Chinese Buddhist monasteries is the \u015a\u016bra\u1e45gama S\u016btra and the dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012b revealed within it, the \u015a\u016bra\u1e45gama Mantra, which are especially influential in the Chinese Chan tradition. Another example is the popular tantric Yujia Yankou ritual, where monastics take on the role of a vajr\u0101c\u0101rya and performs deity yoga through the usage of mantras, mudr\u0101s and ma\u1e47\u1e0dala offerings in order to help facilitate the nourishment and ultimate liberation of all sentient beings. In particular, the usage of mantras, mudr\u0101s and ma\u1e47\u1e0dalas in the ritual correspond directly to the concept of the \"Three Mysteries\" (Chinese: \u4e09\u5bc6; pinyin: \"S\u0101nm\u00ec\") in tantric Buddhism: the \"secrets\" of body, speech and mind. This ritual is commonly performed during or at the end of regular religious temple events such as repentance rites, Buddha recitation retreats, the dedication of a new monastic complex or gatherings for the transmission of monastic vows. It is also widely performed as a post-mortem rite within Chinese society during funerals and other related occasions such as the Ghost Festival. A related ritual that also involves esoteric practices is the extensive Shuilu Fahui ceremony, which involves setting up ma\u1e47\u1e0dalas of esoteric deities such as the Ten Wisdom Kings as well as the invocation of those deities to the ritual space via mantras, mudr\u0101s and visualization.\nA recent development is known as the \"tantric revival movement\" (mijiao fuxing yundong \u5bc6\u6559\u5fa9\u8208\u904b\u52d5) which involved the revival of Chinese Esoteric schools by Chinese students of Japanese Shingon. Some important figures of this revival include Wang Hongyuan \u738b\u5f18\u9858 (1876\u20131937), and Guru Wuguang (\u609f\u5149\u4e0a\u5e2b (1918\u20132000), both trained in Shingon and went on to spread Shingon teachings in the Chinese speaking world. These revivalist lineages exist in Hong Kong, Taiwan and Malaysia. Though they draw mainly from Shingon teachings, they have also adopted some Tibetan Buddhist elements.\nAnother form of esoteric Buddhism in China is the related but unique tradition of Azhaliism, which is practiced among the Bai people of China and venerates Mahakala as a major deity.\nJapanese esotericism.\nShingon Buddhism.\nThe Shingon school is found in Japan and includes practices, known in Japan as \"Mikky\u014d\" (\"Esoteric (or Mystery) Teaching\"), which are similar in concept to those in Vajrayana Buddhism. The lineage for Shingon Buddhism differs from that of Tibetan Vajrayana, having emerged from India during the 9th\u201311th centuries in the Pala Dynasty and Central Asia (via China) and is based on earlier versions of the Indian texts than the Tibetan lineage. Shingon shares material with Tibetan Buddhism \u2013 such as the esoteric sutras (called Tantras in Tibetan Buddhism) and mandalas \u2013 but the actual practices are not related.\nThe primary texts of Shingon Buddhism are the \"Mahavairocana Sutra\" and \"Vajrasekhara Sutra\". The founder of Shingon Buddhism was Kukai, a Japanese monk who studied in China in the 9th century during the Tang dynasty and brought back Vajrayana scriptures, techniques and mandalas then popular in China. The school was merged into other schools in China towards the end of the Tang dynasty but was sectarian in Japan. Shingon is one of the few remaining branches of Buddhism in the world that continues to use the \"siddham\" script of the Sanskrit language.\nTendai Buddhism.\nAlthough the Tendai school in China and Japan does employ some esoteric practices, these rituals came to be considered of equal importance with the exoteric teachings of the \"Lotus Sutra\". By chanting mantras, maintaining mudras, or practicing certain forms of meditation, Tendai maintains that one is able to understand sense experiences as taught by the Buddha, have faith that one is innately an enlightened being, and that one can attain enlightenment within the current lifetime.\nKorean \"milgyo\".\nEsoteric Buddhist practices (known as \"milgyo\", \u5bc6\u6559) and texts arrived in Korea during the introduction of Buddhism to the region in 372 CE. Esoteric Buddhism was supported by the royalty of both Unified Silla (668\u2013935) and Goryeo Dynasty (918\u20131392). During the Goryeo Dynasty esoteric practices were common within large sects like the Seon school and the Hwaeom school as well as smaller esoteric sects like the Sinin (\"mudra\") and Ch'ongji (\"Dharani\") schools. During the era of the Mongol occupation (1251\u20131350s), Tibetan Buddhism also existed in Korea, though it never gained a foothold there.\nDuring the Joseon dynasty, Esoteric Buddhist schools were forced to merge with the Seon and Kyo schools, becoming the ritual specialists. With the decline of Buddhism in Korea, Esoteric Buddhism mostly died out, save for a few traces in the rituals of the Jogye Order and Taego Order.\nThere are now five esoteric Buddhist schools in South Korea: Jingak Order, Jineon Order, Chongji Order, Jisong Order, and Cheonhwa Buddhism. According to Henrik H. S\u00f8rensen, the Jineon and Jingak Orders \"have absolutely no historical link with the Korean Buddhist tradition per se but are late constructs based in large measures on Japanese Shingon Buddhism.\"\nVietnamese Buddhist esotericism.\nVietnamese Buddhist esotericism is known as \"M\u1eadt gi\u00e1o\" or \"M\u1eadt T\u00f4ng\" and is a common part of Vietnamese Mahayana Buddhism (along with Pure Land practice and Thien). Commonly recited esoteric texts include \"U\u1e63\u1e47\u012b\u1e63avijayadh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012b\", the \"N\u012blaka\u1e47\u1e6dha Dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012b\" and the \"\u015a\u016bra\u1e45gama mantra\". According to Quang Minh Thich \"at present, it is still the norm in Vietnamese Buddhist temples, both in Vietnam and abroad, that these mantras, as elements of the Mantrayana, are recited either in their distinctive chanted sessions or in conjunction with other popular Buddhist scriptures. In function, the Vietnamese Tantric practices serve as a complement to the practices of Zen and Pure Land, not as an independent tradition.\"\nThe first Vietnamese monk we know of who studied Vajrayana was Master Van Ky (c.\u20097th century) who received initiation in the kingdom of Srivijaya from a certain J\u00f1anabhadra (Tri Hien) as reported by Yijing. By the 12th century (under the L\u00fd dynasty), esoteric Buddhism was widespread in Vietnam, and was especially favored by the V\u00f4 Ng\u00f4n Th\u00f4ng school as well as by the Vinitaruci school. One famous esoteric master of this period was T\u1eeb \u0110\u1ea1o H\u1ea1nh. He brought back various texts and practices from Burma. He became famous as a powerful magician. He was fond of the \"Mah\u0101karu\u1e47ika Dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012b\". He also spread esoteric teachings throughout Vietnam and liberalized their practice, making them less dependent on reincarnation lineages (similar to Tibetan tulkus). Another promoter of esoteric Buddhism during this period was S\u00f9ng Ph\u1ea1m (1004-1078) of Phap Van pagoda who studied in India for nine years before returning to Vietnam and was the teacher of the influential esoteric master Tri Bat. Phap Loa (1284-1330), a leader of the Truc Lam school, was another very influential Vietnamese esoteric master. He is known for establishing esoteric abhiseka (initiation) ceremonies as well as Huayan (\"Hoa Nghi\u00eam\") assemblies. He also wrote various texts on esoteric topics.\nChinese Buddhist esotericism also influenced Vietnamese esotericism during the medieval period, especially the Huayan Esotericism of Daoshen's \"Xianmi yuantong chengfo xinyao ji\" (\u986f\u5bc6\u5713\u901a\u6210\u4f5b\u5fc3\u8981\u96c6 \"Collection of Essentials for the Attainment of Buddhahood by Total [Inter-]Penetration of the Esoteric and the Exoteric,\" T1955).\nSome modern teachers and organizations focus specifically on Vietnamese esoteric Buddhism. Th\u00edch Vi\u00ean \u0110\u1ee9c (1932-1980) was one important modern promoter of Esoteric Buddhism. He is known for translating a collection of Esoteric Buddhist texts, contributing to the dissemination of Esoteric Buddhism in Vietnam. Th\u00edch Vi\u00ean \u0110\u1ee9c promoted esoteric Buddhist teachings as the fastest path to enlightenment. He established numerous communities in southern Vietnam and was also known as a healer. He also met with Tibetan lamas and Japanese Buddhists. Another modern Vietnamese esoteric organization is Mat Giao Friendship Association who publishes Ph\u01b0\u1edbc Tri\u1ec7u's \"Quintessence of Esoteric Buddhism\" (2004). Esoteric practices are also currently associated with the Th\u1ea7y Temple in Greater Hanoi. Vietnamese esotericism can also be quite sycretic, borrowing from Chinese, Japanese and Tibetan Buddhism.\nIndo-Tibetan Buddhism.\nVajray\u0101na Buddhism was initially established in Tibet in the 8th century when various figures like Padmasambh\u0101va (8th century CE) and \u015a\u0101ntarak\u1e63ita (725\u2013788) were invited by King Trisong Detsen, some time before 767. Tibetan Buddhism reflects the later stages tantric Indian Buddhism of the post-Gupta Early Medieval period (500 to 1200 CE).\nThis tradition practices and studies a set of tantric texts and commentaries associated with the more \"left hand\" (\"vamachara\") tantras, which are not part of East Asian Esoteric Buddhism. These tantras (sometimes termed 'Anuttarayoga tantras' include many transgressive elements, such as sexual and mortuary symbolism that is not shared by the earlier tantras that are studied in East Asian Buddhism. These texts were translated into Classical Tibetan during the \"New translation period\" (10th\u201312th centuries). Tibetan Buddhism also includes numerous native Tibetan developments, such as the tulku system, new sadhana texts, Tibetan scholastic works, Dzogchen literature and Terma literature. There are four major traditions or schools: Nyingma, Sakya, Kagyu, and Gelug.\nIn the pre-modern era, Tibetan Buddhism spread outside of Tibet primarily due to the influence of the Mongol Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368), founded by Kublai Khan, which ruled China, Mongolia and eastern Siberia. In the modern era it has spread outside of Asia due to the efforts of the Tibetan diaspora (1959 onwards).\nThe Tibetan Buddhist tradition is today found in Tibet, Bhutan, northern India, Nepal, southwestern and northern China, Mongolia and various constituent republics of Russia that are adjacent to the area, such as Amur Oblast, Buryatia, Zabaykalsky Krai, the Tuva Republic and Khabarovsk Krai. Tibetan Buddhism is also the main religion in Kalmykia. It has also spread to Western countries and there are now international networks of Tibetan Buddhist temples and meditation centers in the Western world from all four schools.\nBengali Buddhism.\nBengal was a thriving centre of Vajrayana under the patronage of the Pala dynasty. Many mahasiddhas hailed from the Eastern zone of the Indian subcontinent, with the \"Charyapada\", a collection of songs composed by these mahasiddhas, containing early references to Vajrayana as well as being an early written record of Eastern Indic languages. Bengali Vajrayana scholar Ati\u015ba played a vital role in revitalizing Buddhism in Tibet following its persecution by the Bon emperor Langdarma and onset of the Era of Fragmentation, leading to the foundation of the Kadam lineage. Another Bengali Vajrayana scholar Abhayakaragupta also had a profound impact on Tibetan Buddhism. However Vajrayana declined by the time the Sena dynasty came to power. Vajrayana was further affected by the Islamic conquest of India &amp; consolidation of Muslim rule in Bengal, with many of its adherents converting to Islam under duress &amp; later Gaudiya Vaishnavism, which lead to creation of new groups like Sahajiyas. Today Buddhism in Bengal is followed only by a small minority of Jumma people who are followers of Therav\u0101da Buddhism.\nNepalese Newar Buddhism.\nNewar Buddhism is practiced by Newars in Nepal. It is the only form of Vajrayana Buddhism in which the scriptures are written in Sanskrit and this tradition has preserved many Vajrayana texts in this language. Its priests do not follow celibacy and are called \"vajracharya\" (literally \"diamond-thunderbolt carriers\").\nIndonesian Esoteric Buddhism.\nIndonesian Esoteric Buddhism refers to the traditions of Esoteric Buddhism found in the Indonesian islands of Java and Sumatra before the rise and dominance of Islam in the region (13\u201316th centuries). The Buddhist empire of Srivijaya (650 CE\u20131377 CE) was a major center of Esoteric Buddhist learning which drew Chinese monks such as Yijing and Indian scholars like Ati\u015ba. The temple complex at Borobudur in central Java, built by the Shailendra dynasty also reflects strong Tantric or at least proto-tantric influences, particularly of the cult of Vairocana.\nIndonesian Esoteric Buddhism may have also reached the Philippines, possibly establishing the first form of Buddhism in the Philippines. The few Buddhist artifacts that have been found in the islands reflect the iconography of Srivijaya's Vajrayana.\nRelated traditions.\nSome traditions are related to Vajrayana, but are not to be seen as \"Vajrayana\" or \"Mantrayana\" proper. Vajrayana here referring to the Buddhist tradition based on the tantric literature of North Indian Mahayana, the Buddhist tantras and the works of the Nalanda - Vikramashila masters and the Buddhist mahasiddhas. However, these related traditions may have been influenced by Vajrayana proper and have borrowed practices from Vajrayana schools.\nShugend\u014d.\nShugend\u014d was founded in 7th-century Japan by the ascetic En no Gy\u014dja, based on the \"Queen's Peacocks Sutra\". With its origins in the solitary \"hijiri\" back in the 7th century, Shugend\u014d evolved as a sort of amalgamation between Esoteric Buddhism, Shinto and several other religious influences including Taoism. Buddhism and Shinto were amalgamated in the \"shinbutsu sh\u016bg\u014d\", and K\u016bkai's syncretic religion held wide sway up until the end of the Edo period, coexisting with Shinto elements within Shugend\u014d\nIn 1613 during the Edo period, the Tokugawa Shogunate issued a regulation obliging Shugend\u014d temples to belong to either Shingon or Tendai temples. During the Meiji Restoration, when Shinto was declared an independent state religion separate from Buddhism, Shugend\u014d was banned as a superstition not fit for a new, enlightened Japan. Some Shugend\u014d temples converted themselves into various officially approved Shint\u014d denominations. In modern times, Shugend\u014d is practiced mainly by Tendai and Shingon sects, retaining an influence on modern Japanese religion and culture.\nSouthern Esoteric Buddhism.\n\"Southern Esoteric Buddhism\" or Bor\u0101n kamma\u1e6d\u1e6dh\u0101na ('ancient practices') is a term for esoteric forms of Buddhism from Southeast Asia, where Theravada Buddhism is dominant. The monks of the Sri Lankan, Abhayagiri vihara once practiced forms of tantra which were popular in the island. Another tradition of this type was Ari Buddhism, which was common in Burma. The Tantric Buddhist 'Yog\u0101vacara' tradition was a major Buddhist tradition in Cambodia, Laos and Thailand well into the modern era.\nSouthern Esoteric Buddhism is a unique Southeast Asian development based on Theravada Abhidhamma and Pali language sources. As such, it has no direct connection to the Indian \"Vajrayana\" of the Buddhist tantras, the Indian mahasiddhas and the Nalanda-Vikramashila traditions.\nSouthern Esoteric Buddhism declined after the rise of Southeast Asian Buddhist modernism. However, esoteric Buddhist practices remain in some contemporary South East Asian traditions, including the Thai Dhammakaya tradition, the Burmese Weizza tradition and in rural Cambodian Buddhism.\nAcademic study difficulties.\nSerious Vajrayana academic study in the Western world is in early stages due to the following obstacles:\nBuddhist tantric practice is categorized as secret practice; this is to avoid misinformed people from harmfully misusing the practices. A method to keep this secrecy is that tantric initiation is required from a master before any instructions can be received about the actual practice. During the initiation procedure in the highest class of tantra (such as the Kalachakra), students must take the tantric vows which commit them to such secrecy. \"Explaining general tantra theory in a scholarly manner, not sufficient for practice, is likewise not a root downfall. Nevertheless, it weakens the effectiveness of our tantric practice.\"\nTerminology.\nThe terminology associated with Vajrayana Buddhism can be confusing. Most of the terms originated in the Sanskrit language of tantric Indian Buddhism and may have passed through other cultures, notably those of Japan and Tibet, before translation for the modern reader. Further complications arise as seemingly equivalent terms can have subtle variations in use and meaning according to context, the time and place of use. A third problem is that Vajrayana texts employ the tantric tradition of twilight language, a means of instruction that is deliberately coded. These obscure teaching methods relying on symbolism as well as synonym, metaphor and word association add to the difficulties faced by those attempting to understand Vajrayana Buddhism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the Vajrayana tradition, now preserved mainly in Tibetan lineages, it has long been recognized that certain important teachings are expressed in a form of secret symbolic language known as , 'Twilight Language'. \"Mudr\u0101s\" and \"mantras\", and \"cakras\", those mysterious devices and diagrams that were so much in vogue in the pseudo-Buddhist hippie culture of the 1960s, were all examples of Twilight Language [...]\nThe term Tantric Buddhism was not one originally used by those who practiced it. As scholar Isabelle Onians explains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Tantric Buddhism\" [...] is not the transcription of a native term, but a rather modern coinage, if not totally occidental. For the equivalent Sanskrit \"t\u0101ntrika\" is found, but not in Buddhist texts. \"T\u0101ntrika\" is a term denoting someone who follows the teachings of scriptures known as Tantras, but only in Saivism, not Buddhism [...] Tantric Buddhism is a name for a phenomenon which calls itself, in Sanskrit, Mantranaya, Vajray\u0101na, Mantray\u0101na or Mantramah\u0101y\u0101na (and apparently never Tantray\u0101na). Its practitioners are known as \"mantrins\", \"yogis\", or \"s\u0101dhakas\". Thus, our use of the anglicised adjective \u201cTantric\u201d for the Buddhist religion taught in Tantras is not native to the tradition, but is a borrowed term which serves its purpose.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59545", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59545", "title": "Sagrada Fam\u00edlia", "text": "Basilica under construction since 1882 in Barcelona, Spain\nBas\u00edlica i Temple Expiatori de la Sagrada Fam\u00edlia (short form Sagrada Fam\u00edlia), is a church under construction in the Eixample district of Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. It is the largest unfinished Catholic church in the world. Designed by the Catalan architect Antoni Gaud\u00ed, in 2005 his work on Sagrada Fam\u00edlia was added to an existing (1984) UNESCO World Heritage Site, \"Works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed\". On 7\u00a0November 2010, Pope Benedict\u00a0XVI consecrated the church and proclaimed it a minor basilica.\nOn 19 March 1882, construction of Sagrada Fam\u00edlia began under architect Francisco de Paula del Villar. In 1883, when Villar resigned, Gaud\u00ed took over as chief architect, transforming the project with his architectural and engineering style, combining Gothic and curvilinear Art Nouveau forms. Gaud\u00ed devoted the remainder of his life to the project, and he is buried in the church's crypt. At the time of his death in 1926, less than a quarter of the project was complete.\nRelying solely on private donations, Sagrada Fam\u00edlia's construction progressed slowly and was interrupted by the Spanish Civil War. In July 1936, anarchists from the FAI set fire to the crypt and broke their way into the workshop, partially destroying Gaud\u00ed's original plans. In 1939, Francesc de Paula Quintana took over site management, which was able to go on with the material that was saved from Gaud\u00ed's workshop and that was reconstructed from published plans and photographs. Construction resumed with intermittent progress in the 1950s. Advancements in technologies such as computer-aided design and computerised numerical control (CNC) have since enabled faster progress, and construction passed the midpoint in 2010. In 2014, it was anticipated that the building would be completed by 2026, the centenary of Gaud\u00ed's death, but this schedule was threatened by work slowdowns caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In March 2024, an updated forecast reconfirmed a likely completion of the building in 2026, though the announcement stated that work on sculptures, decorative details and a controversial stairway leading to the main entrance is expected to continue until 2034.\nDescribing Sagrada Fam\u00edlia, art critic Rainer Zerbst said \"it is probably impossible to find a church building anything like it in the entire history of art\", and Paul Goldberger describes it as \"the most extraordinary personal interpretation of Gothic architecture since the Middle Ages\".\nThough sometimes described as a cathedral, the basilica is not the cathedral church of the Archdiocese of Barcelona; that title belongs to the Cathedral of the Holy Cross and Saint Eulalia (Barcelona Cathedral).\nOn 30 October 2025, Sagrada Fam\u00edlia became the world's tallest church when a part of its central tower was lifted into place and reached 162.91 m, surpassing Ulm Minster (161.53 m). The tower is intended to reach 172 m when completed, expected in 2026.\nHistory.\nSagrada Fam\u00edlia was inspired by a bookseller, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Bocabella, founder of Asociaci\u00f3n Espiritual de Devotos de San Jos\u00e9 (Spiritual Association of Devotees of St. Joseph). After a visit to the Vatican in 1872, Bocabella returned from Italy with the intention of building a church inspired by the basilica at Loreto. The apse crypt of the church, funded by donations, was begun on 19 March 1882, on the festival of St. Joseph, to the design of the architect Francisco de Paula del Villar, whose plan was for a Gothic revival church of a standard form. The apse crypt was completed before Villar's resignation on 18 March 1883, when Antoni Gaud\u00ed assumed responsibility for its design, which he changed radically. Gaud\u00ed began work on the church in 1883 but was not appointed Architect Director until 1884.\n20th century.\nOn the subject of the extremely long construction period, Gaud\u00ed is said to have remarked: \"My client is not in a hurry.\" When Gaud\u00ed died in 1926, the basilica was between 15 and 25 percent complete. After Gaud\u00ed's death, work continued under the direction of his main disciple Dom\u00e8nec Sugra\u00f1es i Gras until interrupted by the Spanish Civil War in 1936. Parts of the unfinished basilica and Gaud\u00ed's models and workshop were destroyed during the war. The present design is based on reconstructed versions of the plans that were burned in a fire as well as on modern adaptations. Since 1940, the architects Francesc Quintana, Isidre Puig Boada, Llu\u00eds Bonet i Gar\u00ed and Francesc Cardoner have carried on the work. The illumination was designed by Carles Bu\u00efgas. The director until 2012 was the son of Llu\u00eds Bonet, Jordi Bonet i Armengol. Armengol began introducing computers into the design and construction process in the 1980s.\n21st century.\nThe central nave vaulting was completed in 2000 and the main tasks since then have been the construction of the transept vaults and apse. In 2002, the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia Schools building was relocated from the eastern corner of the site to the southern corner, and began housing an exhibition. The school was originally designed by Gaud\u00ed in 1909 for the children of the construction workers.\nAs of 2006[ [update]], work concentrated on the crossing and supporting structure for the main steeple of Jesus Christ as well as the southern enclosure of the central nave, which will become the Glory fa\u00e7ade. Computer-aided design technology has allowed stone to be shaped off-site by a CNC milling machine, whereas in the 20th century the stone was carved by hand. In 2008, some renowned Catalan architects advocated halting construction to respect Gaud\u00ed's original designs, which, although they were not exhaustive and were partially destroyed, have been partially reconstructed in recent years.\nSince 2013, AVE high-speed trains have passed near Sagrada Fam\u00edlia through a tunnel that runs beneath the centre of Barcelona. The tunnel's construction, which began on 26 March 2010, was controversial. The Ministry of Public Works of Spain () claimed the project posed no risk to the church. Sagrada Fam\u00edlia engineers and architects disagreed, saying there was no guarantee that the tunnel would not affect the stability of the building. The Board of the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia () and the neighborhood association (AVE by the Coast) led a campaign against this route for the AVE, without success. In October 2010, the tunnel boring machine reached the church underground under the location of the building's principal fa\u00e7ade. Service through the tunnel was inaugurated on 8 January 2013. Track in the tunnel makes use of a system by Edilon Sedra in which the rails are embedded in an elastic material to dampen vibrations.\nThe main nave was covered and an organ was installed in mid-2010, allowing the still-unfinished building to be used for liturgies. The church was consecrated by Pope Benedict XVI on 7 November 2010 in front of a congregation of 6,500people. A further 50,000 people followed the consecration Mass from outside the basilica, where more than 100bishops and 300priests were on hand to distribute Holy Communion.\nIn 2012, Barcelona-born Jordi Faul\u00ed i Oller took over as architect of the project. Mark Burry of New Zealand serves as Executive Architect and Researcher. Sculptures by J. Busquets, Etsuro Sotoo and Josep Maria Subirachs decorate the fantastical fa\u00e7ades.\nChief architect Jordi Faul\u00ed announced in October 2015 that construction was 70 percent complete and had entered its final phase of raising six immense steeples. The steeples and most of the church's structure were planned to be completed by 2026, the centennial of Gaud\u00ed's death; as of a 2017 estimate, decorative elements should be complete by 2030 or 2032. Visitor entrance fees of \u20ac15 to \u20ac20 finance the annual construction budget of \u20ac25million. Completion of the structure will use post-tensioned stone.\nStarting on 9 July 2017, an international mass is celebrated at the basilica every Sunday and holy day of obligation, at 9a.m., and is open to the public (until the church is full). Occasionally, Mass is celebrated at other times, where attendance requires an invitation. When masses are scheduled, instructions to obtain an invitation are posted on the basilica's website. In addition, visitors may pray in the chapel of the Blessed Sacrament and Penitence.\nThe stone initially used in its construction came from the Montserrat mountain, but it became clear that as quarrying there went deeper, the stone was increasingly fragile and an alternative source had to be found. Since 2018 stone of the type needed to complete the construction has been sourced from the Withnell Quarry in Brinscall, near Chorley, England.\nOn 31 October 2025 Sagrada Fam\u00edlia became the world\u2019s tallest church after a part of its central tower was lifted into place and reached 162.91 m, surpassing Ulm Minster (161.53 m). The tower is intended to reach 172 m when completed, expected in 2026.\nIncidents.\nOn 19 April 2011, an arsonist started a small fire in the sacristy which forced the evacuation of tourists and construction workers. The sacristy was damaged, and the fire took 45 minutes to contain.\nIn August 2017, Barcelona was the target of a series of terrorist attacks with Islamist motivations, commonly referred to as the La Rambla attacks. Investigations later revealed that one of the original targets was the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia basilica. The attackers had planned to detonate a van loaded with gas canisters at the site during peak visiting hours to cause maximum damage. However, the plan was abandoned after an accidental explosion involving the gas canisters occurred in Alcanar, in southern Catalonia, days before the main attack.\nOn 11 March 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic in Spain, construction temporarily stopped and the basilica was closed. This was the first time the construction had been halted since the Spanish Civil War. The Gaud\u00ed House Museum in Park G\u00fcell was also closed. The basilica reopened, initially to key workers, on 4 July 2020.\nLocal residents have concerns about plans to build a large stairway leading up to the basilica's main entrance, unfinished at the time, which could require the demolition of two city blocks: the homes to 1,000 people as well as some businesses.\nDesign.\nThe style of Sagrada Fam\u00edlia is variously likened to Spanish Late Gothic, Catalan Modernism or Art Nouveau. While the style falls within the Art Nouveau period, Nikolaus Pevsner points out that, along with Charles Rennie Mackintosh in Glasgow, Scotland, Gaud\u00ed carried the Art Nouveau style far beyond its usual application as a surface decoration.\nPlan.\nWhile never a cathedral, Sagrada Fam\u00edlia was planned from the outset to be a large building, comparable in size to a cathedral. Its ground-plan has obvious links to earlier Spanish cathedrals such as Burgos Cathedral, Le\u00f3n Cathedral and Seville Cathedral. In common with Catalan and many other European Gothic cathedrals, Sagrada Fam\u00edlia is short in comparison to its width, and has a great complexity of parts, which include double aisles, an ambulatory with a chevet of seven apsidal chapels, a multitude of steeples and three portals, each widely different in structure as well as ornament. Where it is common for cathedrals in Spain to be surrounded by numerous chapels and ecclesiastical buildings, the layout of Sagrada Fam\u00edlia has an unusual feature: a covered passage or cloister which forms a rectangle enclosing the church and passing through the narthex of each of its three portals. With this peculiarity aside, the plan, influenced by Villar's crypt, barely hints at the complexity of Gaud\u00ed's design or its deviations from traditional church architecture. There are no exact right angles to be seen inside or outside the church, and few straight lines in the design.\nSpires.\nGaud\u00ed's original design calls for a total of eighteen spires, representing in ascending order of height the Twelve Apostles, the four Evangelists, the Virgin Mary, and, tallest of all, Jesus Christ. Thirteen spires had been completed as of 2023[ [update]], corresponding to four apostles at the Nativity fa\u00e7ade, four apostles at the Passion fa\u00e7ade, the four Evangelists, and the Virgin Mary.\nThe Evangelists' spires are surmounted by sculptures of their traditional symbols: a winged bull (Saint Luke), a winged man (Saint Matthew), an eagle (Saint John), and a winged lion (Saint Mark). The central spire of Jesus Christ is to be surmounted by a giant cross; its total height () will be less than that of Montju\u00efc hill in Barcelona, as Gaud\u00ed believed that his creation should not surpass God's. The lower spires are surmounted by communion hosts with sheaves of wheat and chalices with bunches of grapes, representing the Eucharist. Plans call for tubular bells to be placed within the spires, driven by the force of the wind, and driving sound down into the interior of the church. Gaud\u00ed performed acoustic studies to achieve the appropriate acoustic results inside the temple. However, only one bell is currently in place.\nThe completion of the Jesus Christ spire will make Sagrada Fam\u00edlia the tallest church building in the world\u2014 taller than the current record-holder, Ulm Minster, which is at its highest point.\nOn 29 November 2021, a twelve-pointed illuminated crystal star was installed on one of the main towers of the basilica dedicated to the Virgin Mary.\nThe construction makes use of post-tensioned stone panels, which are pre-assembled before incorporation into the main structure; using this method has significant structural and operational benefits.\nFa\u00e7ades.\nThe church is designed to have three grand fa\u00e7ades: the Nativity fa\u00e7ade to the east, the Passion fa\u00e7ade to the west, and the Glory fa\u00e7ade to the south (incomplete).\nThe Nativity fa\u00e7ade was built before work was interrupted in 1935 and bears the most direct Gaud\u00ed influence.\nThe Passion fa\u00e7ade was built according to the design that Gaudi created in 1917. The construction began in 1954, and the steeples, built over the elliptical plan, were finished in 1976. It is especially striking for its spare, gaunt, tormented characters, including emaciated figures of Christ being scourged at the pillar; and Christ on the Cross. These controversial designs are the work of Josep Maria Subirachs.\nThe Glory fa\u00e7ade, on which construction began in 2002, will be the largest and most monumental of the three and will represent one's ascension to God. It will also depict various scenes such as Hell, Purgatory, and will include elements such as the seven deadly sins and the seven heavenly virtues.\nNativity Fa\u00e7ade.\nConstructed between 1893 and 1936, the Nativity fa\u00e7ade was the first fa\u00e7ade to be completed. Dedicated to the birth of Jesus, it is decorated with scenes reminiscent of elements of life. Characteristic of Gaud\u00ed's naturalistic style, the sculptures are ornately arranged and decorated with scenes and images from nature, each a symbol in its own manner. For instance, the three porticos are separated by two large columns, and at the base of each lies a turtle or a tortoise (one to represent the land and the other the sea; each are symbols of time as something set in stone and unchangeable). In contrast to the figures of turtles and their symbolism, two chameleons can be found at either side of the fa\u00e7ade and are symbolic of change.\nThe fa\u00e7ade faces the rising sun to the northeast, a symbol for the birth of Christ. It is divided into three porticos, each of which represents a theological virtue (Hope, Faith and Charity). The Tree of Life rises above the door of Jesus in the portico of Charity. Four steeples complete the fa\u00e7ade and are each dedicated to a Saint (Matthias, Barnabas, Jude the Apostle, and Simon the Zealot).\nOriginally, Gaud\u00ed intended for this fa\u00e7ade to be polychromed, for each archivolt to be painted with a wide array of colours. He wanted every statue and figure to be painted. In this way the figures of humans would appear as much alive as the figures of plants and animals.\nGaud\u00ed chose this fa\u00e7ade to embody the structure and decoration of the whole church. He was well aware that he would not finish the church and that he would need to set an artistic and architectural example for others to follow. He also chose for this fa\u00e7ade to be the first on which to begin construction and for it to be, in his opinion, the most attractive and accessible to the public. He believed that if he had begun construction with the Passion Fa\u00e7ade, one that would be hard and bare (as if made of bones), before the Nativity Fa\u00e7ade, people would have withdrawn at the sight of it. Some of the statues were destroyed in 1936 during the Spanish Civil War, and subsequently were reconstructed by the Japanese artist Etsuro Sotoo.\nPassion Fa\u00e7ade.\nIn contrast to the highly decorated Nativity Fa\u00e7ade, the Passion Fa\u00e7ade is austere, plain and simple, with ample bare stone, and is carved with harsh straight lines to resemble the bones of a skeleton. Dedicated to the Passion of Christ, the suffering of Jesus during his crucifixion, the fa\u00e7ade was intended to portray the sins of man. Construction began in 1954, following the drawings and instructions left by Gaud\u00ed for future architects and sculptors. The steeples were completed in 1976, and in 1987 a team of sculptors, headed by Josep Maria Subirachs, began work sculpting the various scenes and details of the fa\u00e7ade. They aimed to give a rigid, angular form to provoke a dramatic effect. Gaud\u00ed intended for this fa\u00e7ade to strike fear into the onlooker. He wanted to \"break\" arcs and \"cut\" columns, and to use the effect of chiaroscuro (dark angular shadows contrasted by harsh rigid light) to further show the severity and brutality of Christ's sacrifice.\nFacing the setting sun, indicative and symbolic of the death of Christ, the Passion Fa\u00e7ade is supported by six large and inclined columns, designed to resemble strained muscles. Above there is a pyramidal pediment, made up of eighteen bone-shaped columns, which culminate in a large cross with a crown of thorns. Each of the four steeples is dedicated to an apostle (James, Thomas, Philip, and Bartholomew) and, like the Nativity Fa\u00e7ade, there are three porticos, each representing the theological virtues, though in a much different light.\nThe scenes sculpted into the fa\u00e7ade may be divided into three levels, which ascend in an \"S\" form and reproduce the Stations of the Cross (Via Crucis of Christ). The lowest level depicts scenes from Jesus' last night before the crucifixion, including the Last Supper, Kiss of Judas, Ecce homo, and the Sanhedrin trial of Jesus. The middle level portrays the Calvary, or Golgotha, of Christ, and includes The Three Marys, Saint Longinus, Saint Veronica, and a hollow-face illusion of Christ on the Veil of Veronica. In the third and final level the Death, Burial and the Resurrection of Christ can be seen. A bronze figure situated on a bridge creating a link between the steeples of Saint Bartholomew and Saint Thomas represents the Ascension of Jesus.\nThe fa\u00e7ade contains a magic square based on the magic square in the 1514 print Melencolia I. The square is rotated and one number in each row and column is reduced by one, so the rows and columns add up to 33 instead of the standard 34 for a 4x4 magic square.\nGlory Fa\u00e7ade.\nThe largest and most striking of the fa\u00e7ades will be the Glory Fa\u00e7ade, on which construction began in 2002. It will be the principal fa\u00e7ade and will offer access to the central nave. Dedicated to the Celestial Glory of Jesus, it represents the road to God: Death, Final Judgment, and Glory, while Hell is left for those who deviate from God's will. Aware that he would not live long enough to see this fa\u00e7ade completed, Gaud\u00ed made a model which was demolished in 1936, whose original fragments were used as the basis for the development of the design for the fa\u00e7ade. The completion of this fa\u00e7ade may require the partial demolition of the block with buildings across the Carrer de Mallorca. The decision was expected to be proposed in May 2023.\nTo reach the Glory Portico, the large staircase will lead over the underground passage built over Carrer de Mallorca with the decoration representing Hell and vice. On other projects, Carrer de Mallorca will have to go underground. It will be decorated with demons, idols, false gods, heresy and schisms, etc. Purgatory and death will also be depicted, the latter using tombs along the ground. The portico will have seven large columns dedicated to gifts of the Holy Spirit. At the base of the columns there will be representations of the seven deadly sins, and at the top, the seven heavenly virtues.\nThis fa\u00e7ade will have five doors corresponding to the five naves of the temple, with the central one having a triple entrance, that will give the Glory Fa\u00e7ade a total seven doors representing the sacraments:\nIn September 2008, the doors of the Glory fa\u00e7ade, by Subirachs, were installed. These central doors bear the text of the Our Father prayer in Catalan in high relief, accompanied with the words \"Our Father\" and \"Give us this day our daily bread\" inscribed in fifty different languages. The handles of the door are the letters \"A\" and \"G,\" forming the initials of Antoni Gaud\u00ed, within the phrase (\"lead us not into temptation\").\nInterior.\nThe church plan is that of a Latin cross with five aisles. The central nave vaults reach while the side nave vaults reach . The transept has three aisles. The columns are on a grid. However, the columns of the apse, resting on del Villar's foundation, do not adhere to the grid, requiring a section of columns of the ambulatory to transition to the grid thus creating a horseshoe pattern to the layout of those columns. The crossing rests on the four central columns of porphyry supporting a great hyperboloid surrounded by two rings of twelve hyperboloids (currently under construction). The central vault reaches . The apse is capped by a hyperboloid vault reaching . Gaud\u00ed intended that a visitor standing at the main entrance be able to see the vaults of the nave, crossing, and apse, thus the graduated increase in vault loft.\nThere are gaps in the floor of the apse, providing a view into the crypt below.\nThe columns of the interior are a unique Gaud\u00ed design. Besides branching to support their load, their ever-changing surfaces are the result of the intersection of various geometric forms. The simplest example is that of a square base evolving into an octagon as the column rises, then a sixteen-sided form, and eventually to a circle. This effect is the result of a three-dimensional intersection of helicoidal columns (for example a square cross-section column twisting clockwise and a similar one twisting counterclockwise).\nEssentially none of the interior surfaces are flat; the ornamentation is comprehensive and rich, consisting in large part of abstract shapes which combine smooth curves and jagged points. Even detail-level work such as the iron railings for balconies and stairways are full of curvaceous elaboration.\nOrgan.\nIn 2010 an organ was installed in the chancel by the Blancafort Orgueners de Montserrat organ builders. The instrument has 26 stops (1,492 pipes) on two manuals and a pedalboard.\nTo overcome the unique acoustical challenges posed by the church's architecture and vast size, several additional organs will be installed at various points within the building. These instruments will be playable separately (from their own individual consoles) and simultaneously (from a single mobile console), yielding an organ of some 8,000 pipes when completed.\nGeometric details.\nThe steeples on the Nativity fa\u00e7ade are crowned with geometrically shaped tops that are reminiscent of Cubism (they were finished around 1930), and the intricate decoration is contemporary to the style of Art Nouveau, but Gaud\u00ed's unique style drew primarily from nature, not other artists or architects, and resists categorization.\nGaud\u00ed used hyperboloid structures in later designs for Sagrada Fam\u00edlia (more obviously after 1914). However, there are a few places on the nativity fa\u00e7ade\u2014a design not equated with Gaud\u00ed's ruled-surface design\u2014where the hyperboloid appears. For example, all around the scene with the pelican, there are numerous examples (including the basket held by one of the figures). There is a hyperboloid adding structural stability to the cypress tree (by connecting it to the bridge). Finally, the \"bishop's mitre\" spires are capped with hyperboloid structures. In his later designs, ruled surfaces are prominent in the nave's vaults and windows and the surfaces of the Passion Fa\u00e7ade.\nSymbolism.\nThemes throughout the decoration include words from the liturgy. The steeples are decorated with words such as \"Hosanna\", \"Excelsis\", and \"Sanctus\"; the great doors of the Passion fa\u00e7ade reproduce excerpts of the Passion of Jesus from the New Testament in various languages, mainly Catalan; and the Glory fa\u00e7ade is to be decorated with the words from the Apostles' Creed, while its main door reproduces the entire Lord's Prayer in Catalan, surrounded by multiple variations of \"Give us this day our daily bread\" in other languages. The three entrances symbolize the three virtues: Faith, Hope and Love. Each of them is also dedicated to a part of Christ's life. The Nativity Fa\u00e7ade is dedicated to his birth; it also has a cypress tree which symbolizes the tree of life. The Glory Fa\u00e7ade is dedicated to his Christ's glory period. The Passion Fa\u00e7ade is symbolic of Christ's suffering. The apse steeple bears Latin text of the Hail Mary prayer.\nAreas of the sanctuary will be designated to represent various concepts, such as saints, virtues and sins, and secular concepts such as regions, presumably with decoration to match.\nAppraisal.\nThe art historian Nikolaus Pevsner, writing in the 1960s, referred to Gaud\u00ed's buildings as growing \"like sugar loaves and anthills\" and describes the ornamenting of buildings with shards of broken pottery as possibly \"bad taste\" but handled with vitality and \"ruthless audacity\".\nThe building's design itself has been polarizing. Assessments by Gaud\u00ed's fellow architects were generally positive; Louis Sullivan greatly admired it, describing Sagrada Fam\u00edlia as the \"greatest piece of creative architecture in the last twenty-five years. It is spirit symbolised in stone!\" Walter Gropius praised Sagrada Fam\u00edlia, describing the building's walls as \"a marvel of technical perfection\". \"Time\" magazine called it \"sensual, spiritual, whimsical, exuberant\". However, author and critic George Orwell, mistakenly referring to it as a cathedral, called it \"one of the most hideous buildings in the world\". Author James A. Michener called it \"one of the strangest-looking serious buildings in the world\" and British historian Gerald Brenan stated about the building \"Not even in the European architecture of the period can one discover anything so vulgar or pretentious.\" The building's distinctive silhouette has nevertheless become symbolic of Barcelona itself, drawing an estimated 3 million visitors annually.\nWorld Heritage status.\nIn 1984, UNESCO granted World Heritage Site designations to three Gaud\u00ed buildings in Barcelona, though not yet including Sagrada Fam\u00edlia, under the collective designation \"Works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed\u00a0\u2013 No 320 bis\" (items 320-001 to 320-003), testifying \"to Gaud\u00ed's exceptional creative contribution to the development of architecture and building technology\", \"having represented el Modernisme of Catalonia\" and \"anticipated and influenced many of the forms and techniques that were relevant to the development of modern construction in the 20th century\". In 2005, UNESCO extended the inscription for Works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed\u00a0\u2013 No 320 bis to include four additional buildings in Barcelona, with item 320-005 listed as two specific sections of Sagrada Fam\u00edlia: the Crypt and the Nativity fa\u00e7ade.\nVisitor access.\nVisitors can access the nave, crypt, museum, shop, and the Passion and Nativity steeples. Entrance to either of the steeples requires a reservation and advance purchase of a ticket. Access is possible only by lift (elevator) and a short walk up the remainder of the steeples to the bridge between the steeples. Descent is via a very narrow spiral staircase of over 300 steps. There is a posted caution for those with medical conditions.\nAs of June 2017, online ticket purchase has been available. As of August 2010, there had been a service whereby visitors could buy an entry code either at Servicaixa ATM kiosks (part of CaixaBank) or online.\nInternational masses.\nThe Archdiocese of Barcelona holds an international mass at the Basilica of the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia every Sunday and on holy days of obligation.\nFunding and building permit.\nConstruction on Sagrada Fam\u00edlia is not supported by any government or official church sources. Private patrons funded the initial stages. Money from tickets purchased by tourists is now used to pay for the work, and private donations are accepted.\nThe construction budget for 2009 was \u20ac18\u00a0million.\nIn October 2018, Sagrada Fam\u00edlia trustees agreed to pay city authorities \u20ac36\u00a0million for a building permit, after 136 years of unlicensed construction. Most of the funds would be directed to improve the access between the church and the Barcelona Metro. The permit was issued by the city on 7 June 2019.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59546", "revid": "50840879", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59546", "title": "Dial-up Internet access", "text": "Access to the Internet via telephone line\nDial-up Internet access is a form of Internet access that uses the facilities of the public switched telephone network (PSTN) to establish a connection to an Internet service provider (ISP) by dialing a telephone number on a conventional telephone line which could be connected using an RJ-11 connector. Dial-up connections use modems to decode audio signals into data to send to a router or computer, and to encode signals from the latter two devices to send to another modem at the ISP.\nDial-up Internet reached its peak popularity during the dot-com bubble. This was in large part because broadband Internet did not become widely used until well into the 2000s. Since then, most dial-up access has been replaced by broadband.\nHistory.\nIn 1979, Tom Truscott and Jim Ellis, graduates of Duke University, created an early predecessor to dial-up Internet access called the Usenet. The Usenet was a UNIX-based system that used a dial-up connection to transfer data through telephone modems.\nDial-up Internet access has existed since the 1980s via public providers such as NSFNET-linked universities in the United States. In the United Kingdom, JANET linked academic users, including a connection to the ARPANET via University College London, while Brunel University and the University of Kent offered dial-up UUCP to non-academic users in the late 1980s.\nCommercial dial-up Internet access was first offered in 1989 in the US by the software development company Software Tool &amp; Die, with their service called \"The World\". Sprint and AT&amp;T in 1992 also began offering internet access, along with Pipex in the United Kingdom. After the introduction of commercial broadband in the late 1990s, dial-up became less popular. In the United States, the availability of dial-up Internet access dropped from 40% of Americans in the early 2000s to 3% in the early 2010s. It is still used where other forms are not available or where the cost is too high, as in some rural or remote areas.\nModems.\nBecause there was no technology to allow different carrier signals on a telephone line at the time, dial-up Internet access relied on using audio communication. A modem would take the digital data from a computer, modulate it into an audio signal and send it to a receiving modem. This receiving modem would demodulate the signal from modulating analogue noise and demodulating it back into digital data for the computer to process via a modem that would decode the data, and send it to the computer.\nThe simplicity of this arrangement meant that people would be unable to use their phone line for verbal communication until the Internet call was finished.\nThe Internet speed using this technology can drop to 21.6 kbit/s or less. Poor condition of the telephone line, high noise level and other factors all affect dial-up speed. For this reason, it is popularly called the \"21600 syndrome\".\nAvailability.\nDial-up connections to the Internet require no additional infrastructure other than the telephone network and the modems and servers needed to make and answer the calls. Because telephone access is widely available, dial-up is often the only choice available for rural or remote areas, where broadband installations are not prevalent due to low population density and high infrastructure cost.\nA 2008 Pew Research Center study stated that only 10% of US adults still used dial-up Internet access. The study found that the most common reason for retaining dial-up access was high broadband prices. Users cited lack of infrastructure as a reason less often than stating that they would never upgrade to broadband. That number had fallen to 6% by 2010, and to 3% by 2013.\nA survey conducted in 2018 estimated that 0.3% of Americans were using dial-up by 2017.\nThe CRTC estimated that there were 336,000 Canadian dial-up users in 2010.\nReplacement by broadband.\nBroadband Internet access via cable, digital subscriber line, wireless broadband, mobile broadband, satellite and FTTx has replaced dial-up access in many parts of the world. Broadband connections typically offer speeds of 700 kbit/s or higher for two-thirds more than the price of dial-up on average. In addition, broadband connections are always on, thus avoiding the need to connect and disconnect at the start and end of each session. Broadband does not require the exclusive use of a phone line, and thus one can access the Internet and at the same time make and receive voice phone calls without having a second phone line.\nHowever, many rural areas remain without high-speed Internet, despite the eagerness of potential customers. This can be attributed to population, location, or sometimes ISPs' lack of interest due to little chance of profitability and high costs to build the required infrastructure. Some dial-up ISPs have responded to the increased competition by lowering their rates and making dial-up an attractive option for those who merely want email access or basic Web browsing.\nDial-up has seen a significant fall in usage, with the potential to cease to exist in future as more users switch to broadband. In 2013, only about 3% of the U.S population used dial-up, compared to 30% in 2000. One contributing factor is the bandwidth requirements of newer computer programs, like operating systems and antivirus software, which automatically download sizeable updates in the background when a connection to the Internet is first made. These background downloads can take several minutes or longer and, until all updates are completed, they can severely impact the amount of bandwidth available to other applications like Web browsers.\nSince an \"always on\" broadband is the norm expected by most newer applications being developed, this automatic background downloading trend is expected to continue to eat away at dial-up's available bandwidth to the detriment of dial-up users' applications. Many newer websites also now assume broadband speeds as the norm, and when connected to with slower dial-up speeds may drop (timeout) these slower connections to free up communication resources. On websites that are designed to be more dial-up friendly, use of a reverse proxy prevents dial-ups from being dropped as often but can introduce long wait periods for dial-up users caused by the buffering used by a reverse proxy to bridge the different data rates.\nDespite the rapid decline, dial-up Internet still exists in some rural areas, and many areas of developing and underdeveloped nations, although wireless and satellite broadband are providing faster connections in many rural areas where fibre or copper may be uneconomical.\nIn 2010, it was estimated that there were 800,000 dial-up users in the UK. BT turned off its dial-up service in 2013.\nIn 2012, it was estimated that 7% of Internet connections in New Zealand were dial-up. One NZ (formerly Vodafone) turned off its dial-up service in 2021.\nAOL discontinued its dial-up internet service on 30 September 2025 after thirty-four years of operation, following an announcement a month earlier. It is estimated that over 163,000 to 175,000 people still used dial up in 2025 before shutting down in the U.S.\nPerformance.\nModern dial-up modems typically have a maximum theoretical transfer speed of 56\u00a0kbit/s (using the V.90 or V.92 protocol), although in most cases, 40\u201350\u00a0kbit/s is the norm. Factors such as phone line noise as well as the quality of the modem itself play a large part in determining connection speeds.\nSome connections may be as low as 21.6\u00a0kbit/s in extremely noisy environments, such as in a hotel room where the phone line is shared with many extensions, or in a rural area, many kilometres from the phone exchange. Other factors such as long loops, loading coils, pair gain, electric fences (usually in rural locations), and digital loop carriers can also slow connections to 21.6\u00a0kbit/s or lower. Because of this, it was nicknamed \"21600 Syndrome\".\nThe values given are maximum values, and actual values may be slower under certain conditions (for example, noisy phone lines).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[The dial-up sounds are] a choreographed sequence that allowed these digital devices to piggyback on an analog telephone network. A phone line carries only the small range of frequencies in which most human conversation takes place: about three hundred to three thousand hertz. The modem works within these [telephone network] limits in creating sound waves to carry data across phone lines. What you're hearing is the way 20th century technology tunneled through a 19th century network; what you're hearing is how a network designed to send the noises made by your muscles as they pushed around air came to transmit \"anything\" [that can be] coded in zeroes and ones.\n\u2014 Alexis Madrigal, paraphrasing Glenn Fleishman\nAnalog telephone lines are digitally switched and transported inside a Digital Signal 0 once reaching the telephone company's equipment. Digital Signal 0 is 64\u00a0kbit/s and reserves 8\u00a0kbit/s for signaling information; therefore a 56\u00a0kbit/s connection is the highest that will ever be possible with analog phone lines.\nDial-up connections usually have latency as high as 150 ms or even more, higher than many forms of broadband, such as cable or DSL, but typically less than satellite connections. Longer latency can make video conferencing and online gaming difficult, if not impossible. An increasing amount of Internet content such as streaming media will not work at dial-up speeds.\nVideo games released from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s that utilized Internet access such as \"EverQuest\", \"Red Faction\", \"Warcraft 3\", \"Final Fantasy XI\", \"Phantasy Star Online\", \"Guild Wars\", \"Unreal Tournament\", ', \"Audition\", ', \"\" and \"Ragnarok Online\", etc., accommodated for 56k dial-up with limited data transfer between the game servers and user's personal computer. The first consoles to provide Internet connectivity, the Dreamcast and PlayStation 2, supported dial-up as well as broadband. The GameCube could use dial-up and broadband connections, but this was used in very few games and required a separate adapter. The original Xbox exclusively required a broadband connection. Many computer and video games released since 2006 do not even include the option to use dial-up. However, there are exceptions to this, such as \"Vendetta Online\", which can still run on a dial-up modem.\nUsing compression to exceed 56k.\nThe V.42, V.42bis and V.44 standards allow modems to accept compressed data at a rate faster than the line rate. These algorithms use data compression to achieve higher throughput.\nFor instance, a 53.3\u00a0kbit/s connection with V.44 can transmit up to 53.3 \u00d7 6 = 320\u00a0kbit/s if the offered data stream can be compressed that much. However, the compression ratio varies considerably. ZIP archives, JPEG images, MP3, video, etc. are already compressed. A modem might be sending compressed files at approximately 50\u00a0kbit/s, uncompressed files at 160\u00a0kbit/s, and pure text at 320\u00a0kbit/s, or any rate in this range.\nCompression by the ISP.\nAs telephone-based Internet lost popularity by the mid-2000s, some Internet service providers such as TurboUSA, Netscape, CdotFree, and NetZero started using data compression to increase the perceived speed. As an example, EarthLink advertises \"surf the Web up to 7x faster\" using a compression program on images, text/html, and SWF flash animations prior to transmission across the phone line.\nThe pre-compression operates much more efficiently than the on-the-fly compression of V.44 modems. Typically, website text is compacted to 5%, thus increasing effective throughput to approximately 1000\u00a0kbit/s, and JPEG/GIF/PNG images are lossy-compressed to 15\u201320%, increasing effective throughput up to 300\u00a0kbit/s.\nThe drawback of this approach is a loss in quality, where the graphics acquire compression artifacts taking on a blurry or colorless appearance. However, the transfer speed is dramatically improved. If desired, the user may choose to view uncompressed images instead, but at a much slower load rate. Since streaming music and video are already compressed at the source, they are typically passed by the ISP unaltered.\nUsage in other devices.\nOther devices, such as satellite receivers and digital video recorders (such as TiVo), have also used a dial-up connection using a household phone socket. This connection allowed to download data at request and to report usage (e.g. ordering pay-per-view) to the service provider. This feature did not require an Internet service provider account \u2013 instead, the device's internal modem dialed the server of the service provider directly. These devices may experience difficulties when operating on a VoIP line because the compression could alter the modem signal. Later, these devices moved to using an Ethernet connection to the user's Internet router, which became a more convenient approach due to the growth in popularity of broadband.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59547", "revid": "421426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59547", "title": "Coterminal", "text": ""}
{"id": "59551", "revid": "50518325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59551", "title": "Art Nouveau", "text": "1890\u20131911 European style of art and architecture\n \nArt Nouveau ( ; ; lit.\u2009'New Art'), \"Jugendstil\" in German, is an international style of art, architecture, and applied art, especially the decorative arts. It was often inspired by natural forms such as the sinuous curves of plants and flowers. Other characteristics of Art Nouveau were a sense of dynamism and movement, often given by asymmetry or whiplash lines, and the use of modern materials, particularly iron, glass, ceramics and later concrete, to create unusual forms and larger open spaces. It was popular between 1890 and 1910 during the Belle \u00c9poque period, and was a reaction against the academicism, eclecticism and historicism of 19th century architecture and decorative art.\nOne major objective of Art Nouveau was to break down the traditional distinction between fine arts (especially painting and sculpture) and applied arts. It was most widely used in interior design, graphic arts, furniture, glass art, textiles, ceramics, jewellery and metal work. The style responded to leading 19th century theoreticians, such as French architect Eug\u00e8ne-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc (1814\u20131879) and British art critic John Ruskin (1819\u20131900). In Britain, it was influenced by William Morris and the Arts and Crafts movement. German architects and designers sought a spiritually uplifting ('total work of art') that would unify the architecture, furnishings, and art in the interior in a common style, to uplift and inspire the residents.\nThe first Art Nouveau houses and interior decoration appeared in Brussels in the 1890s, in the architecture and interior design of houses designed by Paul Hankar, Henry van de Velde, and especially Victor Horta, whose H\u00f4tel Tassel was completed in 1893. It moved quickly to Paris, where it was adapted by Hector Guimard, who saw Horta's work in Brussels and applied the style to the entrances of the new Paris M\u00e9tro. It reached its peak at the 1900 Paris International Exposition, which introduced the Art Nouveau work of artists such as Louis Tiffany. It appeared in graphic arts in the posters of Alphonse Mucha, and the glassware of Ren\u00e9 Lalique and \u00c9mile Gall\u00e9.\nFrom Britain, Art Nouveau spread to Belgium onto Spain and France, and then to the rest of Europe, taking on different names and characteristics in each country (see Naming section below). It often appeared not only in capitals, but also in rapidly growing cities that wanted to establish artistic identities (Turin and Palermo in Italy; Glasgow in Scotland; Munich and Darmstadt in Germany; Barcelona in Catalonia, Spain), as well as in centres of independence movements (Helsinki in Finland, then part of the Russian Empire).\nBy 1914, with the beginning of the First World War, Art Nouveau was largely exhausted. In the 1920s, it was replaced as the dominant architectural and decorative art style by Art Deco and then modernism. The Art Nouveau style began to receive more positive attention from critics in the late 1960s, with a major exhibition of the work of Hector Guimard at the Museum of Modern Art in 1970.\nNaming.\nThe term \"Art Nouveau\" was first used in the 1880s in the Belgian journal \"L'Art Moderne\" to describe the work of \"Les Vingt\", twenty painters and sculptors seeking reform through art. The name was popularized by the ('House of the New Art'), an art gallery opened in Paris in 1895 by the Franco-German art dealer Siegfried Bing. In Britain, the French term was commonly used, while in France, it was often called by the term (akin to the British term \"Modern Style\"), or . In France, it was also sometimes called (after the novelist Jules Verne), (after Hector Guimard's iron and glass subway entrances), , or .\nArt Nouveau is known by different names in different languages: in German, in Italian, in Catalan, and also known as the Modern Style in English. The style is often related to, but not always identical with, styles that emerged in many countries in Europe and elsewhere at about the same time. Their local names were often used in their respective countries to describe the whole movement.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe new art movement had its roots in Britain, in the floral designs of William Morris, and in the Arts and Crafts movement founded by the pupils of Morris. Early prototypes of the style include the Red House with interiors by Morris and architecture by Philip Webb (1859), and the lavish Peacock Room by James Abbott McNeill Whistler. The new movement was also strongly influenced by the Pre-Raphaelite painters, including Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Edward Burne-Jones, and especially by British graphic artists of the 1880s, including Selwyn Image, Heywood Sumner, Walter Crane, Alfred Gilbert, and especially Aubrey Beardsley. The chair designed by Arthur Mackmurdo has been recognized as a precursor of Art Nouveau design.\nIn France, it was influenced by the architectural theorist and historian Eug\u00e8ne Viollet-le-Duc, a declared enemy of the historical Beaux-Arts architectural style, whose theories on rationalism were derived from his study of medieval art:\nViollet-le-Duc was himself a precursor of Art Nouveau: in 1851, at Notre-Dame de Paris, he created a series of mural paintings typical of the style. These paintings were removed in 1945 as deemed non academic. At the Ch\u00e2teau de Roquetaillade in the Bordeaux region, his interior decorations dating from 1865 also anticipate Art Nouveau. In his 1872 book \"Entretiens sur l'architecture\", he wrote, \"Use the means and knowledge given to us by our times, without the intervening traditions which are no longer viable today, and in that way we can inaugurate a new architecture. For each function its material; for each material its form and its ornament.\" This book influenced a generation of architects, including Louis Sullivan, Victor Horta, Hector Guimard, and Antoni Gaud\u00ed.\nThe French painters Maurice Denis, Pierre Bonnard and \u00c9douard Vuillard played an important part in integrating fine arts painting with decoration. \"I believe that before everything a painting must decorate\", Denis wrote in 1891. \"The choice of subjects or scenes is nothing. It is by the value of tones, the coloured surface and the harmony of lines that I can reach the spirit and wake up the emotions.\" These painters all did both traditional painting and decorative painting on screens, in glass, and in other media.\nAnother important influence on the new style was Japonism. This was a wave of enthusiasm for Japanese woodblock printing, particularly the works of Hiroshige, Hokusai, and Utagawa Kunisada, which were imported into Europe beginning in the 1870s. The enterprising Siegfried Bing founded a monthly journal, \"Le Japon artistique\" in 1888, and published thirty-six issues before it ended in 1891. It influenced both collectors and artists, including Gustav Klimt. The stylised features of Japanese prints appeared in Art Nouveau graphics, porcelain, jewellery, and furniture. Since the beginning of 1860, a Far Eastern influence suddenly manifested. In 1862, art lovers from London or Paris, could buy Japanese artworks, because in that year, Japan appeared for the first time as an exhibitor at the International Exhibition in London. Also in 1862, in Paris, \"La Porte Chinoise\" store, on Rue de Rivoli, was open, where Japanese ukiyo-e and other objects from the Far East were sold. In 1867, \"Examples of Chinese Ornaments\" by Owen Jones appeared, and in 1870 \"Art and Industries in Japan\" by R. Alcock, and two years later, O. H. Moser and T. W. Cutler published books about Japanese art. Some Art Nouveau artists, like Victor Horta, owned a collection of Far Eastern art, especially Japanese.\nNew technologies in printing and publishing allowed Art Nouveau to quickly reach a global audience. Art magazines, illustrated with photographs and colour lithographs, played an essential role in popularizing the new style. \"The Studio\" in England, \"Arts et id\u00e8es\" and \"Art et d\u00e9coration\" in France, and \"Jugend\" in Germany allowed the style to spread rapidly to all corners of Europe. Aubrey Beardsley in England, and Eug\u00e8ne Grasset, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, and F\u00e9lix Vallotton achieved international recognition as illustrators.\nWith the posters by Jules Ch\u00e9ret for dancer Loie Fuller in 1893, and by Alphonse Mucha for actress Sarah Bernhardt in 1895, the poster became not just advertising, but an art form. Sarah Bernhardt set aside large numbers of her posters for sale to collectors.\nDevelopment \u2013 Brussels (1893\u20131898).\nThe first Art Nouveau town houses, the Hankar House by Paul Hankar (1893) and the H\u00f4tel Tassel by Victor Horta (1892\u20131893), were built almost simultaneously in Brussels. They were similar in their originality, but very different in their design and appearance.\nVictor Horta was among the most influential architects of early Art Nouveau, and his H\u00f4tel Tassel (1892\u20131893) in Brussels is one of the style's landmarks. Horta's architectural training was as an assistant to Alphonse Balat, architect to King Leopold II, constructing the monumental iron and glass Royal Greenhouses of Laeken. He was a great admiror of Viollet-le-Duc, with whose ideas he completely identified. In 1892\u20131893, he put this experience to a very different use. He designed the residence of a prominent Belgian chemist, \u00c9mile Tassel, on a very narrow and deep site. The central element of the house was the stairway, not enclosed by walls, but open, decorated with a curling wrought-iron railing, and placed beneath a high skylight. The floors were supported by slender iron columns like the trunks of trees. The mosaic floors and walls were decorated with delicate arabesques in floral and vegetal forms, which became the most popular signature of the style. In a short period, Horta built three more town houses, all with open interiors, and all with skylights for maximum interior light: the H\u00f4tel Solvay, the H\u00f4tel van Eetvelde (for Edmond van Eetvelde), and the Maison &amp; Atelier Horta. All four are now part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nPaul Hankar was also an innovator of early Art Nouveau. Born at Frameries, in Hainaut, the son of a master stone cutter, he had studied ornamental sculpture and decoration at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts in Brussels from 1873 to 1884, whilst working as an ornamental sculptor. From 1879 to 1894, he worked in the studio of the prominent architect Henri Beyaert, a master of eclectic and neoclassical architecture. Through Beyaert, Hankar also became an admirer of Viollet-le-Duc. In 1893, Hankar designed and built the Hankar House, his own residence in Brussels. With a goal to create a synthesis of fine arts and decorative arts, he brought together the sculptor Ren\u00e9 Janssens and the painter Albert Ciamberlani to decorate the interior and exterior with sgraffiti, or murals. The fa\u00e7ade and balconies featured iron decoration and curling lines in stylised floral patterns, which became an important feature of Art Nouveau. Based on this model, he built several houses for his artist friends. He also designed a series of innovative glass display windows for Brussels shops, restaurants and galleries, in what a local critic called \"a veritable delirium of originality\". He died in 1901, just as the movement was beginning to receive recognition.\nHenry van de Velde, born in Antwerp, was another founding figure in the birth of Art Nouveau. Van de Velde's designs included the interior of his residence in Brussels, the Villa Bloemenwerf (1895). The exterior of the house was inspired by the Red House, the residence of writer and theorist William Morris, the founder of the Arts and Crafts movement. Trained as a painter, Van de Velde turned to illustration, then to furniture design, and finally to architecture. For the Villa Bloemenwerf, he created the textiles, wallpaper, silverware, jewellery, and even clothing, that matched the style of the residence. Van de Velde went to Paris, where he designed furniture and decoration for the German-French art dealer Siegfried Bing, whose Paris gallery gave the style its name. He was also an early Art Nouveau theorist, demanding the use of dynamic, often opposing lines. Van de Velde wrote: \"A line is a force like all the other elementary forces. Several lines put together but opposed have a presence as strong as several forces\". In 1906, he departed Belgium for Weimar (Germany), where he founded the Grand-Ducal School of Arts and Crafts, where the teaching of historical styles was forbidden. He played an important role in the German Werkbund, before returning to Belgium.\nThe debut of Art Nouveau architecture in Brussels was accompanied by a wave of Decorative Art in the new style. Important artists included Gustave Strauven, who used wrought iron to achieve baroque effects on Brussels fa\u00e7ades; the furniture designer Gustave Serrurier-Bovy, known for his highly original chairs and articulated metal furniture; and the jewellery designer Philippe Wolfers, who made jewellery in the form of dragonflies, butterflies, swans and serpents.\nThe Brussels International Exposition held in 1897 brought international attention to the style; Horta, Hankar, Van de Velde, and Serrurier-Bovy, among others, took part in the design of the fair, and Henri Privat-Livemont created the poster for the exhibition.\nParis \u2013 Maison de l'Art Nouveau (1895) and Castel Beranger (1895\u20131898).\nThe Franco-German art dealer and publisher Siegfried Bing played a key role in publicizing the style. In 1891, he founded a magazine devoted to the art of Japan, which helped publicize Japonism in Europe. In 1892, he organized an exhibit of seven artists, among them Pierre Bonnard, F\u00e9lix Vallotton, \u00c9douard Vuillard, Toulouse-Lautrec and Eug\u00e8ne Grasset, which included both modern painting and decorative work. This exhibition was shown at the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 nationale des beaux-arts in 1895. In the same year, Bing opened a new gallery at 22 rue de Provence in Paris, the Maison de l'Art Nouveau, devoted to new works in both the fine and decorative arts. The interior and furniture of the gallery were designed by the Belgian architect Henry van de Velde, one of the pioneers of Art Nouveau architecture. The \"Maison de l'Art Nouveau\" showed paintings by Georges Seurat, Paul Signac and Toulouse-Lautrec, glass from Louis Comfort Tiffany and \u00c9mile Gall\u00e9, jewellery by Ren\u00e9 Lalique, and posters by Aubrey Beardsley. The works shown there were not at all uniform in style. Bing wrote in 1902, \"Art Nouveau, at the time of its creation, did not aspire in any way to have the honor of becoming a generic term. It was simply the name of a house opened as a rallying point for all the young and ardent artists impatient to show the modernity of their tendencies.\"\nThe style was quickly noticed in neighbouring France. After visiting Horta's H\u00f4tel Tassel, Hector Guimard built the Castel B\u00e9ranger, among the first Paris buildings in the new style, between 1895 and 1898. Parisians had been complaining of the monotony of the architecture of the boulevards built under Napoleon III by Georges-Eug\u00e8ne Haussmann. The Castel Beranger was a curious blend of Neo-Gothic and Art Nouveau, with curving whiplash lines and natural forms. Guimard, a skilled publicist for his work, declared: \"What must be avoided at all cost is...the parallel and symmetry. Nature is the greatest builder of all, and nature makes nothing that is parallel and nothing that is symmetric.\"\nParisians welcomed Guimard's original and picturesque style; the Castel B\u00e9ranger was chosen as one of the best new fa\u00e7ades in Paris, launching Guimard's career. Guimard was given the commission to design the entrances for the new Paris M\u00e9tro system, which brought the style to the attention of the millions of visitors to the city's 1900 .\nParis \"Exposition Universelle\" (1900).\nThe Paris 1900 \"Exposition universelle\" marked the high point of Art Nouveau. Between April and November 1900, it attracted nearly fifty million visitors from around the world, and showcased the architecture, design, glassware, furniture and decorative objects of the style. The architecture of the Exposition was often a mixture of Art Nouveau and Beaux-Arts architecture: the main exhibit hall, the Grand Palais had a Beaux-Arts fa\u00e7ade completely unrelated to the spectacular Art Nouveau stairway and exhibit hall in the interior.\nFrench designers all made special works for the Exhibition: Lalique crystal and jewellery; jewellery by Henri Vever and Georges Fouquet; Daum glass; the Manufacture nationale de S\u00e8vres in porcelain; ceramics by Alexandre Bigot; sculpted glass lamps and vases by \u00c9mile Gall\u00e9; furniture by \u00c9douard Colonna and Louis Majorelle; and many other prominent arts and crafts firms. At the 1900 Paris Exposition, Siegfried Bing presented a pavilion called \" Art Nouveau Bing\", which featured six different interiors entirely decorated in the Style.\nThe Exposition was the first international showcase for Art Nouveau designers and artists from across Europe and beyond. Prize winners and participants included Alphonse Mucha, who made murals for the pavilion of Bosnia-Herzegovina and designed the menu for the restaurant of the pavilion; the decorators and designers Bruno Paul and Bruno M\u00f6hring from Berlin; Carlo Bugatti from Turin; Bernhardt Pankok from Bavaria; The Russian architect-designer Fyodor Schechtel, and Louis Comfort Tiffany and Company from the United States. The Viennese architect Otto Wagner was a member of the jury, and presented a model of the Art Nouveau bathroom of his own town apartment in Vienna, featuring a glass bathtub. Josef Hoffmann designed the Viennese exhibit at the Paris exposition, highlighting the designs of the Vienna Secession. Eliel Saarinen first won international recognition for his imaginative design of the pavilion of Finland.\nWhile the Paris Exposition was by far the largest, other expositions did much to popularize the style. The 1888 Barcelona Universal Exposition marked the beginning of the Modernisme style in Spain, with some buildings of Llu\u00eds Dom\u00e8nech i Montaner. The \"Esposizione internazionale d'arte decorativa moderna\" of 1902 in Turin, Italy, showcased designers from across Europe, including Victor Horta from Belgium and Joseph Maria Olbrich from Vienna, along with local artists such as Carlo Bugatti, Galileo Chini and Eugenio Quarti.\nLocal variations.\nArt Nouveau in France.\nFollowing the 1900 Exposition, the capital of Art Nouveau was Paris. The most extravagant residences in the style were built by Jules Lavirotte, who entirely covered the fa\u00e7ades with ceramic sculptural decoration. The most flamboyant example is the Lavirotte Building, at 29, (1901). Office buildings and department stores featured high courtyards covered with stained glass cupolas and ceramic decoration. The style was particularly popular in restaurants and caf\u00e9s, including \"Maxim's\" at 3, \"rue Royale\", and \"Le Train bleu\" at the Gare de Lyon (1900).\nThe status of Paris attracted foreign artists to the city. The Swiss-born artist Eug\u00e8ne Grasset was one of the first creators of French Art Nouveau posters. He helped decorate the famous cabaret Le Chat Noir in 1885, made his first posters for the \"F\u00eates de Paris\" and a celebrated poster of Sarah Bernhardt in 1890. In Paris, he taught at the Gu\u00e9rin school of art (\"\u00c9cole normale d'enseignement du dessin\"), where his students included Augusto Giacometti and Paul Berthon. Swiss-born Th\u00e9ophile-Alexandre Steinlen created the famous poster for the Paris cabaret \"Le Chat noir\" in 1896. The Czech artist Alphonse Mucha (1860\u20131939) arrived in Paris in 1888, and in 1895, made a poster for actress Sarah Bernhardt in the play \"Gismonda\" by Victorien Sardou in Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Renaissance. The success of this poster led to a contract to produce posters for six more plays by Bernhardt.\nThe city of Nancy in Lorraine became the other French capital of the new style. In 1901, the \"Alliance provinciale des industries d'art\", also known as the \"\u00c9cole de Nancy\", was founded, dedicated to upsetting the hierarchy that put painting and sculpture above the decorative arts. The major artists working there included the glass vase and lamp creators \u00c9mile Gall\u00e9, the Daum brothers in glass design, and the designer Louis Majorelle, who created furniture with graceful floral and vegetal forms. The architect Henri Sauvage brought the new architectural style to Nancy with his Villa Majorelle in 1902.\nThe French style was widely propagated by new magazines, including \"The Studio\", \"Arts et Id\u00e9es\" and \"Art et D\u00e9coration\", whose photographs and colour lithographs made the style known to designers and wealthy clients around the world.\nIn France, the style reached its summit in 1900, and thereafter slipped rapidly out of fashion, virtually disappearing from France by 1905. Art Nouveau was a luxury style, which required expert and highly-paid craftsmen, and could not be easily or cheaply mass-produced. One of the few Art Nouveau products that could be mass-produced was the perfume bottle, and these are still manufactured in the style today.\nArt Nouveau in Belgium.\nBelgium was an early centre of Art Nouveau, thanks largely to the architecture of Victor Horta, who designed one of the first Art Nouveau houses, the H\u00f4tel Tassel in 1893, and three other townhouses in variations of the same style. They are now UNESCO World Heritage sites. Horta had a strong influence on the work of the young Hector Guimard, who came to see the H\u00f4tel Tassel under construction, and later declared that Horta was the \"inventor\" of the Art Nouveau. Horta's innovation was not the fa\u00e7ade, but the interior, using an abundance of iron and glass to open up space and flood the rooms with light, and decorating them with wrought iron columns and railings in curving vegetal forms, which were echoed on the floors and walls, as well as the furniture and carpets which Horta designed.\nPaul Hankar was another pioneer of Brussels' Art Nouveau. His house was completed in 1893, the same year as Horta's H\u00f4tel Tassel, and featured sgraffiti murals on the fa\u00e7ade. Hankar was influenced by both Viollet-le-Duc and the ideas of the English Arts and Crafts movement. His conception idea was to bring together decorative and fine arts in a coherent whole. He commissioned the sculptor Alfred Crick and the painter Adolphe Crespin to decorate the fa\u00e7ades of houses with their work. The most striking example was the house and studio built for the artist Albert Ciamberlani at 48, / in Brussels, for which he created an exuberant fa\u00e7ade covered with sgraffito murals with painted figures and ornament, recreating the decorative architecture of the Quattrocento, or 15th-century Italy. Hankar died in 1901, when his work was just receiving recognition.\nGustave Strauven began his career as an assistant designer working with Horta, before he started his own practice at age 21, making some of the most extravagant Art Nouveau buildings in Brussels. His most famous work is the Saint-Cyr House at 11, /. The house is only wide, but is given extraordinary height by his elaborate architectural inventions. It is entirely covered by polychrome bricks and a network of curling vegetal forms in wrought iron, in a virtually Art Nouveau-Baroque style.\nOther important Art Nouveau artists from Belgium included the architect and designer Henry van de Velde, though the most important part of his career was spent in Germany; he strongly influenced the decoration of the Jugendstil. Others included the decorator Gustave Serrurier-Bovy, and the graphic artist Fernand Khnopff. Belgian designers took advantage of an abundant supply of ivory imported from the Belgian Congo; mixed sculptures, combining stone, metal and ivory, by such artists as Philippe Wolfers, was popular.\n\"Nieuwe Kunst\" in the Netherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, the style was known as the ('New Style'), or ('New Art'), and it took a different direction from the more floral and curving style in Belgium. It was influenced by the more geometric and stylised forms of the German Jugendstil and Austrian Vienna Secession. It was also influenced by the art and imported woods from Indonesia, then the Dutch East Indies, particularly the designs of the textiles and batik from Java.\nThe most important architect and furniture designer in the style was Hendrik Petrus Berlage, who denounced historical styles and advocated a purely functional architecture. He wrote, \"It is necessary to fight against the art of illusion, to and to recognize the lie, in order to find the essence and not the illusion.\" Like Victor Horta and Gaud\u00ed, he was an admirer of architectural theories of Viollet-le-Duc. His furniture was designed to be strictly functional, and to respect the natural forms of wood, rather than bending or twisting it as if it were metal. He pointed to the example of Egyptian furniture, and preferred chairs with right angles. His first and most famous architectural work was the Beurs van Berlage (1896\u20131903), the Amsterdam Commodities Exchange, which he built following the principles of constructivism. Everything was functional, including the lines of rivets that decorated the walls of the main room. He often included very tall towers to his buildings to make them more prominent, a practice used by other Art Nouveau architects of the period, including Joseph Maria Olbrich in Vienna and Eliel Saarinen in Finland.\nOther buildings in the style include the American Hotel (1898\u20131900), by W. Kromhout and H. G. Jansen; and Astoria (1904\u20131905) by Herman Hendrik Baanders and Gerrit van Arkel in Amsterdam; the railway station in Haarlem (1906\u20131908), and the former office building of the Holland America Lines (1917) in Rotterdam, now the Hotel New York.\nProminent graphic artists and illustrators in the style included Jan Toorop, whose work inclined toward mysticism and symbolism, even in his posters for salad oil. In their colors and designs, they also sometimes showed the influence of the art of Java.\nImportant figures in Dutch ceramics and porcelain included Jurriaan Kok and Theo Colenbrander. They used colorful floral pattern and more traditional Art Nouveau motifs, combined with unusual forms of pottery and contrasting dark and light colors, borrowed from the batik decoration of Java.\nModern Style and Glasgow School in Britain.\nArt Nouveau had its roots in Britain, in the Arts and Crafts movement which started in the 1860s and reached international recognition by the 1880s. It called for better treatment of decorative arts, and took inspiration in medieval craftmanship and design, and nature. One notable early example of the Modern Style is Arthur Mackmurdo's design for the cover of his essay on the city churches of Sir Christopher Wren, published in 1883, as is his Mahogany chair from the same year.\nOther important innovators in Britain included the graphic designers Aubrey Beardsley whose drawings featured the curved lines that became the most recognizable feature of the style. Free-flowing wrought iron from the 1880s could also be adduced, or some flat floral textile designs, most of which owed some impetus to patterns of 19th century design. Other British graphic artists who had an important place in the style included Walter Crane and Charles Ashbee.\nThe Liberty department store in London played an important role, through its colourful stylised floral designs for textiles, and the silver, pewter, and jewellery designs of Manxman (of Scottish descent) Archibald Knox. His jewellery designs in materials and forms broke away entirely from the historical traditions of jewellery design.\nFor Art Nouveau architecture and furniture design, the most important centre in Britain was Glasgow, with the creations of Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the Glasgow School, whose work was inspired by Scottish baronial architecture and Japanese design. Beginning in 1895, Mackintosh displayed his designs at international expositions in London, Vienna, and Turin; his designs particularly influenced the Secession Style in Vienna. His architectural creations included the Glasgow Herald Building (1894) and the library of the Glasgow School of Art (1897). He also established a major reputation as a furniture designer and decorator, working closely with his wife, Margaret Macdonald Mackintosh, a prominent painter and designer. Together they created striking designs that combined geometric straight lines with gently curving floral decoration, particularly a famous symbol of the style, the Glasgow Rose\".\nL\u00e9on-Victor Solon, made an important contribution to Art Nouveau ceramics as art director at Mintons. He specialised in plaques and in tube-lined vases marketed as \"secessionist ware\" (usually described as named after the Viennese art movement). Apart from ceramics, he designed textiles for the Leek silk industry and doublures for a bookbinder (G.T.Bagguley of Newcastle-under-Lyme), who patented the \"Sutherland\" binding in 1895.\nGeorge Skipper was perhaps the most active Art Nouveau architect in England. The Edward Everard building in Bristol, built during 1900\u201301 to house the printing works of Edward Everard, features an Art Nouveau fa\u00e7ade. The figures depicted are of Johannes Gutenberg and William Morris, both eminent in the field of printing. A winged figure symbolises the \"Spirit of Light\", while a figure holding a lamp and mirror symbolises light and truth.\n\"Jugendstil\" in Germany.\nGerman Art Nouveau is commonly known by its German name, , or 'Youth Style'. The name is taken from the artistic journal, ('Youth'), which was published in Munich. The magazine was founded in 1896 by Georg Hirth, who remained editor until his death in 1916. The magazine survived until 1940. During the early 20th century, \"Jugendstil\" was applied only to the graphic arts. It referred especially to the forms of typography and graphic design found in German magazines such as \"Jugend\", \"Pan\", and \"Simplicissimus\". \"Jugendstil\" was later applied to other versions of Art Nouveau in Germany, the Netherlands. The term was borrowed from German by several languages of the Baltic states and Nordic countries to describe Art Nouveau (see Naming section).\nIn 1892 Georg Hirth chose the name Munich Secession for the Association of Visual Artists of Munich. The Vienna Secession, founded in 1897, and the Berlin Secession also took their names from the Munich group.\nThe journals \"Jugend\" and \"Simplicissimus\", published in Munich, and \"Pan\", published in Berlin, were important proponents of the \"Jugendstil\". \"Jugendstil\" art combined sinuous curves and more geometric lines, and was used for covers of novels, advertisements, and exhibition posters. Designers often created original styles of typeface that worked harmoniously with the image, e.g. Arnold B\u00f6cklin typeface in 1904.\nOtto Eckmann was one of the most prominent German artists associated with both \"Die Jugend\" and \"Pan\". His favourite animal was the swan, and so great was his influence that the swan came to serve as the symbol of the entire movement. Another prominent designer in the style was Richard Riemerschmid, who made furniture, pottery, and other decorative objects in a sober, geometric style that pointed forward toward Art Deco. The Swiss artist Hermann Obrist, living in Munich, illustrated the \"coup de fouet\" or whiplash motif, a highly stylised double curve suggesting motion taken from the stem of the cyclamen flower.\nThe Darmstadt Artists' Colony was founded in 1899 by Ernest Ludwig, Grand Duke of Hesse. The architect who built Grand Duke's house, as well as the largest structure of the colony (Wedding tower), was Joseph Maria Olbrich, one of the Vienna Secession founders. Other notable artists of the colony were Peter Behrens and Hans Christiansen. Ernest Ludwig also commissioned to rebuild the spa complex in Bad Nauheim at the beginning of century. A completely new Sprudelhof complex was constructed in 1905\u20131911 under the direction of Wilhelm Jost and attained one of the main objectives of Jugendstil: a synthesis of all the arts. Another member of the reigning family who commissioned an Art Nouveau structure was Princess Elisabeth of Hesse and by Rhine. She founded Marfo-Mariinsky Convent in Moscow in 1908 and its katholikon is recognized as an Art Nouveau masterpiece.\nAnother notable union in German Empire was the Deutscher Werkbund, founded in 1907 in Munich at the instigation of Hermann Muthesius by artists of Darmstadt Colony Joseph Maria Olbrich, Peter Behrens; by another founder of Vienna Secession Josef Hoffmann, as well as by Wiener Werkst\u00e4tte (founded by Hoffmann), by Richard Riemerschmid, Bruno Paul and other artists and companies. Later Belgian Henry van de Velde joined the movement. The Grand-Ducal School of Arts and Crafts, founded by him in Weimar, was a predecessor of Bauhaus, one of the most influential currents in Modernist architecture.\nIn Berlin, Jugendstil was chosen for the construction of several railway stations. The most notable is B\u00fclowstra\u00dfe by Bruno M\u00f6hring (1900\u20131902), other examples are Mexikoplatz (1902\u20131904), Botanischer Garten (1908\u20131909), Frohnau (1908\u20131910), Wittenbergplatz (1911\u20131913) and Pankow (1912\u20131914) stations. Another notable structure of Berlin is Hackesche H\u00f6fe (1906) which used polychrome glazed brick for the courtyard fa\u00e7ade.\nArt Nouveau in Strasbourg (then part of the German Empire as the capital of the \"Reichsland Elsa\u00df-Lothringen\") was a specific brand, in that it combined influences from Nancy and Brussels, with influences from Darmstadt and Vienna, to operate a local synthesis which reflected the history of the city between the Germanic and the French realms.\nSecession in Austria\u2013Hungary.\nVienna Secession.\nVienna became the centre of a distinct variant of Art Nouveau, which became known as the Vienna Secession. The movement took its name from Munich Secession established in 1892. Vienna Secession was founded in April 1897 by a group of artists that included Gustav Klimt, Koloman Moser, Josef Hoffmann, Joseph Maria Olbrich, Max Kurzweil, Ernst St\u00f6hr, and others. The painter Klimt became the president of the group. They objected to the conservative orientation toward historicism expressed by Vienna K\u00fcnstlerhaus, the official union of artists. The Secession founded a magazine, \"Ver Sacrum\", to promote their works in all media. The architect Joseph Olbrich designed the domed Secession building in the new style, which became a showcase for the paintings of Gustav Klimt and other Secession artists.\nKlimt became the best-known of the Secession painters, often erasing the border between fine art painting and decorative painting. Koloman Moser was an extremely versatile artist in the style; his work including magazine illustrations, architecture, silverware, ceramics, porcelain, textiles, stained glass windows, and furniture.\nThe most prominent architect of the Vienna Secession was Otto Wagner, he joined the movement soon after its inception to follow his students Hoffmann and Olbrich. His major projects included several stations of the urban rail network (the Stadtbahn), the Linke Wienzeile Buildings (consisting of Majolica House, the House of Medallions and the house at K\u00f6stlergasse). The Karlsplatz Station is now an exhibition hall of the Vienna Museum. The Kirche am Steinhof of Steinhof Psychiatric hospital (1904\u20131907) is a unique and finely crafted example of Secession religious architecture, with a traditional domed exterior but sleek, modern gold and white interior lit by abundance of modern stained glass.\nIn 1899 Joseph Maria Olbrich moved to Darmstadt Artists' Colony, in 1903 Koloman Moser and Josef Hoffmann founded the Wiener Werkst\u00e4tte, a training school and workshop for designers and craftsmen of furniture, carpets, textiles and decorative objects. In 1905 Koloman Moser and Gustav Klimt separated from Vienna Secession, later in 1907 Koloman Moser left Wiener Werkst\u00e4tte as well, while its other founder Josef Hoffmann joined the Deutscher Werkbund. Gustav Klimt and Josef Hoffmann continued collaborating, they organized Kunstschau Exhibition in 1908 in Vienna and built the Stoclet Palace in Brussels (1905\u20131911) that announced the coming of modernist architecture. It was designated as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in June 2009.\nHungarian \"Szecesszi\u00f3\".\nThe pioneer and prophet of the ('Secession' in Hungarian), the architect \u00d6d\u00f6n Lechner, created buildings which marked a transition from historicism to modernism for Hungarian architecture. His idea for a Hungarian architectural style was the use of architectural ceramics and oriental motifs. In his works, he used pygorganite placed in production by 1886 by Zsolnay Porcelain Manufactory. This material was used in the construction of notable Hungarian buildings of other styles, e.g. the Hungarian Parliament Building and Matthias Church.\nWorks by \u00d6d\u00f6n Lechner include the Museum of Applied Arts (1893\u20131896), other building with similar distinctive features are Geological Museum (1896\u20131899) and The Postal Savings Bank building (1899\u20131902), all in Budapest. However, due to the opposition of Hungarian architectural establishment to Lechner's success, he soon was unable to get new commissions comparable to his earlier buildings. But Lechner was an inspiration and a master to the following generation of architects who played the main role in popularising the new style. Within the process of Magyarization numerous buildings were commissioned to his disciples in outskirts of the kingdom: e.g. Marcell Komor and Dezs\u0151 Jakab were commissioned to build the Synagogue (1901\u20131903) and Town Hall (1908\u20131910) in Szabadka (now Subotica, Serbia), County Prefecture (1905\u20131907) and Palace of Culture (1911\u20131913) in Marosv\u00e1s\u00e1rhely (now T\u00e2rgu Mure\u0219, Romania). Later Lechner himself built the Blue Church in Pozsony (present-day Bratislava, Slovakia) in 1909\u20131913.\nAnother important architect was K\u00e1roly K\u00f3s who was a follower of John Ruskin and William Morris. K\u00f3s took the Finnish National Romanticism movement as a model and the Transylvanian vernacular as the inspiration. His most notable buildings include the Roman Catholic Church in Zebeg\u00e9ny (1908\u201309), pavilions for the Budapest Municipal Zoo (1909\u20131912) and the Sz\u00e9kely National Museum in Sepsiszentgy\u00f6rgy (now Sf\u00e2ntu Gheorghe, Romania, 1911\u201312).\nThe movement that promoted Szecesszi\u00f3 in arts was G\u00f6d\u00f6ll\u0151 Art Colony, founded by Alad\u00e1r K\u00f6r\u00f6sf\u0151i-Kriesch, also a follower John Ruskin and William Morris and a professor at the Royal School of Applied Arts in Budapest in 1901. Its artists took part in many projects, including the Franz Liszt Academy of Music in Budapest.\nAn associate to G\u00f6d\u00f6ll\u0151 Art Colony, Miksa R\u00f3th was also involved in several dozen Szecesszi\u00f3 projects, including Budapest buildings including Gresham Palace (stained glass, 1906) and T\u00f6r\u00f6k Bank (mosaics, 1906) and also created mosaics and stained glass for Palace of Culture (1911\u20131913) in Marosv\u00e1s\u00e1rhely.\nA notable furniture designer is \u00d6d\u00f6n Farag\u00f3 who combined traditional popular architecture, oriental architecture and international Art Nouveau in a highly picturesque style. P\u00e1l Horti, another Hungarian designer, had a much more sober and functional style, made of oak with delicate traceries of ebony and brass.\nSecession in Bohemia, Moravia and Slovakia.\nThe most notable Secession buildings in \"Prague\" are examples of total art with distinctive architecture, sculpture and paintings. The main railway station (1901\u20131909) was designed by Josef Fanta and features paintings of V\u00e1clav Jansa and sculptures of Ladislav \u0160aloun and Stanislav Sucharda along with other artists. The Municipal House (1904\u20131912) was designed by Osvald Pol\u00edvka and Anton\u00edn Bal\u0161\u00e1nek, painted by famous Czech painter Alphonse Mucha and features sculptures of Josef Ma\u0159atka and Ladislav \u0160aloun. Pol\u00edvka, Ma\u0159atka, and \u0160aloun simultaneously cooperated in the construction of New City Hall (1908\u20131911) along with Stanislav Sucharda, and Mucha later painted St. Vitus Cathedral's stained glass windows in his distinctive style.\nThe most important Czech architect of this period was Jan Kot\u011bra, who studied in Vienna under Otto Wagner. His best-known works are the Peterka House at 12 Wenceslas Square in Prague (1899\u20131900), the National House in Prost\u011bjov (1905\u20131907) and the Museum of Eastern Bohemia in Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9 (1909\u20131912). Many important Vienesse architects were born in Moravia or Austrian Silesia, like Josef Hoffmann, Hubert Gessner, Joseph Maria Olbrich and Leopold Bauer.\nThe style of combining Hungarian Szecesszi\u00f3 and national architectural elements was typical for a Slovak architect Du\u0161an Jurkovi\u010d. His most original works are the Cultural House in Szakolca (now Skalica in Slovakia, 1905), the buildings of spa in Luha\u010dovice (now Czech Republic) in 1901\u20131903 and 35 war cemeteries near Nowy \u017bmigr\u00f3d in Galicia (now Poland), most of them heavily influenced by local Lemko (Rusyn) folk art and carpentry (1915\u20131917).\nSecession in Galicia.\nThe most important centres of Secession in Galicia were Krak\u00f3w, Lviv and Bielsko-Bia\u0142a. The most important example of the style in Krak\u00f3w is the Palace of Art (1898\u20131901), designed by Franciszek M\u0105czy\u0144ski under the influence of the Secession Hall in Vienna. Other important works M\u0105czy\u0144ski designed in Krak\u00f3w together with Tadeusz Stryje\u0144ski: the House Under the Globe (1904\u20131905) and the Old Theater (1903\u20131906). The most important interior designers were Stanis\u0142aw Wyspia\u0144ski and J\u00f3zef Mehoffer, who designed many stained glass windows and building interiors. The most important work of the former are the stained glasses in the Franciscan Church and in the House of the Krakow Medical Society (1905) and of the latter in the interior of the House Under the Globe.\nIn Lviv the most important architect was W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sad\u0142owski, who studied in Vienna and was influenced by Otto Wagner. He designed the Lviv railway station (1899\u20131904), the Lviv's Philharmonic (1905\u20131908), and the Industrial School (1907\u20131908). Other important architected, also inspired by Wagner, was Ivan Levynskyi.\nOne of the most famous buildings in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a is the so-called Frog House by Emanuel Rost (1903). Other important examples of Secession were designed by Vienesse architects: Max Fabiani, the author of the house at 1 Barlickiego Street (1900) as well as Leopold Bauer, who designed the house at 51 Stoja\u0142owskiego Street (1903) and the rebuilding of the Saint Nicholas' Cathedral (1909\u201310).\nSecession in Slovenia, Bosnia, Croatia and Trieste.\nThe most prolific \"Slovenian\" Secession architect was Ciril Metod Koch. He studied at Otto Wagner's classes in Vienna and worked in the Laybach (now Ljubljana, Slovenia) City Council from 1894 to 1923. After the earthquake in Laybach in 1895, he designed many secular buildings in Secession style that he adopted from 1900 to 1910: Poga\u010dnik House (1901), \u010cuden Building (1901), The Farmers Loan Bank (1906\u201307), renovated Hauptmann Building in Secession style in 1904. The highlight of his career was the Loan Bank in Radmannsdorf (now Radovljica) in 1906.\nOther important Slovene architect, who was active also in Bosnia, was Josip Vanca\u0161, the authot of such works like Grand Hotel Union (1902\u20131903) or City Savings Bank in Ljubljana (1902\u20131903) as well as the Je\u0161ua D. Salom Mansion (1901) and the Central Post Office in Sarajevo (1907\u20131913). Also Jo\u017ee Ple\u010dnik and Max Fabiani, both important Vienna Secession architects, were born in Slovenia. The latter designed some buildings in Slovenia and Trieste, like the Bartoli House in Trieste (1906).\nIn Croatia, the most important examples of Secession include the Kallina House in Zagreb by Vjekoslav Bastl (1903\u20131904) and the Croatian State Archives in Zagreb by Rudolf Lubinski (1911\u20131913).\nArta 1900 or Art Nouveau in Romania.\nArt Nouveau appeared in Romania during the same years as in Western Europe (early 1890s until the outbreak of World War I in 1914), but here few of the buildings are in this style, the Beaux-Arts style being predominant. The most famous is the Constan\u021ba Casino. Most of the Romanian examples of Art Nouveau architecture are actually mixes of Beaux Arts and Art Nouveau, like the Romulus Porescu House or house no. 61 on Strada Vasile Lasc\u0103r, both in Bucharest. This is similar to what was happening in France, where eclecticism was more popular, pure Art Nouveau buildings and structures being relatively rare. Despite most houses from the reign of Carol I being Beaux-Arts, some of them have Art Nouveau stoves inside, since the style of the exterior did not always dictate that of the stove or the entire interior.\nOne of the most notable Art Nouveau painters from Romania was \u0218tefan Luchian, who quickly took over the innovative and decorative directions of Art Nouveau for a short period of time. This period coincided with the founding of the Ileana Society in 1897, of which he was a founding member, a society that organized an exhibition at the Union Hotel titled \"The Exhibition of Independent Artists\" (1898) and published the \"Ileana Magazine\".\nTransylvania has examples of both Art Nouveau and Romanian Revival buildings, the former being from the Austro-Hungarian era. Most of them can be found in Oradea, nicknamed the \"Art Nouveau capital of Romania\", but also in Timi\u0219oara, T\u00e2rgu Mure\u0219 and Sibiu.\n\"Stile Liberty\" in Italy.\nArt Nouveau in Italy was known as , , and especially . Liberty style took its name from Arthur Lasenby Liberty and the store he founded in 1874 in London, Liberty department store, which specialised in importing ornaments, textiles and art objects from Japan and the Far East, and whose colourful textiles which were particularly popular in Italy. Notable Italian designers in the style included Galileo Chini, whose ceramics were often inspired both by majolica patterns. He was later known as a painter and a theatrical scenery designer; he designed the sets for two celebrated Puccini operas \"Gianni Schicchi\" and \"Turandot\".\nLiberty style architecture varied greatly, and often followed historical styles, particularly the Baroque. Fa\u00e7ades were often drenched with decoration and sculpture. Examples of the Liberty style include the Villino Florio (1899\u20131902) by Ernesto Basile in Palermo; the Palazzo Castiglioni in Milan by Giuseppe Sommaruga (1901\u20131903); Milan, and the Casa Guazzoni (1904\u201305) in Milan by Giovanni Battista Bossi (1904\u201306).\nColorful frescoes, painted or in ceramics, and sculpture, both in the interior and exterior, were a popular feature of Liberty style. They drew upon both classical and floral themes. as in the baths of Acque della Salute, and in the Casa Guazzoni in Milan.\nThe most important figure in Liberty style design was Carlo Bugatti, the son of an architect and decorator, father of Rembrandt Bugatti, Liberty sculptor, and of Ettore Bugatti, famous automobile designer. He studied at the Milanese Academy of Brera, and later the in Paris. His work was distinguished by its exoticism and eccentricity, included silverware, textiles, ceramics, and musical instruments, but he is best remembered for his innovative furniture designs, shown first in the 1888 Milan Fine Arts Fair. His furniture often featured a keyhole design, and had unusual coverings, including parchment and silk, and inlays of bone and ivory. It also sometimes had surprising organic shapes, copied after snails and cobras.\nArt Nouveau and Secession in Serbia.\nDue to the close proximity to Austria\u2013Hungary and Vojvodina being part of the empire until 1918, both the Vienna Secession and Hungarian Szecesszi\u00f3 were prevalent movements in what is today's northern Serbia, as well as the Capital of Belgrade. Famous Austrian and Hungarian architects would design many buildings in Subotica, Novi Sad, Pali\u0107, Zrenjanin, Vrbas, Senta, and Kikinda. Art Nouveau heritage in Belgrade, Pan\u010devo, Aran\u0111elovac, and Vrnja\u010dka Banja are a mixture of French, German, Austrian, Hungarian, and local Serbian movements. From the curvy floral beauty of the Subotica's Synagogue to the Morava-style inspired rosettes on Belgrade's telegraph building, Art Nouveau architecture takes various shapes in present-day Serbia.\nIn the early 1900s, north of the Sava and the Danube, resurgent Hungarian national sentiment infused the buildings in Subotica and Senta with local floral ethnic motifs, while in the tiny Kingdom of Serbia, national romantics like Branko Tanezevi\u0107 and Dragutin Inkiostiri-Medenjak (both born in the Austro-Hungarian Empire), translated Serbia's traditional motifs into marvellous buildings. Other architects, like Milan Antonovi\u0107 and Nikola Nestorovi\u0107 brought the then-fashionable sinuous lines and natural motifs to the homes and businesses of their wealthy patrons, so they could show off their worldliness and keeping up with the trends in Paris, Munich and Vienna.\n\"Modernismo\" and \"Modernisme\" in Spain.\nA highly original variant of the style emerged in Barcelona, Catalonia, at about the same time that the Art Nouveau style appeared in Belgium and France. It was called in Catalan and \"Modernismo\" in Spanish. Its most famous creator was Antoni Gaud\u00ed. Gaud\u00ed used floral and organic forms in a very novel way in \"Palau G\u00fcell\" (1886\u20131890). According to UNESCO, \"the architecture of the park combined elements from the Arts and Crafts movement, Symbolism, Expressionism, and Rationalism, and presaged and influenced many forms and techniques of 20th-century Modernism.\"\nHe integrated crafts as ceramics, stained glass, wrought ironwork forging and carpentry into his architecture. In his G\u00fcell Pavilions (1884\u20131887) and then Parc G\u00fcell (1900\u20131914) he also used a new technique called \"trencad\u00eds\", which used waste ceramic pieces. His designs from about 1903, the \"Casa Batll\u00f3\" (1904\u20131906) and \"Casa Mil\u00e0\" (1906\u20131912), are most closely related to the stylistic elements of Art Nouveau. Later structures such as \"Sagrada Fam\u00edlia\" combined Art Nouveau elements with revivalist Neo-Gothic. Casa Batll\u00f3, Casa Mil\u00e0, G\u00fcell Pavilions, and Parc G\u00fcell were results of his collaboration with Josep Maria Jujol, who himself created houses in Sant Joan Desp\u00ed (1913\u20131926), several churches near Tarragona (1918 and 1926) and the sinuous Casa Planells (1924) in Barcelona.\nBesides the dominating presence of Gaud\u00ed, Llu\u00eds Dom\u00e8nech i Montaner also used Art Nouveau in Barcelona in buildings such as the Castell dels Tres Dragons (1888), Casa Lle\u00f3 Morera, Palau de la M\u00fasica Catalana (1905) and Hospital de Sant Pau (1901\u20131930). The two latter buildings have been listed by UNESCO as World Cultural Heritage.\nAnother major modernista was Josep Puig i Cadafalch, who designed the Casa Mart\u00ed and its caf\u00e9, the Casimir Casaramona textile factory (now the CaixaF\u00f2rum art museum), Casa Macaya, Casa Amatller, the Palau del Bar\u00f3 de Quadras (housing Casa \u00c0sia for 10 years until 2013) and the ('House of Spikes').\nA distinctive Art Nouveau movement was also in the Valencian Community. Some of the notable architects were Demetrio Ribes Marco, Vicente Pascual Pastor, Timoteo Briet Montaud, and Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Manuel Cortina P\u00e9rez. Valencian Art Nouveau defining characteristics are a notable use of ceramics in decoration, both in the fa\u00e7ade and in ornamentation, and also the use of Valencian regional motives.\nAnother remarkable variant is the Madrilenian Art Nouveau or , with such notable buildings as the Longoria Palace, the Casino de Madrid or the Cementerio de la Almudena, among others. Renowned modernistas from Madrid were architects Jos\u00e9 L\u00f3pez Sallaberry, Fernando Arb\u00f3s y Tremanti and Francisco Andr\u00e9s Octavio.\nThe movement left a wide art heritage including drawings, paintings, sculptures, glass and metal work, mosaics, ceramics, and furniture. A part of it can be found in Museu Nacional d'Art de Catalunya.\nInspired by a Paris caf\u00e9 called Le Chat Noir, where he had previously worked, Pere Romeu i Borr\u00e0s decided to open a caf\u00e9 in Barcelona that was named (Four Cats in Catalan). The caf\u00e9 became a central meeting point for Barcelona's most prominent figures of \"Modernisme\", such as Pablo Picasso and Ramon Casas i Carb\u00f3 who helped to promote the movement by his posters and postcards. For the caf\u00e9 he created a picture called Ramon Casas and Pere Romeu on a Tandem that was replaced with his another composition entitled Ramon Casas and Pere Romeu in an Automobile in 1901, symbolizing the new century.\nAntoni Gaud\u00ed designed furniture for many of the houses he built; one example is an armchair called the for the Battle House. He influenced another notable Catalan furniture designer, Gaspar Homar (1870\u20131953) who often combined marquetry and mosaics with his furnishings.\n\"Arte Nova\" in Portugal.\nThe Art Nouveau variant in Aveiro (Portugal) was called \"Arte Nova\", and its principal characteristic feature was ostentation: the style was used by bourgeoisie who wanted to express their wealth on the fa\u00e7ades while leaving the interiors conservative. Another distinctive feature of Arte Nova was the use of locally produced tiles with Art Nouveau motifs.\nThe most influential artist of Arte Nova was Francisco Augusto da Silva Rocha. Though he was not trained as an architect, he designed many buildings in Aveiro and in other cities in Portugal. One of them, the Major Pessoa residence, has both an Art Nouveau fa\u00e7ade and interior, and now hosts the Museum of Arte Nova.\nThere are other examples of Arte Nova in other cities of Portugal. Some of them are the Museum-Residence Dr. Anast\u00e1cio Gon\u00e7alves by Manuel Joaquim Norte J\u00fanior (1904\u20131905) in Lisbon, Caf\u00e9 Majestic by Jo\u00e3o Queiroz (1921) and Livraria Lello bookstore by Xavier Esteves (1906), both in Porto.\n\"Jugendstil\" in the Nordic countries.\nFinland.\nArt Nouveau was popular in the Nordic countries, where it was usually known as Jugendstil, and was often combined with the National Romantic Style of each country. The Nordic country with the largest number of Jugendstil buildings is the Grand Duchy of Finland, then a part of Russian Empire. The Jugendstil period coincided with Golden Age of Finnish Art and national awakening. After Paris Exposition in 1900 the leading Finnish artist was Akseli Gallen-Kallela. He is known for his illustrations of the Kalevala, the Finnish national epic, as well as for painting numerous Judendstil buildings in the Duchy.\nThe architects of the Finnish pavilion at the Exposition were Herman Gesellius, Armas Lindgren, and Eliel Saarinen. They worked together from 1896 to 1905 and created many notable buildings in Helsinki including Pohjola Insurance building (1899\u20131901) and National Museum of Finland (1905\u20131910) as well as their joint residence Hvittr\u00e4sk in Kirkkonummi (1902). Architects were inspired by Nordic legends and nature, rough granite fa\u00e7ade thus became a symbol for belonging to the Finnish nation. After the firm dissolved, Saarinen designed the Helsinki Railway Station (1905\u20131914) in clearer forms, influenced by American architecture. The sculptor who worked with Saarinen in construction of National Museum of Finland and Helsinki Railway Station was Emil Wikstr\u00f6m.\nAnother architect who created several notable works in Finland was Lars Sonck. His major Jugendstil works include Tampere Cathedral (1902\u20131907), Ainola, the home of Jean Sibelius (1903), Headquarters of the Helsinki Telephone Association (1903\u20131907) and Kallio Church in Helsinki (1908\u20131912). Also, Magnus Schjerfbeck, brother of Helene Schjerfbeck, made tuberculosis sanatorium known as Nummela Sanatorium in 1903 using the Jugendstil style.\nNorway.\nNorway also was aspiring independence (from Sweden) and local Art Nouveau was connected with a revival inspired by Viking folk art and crafts. Notable designers included Lars Kisarvik, who designed chairs with traditional Viking and Celtic patterns, and Gerhard Munthe, who designed a chair with a stylised dragon-head emblem from ancient Viking ships, as well as a wide variety of posters, paintings and graphics.\nThe Norwegian town of \u00c5lesund is regarded as the main centre of Art Nouveau in Scandinavia because it was completely reconstructed after a fire of 23 January 1904. About 350 buildings were built between 1904 and 1907 under an urban plan designed by the engineer Frederik N\u00e6sser. The merger of unity and variety gave birth to a style known as \u00c5l Stil. Buildings of the style have linear decor and echoes of both Jugendstil and vernacular elements, e.g. towers of stave churches or the crested roofs. One of the buildings, Swan Pharmacy, now hosts the Art Nouveau Centre.\nSweden and Denmark.\nJugendstil masterpieces of other Nordic countries include Engelbrektskyrkan (1914) and Royal Dramatic Theatre (1901\u20131908) in Stockholm, Sweden and former City Library (now Danish National Business Archives) in Aarhus, Denmark (1898\u20131901). The architect of the latter is Hack Kampmann, then a proponent of National Romantic Style who also created Custom House, Theatre and Villa Kampen in Aarhus. Denmark's most notable Art Nouveau designer was the silversmith Georg Jensen. The Baltic Exhibition in Malm\u00f6 1914 can be seen as the last major manifestation of the Jugendstil in Sweden.\n\"Modern\" in Russia.\n ('Modern') was a very colourful Russian variation of Art Nouveau which appeared in Moscow and Saint Petersburg in 1898 with the publication of a new art journal, (\"Mir Iskusstva\", 'The World of Art'), by Russian artists Alexandre Benois and L\u00e9on Bakst, and chief editor Sergei Diaghilev. The magazine organized exhibitions of leading Russian artists, including Mikhail Vrubel, Konstantin Somov, Isaac Levitan, and the book illustrator Ivan Bilibin. The World of Art style made less use of the vegetal and floral forms of French Art Nouveau; it drew heavily upon the bright colours and exotic designs of Russian folklore and fairy tales. The most influential contribution of the \"Mir Iskusstva\" was the creation of a new ballet company, the , headed by Diaghilev, with costumes and sets designed by Bakst and Benois. The new ballet company premiered in Paris in 1909, and performed there every year through 1913. The exotic and colourful sets designed by Benois and Bakst had a major impact on French art and design. The costume and set designs were reproduced in the leading Paris magazines, , and , and the Russian style became known in Paris as . The company was stranded in Paris first by the outbreak of World War I, and then by the Russian Revolution in 1917, and ironically never performed in Russia.\nOf Russian architects, the most prominent in the pure Art Nouveau style was Fyodor Schechtel. The most famous example is the Ryabushinsky House in Moscow. It was built by a Russian businessman and newspaper owner, and then, after the Russian Revolution, became the residence of the writer Maxim Gorky, and is now the Gorky Museum. Its main staircase, made of a polished aggregate of concrete, marble and granite, has flowing, curling lines like the waves of the sea, and is illuminated by a lamp in the form of a floating jellyfish. The interior also features doors, windows and ceiling decorated with colorful frescoes of mosaic. Schechtel, who is also considered a major figure in Russian symbolism, designed several other landmark buildings in Moscow, including the rebuilding of the Moscow Yaroslavsky railway station, in a more traditional Moscow revival style.\nOther Russian architects of the period created Russian Revival architecture, which drew from historic Russian architecture. These buildings were created mostly in wood, and referred to the Architecture of Kievan Rus'. One example is the Teremok House in Talashkino (1901\u20131902) by Sergey Malyutin, and Pertsova House (also known as Pertsov House) in Moscow (1905\u20131907). He also was a member of Mir iskusstva movement. The Saint Petersburg architect Nikolai Vasilyev built in a range of styles before emigrating in 1923. This building is most notable for stone carvings made by Sergei Vashkov inspired by the carvings of Cathedral of Saint Demetrius in Vladimir and Saint George Cathedral in Yuryev-Polsky of the 12th and 13th centuries. Another example of this Russian Revival architecture is the Marfo-Mariinsky Convent (1908\u20131912), an updated Russian Orthodox Church by Alexey Shchusev, who later, ironically, designed Lenin's Mausoleum in Moscow.\nSeveral art colonies in Russia in this period were built in the Russian Revival style. The two best-known colonies were Abramtsevo, funded by Savva Mamontov, and Talashkino, Smolensk Governorate, funded by Princess Maria Tenisheva.\nUkrainian \"Modern\" architecture.\nEarly 20th-century architecture in Ukrainian lands (southwestern part of the Russian Empire, Eastern Galicia, Bukovina and Transcarpathia in Austria-Hungary) developed under the influence of Ukrainian folk architecture, as well as trends of European Art Nouveau, such as Zakopane Style. Ukrainian \"modern\" architecture first came to prominence in Poltava Governorate, where its most active promoters were Vasyl Krychevskyi and Opanas Slastion. In the late 1900s and early 1910s, a number of buildings in what was then known simply as \"Ukrainian style\" were constructed in Kyiv, Kharkiv, Odesa, Katerynoslav and a number of other places in the Russian Empire. In Western Ukraine, which was at that time part of Austria-Hungary, the local Ukrainian style was influenced by Hutsul architecture, as well as Western European trends and influences from Great Ukraine.\n\"J\u016bgendstils\" (Art Nouveau in Riga).\nRiga, the present-day capital of Latvia, was at the time one of the major cities of the Russian Empire. Art Nouveau architecture in Riga nevertheless developed according to its own dynamics, and the style became overwhelmingly popular in the city. Soon after the Latvian Ethnographic Exhibition in 1896 and the Industrial and Handicrafts Exhibition in 1901, Art Nouveau became the dominant style in the city. Thus Art Nouveau architecture accounts for one-third of all the buildings in the centre of Riga, making it the city with the highest concentration of such buildings anywhere in the world. The quantity and quality of Art Nouveau architecture was among the criteria for including Riga in UNESCO World Cultural Heritage.\nThere were different variations of Art Nouveau architecture in Riga:\nSome later Neo-Classical buildings also contained Art Nouveau details.\n\"Style Sapin\" in La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland.\nA variation called ('Fir-tree Style') emerged in La Chaux-de-Fonds in the Canton of Neuch\u00e2tel in Switzerland. The style was launched by the painter and artist Charles l\u2019Eplattenier and was inspired especially by the , 'fir tree', and other plants and wildlife of the Jura Mountains. One of his major works was the crematorium in the town, which featured triangular tree forms, pine cones, and other natural themes from the region. The style also blended in the more geometric stylistic elements of Jugendstil and Vienna Secession.\nAnother notable building in the style is the Villa Fallet La Chaux-de-Fonds, a chalet designed and built in 1905 by a student of L'Eplattenier, the eighteen-year-old Le Corbusier. The form of the house was a traditional Swiss chalet, but the decoration of the fa\u00e7ade included triangular trees and other natural features. Le Corbusier built two more chalets in the area, including the Villa Stotzer, in a more traditional chalet style.\n\"Tiffany Style\" and Louis Sullivan in the United States.\nIn the United States, the firm of Louis Comfort Tiffany played a central role in American Art Nouveau. Born in 1848, he studied at the National Academy of Design in New York City, began working with glass at the age of 24, entered the family business started by his father, and in 1885 set up his own enterprise devoted to fine glass, and developed new techniques for its colouring. In 1893, he began making glass vases and bowls, again developing new techniques that allowed more original shapes and colouring, and began experimenting with decorative window glass. Layers of glass were printed, marbled and superimposed, giving an exceptional richness and variety of colour in 1895 his new works were featured in the Art Nouveau gallery of Siegfried Bing, giving him a new European clientele. After the death of his father in 1902, he took over the entire Tiffany enterprise, but still devoted much of his time to designing and manufacturing glass art objects. At the urging of Thomas Edison, he began to manufacture electric lamps with multicoloured glass shades in structures of bronze and iron, or decorated with mosaics, produced in numerous series and editions, each made with the care of a piece of jewellery. A team of designers and craftsmen worked on each product. The Tiffany lamp in particular became one of the icons of the Art Nouveau, but Tiffany's craftsmen designed and made extraordinary windows, vases, and other glass art. Tiffany's glass also had great success at the \"1900 Exposition Universelle\" in Paris; his stained glass window called the \"Flight of Souls\" won a gold medal. The Columbian Exposition was an important venue for Tiffany; a chapel he designed was shown at the Pavilion of Art and Industry. The Tiffany Chapel, along with one of the windows of Tiffany's home in New York, are now on display at the Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art in Winter Park, Florida.\nAnother important figure in American Art Nouveau was the architect Louis Sullivan. Sullivan was a leading pioneer of American modern architecture. He was the founder of the Chicago School, the architect of some of the first skyscrapers, and the teacher of Frank Lloyd Wright. His most famous saying was \"Form follows function.\" While the form of his buildings was shaped by their function, his decoration was an example of American Art Nouveau. At the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago, most famous for the neoclassical architecture of its renowned \"White City\", he designed a spectacular Art Nouveau entrance for the very functional Transportation Building.\nWhile the architecture of his \"Carson, Pirie, Scott and Company Building\" (1899) (now the Sullivan Center) was strikingly modern and functional, he surrounded the windows with stylised floral decoration. He invented equally original decoration for the National Farmer's Bank of Owatonna, Minnesota (1907\u20131908) and the Merchants' National Bank in Grinell, Iowa. He invented a specifically American variety of Art Nouveau, declaring that decorative forms should oscillate, surge, mix and derive without end. He created works of great precision which sometimes combined Gothic with Art Nouveau themes.\nAlso worth noting are the \"Uhl brothers\" from Toledo, Ohio, who set new standards in metal furniture production with their designs for the \"Toledo Metal Furniture Co.\"\nArt Nouveau in Argentina.\nFlooded with European immigrants, Argentina welcomed all artistic and architectural European styles, including Art Nouveau. There was an environment of huge investments and flexible rules for construction, which encouraged young architects from Europe to come and grow their portfolio to later go back to Europe. As a result of this, Argentina became the country outside of Europe with most art nouveau buildings. Cities with the most notable Art Nouveau heritage in Argentina are Buenos Aires, Rosario and Mar del Plata.\nParis was a prototype for Buenos Aires with the construction of large boulevards and avenues in the 19th century. The local style along with French influence was also following Italian Liberty as many architects (Virginio Colombo, Francisco Gianotti, Mario Palanti) were Italians. In works of Juli\u00e1n Garc\u00eda N\u00fa\u00f1ez Catalan influence can be noted as he completed his studies in Barcelona in 1900 as well as in the work of Eduardo Rodr\u00edguez Ortega. The influence of Vienna Secession can be found at Paso y Viamonte building, Club Espa\u00f1ol, Regimiento de Granaderos a Caballo and the Savoy hotel.\nSome local features are the adaptation to the previously existent \"chorizo house\" format of buildings, which implied a relatively narrow fa\u00e7ade for an actually deep building inside of the block, with multiple patios or holes for air and light; as well as the characteristic \"cut corners\" on every block that was a requirement by law in Buenos Aires since the end of the 1800s; material availability was also different than in Europe, and buildings will often be covered of a \"simil piedra Par\u00eds\" which was an imitation of the Parisian stone made by mixing cement with sand and different minerals.\nThe introduction of Art Nouveau in Rosario is connected to Francisco Roca Sim\u00f3 who trained in Barcelona. His Club Espa\u00f1ol building (1912) features one of the largest stained glass windows in Latin America produced (as well as tiling and ceramics) by the local firm Buxadera, Fornells y C\u00eda. The sculptor of the building is Diego Masana from Barcelona.\nBelgian influence on Argentinian Art Nouveau is represented by the Villa Ortiz Basualdo, now hosting the Juan Carlos Castagnino Municipal Museum of Art in Mar del Plata where the furniture, interiors, and lighting are by Gustave Serrurier-Bovy.\nArt Nouveau in the rest of the world.\nAs in Argentina, Art Nouveau in other countries was mostly influenced by foreign artists:\nArt Nouveau motifs can also be found in French Colonial artchitechture throughout French Indochina.\nA notable art movement called Bezalel school appeared in the Palestine region in dating to the late Ottoman and British Mandate periods. It has been described as \"a fusion of oriental art and Jugendstil.\" Several artists associated with the Bezalel school were noted for their Art Nouveau style, including Ze'ev Raban, Ephraim Moses Lilien and Abel Pann.\nCharacteristics, decoration and motifs.\nEarly Art Nouveau, particularly in Belgium and France, was characterized by undulating, curving forms inspired by lilies, vines, flower stems and other natural forms, used in particular in the interiors of Victor Horta and the decoration of Louis Majorelle and \u00c9mile Gall\u00e9. It also drew upon patterns based on butterflies and dragonflies, borrowed from Japanese art, which were popular in Europe at the time.\nEarly Art Nouveau also often featured more stylised forms expressing movement, such as the \"coup de fouet\" or \"whiplash\" line, depicted in the cyclamen plants drawn by designer Hermann Obrist in 1894. A description published in \"Pan\" magazine of Hermann Obrist's wall hanging \"Cyclamen\" (1894), compared it to the \"sudden violent curves generated by the crack of a whip,\" The term \"whiplash\", though it was originally used to ridicule the style, is frequently applied to the characteristic curves employed by Art Nouveau artists. Such decorative undulating and flowing lines in a syncopated rhythm and asymmetrical shape, are often found in the architecture, painting, sculpture, and other forms of Art Nouveau design.\nOther floral forms were popular, inspired by lilies, wisteria and other flowers, particularly in the lamps of Louis Comfort Tiffany and the glass objects made by the artists of the School of Nancy and \u00c9mile Gall\u00e9. Other curving and undulating forms borrowed from nature included butterflies, peacocks, swans, and water lilies. Many designs depicted women's hair intertwined with stems of lilies, irises and other flowers. Stylised floral forms were particularly used by Victor Horta in carpets, balustrades, windows, and furniture. They were also used extensively by Hector Guimard for balustrades, and, most famously, for the lamps and railings at the entrances of the Paris Metro. Guimard explained: \"That which must be avoided in everything that is continuous is the parallel and symmetry. Nature is the greatest builder and nature makes nothing that is parallel and nothing that is symmetrical.\"\nEarlier Art Nouveau furniture, such as that made by Louis Majorelle and Henry van de Velde, was characterized by the use of exotic and expensive materials, including mahogany with inlays of precious woods and trim, and curving forms without right angles. It gave a sensation of lightness.\nIn the second phase of Art Nouveau, following 1900, the decoration became purer and the lines were more stylised. The curving lines and forms evolved into polygons and then into cubes and other geometric forms. These geometric forms were used with particular effect in the architecture and furniture of Joseph Maria Olbrich, Otto Wagner, Koloman Moser and Josef Hoffmann, especially the Stoclet Palace in Brussels, which announced the arrival of Art Deco and modernism.\nAnother characteristic of Art Nouveau architecture was the use of light, by opening up of interior spaces, by the removal of walls, and the extensive use of skylights to bring a maximum amount of light into the interior. Victor Horta's residence-studio and other houses built by him had extensive skylights, supported on curving iron frames. In the Hotel Tassel he removed the traditional walls around the stairway, so that the stairs became a central element of the interior design.\nRelationship with contemporary styles and movements.\nAs an art style, Art Nouveau has affinities with the Pre-Raphaelites and the Symbolist styles, and artists like Aubrey Beardsley, Alphonse Mucha, Edward Burne-Jones, Gustav Klimt and Jan Toorop could be classed in more than one of these styles. Unlike Symbolist painting, however, Art Nouveau has a distinctive appearance; and, unlike the artisan-oriented Arts and Crafts movement, Art Nouveau artists readily used new materials, machined surfaces, and abstraction in the service of pure design.\nArt Nouveau did not eschew the use of machines, as the Arts and Crafts movement did. For sculpture, the principal materials employed were glass and wrought iron, resulting in sculptural qualities even in architecture. Ceramics were also employed in creating editions of sculptures by artists such as Auguste Rodin. though his sculpture is not considered Art Nouveau.\nArt Nouveau architecture made use of many technological innovations of the late 19th century, especially the use of exposed iron and large, irregularly shaped pieces of glass for architecture.\nArt Nouveau tendencies were also absorbed into local styles. In Denmark, for example, it was one aspect of ('Aesthetic work'), which itself more closely relates to the Arts and Crafts style. Likewise, artists adopted many of the floral and organic motifs of Art Nouveau into the ('Young Poland') style in Poland. , however, was also inclusive of other artistic styles and encompassed a broader approach to art, literature, and lifestyle.\nArchitecturally, Art Nouveau has affinities with styles that, although modern, exist outside the modernist tradition established by architects like Walter Gropius and Le Corbusier. It is particularly closely related to Expressionist architecture, which shares its preference for organic shapes, but grew out of an intellectual dissatisfaction with Art Nouveau's approach to ornamentation. As opposed to Art Nouveau's focus on plants and vegetal motifs, Expressionism takes inspiration from things like caves, mountains, lightning, crystal, and rock formations. Another style conceived as a reaction to Art Nouveau was Art Deco, which rejected organic surfaces altogether in preference for a rectilinear style derived from the contemporary artistic avant-garde.\nGenres.\nArt Nouveau is represented in painting and sculpture, but it is most prominent in architecture and the decorative arts. It was well-suited to the graphic arts, especially the poster, interior design, metal and glass art, jewellery, furniture design, ceramics and textiles.\nPosters and graphic art.\nThe graphic arts flourished in the Art Nouveau period, thanks to new technologies of printing, particularly colour lithography, which allowed the mass production of colour posters. Art was no longer confined to galleries, museums and salons; it could be found on Paris walls, and in illustrated art magazines, which circulated throughout Europe and to the United States. The most popular theme of Art Nouveau posters was women; women symbolizing glamour, modernity and beauty, often surrounded by flowers.\nIn Britain, the leading graphic artist in the Art Nouveau style was Aubrey Beardsley (1872\u20131898). He began with engraved book illustrations for \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", then black and white illustrations for \"Salome\" by Oscar Wilde (1893), which brought him fame. In the same year, he began engraving illustrations and posters for the art magazine \"The Studio\", which helped publicize European artists such as Fernand Khnopff in Britain. The curving lines and intricate floral patterns attracted as much attention as the text.\nThe Swiss-French artist Eug\u00e8ne Grasset (1845\u20131917) was one of the first creators of French Art Nouveau posters. He helped decorate the famous cabaret Le Chat noir in 1885 and made his first posters for the \"F\u00eates de Paris\". He made a celebrated poster of Sarah Bernhardt in 1890, and a wide variety of book illustrations. The artist-designers Jules Ch\u00e9ret, Georges de Feure and the painter Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec all made posters for Paris theaters, caf\u00e9s, dance halls cabarets. The Czech artist Alphonse Mucha (1860\u20131939) arrived in Paris in 1888, and in 1895 made a poster for actress Sarah Bernhardt in the play \"Gismonda\" by Victorien Sardou. The success of this poster led to a contract to produce posters for six more plays by Bernhardt. Over the next four years, he also designed sets, costumes, and even jewellery for the actress. Based on the success of his theater posters, Mucha made posters for a variety of products, ranging from cigarettes and soap to beer biscuits, all featuring an idealized female figure with an hourglass figure. He went on to design products, from jewellery to biscuit boxes, in his distinctive style.\nIn Vienna, the most prolific designer of graphics and posters was Koloman Moser (1868\u20131918), who actively participated in the Secession movement with Gustav Klimt and Josef Hoffmann, and made illustrations and covers for the magazine of the movement, \"Ver Sacrum\", as well as paintings, furniture and decoration.\nPainting.\nPainting was another domain of Art Nouveau, though most painters associated with Art Nouveau are primarily described as members of other movements, particularly Post-Impressionism and symbolism. Alphonse Mucha was famous for his Art Nouveau posters, which frustrated him. According to his son and biographer, Ji\u0159\u00ed Mucha, he did not think much of Art Nouveau. \"What is it, \"Art Nouveau\"? he asked. \"...\u00a0Art can never be new.\" He took the greatest pride in his work as a history painter. His Art Nouveau-inspired painting \"Slava\" is a portrait of the daughter of his patron in Slavic costume, which was modelled after his theatrical posters.\nThe painters most closely associated with Art Nouveau were Les Nabis, post-impressionist artists who were active in Paris from 1888 until 1900. One of their stated goals was to break down the barrier between the fine arts and the decorative arts. They painted not only canvases, but also decorative screens and panels. Many of their works were influenced by the aesthetics of Japanese prints. The members included Pierre Bonnard, Maurice Denis, Paul Ranson, \u00c9douard Vuillard, Ker-Xavier Roussel, F\u00e9lix Vallotton, and Paul S\u00e9rusier.\nThe Austrian painter Gustav Klimt was an exponent of Art Nouveau painting, and more specifically a representative of the Modernist movement of the Viennese Secession. Klimt painted canvases and murals in an ornate personal style, which he also expressed through handicrafts, such as those found in the Viennese Secession Gallery. Klimt found one of his most recurring sources of inspiration in the female nude. His works are sensual, with a naturalistic, individual, organic style, inspired by nature following the decorative style of Gaud\u00ed.\nThe Catalan modernist painters (Ram\u00f3n Casas, Santiago Rusi\u00f1ol, Aleix Clap\u00e9s, Joaquim Sunyer, Hermenegildo Anglada Camarasa, Juan Brull, Ricard Canals, Javier Gos\u00e9, Josep Maria Sert, Miguel Utrillo, etc.), closely connected with the avant-garde in Paris, and hugely influenced by Antoni Gaud\u00ed, had in the Els Quatre Gats tavern their meeting place. Pablo Picasso came out of the group.\nDisciples of Anglada Camarasa were the Argentines Gregorio L\u00f3pez Naguil, Tito Cittadini and Ra\u00fal Mazza who were responsible for carrying art nouveau painting to South America\nIn Belgium, Fernand Khnopff worked in both painting and graphic design. Wall murals by Gustav Klimt were integrated into decorative scheme of Josef Hoffmann for the Stoclet Palace (1905\u20131911). The Klimt mural for the dining room at the Stoclet Palace is considered a masterpiece of late Art Nouveau.\nOne subject did appear both in traditional painting and Art Nouveau; the American dancer Loie Fuller, was portrayed by French and Austrian painters and poster artists.\nOne particular style that became popular in the Art Nouveau period, especially in Brussels, was sgraffito, a technique invented in the Renaissance of applying layers of tinted plaster to make murals on the fa\u00e7ades of houses. This was used in particular by Belgian architect Paul Hankar for the houses he built for two artist friends, Paul Cauchie and Albert Ciamberlani.\nGlass art.\nGlass art was a medium in which Art Nouveau found new and varied ways of expression. Intense amount of experimentation went on, particularly in France, to find new effects of transparency and opacity: in engraving win cameo, double layers, and acid engraving, a technique that permitted production in series. The city of Nancy became an important centre for the French glass industry, and the workshops of \u00c9mile Gall\u00e9 and the Daum studio, led by Auguste and Antonin Daum, were located there. They worked with many notable designers, including Ernest Bussi\u00e8re, Henri Berg\u00e9 (illustrateur), and Amalric Walter. They developed a new method of incrusting glass by pressing fragments of different coloured glass into the unfinished piece. They often collaborated with the furniture designer Louis Majorelle, whose home and workshops were in Nancy. Another feature of Art Nouveau was the use of stained glass windows with that style of floral themes in residential salons, particularly in the Art Nouveau houses in Nancy. Many were the work of Jacques Gr\u00fcber, who made windows for the Villa Majorelle and other houses.\nIn Belgium, the leading firm was the glass factory of Val Saint Lambert, which created vases in organic and floral forms, many of them designed by Philippe Wolfers. Wolfers was noted particularly for creating works of symbolist glass, often with metal decoration attached. In Bohemia, then a region of the Austro-Hungarian Empire noted for crystal manufacture, the companies J. &amp; L. Lobmeyr and Joh. Loetz Witwe also experimented with new colouring techniques, producing more vivid and richer colours. In Germany, experimentation was led by Karl K\u00f6pping, who used blown glass to create extremely delicate glasses in the form of flowers; so delicate that few survive today.\nIn Vienna, the glass designs of the Secession movement were much more geometrical than those of France or Belgium; Otto Prutscher was the most rigorous glass designer of the movement. In Britain, a number of floral stained glass designs were created by Margaret Macdonald Mackintosh for the architectural display called \"The House of an Art Lover\".\nIn the United States, Louis Comfort Tiffany and his designers became particularly famous for their lamps, whose glass shades used common floral themes intricately pieced together. Tiffany lamps gained popularity after the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893, where Tiffany displayed his lamps in a Byzantine-like chapel. Tiffany experimented extensively with the processes of colouring glass, patenting in 1894 the process Favrile glass, which used metallic oxides to colour the interior of the molten glass, giving it an iridescent effect. His workshops produced several different series of the Tiffany lamp in different floral designs, along with stained glass windows, screens, vases and a range of decorative objects. His works were first imported to Germany, then to France by Siegfried Bing, and then became one of the decorative sensations of the 1900 Exposition. An American rival to Tiffany, Steuben Glass, was founded in 1903 in Corning, N.Y., by Frederick Carder, who, like Tiffany, used the Fevrile process to create surfaces with iridescent colours. Another notable American glass artist was John La Farge, who created intricate and colourful stained glass windows on both religious and purely decorative themes.\nExamples of stained glass windows in churches can be found in the Art Nouveau religious buildings article.\nMetal art.\nThe 19th-century architectural theorist Viollet-le-Duc had advocated showing, rather than concealing the iron frameworks of modern buildings, but Art Nouveau architects Victor Horta and Hector Guimard went a step further: they added iron decoration in curves inspired by floral and vegetal forms both in the interiors and exteriors of their buildings. They took the form of stairway railings in the interior, light fixtures, and other details in the interior, and balconies and other ornaments on the exterior. These became some of the most distinctive features of Art Nouveau architecture. The use of metal decoration in vegetal forms soon also appeared in silverware, lamps, and other decorative items.\nIn the United States, the designer George Grant Elmslie made extremely intricate cast iron designs for the balustrades and other interior decoration of the buildings of Chicago architect Louis Sullivan.\nWhile French and American designers used floral and vegetal forms, Joseph Maria Olbrich and the other Secession artists designed teapots and other metal objects in a more geometric and sober style.\nJewellery.\nArt Nouveau jewellery's characteristics include subtle curves and lines. Its design often features natural objects including flowers, animals or birds. The female body is also popular often appearing on cameos. It frequently included long necklaces made of pearls or sterling-silver chains punctuated by glass beads or ending in a silver or gold pendant, itself often designed as an ornament to hold a single, faceted jewel of amethyst, peridot, or citrine.\nArt Nouveau jewellery is distinguished by its extensive use of detailed, symbolic motifs that embody the movement's deep connection to nature and mythology. Predominant motifs include the ethereal forms of dragonflies and peacocks, which symbolise transformation and beauty, and the detailed depictions of plants and flowers, highlighting nature's cyclicality and growth. Intricately designed insects like butterflies and scarabs, often rendered with meticulous enamelling, add a layer of mysticism, symbolising rebirth and protection. This style also frequently featured sinuous figures of women, suggesting sensuality and the connection to the earth. More ominous figures such as snakes and mythical creatures like Medusas and chimeras were used to evoke the darker aspects of the natural and mythical worlds. The use of these motifs was not merely for embellishment; each was imbued with meanings, reflecting Art Nouveau's philosophy of integrating art, nature, and spiritual symbolism.\nThe Art Nouveau period brought a notable stylistic revolution to the jewellery industry, led largely by the major firms in Paris. For the previous two centuries, the emphasis in fine jewellery had been creating dramatic settings for diamonds. During the reign of Art Nouveau, diamonds usually played a supporting role. Jewellers experimented with a wide variety of other stones, including agate, garnet, opal, moonstone, aquamarine and other semi-precious stones, and with a wide variety of new techniques, among others enamelling, and new materials, including horn, moulded glass, and ivory. These materials allowed them to create organic forms and intricate details, highlighting the era's departure from traditional jewellery design towards more artistic and expressive creations. Techniques like plique-\u00e0-jour enamelling were employed to achieve translucent effects akin to stained glass, adding depth and luminosity to their pieces.\nEarly notable Paris jewellers in the Art Nouveau style included Louis Aucoc, whose family jewellery firm dated to 1821. The most famous designer of the Art Nouveau period, Ren\u00e9 Lalique, served his apprenticeship in the Aucoc studio from 1874 to 1876. Lalique became a central figure of Art Nouveau jewellery and glass, using nature, from dragonflies to grasses, as his models. Artists from outside of the traditional world of jewellery, such as Paul Follot, best known as a furniture designer, experimented with jewellery designs. Other notable French Art Nouveau jewellery designers included Jules Brateau and Georges Henry. In the United States, the most famous designer was Louis Comfort Tiffany, whose work was shown at the shop of Siegfried Bing and also at the 1900 Paris Exposition. Siegfried Bing's Paris gallery, Maison de l'Art Nouveau, played a pivotal role in promoting Art Nouveau jewellery. By showcasing works from avant-garde jewellers like Ren\u00e9 Lalique, Henri Vever, and Edward Colonna, Bing elevated jewellery to the status of fine art and fostered international appreciation for the style.\nIn Britain, the most prominent figure was the Liberty &amp; Co. &amp; Cymric designer Archibald Knox, who made a variety of Art Nouveau pieces, including silver belt buckles. C. R. Ashbee designed pendants in the shapes of peacocks. The versatile Glasgow designer Charles Rennie Mackintosh also made jewellery, using traditional Celtic symbols. In Germany, the centre for \"Jugendstil\" jewellery was the city of Pforzheim, where most of the German firms, including Theodor Fahrner, were located. They quickly produced works to meet the demand for the new style.\nArchitecture and ornamentation.\nArt Nouveau architecture was a reaction against the eclectic styles that dominated European architecture in the second half of the 19th century. It was expressed through decoration: either ornamental (based on flowers and plants, e.g. thistles, irises, cyclamens, orchids, water lilies etc.) or sculptural (see the respective section below). While faces of people (or mascarons) are referred to ornament, the use of people in different forms of sculpture (statues and reliefs: see the respective section below) was also common in some forms of Art Nouveau. Before Vienna Secession, Jugendstil and the various forms of the National romantic style fa\u00e7ades were asymmetrical, and often decorated with polychrome ceramic tiles. The decoration usually suggested movement; there was no distinction between the structure and the ornament. A curling or \"whiplash\" motif, based on the forms of plants and flowers, was widely used in the early Art Nouveau, but decoration became more abstract and symmetrical in Vienna Secession and other later versions of the style, as in the Stoclet Palace in Brussels (1905\u20131911).\nThe style first appeared in Brussels' Hankar House by Paul Hankar (1893) and H\u00f4tel Tassel (1892\u201393) of Victor Horta. The H\u00f4tel Tassel was visited by Hector Guimard, who used the same style in his first major work, the Castel B\u00e9ranger (1897\u201398). Horta and Guimard also designed the furniture and the interior decoration, down to the doorknobs and carpeting. In 1899, based on the fame of the Castel B\u00e9ranger, Guimard received a commission to design the entrances of the stations of the new Paris M\u00e9tro, which opened in 1900. Though few of the originals survived, these became the symbol of the Art Nouveau movement in Paris.\nIn Paris, the architectural style was also a reaction to the strict regulations imposed on building fa\u00e7ades by Georges-Eug\u00e8ne Haussmann, the prefect of Paris under Napoleon III. Bow windows were finally allowed in 1903, and Art Nouveau architects went to the opposite extreme, most notably in the houses of Jules Lavirotte, which were essentially large works of sculpture, completely covered with decoration. An important neighbourhood of Art Nouveau houses appeared in the French city of Nancy, around the Villa Majorelle (1901\u201302), the residence of the furniture designer Louis Majorelle. It was designed by Henri Sauvage as a showcase for Majorelle's furniture designs.\nMany Art Nouveau buildings were included in UNESCO World Cultural Heritage list as a part of their city centres (in Bern, Budapest, Lviv, Paris, Porto, Prague, Riga, Saint Petersburg, Strasbourg (Neustadt), Vienna). Along with them, there were buildings that were included in the list as separate objects:\nSculpture.\nSculpture was another form of expression for Art Nouveau artists, crossing with ceramics sometimes. The porcelain figurine \"Dancer with a Scarf\" by Agathon L\u00e9onard won recognition both in ceramics and in sculpture at the Paris Exposition in 1900. Sculptors of other countries also created ceramic sculptures: Bohemian Stanislav Sucharda and Ladislav \u0160aloun, Belgian Charles Van der Stappen and Catalan Lambert Escaler, who created statues of polychrome terracotta. Another notable sculptor of that time was Agust\u00ed Querol Subirats from Catalonia who created statues in Spain, Mexico, Argentina, and Cuba.\nIn architectural sculpture not only statues but also reliefs were used. Art Nouveau architects and sculptors found inspiration in animal motifs (butterflies, peacocks, swans, owls, bats, dragons, bears). Atlantes, caryatids, putti, and gargoyles were also used.\nFurniture.\nFurniture design in the Art Nouveau period was closely associated with the architecture of the buildings; the architects often designed the furniture, carpets, light fixtures, doorknobs, and other decorative details. The furniture was often complex and expensive; a fine finish, usually polished or varnished, was regarded as essential, and continental designs were usually very complex, with curving shapes that were expensive to make. It also had the drawback that the owner of the home could not change the furniture or add pieces in a different style without disrupting the entire effect of the room. For this reason, when Art Nouveau architecture went out of style, the style of furniture also largely disappeared.\nIn France, the centre for furniture design and manufacture was in Nancy, where two major designers, \u00c9mile Gall\u00e9 and Louis Majorelle had their studios and workshops, and where the \"Alliance des industries d'art\" (later called the School of Nancy) had been founded in 1901. Both designers based on their structure and ornamentation on forms taken from nature, including flowers and insects, such as the dragonfly, a popular motif in Art Nouveau design. Gall\u00e9 was particularly known for his use of marquetry in relief, in the form of landscapes or poetic themes. Majorelle was known for his use of exotic and expensive woods, and for attaching bronze sculpted in vegetal themes to his pieces of furniture. Both designers used machines for the first phases of manufacture, but all the pieces were finished by hand. Other notable furniture designers of the Nancy School included Eug\u00e8ne Vallin and \u00c9mile Andr\u00e9; both were architects by training, and both designed furniture that resembled the furniture from Belgian designers such as Horta and Van de Velde, which had less decoration and followed more closely the curving plants and flowers.\nOther notable French designers included Henri Bellery-Desfontaines, who took his inspiration from the neo-Gothic styles of Viollet-le-Duc; and Georges de Feure, Eug\u00e8ne Gaillard, and \u00c9douard Colonna, who worked together with art dealer Siegfried Bing to revitalize the French furniture industry with new themes. Their work was known for \"abstract naturalism\", its unity of straight and curved lines, and its rococo influence. The furniture of de Feure at the Bing pavilion won a gold medal at the 1900 Paris Exposition. The most unusual and picturesque French designer was Fran\u00e7ois-Rupert Carabin, a sculptor by training, whose furniture featured sculpted nude female forms and symbolic animals, particularly cats, who combined Art Nouveau elements with Symbolism. Other influential Paris furniture designers were Charles Plumet, and Alexandre Charpentier. In many ways the old vocabulary and techniques of classic French 18th-century Rococo furniture were re-interpreted in a new style.\nIn Belgium, the pioneer architects of the \"Art Nouveau movement\", Victor Horta and Henry van de Velde, designed furniture for their houses, using vigorous curving lines and a minimum of decoration. The Belgian designer Gustave Serrurier-Bovy added more decoration, applying brass strips in curving forms. In the Netherlands, where the style was called \"Nieuwe Kunst\" or New Art, H. P. Berlag, Lion Cachet and Theodor Nieuwenhuis followed a different course, that of the English Arts and Crafts movement, with more geometric rational forms.\nIn Britain, the furniture of Charles Rennie Mackintosh was purely Arts and Crafts, austere and geometrical, with long straight lines and right angles and a minimum of decoration. Continental designs were much more elaborate, often using curved shapes both in the basic shapes of the piece, and in applied decorative motifs. In Germany, the furniture of Peter Behrens and the Jugendstil was largely rationalist, with geometric straight lines and some decoration attached to the surface. Their goal was exactly the opposite of French Art Nouveau; simplicity of structure and simplicity of materials, for furniture that could be inexpensive and easily mass-manufactured. The same was true for the furniture of designers of the Wiener Werkst\u00e4tte in Vienna, led by Otto Wagner, Josef Hoffmann, Josef Maria Olbrich and Koloman Moser. The furniture was geometric and had a minimum of decoration, though in style it often followed national historic precedent, particularly the Biedemeier style.\nItalian and Spanish furniture design went off in their own direction. Carlo Bugatti in Italy designed the extraordinary Snail Chair, wood covered with painted parchment and copper, for the Turin International Exposition of 1902. In Spain, following the lead of Antoni Gaud\u00ed and the \"Modernismo\" movement, the furniture designer Gaspar Homar designed works that were inspired by natural forms with touches of Catalan historic styles.\nIn the United States, furniture design was more often inspired by the Arts and Crafts movement, or by historic American models, than by the Art Nouveau. One designer who did introduce Art Nouveau themes was Charles Rohlfs in Buffalo, N.Y., whose designs for American white oak furniture were influenced by motifs of Celtic art and Gothic art, with touches of Art Nouveau in the metal trim applied to the pieces.\nCeramics.\nCeramic art, including faience, was another flourishing domain for Art Nouveau artists, in the English-speaking countries falling under the wider art pottery movement. The last part of the 19th century saw many technological innovations in the manufacture of ceramics, particularly the development of high temperature (\"grand feu\") ceramics with crystallised and matte glazes. At the same time, several lost techniques, such as sang de boeuf glaze, were rediscovered. Art Nouveau ceramics were also influenced by traditional and modern Japanese and Chinese ceramics, whose vegetal and floral motifs fitted well with the Art Nouveau style. In France, artists also rediscovered the traditional stoneware (\"gr\u00e9s\") methods and reinvented them with new motifs.\n\u00c9mile Gall\u00e9, in Nancy, created earthenware works in natural earth colors with naturalistic themes of plants and insects. Ceramics also found an important new use in architecture: Art Nouveau architects, Jules Lavirotte and Hector Guimard among them, began to decorate the fa\u00e7ades of buildings with architectural ceramics, many of them made by the firm of Alexandre Bigot, giving them a distinct Art Nouveau sculptural look.\nOne of the pioneer French Art Nouveau ceramists was Ernest Chaplet, whose career in ceramics spanned thirty years. He began producing stoneware influenced by Japanese and Chinese prototypes. Beginning in 1886, he worked with painter Paul Gauguin on stoneware designs with applied figures, multiple handles, painted and partially glazed, and collaborated with sculptors F\u00e9lix Bracquemond, Jules Dalou and Auguste Rodin. His works were acclaimed at the 1900 Exposition.\nThe major national ceramics firms had an important place at the 1900 Paris Exposition: the Manufacture nationale de S\u00e8vres outside Paris; Nymphenburg, Meissen, Villeroy &amp; Boch in Germany, and Doulton in Britain. Other leading French ceramists included Taxile Doat, Pierre-Adrien Dalpayrat, Edmond Lachenal, Albert Dammouse and Auguste Delaherche.\nIn France, Art Nouveau ceramics sometimes crossed the line into sculpture. The porcelain figurine \"Dancer with a Scarf\" by Agathon L\u00e9onard, made for the Manufacture nationale de S\u00e8vres, won recognition in both categories at the 1900 Paris Exposition.\nThe Zsolnay factory in P\u00e9cs, Hungary, was founded by Mikl\u00f3s Zsolnay (1800\u20131880) in 1853 and led by his son, Vilmos Zsolnay (1828\u20131900) with chief designer T\u00e1d\u00e9 Sikorski (1852\u20131940) to produce stoneware and other ceramics. In 1893, Zsolnay introduced porcelain pieces made of eosin. He led the factory to worldwide recognition by demonstrating its innovative products at world fairs and international exhibitions, including the 1873 World Fair in Vienna, then at the 1878 World Fair in Paris, where Zsolnay received a \"Grand Prix\". Frost-resisting Zsolnay building decorations were used in numerous buildings, specifically during the Art Nouveau movement.\nCeramic tiles were also a distinctive feature of Portuguese \"Arte Nova\" that continued the long azulejo tradition of the country.\nMosaics.\nMosaics were used by many Art Nouveau artists of different movements, especially of Catalan Modernisme (Hospital de Sant Pau, Palau de la M\u00fasica Catalana, Casa Lle\u00f3-Morera and many others). Antoni Gaud\u00ed invented a new technique in the treatment of materials called trencad\u00eds, which used waste ceramic pieces.\nColourful Maiolica tile in floral designs were a distinctive feature of the Majolica House in Vienna by Otto Wagner, (1898) and of the buildings of the works of the Russian Abramtsevo Colony, especially those by Mikhail Vrubel.\nTextiles and wallpaper.\nTextiles and wallpapers were an important vehicle of Art Nouveau from the beginning of the style, and an essential element of Art Nouveau interior design. In Britain, the textile designs of William Morris had helped launch the Arts and Crafts movement and then Art Nouveau. Many designs were created for the Liberty department store in London, which popularized the style throughout Europe. One such designer was the Silver Studio, which provided colourful stylised floral patterns. Other distinctive designs came from Glasgow School, and Margaret Macdonald Mackintosh. The Glasgow school introduced several distinctive motifs, including stylised eggs, geometric forms and the \"Rose of Glasgow\".\nIn France, a major contribution was made by designer Eug\u00e8ne Grasset who in 1896 published \"La Plante et ses applications ornamentales\", suggesting Art Nouveau designs based on different flowers and plants. Many patterns were designed for and produced by for the major French textile manufacturers in Mulhouse, Lille and Lyon, by German and Belgian workshops. The German designer Hermann Obrist specialized in floral patterns, particularly the cyclamen and the \"whiplash\" style based on flower stems, which became a major motif of the style. The Belgian Henry van de Velde presented a textile work, \"La Veill\u00e9e d'Anges\", at the Salon \"La Libre Esth\u00e9thique\" in Brussels, inspired by the symbolism of Paul Gauguin and of the Nabis. In the Netherlands, textiles were often inspired by batik patterns from the Dutch colonies in the East Indies. Folk art also inspired the creation of tapestries, carpets, embroidery and textiles in Central Europe and Scandinavia, in the work of Gerhard Munthe and Frida Hansen in Norway. The \"Five Swans\" design of Otto Eckmann appeared in more than one hundred different versions. The Hungarian designer J\u00e1nos Vaszary combined Art Nouveau elements with folkloric themes.\nMuseums.\nThere are 4 types of museums featuring Art Nouveau heritage:\nThere are many other Art Nouveau buildings and structures that do not have museum status but can be officially visited for a fee or unofficially for free (e.g. railway stations, churches, cafes, restaurants, pubs, hotels, stores, offices, libraries, cemeteries, fountains as well as numerous apartment buildings that are still inhabited).\nPosterity.\nCriticized for \"its primitive extravagances\", Art Nouveau started to fade away after 1911. In histories of European architecture in the 20th century, from the 1930s to the 1950s, influential historians, like Nikolaus Pevsner, Sigfried Giedion and Henry-Russell Hitchcock, did not take Art Nouveau into consideration. This left the first versions of Pevsner's \"The Genius of European Architecture\" without a mention of Hector Guimard or Antoni Gaud\u00ed. The first major works dealing with Art Nouveau were published at the end of the 1950s, with Johnny Watser.\nInfluence on Art Deco.\nArt Nouveau was one of the factors that led to Art Deco, a style created as a collective effort of multiple French designers to create a new modern style around 1910. This is because Art Nouveau broke the supremacy of 19th-century revivalism and eclecticism, opposing academic conventions. Through its various manifestations, it invented new ornamental systems, no longer dependent on historical formulae, through curvy plant forms in most of the world, geometric decoration in Austria-Hungary and the UK, and reinterpretations of national tradition in the countries of Northern, Central and Eastern Europe. The idea of creating a new style, with new ornaments and shapes, was a significant contribution that Art Nouveau brought to the invention of Art Deco. Another aspect taken from Art Nouveau is the emphasis put on domestic luxury.\nSome of the fine details and sinuous lines of Art Nouveau are also found in Art Deco architecture and design of the 1920s, but slightly simplified. Similarly, the flat colours and visible outlines popularized by Art Nouveau posters are very often used in Art Deco illustration. Compared to many Art Nouveau designs, where the vegetal motifs seem to grow and morph on the object or architectural ornament, most Art Deco works have a clear compositional structure, similar to Neoclassicism.\nAside from ideas taken from Franco-Belgian Art Nouveau, influence came also from the geometric motifs and volumes found in the UK and Vienna. The flowers, spirals and squares found here are very similar to the ones found in Art Deco. Charles Rennie Mackintosh even anticipated Art Deco forms in his later creations. One of the Secessionist works that best anticipates the style is the Stoclet Palace in Brussels, with its ziggurat-shaped setbacks, the vertical slit of the staircase window, and the overall simplicity and modest ornamentation.\nRevivals.\nDuring the 1960s, postmodernism was born. This was and is a movement that questions modernism (the status quo after World War II), and promoted the inclusion and reinterpretation of elements of historic styles in new designs. Although several international exhibitions on Art Nouveau happened in the 1950s, a successful revival appeared in the 1960s, and especially in the 1970s with the rise of postmodernism. Aside from exhibitions, this revival might be connected with the \"flower power\" generation that set the tone at the time recognized its own life ideals in the floral ornament and the erotically \"emancipated\" art themes of the years around 1900.\nArt Nouveau was also one of the main sources of inspiration for many posters of psychedelic rock from the same period. Leading proponents of the 1960s psychedelic art movement were San Francisco poster artists such as Rick Griffin, Victor Moscoso, Bonnie MacLean, Stanley Mouse, Alton Kelley, and Wes Wilson. Compared to the earthy colours that characterize Art Nouveau, these posters had highly saturated colours put in contrast, and also highly stylised text, sometimes hard to read. This style flourished from about 1966 to 1972.\nGustav Klimt's iconic paintings are found today on many kitschy souvenirs: mugs, plates, napkins, key chains, and so on. \"The Kiss\" has been printed on countless sizes and materials. In a similar situation are Alphonse Mucha's posters.\nOne of the artists who found in Art Nouveau a major source of inspiration was the Austrian painter and architect Friedensreich Hundertwasser. He took inspiration from multiple sources, including Egon Schiele, Baroque and Persian miniature, and the curvy ornamentation of Art Nouveau.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59553", "revid": "40773323", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59553", "title": "Albuminuria", "text": "Abnormal presence of albumin in the urine\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAlbuminuria is a pathological condition of elevated albumin protein in the urine (often measured as urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio of &gt;30 milligrams of albumin per 1 gram of creatinine per day). It is a type of proteinuria, and is the most common protein detected on urinalysis that, when elevated, is associated with kidney and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Albumin is an abundant plasma protein (present in blood) which is normally prevented from being lost into the urine by the sieve-like glomeruli of the nephrons. In healthy people, only trace amounts of it are present in urine, but when the filtration system of the kidney is damaged, larger amounts of albumin escape into the urine, which can be quantified and used to determine the extent of kidney injury/kidney disease.\nSigns and symptoms.\nAlbuminuria is often asymptomatic in low quantities but foamy urine may be present. As significant albumin is lost to the urine, swelling of the ankles, hands, belly or face may occur (see edema and nephrotic syndrome). This is because a major role of albumin in the blood is to act as an osmotic agent, keeping water from leaving blood vessels and leaking into the surrounding body tissues.\nCauses.\nAlbuminuria is not a disease itself but a marker of kidney injury, particularly to the filtration mechanism (glomerulus), and can be caused by a number of pathological states, including:\nIn all cases, the result is a loss of the kidney's ability to retain albumin from the urine.\nDiagnosis/Testing.\nAccording to Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) guidelines, albuminuria is categorized into 3 grades with increasing severity of associated kidney injury: A1, A2, and A3. This grading scale, along with estimated glomerular filtration rate, is used to assess risk of progression and severity of kidney disease, particularly in chronic kidney disease.\nVarious tests are available to measure albuminuria. https:// can provide a qualitative estimate of the amount of albumin in the urine sample. More quantitative and accurate testing include a https:// and a https://.\nTreatment.\nBecause albuminuria is a sign of underlying kidney injury/disease, treatment should be aimed at the causative factor/s. Common methods of improving and preserving kidney function include medication and lifestyle modifications such as diet and exercise. Blood pressure control, especially with the use of inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin-system, is the most commonly used therapy to control albuminuria.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59554", "revid": "45542597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59554", "title": "Jesus Christ Superstar", "text": "Rock opera by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice\nJesus Christ Superstar is a sung-through rock opera with music by Andrew Lloyd Webber and lyrics by Tim Rice. Loosely based on the Gospel accounts of the Passion, the work interprets the psychology of Jesus and other characters, with much of the plot centred on Judas, who is dissatisfied with how Jesus steers his disciples. Contemporary attitudes, sensibilities, and slang pervade the rock opera's lyrics, and ironic allusions to modern life are scattered throughout the depiction of political events; stage and film productions accordingly contain many intentional anachronisms.\nInitially unable to get backing for a stage production, the composers released the score as a 1970 concept album, an immediate success which led to its Broadway stage debut in 1971. By 1980, the musical had grossed more than $ worldwide. Running over eight years in London between 1972 and 1980, the show held the record for longest-running West End musical until 1989 (overtaken by \"Cats\").\nPlot.\nAct I.\nJudas Iscariot, one of the Twelve Apostles, worries that the followers of Jesus are getting out of control and may be seen as a threat by the Roman Empire, who might harshly suppress them (\"Heaven on Their Minds\").\nThe other apostles anticipate entering Jerusalem alongside Jesus and ask him about his plans, but Jesus tells them not to worry about the future. Meanwhile, Mary Magdalene tries to help Jesus relax. Judas warns Jesus to avoid Mary because a relationship with a prostitute could be seen as inconsistent with his teachings and be used against him. Jesus scolds Judas, saying he should not judge others unless he is free of sin. Jesus then reproaches the apostles and complains that none of them truly care for him (\"What's the Buzz/Strange Thing Mystifying\").\nMary reassures Jesus while anointing him. Judas fumes that the money spent on fine oil should have been used to help the poor. Jesus reasons they do not have the resources to end poverty, and that they should treasure what comforts they possess (\"Everything's Alright\").\nMeanwhile, Caiaphas, the High Priest of Israel, assembles the Pharisees and priests. Like Judas, they fear that Jesus's followers will be seen as a threat by the Romans, and that many innocent Jews might suffer the consequences. Thus, Caiaphas concludes that for the greater good, Jesus must be executed (\"This Jesus Must Die\"). As Jesus and his followers arrive exultantly in Jerusalem, they are confronted by Caiaphas, who demands that Jesus disperse the crowd. Jesus instead greets them (\"Hosanna\"). Simon the Zealot suggests that Jesus lead his mob in a war against Rome and gain absolute power (\"Simon Zealotes\"). Jesus rejects this, stating that none of his followers understand what true power is (\"Poor Jerusalem\").\nPontius Pilate, the governor of Judea, has a dream in which he meets a Galilean and then receives the blame for the man's violent death at the hands of a mob (\"Pilate's Dream\"). Jesus arrives at the Temple and finds that it is being used as a marketplace; angered by this, he drives everyone out. A group of lepers ask Jesus to heal them. Their number increases, and overwhelmed, Jesus rejects them (\"The Temple\"). Mary Magdalene sings Jesus to sleep (\"Everything's Alright (Reprise)\"). While he sleeps, Mary acknowledges that she is in love with him, and it frightens her (\"I Don't Know How to Love Him\").\nConflicted, Judas seeks out the Pharisees and proposes helping them arrest Jesus, believing that Jesus is out of control and that Jesus himself would approve of this action. In exchange for his help, Judas is offered thirty pieces of silver. Judas adamantly refuses, but then accepts upon Caiaphas's suggestion that he could use the money to help the poor (\"Damned for All Time/Blood Money\").\nAct II.\nJesus shares a Passover meal with his disciples, where they get drunk and pay little attention to him. He remarks that \"for all you care\" the wine they are drinking could be his blood and the bread his body. He asks them to remember him, and then, frustrated by their lack of understanding, he predicts that Peter will deny him three times that night, and that another one of them will betray him. Judas admits that he is the one who will betray Jesus and, saying that he does not understand why Jesus had no plan, leaves (\"The Last Supper\").\nThe remaining apostles fall asleep as Jesus retreats to the Garden of Gethsemane to pray. He tells God his doubts about whether his mission has had any success and pleads to find a way to avoid the horrible death that awaits him. Receiving no answer, he realises that there is no other way to complete his mission, and resigns himself to God's will. (\"Gethsemane (I Only Want to Say)\"). Judas arrives with Roman soldiers and identifies Jesus by kissing him on the cheek. When Jesus is brought to trial before the Sanhedrin, Caiaphas and the priests send him to Pilate (\"The Arrest\"). Meanwhile, Peter is confronted by three witnesses of Jesus's arrest, to each of whom he denies that he knows Jesus. Mary observes that Jesus had predicted this (\"Peter's Denial\").\nPilate asks Jesus if he is the King of the Jews. Jesus answers: \"That's what you say.\" Since Jesus is from Galilee, Pilate says that he is not under his jurisdiction and sends him to King Herod (\"Pilate and Christ\"). The flamboyant King Herod pressures Jesus to prove his divinity by performing miracles, but Jesus ignores him. Herod angrily sends him back to Pilate (\"King Herod's Song\"). Mary Magdalene, Peter, and the apostles remember when they first began following Jesus, and wish that they could return to a time of hope and peace (\"Could We Start Again, Please?\").\nJudas is horrified at Jesus's harsh treatment. He expresses regret to the Pharisees, correctly dreading that he will forever be remembered as a traitor. Caiaphas and Annas assure him that he has done the right thing. Judas throws the money he was given to the floor and storms out. He curses God for manipulating him, and commits suicide (\"Judas' Death\").\nAt Jesus's trial, Pilate attempts to interrogate Jesus, but is cut off by a bloodthirsty mob which demands that Jesus be crucified. Unnerved, he tells the mob that Jesus has committed no crime and does not deserve to die, but to satisfy the mob, he will have Jesus flogged. Pilate pleads with Jesus to defend himself, but Jesus says weakly that everything has been determined by God. The crowd still calls for Jesus's death, and finally, Pilate reluctantly agrees to crucify Jesus (\"Trial Before Pilate (Including The 39 Lashes)\").\nAs Jesus awaits crucifixion, the spirit of Judas returns and questions why Jesus chose to arrive in the manner and time that he did, and if it was all part of a divine plan after all (\"Superstar\"). Jesus is crucified, recites his final words, and dies (\"The Crucifixion\"). Jesus' body is taken down from the cross and buried (\"John 19:41\"). \nMusical numbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNote: In the 1992 Australian arena tour and 1994 New Zealand production, \"Could We Start Again Please?\" was moved to after \"Peter\u2019s Denial\".\nProduction.\nThe songs were written and conceived as an album musical, before the musical was created and staged. On the original album, the part of Jesus was sung by Ian Gillan, with Murray Head as Judas, Michael d'Abo as King Herod, Yvonne Elliman as Mary Magdalene, and Barry Dennen as Pilate. In July 1971, the first authorised American production of the rock opera took place in front of an audience of 13,000 people at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania's Civic Arena\u2014staged as a concert, like an oratorio, rather than enacted, with Jeff Fenholt singing the role of Jesus, Carl Anderson as Judas and Elliman repeating as Mary Magdalene.\nIn August 1971, MCA Records executive David Skepner reported that MCA had been investigating and shutting down 21 unauthorised productions in the US to protect the rights of London-based Leeds Music, which owned the musical. The biggest violations Skepner found were a theatre troupe from Toronto that had crossed the US\u2013Canada border to perform with the Detroit Symphony Orchestra, with only a few hours' prior announcement, and another big production mounted by the Las Vegas Hilton. Other American cities with unauthorised productions included Washington D.C., Boston, Kansas City, Baltimore, San Francisco, Cincinnati, Richmond, Louisville, Cleveland, St. Louis, Memphis, Atlanta, Columbus, Troy, Philadelphia, Los Angeles, New Orleans, Brooklyn in New York City, and Hollywood, Florida. Court injunctions were obtained in each of these cities to close the shows. Producer Robert Stigwood, who was assembling an authorised touring company, called these unsanctioned groups \"outright pirates\", stressing that he would continue to protect his rights by \"relentlessly\" pursuing legal action.\nOriginal Broadway production.\nThe musical opened on Broadway on 12 October 1971, directed by Tom O'Horgan, at the Mark Hellinger Theatre. It starred Jeff Fenholt as Jesus, Ben Vereen as Judas and Bob Bingham as Caiaphas. Dennen and Elliman played the roles that they had sung on the album. Paul Ainsley was Herod. Carl Anderson replaced Vereen when he fell ill, and the two performers later took turns playing the role. The show closed on 30 June 1973 after 711 performances. The production received mixed reviews; the bold casting of African-Americans as Judas was lauded, but reviewer Clive Barnes from \"The New York Times\" said, \"the real disappointment was not in the music ... but in the conception.\" The show was nominated for five Tony Awards, including Best Score, but won none. Lloyd Webber won a Drama Desk Award as \"Most Promising Composer\", and Vereen won a Theatre World Award.\nControversy.\nThe Broadway show and subsequent productions were condemned by different religious groups. Tim Rice was quoted as saying, \"It happens that we don't see Christ as God but simply the right man at the right time at the right place.\" Christians considered such comments to be blasphemous, the character of Judas too sympathetic, and some of his criticisms of Jesus offensive. The musical's lack of allusion to the resurrection of Jesus has resulted in criticism similar to that of fellow musical \"Godspell\", which also did not clearly depict a resurrection.\nAt the same time, some Jews claimed that it bolstered the myth of Jewish deicide by showing most of the villains as Jewish (Caiaphas and the other priests, Herod) and showing the mob in Jerusalem calling for Christ's crucifixion.\nThe musical was banned in South Africa for being \"irreligious\", and in the Hungarian People's Republic for \"distribution of religious propaganda\".\nOther 1970s and 1980s productions.\n\"Superstar\" opened at the Palace Theatre in London in 1972, starring Paul Nicholas as Jesus, Stephen Tate as Judas and Dana Gillespie as Mary Magdalene. It was directed by Australian Jim Sharman and based on his 'stripped back' production staged in Australia soon after the Broadway production opened. This version was deemed by the creators to be more efficient than the New York show, hence its use as a template for London and other subsequent productions. This production was much more successful than the original production on Broadway, running for eight years and becoming the United Kingdom's longest-running musical at the time. Dmitri Shostakovich attended this production in London just before his death. He regretted that he could not have composed something like it; he lauded especially a rock band underpinning full symphonic strings, brass, and woodwind.\nOne of the earliest foreign productions was a five-day run in Sweden at Scandinavium in Gothenburg, opening on 18 February 1972 and playing to 74,000 people (a record at the time). Starring as Mary Magdalene was Agnetha F\u00e4ltskog. On 16 March 1972 an oratorio version was performed at Memorial Drive Park in Adelaide, South Australia as part of the Adelaide Festival of the Arts. This was followed in May by the first official Australian production (A studio production was made in Australia earlier the same year, but it wasn't officially licensed), at the Capitol Theatre, Sydney, later moving to the Palais Theatre in Melbourne. Sharman again directed, and the cast included Trevor White as Jesus, Jon English as Judas, and Michele Fawdon (1972\u20131973) and Marcia Hines (1973\u20131974) as Mary Magdalene. Hines was the first black woman to play the role. Other cast members included Reg Livermore, John Paul Young, Stevie Wright and Rory O'Donoghue as well as Graham Russell and Russell Hitchcock who met during the production and subsequently formed the band Air Supply. The production ran until February 1974. In June 1972 the show opened in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, in Atelje 212 theatre, in adaptation by Jovan \u0106irilov. The role of Jesus Christ was played by Korni Grupa vocalist Zlatko Pejakovi\u0107, the role of Mary Magdalene by Azra Halinovi\u0107 and the role of Pontius Pilate by Branko Mili\u0107evi\u0107. The premiere was directly broadcast by Radio Television of Belgrade. Bora \u0110or\u0111evi\u0107 and Sr\u0111an Marjanovi\u0107, at the time little known musicians, also participated as members of the choir. The production was praised by the Yugoslav public.\nIn 1973, the show opened in Paris at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de Chaillot in a French adaptation by Pierre Delano\u00eb. The title role was sung by Daniel Beretta, and Mary Magdalene was Anne-Marie David. The critics were unimpressed, and the production stopped after 30 performances. In the same year, Noel Pearson produced the show at the Gaiety Theatre, Dublin, Republic of Ireland, with Luke Kelly giving a critically acclaimed performance as King Herod and Jim McCann as Petrus. In 1974, first Spanish-language production ran in Mexico with the title \"Jesucristo Super Estrella\". Julissa played Mary Magdalen. One year later, the musical was released for the second time in a Spanish-speaking country. It was released in Spain under the title \"Jesucristo Superstar\" and directed by the Spanish singer and songwriter Camilo Sesto, who also played the title role of Jesus Christ. The musical was seen in 1974 in Peru and Singapore.\nRobert Stigwood launched two road touring companies in 1971 to cover North America, with Robert Corff and Tom Westerman as Jesus, respectively. The first major US National Tour, however began In 1976, managed by Laura Shapiro Kramer. The tour continued until 1980. In 1977, the show had its first Broadway revival, running from 23 November 1977 to 12 February 1978. It was directed by William Daniel Grey, with choreography by Kelly Carrol and starred William Daniel Grey as Jesus, Patrick Jude as Judas, and Barbara Niles as Mary Magdalene. Regional productions followed.\nIn 1981, Emilio de Soto directed an English-language version in Venezuela, with 163 actors. From 1982 to 1984, an Australian production toured Australia and South-East Asia, directed by Trevor White, who also reprised his role of Jesus. The cast included Doug Parkinson as Judas and Marcia Hines (reprising her role as Mary Magdalene).\n1990s and 2000s.\nThe North American touring revival of \"Superstar\" in 1992 starred Neeley and Anderson reprising their respective Broadway and 1973 film roles as Jesus and Judas, receiving positive reviews for their performances. This production also starred both Dennis DeYoung as Pilate, and Syreeta and Irene Cara sharing Mary Magdalene. Originally expected to run for three to four months, the tour ended up running for five years. Original cast replacements to this tour included Christine Rea as Mary Magdalene, Jason Raize as Pontius Pilate and Simone as the Maid by the Fire and understudy for Mary.\nAlso in 1992 a touring concert version was staged in Australia starring John Farnham as Jesus, Jon Stevens as Judas and Kate Ceberano as Mary. Anthony Warlow was also originally set to star as Pilate but he had to leave the production due to his Non-Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosis. This production broke box office records and produced a number 1 soundtrack album. In 1994, a New Zealand production starred Darryl Lovegrove as Jesus, Jay Laga'aia as Judas and Frankie Stevens as Caiaphas. Also in 1994, a stage version titled \"Jesus Christ Superstar: A Resurrection\" was performed in Atlanta, Austin and Seattle featuring Amy Ray and Emily Saliers of the Indigo Girls as Jesus and Mary Magdalene respectively, and Michael Lorant as Judas.\nIn 1996, the musical was revived in London at the Lyceum Theatre and ran for a year and a half. Directed by Gale Edwards, it starred Steve Balsamo and Zubin Varla as Jesus and Judas, and Joanna Ampil as Mary Magdalene. Alice Cooper sang the role of King Herod on the cast recording but did not play the role on stage. The production was nominated for an Olivier Award for Best Musical Revival but did not win. It was followed by a UK tour. This production was revived on Broadway at the Ford Center for the Performing Arts in 2000, starring Glenn Carter as Jesus and Tony Vincent as Judas. It opened to mixed reviews and ran for 161 performances. It was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Revival of a Musical but did not win. In 2002, a national tour starred Sebastian Bach as Jesus and Carl Anderson once again as Judas. Bach received mixed reviews while Anderson was again praised. In April 2003, Bach was replaced by Eric Kunze. Anderson left the show later in 2003 after being diagnosed with leukaemia and died in 2004. The tour closed shortly after Anderson's departure.\nIn 2004 a year-long UK tour began, directed by Bob Tomson and Bill Kenwright. Carter reprised his role as Jesus, with James Fox as Judas. In 2005, a successful Scandinavian tour starred Peter Murphy as Jesus, Kristen Cummings as Mary Magdalene, Jon Boydon n\u00e9e Stokes as Judas, J\u00e9r\u00f4me Pradon as King Herod and Michael-John Hurney as Pilate. A US tour starring Neeley, reprising his role as Jesus, Corey Glover as Judas, and Christine Rea as Mary, began in 2006 and played for five years. A Chilean heavy metal version has played annually in Santiago since 2004. In Boston, Gary Cherone portrayed Jesus in productions in 1994, 1996 and 2003 and Judas in 2000.\n2010s and 2020s.\nA new production of \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" was mounted at the Stratford Shakespeare Festival, in Stratford, Ontario, in 2011. Directed by Des McAnuff, the cast starred Paul Nolan as Jesus, Josh Young as Judas, Brent Carver as Pilate, Chilina Kennedy as Mary Magdalene, Bruce Dow as Herod and Melissa O'Neil as Martha. This moved to La Jolla Playhouse later in the year and transferred to the Neil Simon Theatre on Broadway in 2012, with Tom Hewitt taking over the role of Pilate. Reviews were mixed. The revival was nominated for two Tonys: Best Revival and, for Young, Best Actor. Neither award was won, but Young won a Theatre World Award. The revival closed after 116 performances and 24 previews.\nThrough a 2012 ITV competition TV show called \"Superstar\", produced by Andrew Lloyd Webber, the UK public chose Ben Forster for the role of Jesus in an arena tour of the musical, beginning at O2 in September 2012. The production also starred Tim Minchin as Judas, Melanie C as Mary Magdalene and Chris Moyles as King Herod. Lloyd Webber stated, \"The funny thing is that \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" [as a rock concert] is what we actually intended it to be. When it is done in a conventional proscenium theatre production it feels shoe-horned in. That is why I wanted to do this.\" The tour resumed in March 2013 in the UK, and an Australian leg of the tour commenced in Perth in May 2013. Andrew O'Keefe played King Herod in Australia, with Jon Stevens, who had played Judas in the 1992 Australian arena tour, as Pilate.\nIn 2016, celebrating 45 years since the musical debuted on Broadway, \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" returned to London at Regent's Park Open Air Theatre from 15 July to 27 August, directed by Timothy Sheader. The production won the BBC Radio 2 Audience Award for Best Musical at the Evening Standard Theatre Awards, and a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Musical Revival. The production returned as part of the 2017 season, running from 11 August 2017 to 23 September. The Lyric Opera of Chicago hosted a run from late April 2018 to late May 2018. before returning to London at the Barbican Centre from 9 July to 24 August 2019 prior to a 50th anniversary US tour from October 2019. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the US tour was temporarily suspended in March 2020. The production returned to Regent's Park Open Air Theatre in a socially distanced environment in a concert staging from 14 August to 27 September 2020. The US tour resumed performances on 28 September 2021 at the Keller Auditorium. On 23 November 2021, James D. Beeks, who played Judas in the tour, was arrested for involvement in the 2021 United States Capitol attack. Beeks, performing in the show under the stage name James T. Justis, is alleged to have been one of those who forced entry into the Capitol and to have paid dues to the far right-wing anti-government militia Oath Keepers. Beeks was immediately suspended from the touring production with the role of Judas assumed by another performer in the cast. On 2 December 2021, Tyrone Huntley, who played Judas in the 2016 London production, was announced to have replaced Beeks. A UK tour began at the Palace Theatre, Manchester from September 2023 featuring comedian Julian Clary as Herod.\nIn 2017, a production featuring an all-Black cast was directed by Ron Kellum at the Paramount Theatre in Aurora, IL. Kellum's production ran from 19 April 2017, through 28 May 2017.\nA new actor-musician revival was performed at the Watermill Theatre, Newbury from 24 June until 21 September 2025, directed by Paul Hart.\nIn August 2025, a production of the show was presented at the Hollywood Bowl starring Cynthia Erivo as Jesus, Adam Lambert as Judas, Phillipa Soo as Mary, Raul Esparza as Pilate, Josh Gad as Herod, Zachary James as Caiaphas, Milo Manheim as Peter, Tyrone Huntley as Simon, and Brian Justin Crum as Annas. Two days before opening, Gad tested positive for COVID-19 and the role of Herod was covered by John Stamos the following day for one of the three performances.\nOn 7 November 2025, it was announced that the Regents Park Open Air Theatre production will be staged at The London Palladium running for a limited 11-week season from 20 June to 5 September 2026. Sam Ryder will star as Jesus.\nNotable international productions.\nTwo notable Jesuses were Takeshi Kaga, in the 1976 Japanese production, and Camilo Sesto in the 1975 Spanish production. Mary Magdalene was played by Roc\u00edo Banquells in a 1981 production in Mexico.\nAn Australian arena tour launched in 1992, with an all-star line-up. Headline stars John Farnham (Jesus), Jon Stevens (Judas) and Kate Ceberano (Mary) lead this star-studded cast, including John Waters (Pilate) and Angry Anderson (Herod).\nA Czech version premiered in 1994 in Prague's Spir\u00e1la Theatre and ran until 1998, with 1288 performances. In the 2000s, a Venezuelan production ran for two years (2006\u20132008), directed by Michel Hausmann. A Spanish production produced by Stage Entertainment ran from 2007 to 2009, followed by long-running productions in Italy and Sweden (featuring Ola Salo) and Norway.\nConcerts of the show have been mounted in Vienna, Austria, since 1981, including one on Easter of 2015 starring Drew Sarich in the title role.\nA 2014 production in S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil starred Igor Rickli as Jesus. Negra Li was Mary Magdalene. A 2014 production in Lima, Peru, at the Sarita Colonia prison, as part of a rehabilitation program for inmates, received some press. Eighty prisoners mounted the production, directed by inmate Freddy Battifora, who also played the role of Jesus. The Catholic Church approved of the production.\nIn 2018, a new production, directed by Michael Hunt was premiered at the Perm Academic Theatre, Russia. Hunt worked closely with The Really Useful Group on a new translation together with the concept for a new staging. This rock opera is very popular in Russia but is the first authorised production to receive the support of the Really Useful Group.\nA Mexican production featuring an all-star rock and pop cast was produced in 2019 with the title role of Jesus being played by Chilean rock musician Beto Cuevas. It was so successful it would run again in 2021.\nRecordings and radio broadcasts.\nThe original 1970 concept album was very popular; its 1971 release topped the US Billboard Pop Albums. The 1972 and 1992 Australian cast recordings were also both highly successful.\nIn 1994, a studio recording under the name of \"Jesus Christ Superstar: A Resurrection\" was released. Another studio album was released that year with Dave Willetts as Jesus, Clive Rowe as Judas, Ethan Freeman as Pilate, Clive Carter as Peter, Issy van Randwyck as Mary, Billy Hartman as Caiaphas, and Christopher Biggins as Herod.\nA 1996 radio production for BBC Radio 2 starred Tony Hadley as Jesus, Roger Daltrey as Judas, Frances Ruffelle as Mary Magdalene and Julian Clary as King Herod; this production was re-broadcast on BBC Radio 4 Extra on 6 August 2016.\nA 2005 remastered version includes Steve Balsamo as Jesus. Balsamo portrayed Jesus in London's West End from November 1996 to September 1997.\nIn May 2018, Aztec Records released a 1973 live recording of the Australian production; previous recordings of that production were released as \"bootleg\" copies.\nAdaptations.\nFilms.\nA film adaptation of \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" was released in 1973. The film, directed by Norman Jewison, was shot in Israel and other Middle Eastern locations. Ted Neeley, Carl Anderson and Yvonne Elliman were each nominated for a Golden Globe Award for their portrayals of Jesus, Judas and Mary Magdalene, respectively. Bob Bingham (Caiaphas) and Barry Dennen (Pilate) also reprised their roles. A new song, called \"Then We Are Decided\" and phrased as a dialogue between Caiaphas and Annas, was written for this adaptation.\nA second adaptation was filmed in 1999 and released around the world on video in 2000 and 2001. It starred Glenn Carter as Jesus, J\u00e9r\u00f4me Pradon as Judas, Rene\u00e9 Castle as Mary Magdalene, and Rik Mayall as Herod, and was directed by Gale Edwards and Nick Morris. It was released on video in the UK in October 2000. In the U.S. it was released on VHS and DVD in March 2001, and aired on PBS's \"Great Performances\" series in April 2001. It won the International Emmy Award for Best Performing Arts Film in November 2001. The style of the film is more like the stage version than the location-based 1973 adaptation, and it used many of the ideas from the 1996\u20131999 UK production.\nA third adaptation was filmed during the 2012 UK arena tour over two nights at the National Indoor Arena in Birmingham, England and released on DVD, with constuming and set production reimagined for a contemporary setting. The production starred Ben Forster as Jesus, Tim Minchin as Judas, Melanie C as Mary Magdalene and Chris Moyles as King Herod. Lloyd Webber stated, \"The funny thing is that \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" [as a rock concert] is what we actually intended it to be. When it is done in a conventional proscenium theatre production it feels shoe-horned in. That is why I wanted to do this.\"\nTelevision.\nOn Easter Sunday, 1 April 2018, NBC aired a live concert version of the show featuring John Legend as Jesus, Sara Bareilles as Mary Magdalene, Brandon Victor Dixon as Judas, Alice Cooper as King Herod, Norm Lewis as Caiaphas, Ben Daniels as Pilate, Jin Ha as Annas, Erik Gr\u00f6nwall as Simon Zealotes and Jason Tam as Peter.\nNotes.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59555", "revid": "46555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59555", "title": "Oral glucose tolerance test", "text": ""}
{"id": "59556", "revid": "400620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59556", "title": "Languages of Africa", "text": "The number of languages natively spoken in Africa is variously estimated (depending on the delineation of language vs. dialect) at between 1,250 and 2,100, and by some counts at over 3,000. Nigeria alone has over 500 languages (according to SIL Ethnologue), one of the greatest concentrations of linguistic diversity in the world. The languages of Africa belong to many distinct language families, among which the largest are:\nThere are several other small families and language isolates, as well as creoles and languages that have yet to be classified. In addition, Africa has a wide variety of sign languages, many of which are language isolates.\nAround a hundred languages are widely used for interethnic communication. These include Arabic, Swahili, Amharic, Oromo, Igbo, Somali, Hausa, Manding, Fulani and Yoruba, which are spoken as a second (or non-first) language by millions of people. However that is changing because the is an awakening and such languages like Yoruba and Hausa languages are spoken as first language in various communities in Nigeria and Africa. Although many African languages are used on the radio, in newspapers and in primary-school education, and some of the larger ones are considered national languages, only a few are official at the national level. In Sub-Saharan Africa, most official languages at the national level tend to be colonial languages such as French, Portuguese, or English.\nThe African Union declared 2006 the \"Year of African Languages\".\nLanguage groups.\nMost languages natively spoken in Africa belong to one of the two large language families that dominate the continent: Afroasiatic, or Niger\u2013Congo. Another hundred belong to smaller families such as Ubangian, Nilotic, Saharan, and the various families previously grouped under the umbrella term Khoisan. In addition, the languages of Africa include several unclassified languages and sign languages.\nThe earliest Afroasiatic languages are associated with the Capsian culture, the Saharan languages are linked with the Khartoum Mesolithic/Neolithic cultures. Niger-Congo languages are correlated with the west and central African hoe-based farming traditions and the Khoisan languages are matched with the south and southeastern Wilton culture.\nAfroasiatic languages.\nAfroasiatic languages are spoken throughout North Africa, the Horn of Africa, Western Asia and parts of the Sahel. There are approximately 375 Afroasiatic languages spoken by over 400 million people. The main subfamilies of Afroasiatic are Berber, Chadic, Cushitic, Omotic, Egyptian and Semitic. The Afroasiatic Urheimat is uncertain. The family's most extensive branch, the Semitic languages (including Arabic, Amharic and Hebrew among others), is the only branch of Afroasiatic that is spoken outside Africa.\nSome of the most widely spoken Afroasiatic languages include Arabic (a Semitic language, and a recent arrival from West Asia), Somali (Cushitic), Berber (Berber), Hausa (Chadic), Amharic (Semitic) and Oromo (Cushitic). Of the world's surviving language families, Afroasiatic has the longest written history, as both the Akkadian language of Mesopotamia and Ancient Egyptian are members.\nNilo-Saharan languages.\nNilo-Saharan languages are a proposed grouping of some one hundred diverse languages. Genealogical linkage between these languages has failed to be conclusively demonstrated, and support for the proposal is sparse among linguists. The languages share some unusual morphology, but if they are related, most of the branches must have undergone major restructuring since diverging from their common ancestor.\nThis hypothetical family would reach an expanse that stretches from the Nile Valley to northern Tanzania and into Nigeria and DR Congo, with the Songhay languages along the middle reaches of the Niger River as a geographic outlier. The inclusion of the Songhay languages is questionable, and doubts have been raised over the Koman, Gumuz and Kadu branches.\nSome of the better known Nilo-Saharan languages are Kanuri, Fur, Songhay, Nobiin and the widespread Nilotic family, which includes the Luo, Dinka and Maasai. Most Nilo-Saharan languages are tonal, as are Niger-Congo languages.\nNiger\u2013Congo languages.\nThe Niger\u2013Congo languages constitute the largest language family spoken in West Africa and perhaps the world in terms of the number of languages. One of its salient features is an elaborate noun class system with grammatical concord. A large majority of languages of this family are tonal such as Yoruba and Igbo, Akan and Ewe language. A major branch of Niger\u2013Congo languages is the Bantu phylum, which has a wider speech area than the rest of the family (see Niger\u2013Congo B (Bantu) in the map above).\nThe Niger\u2013Kordofanian language family, joining Niger\u2013Congo with the Kordofanian languages of south-central Sudan, was proposed in the 1950s by Joseph Greenberg. Today, linguists often use \"Niger\u2013Congo\" to refer to this entire family, including Kordofanian as a subfamily. One reason for this is that it is not clear whether Kordofanian was the first branch to diverge from rest of Niger\u2013Congo. Mande has been claimed to be equally or more divergent. Niger\u2013Congo is generally accepted by linguists, though a few question the inclusion of Mande and Dogon, and there is no conclusive evidence for the inclusion of Ubangian.\nOther language families.\nSeveral languages spoken in Africa belong to language families concentrated or originating outside the African continent.\nAustronesian.\nMalagasy belongs to the Austronesian languages and is the westernmost branch of the family. It is the national and co-official language of Madagascar, and a Malagasy dialect called Bushi is also spoken in Mayotte.\nThe ancestors of the Malagasy people migrated to Madagascar around 1,500 years ago from Southeast Asia, more specifically the island of Borneo. The origins of how they arrived to Madagascar remains a mystery, however the Austronesians are known for their seafaring culture. Despite the geographical isolation, Malagasy still has strong resemblance to Barito languages especially the Ma'anyan language of southern Borneo.\nWith more than 20 million speakers, Malagasy is one of the most widely spoken of the Austronesian languages.\nIndo-European.\nAfrikaans is Indo-European, as is most of the vocabulary of most African creole languages. Afrikaans evolved from the Dutch vernacular of South Holland (Hollandic dialect) spoken by the mainly Dutch settlers of what is now South Africa, where it gradually began to develop distinguishing characteristics in the course of the 18th century, including the loss of verbal conjugation (save for 5 modal verbs), as well as grammatical case and gender. Most Afrikaans speakers live in South Africa. In Namibia it is the lingua franca. Overall 14 to 21 million people are estimated to speak Afrikaans.\nSince the colonial era, Indo-European languages such as Afrikaans, English, French, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish have held official status in many countries, and are widely spoken, generally as lingua francas. (\"See African French and African Portuguese\".) Additionally, languages like French, and Portuguese have become native languages in various countries.\nFrench has become native in the urban areas of the DRC, and Gabon. Spanish is spoken as a native language by a small minority in Equatorial Guinea, primarily in larger cities.\nGerman was once used in Germany's colonies there from the late 1800s until World War I, when Britain and France took over and revoked German's official status. Despite this, German is still spoken in Namibia, mostly among the white population. Although it lost its official status in the 1990s, it has been redesignated as a national language. Indo-Aryan languages such as Gujarati and Sindhi are spoken by South Asian expatriates exclusively. In earlier historical times, other Indo-European languages could be found in various parts of the continent, such as Old Persian and Greek in Egypt, Latin and Vandalic in North Africa and Modern Persian in the Horn of Africa.\nSmall families.\nThe three small Khoisan families of southern Africa have not been shown to be closely related to any other major language family. In addition, there are various other families that have not been demonstrated to belong to one of these families. The classifications below follow Glottolog.\n\"Khoisan\" is a term of convenience covering some 30 languages spoken by around 300,000\u2013400,000 people. There are five Khoisan families that have not been shown to be related to each other: Khoe, Tuu and Kx'a, which are found mainly in Namibia and Botswana, as well as Sandawe and Hadza of Tanzania, which are language isolates. A striking feature of Khoisan languages, and the reason they are often grouped together, is their use of click consonants. Some neighbouring Bantu languages (notably Xhosa and Zulu) have clicks as well, but these were adopted from Khoisan languages. The Khoisan languages are also tonal.\nCreole languages.\nDue partly to its multilingualism and its colonial past, a substantial proportion of the world's creole languages are to be found in Africa. Some are based on Indo-European languages (e.g. Krio from English in Sierra Leone and the very similar Pidgin in Nigeria, Ghana and parts of Cameroon; Cape Verdean Creole in Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau Creole in Guinea-Bissau and Senegal, all from Portuguese; Seychellois Creole in the Seychelles and Mauritian Creole in Mauritius, both from French); some are based on Arabic (e.g. Juba Arabic in the southern Sudan, or Nubi in parts of Uganda and Kenya); some are based on local languages (e.g. Sango, the main language of the Central African Republic); while in Cameroon a creole based on French, English and local African languages known as Camfranglais has started to become popular.\nUnclassified languages.\nA fair number of unclassified languages are reported in Africa. Many remain unclassified simply for lack of data; among the better-investigated ones that continue to resist easy classification are:\nOf these, Jalaa is perhaps the most likely to be an isolate.\nLess-well investigated languages include Irimba, Luo, Mawa, Rer Bare (possibly Bantu languages), Bete (evidently Jukunoid), Bung (unclear), Kujarge (evidently Chadic), Lufu (Jukunoid), Meroitic (possibly Afroasiatic), Oropom (possibly spurious) and Weyto (evidently Cushitic). Several of these are extinct, and adequate comparative data is thus unlikely to be forthcoming. Hombert &amp; Philippson (2009) list a number of African languages that have been classified as language isolates at one point or another. Many of these are simply unclassified, but Hombert &amp; Philippson believe Africa has about twenty language families, including isolates. Beside the possibilities listed above, there are:\nRoger Blench notes a couple additional possibilities:\nBelow is a list of language isolates and otherwise unclassified languages in Africa, from Vossen &amp; Dimmendaal (2020:434):\nSign languages.\nMany African countries have national sign languages, such as Algerian Sign Language, Tunisian Sign Language, Ethiopian Sign Language. Other sign languages are restricted to small areas or single villages, such as Adamorobe Sign Language in Ghana. Tanzania has seven, one for each of its schools for the Deaf, all of which are discouraged. Not much is known, since little has been published on these languages\nSign language systems extant in Africa include the Paget Gorman Sign System used in Namibia and Angola, the Sudanese Sign languages used in Sudan and South Sudan, the Arab Sign languages used across the Arab Mideast, the Francosign languages used in Francophone Africa and other areas such as Ghana and Tunisia, and the Tanzanian Sign languages used in Tanzania.\nLanguage in Africa.\nThroughout the long multilingual history of the African continent, African languages have been subject to phenomena like language contact, language expansion, language shift and language death. A case in point is the Bantu expansion, in which Bantu-speaking peoples expanded over most of Sub-Equatorial Africa, intermingling with Khoi-San speaking peoples from much of Southeast Africa and Southern Africa and other peoples from Central Africa. Another example is the Arab expansion in the 7th century, which led to the extension of Arabic from its homeland in Asia, into much of North Africa and the Horn of Africa.\nTrade languages are another age-old phenomenon in the African linguistic landscape. Cultural and linguistic innovations spread along trade routes and languages of peoples dominant in trade developed into languages of wider communication (lingua franca). Of particular importance in this respect are Berber (North and West Africa), Jula (western West Africa), Fulfulde (West Africa), Hausa (West Africa), Lingala (Congo), Swahili (Southeast Africa), Somali (Horn of Africa) and Arabic (North Africa and Horn of Africa).\nAfter gaining independence, many African countries, in the search for national unity, selected one language, generally the former Indo-European colonial language, to be used in government and education. However, in recent years, African countries have become increasingly supportive of maintaining linguistic diversity. Language policies that are being developed nowadays are mostly aimed at multilingualism. This presents a methodological complication when collecting data in Africa and limited literature exists. An analysis of Afrobarometer public opinion survey data of 36 countries suggested that survey interviewers and respondents could engage in various linguistic behaviors, such as code-switching during the survey. Moreover, some African countries have been considering removing their official former Indo-European colonial languages, like Mali and Burkina Faso which removed French as an official language in 2024.\nCross-border languages.\nThe colonial borders established by European powers following the Berlin Conference in 1884\u20131885 divided a great many ethnic groups and African language speaking communities. This can cause divergence of a language on either side of a border (especially when the official languages are different), for example, in orthographic standards. Some notable cross-border languages include Berber (which stretches across much of North Africa and some parts of West Africa), Kikongo (that stretches across northern Angola, western and coastal Democratic Republic of the Congo, and western and coastal Republic of the Congo), Somali (stretches across most of the Horn of Africa), Swahili (spoken in the African Great Lakes region), Fula (in the Sahel and West Africa) and Luo (in Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, South Sudan and Sudan).\nSome prominent Africans such as former Malian president and former Chairman of the African Commission, Alpha Oumar Konar\u00e9, have referred to cross-border languages as a factor that can promote African unity.\nLanguage change and planning.\nLanguage is not static in Africa any more than on other continents. In addition to the (likely modest) impact of borders, there are also cases of dialect levelling (such as in Igbo and probably many others), koin\u00e9s (such as N'Ko and possibly Runyakitara) and emergence of new dialects (such as Sheng). In some countries, there are official efforts to develop standardized language versions.\nThere are also many less widely spoken languages that may be considered endangered languages.\nDemographics.\nOf the 1 billion Africans (in 2009), about 17 percent speak an Arabic dialect. About 10 percent speak Swahili, the lingua franca of Southeast Africa; about 5 percent speak a Berber dialect; and about 5 percent speak Hausa, which serves as a lingua franca in much of the Sahel. Other large West African languages are Yoruba, Igbo, Akan and Fula. Major Horn of Africa languages are Somali, Amharic and Oromo. Lingala is important in Central Africa. Important South African languages are Sotho, Tswana, Pedi, Venda, Tsonga, Swazi, Southern Ndebele, Zulu, Xhosa and Afrikaans.\nFrench, English, and Portuguese are important languages in Africa due to colonialism. About 320 million, 240 million and 35 million Africans, respectively, speak them as either native or secondary languages. Portuguese has become the national language of Angola and S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, and Portuguese is the official language of Mozambique.\nLinguistic features.\nSome linguistic features are particularly common among languages spoken in Africa, whereas others are less common. Such shared traits probably are not due to a common origin of all African languages. Instead, some may be due to language contact (resulting in borrowing) and specific idioms and phrases may be due to a similar cultural background.\nPhonological.\nSome widespread phonetic features include:\nSounds that are relatively uncommon in African languages include uvular consonants, diphthongs and front rounded vowels\nTonal languages are found throughout the world but are especially common in Africa - in fact, there are far more tonal than non-tonal languages in Africa. Both the Nilo-Saharan and the Khoi-San phyla are fully tonal. The large majority of the Niger\u2013Congo languages are also tonal. Tonal languages are also found in the Omotic, Chadic and South &amp; East Cushitic branches of Afroasiatic. The most common type of tonal system opposes two tone levels, High (H) and Low (L). Contour tones do occur, and can often be analysed as two or more tones in succession on a single syllable. \"Tone melodies\" play an important role, meaning that it is often possible to state significant generalizations by separating tone sequences (\"melodies\") from the segments that bear them. Tonal sandhi processes like tone spread, tone shift, downstep and downdrift are common in African languages.\nSyntactic.\nWidespread syntactical structures include the common use of adjectival verbs and the expression of comparison by means of a verb 'to surpass'. The Niger\u2013Congo languages have large numbers of genders (noun classes) which cause agreement in verbs and other words. Case, tense and other categories may be distinguished only by tone. Auxiliary verbs are also widespread among African languages; the fusing of subject markers and TAM/polarity auxiliaries into what are known as tense pronouns are more common in auxiliary verb constructions in African languages than in most other parts of the world.\nSemantic.\nQuite often, only one term is used for both animal and meat; the word \"nama\" or \"nyama\" for animal/meat is particularly widespread in otherwise widely divergent African languages.\nDemographics.\nThe following is a table displaying the number of speakers of prominent languages within Africa:\nBy region.\nBelow is a list of the major languages of Africa by region, family and total number of primary language speakers in millions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59557", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59557", "title": "Palau G\u00fcell", "text": "Mansion in Barcelona designed by Gaud\u00ed\nThe Palau G\u00fcell (, ) is a mansion designed by the architect Antoni Gaud\u00ed for the industrial tycoon Eusebi G\u00fcell, and was built between 1886 and 1888. It is situated on the Carrer Nou de la Rambla, in the El Raval neighborhood of Barcelona in Catalonia, Spain. It is part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site \"Works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed\".\nThe home is centered around the main room for entertaining high society guests. Guests entered the home in horse-drawn carriages through the front iron gates, which featured a parabolic arch and intricate patterns of forged ironwork resembling seaweed and in some parts a horsewhip. Animals could be taken down a ramp and kept in the livery stable in the basement where the servants resided, while the guests went up the stairs to the receiving room. The ornate walls and ceilings of the receiving room disguised small viewing windows high on the walls where the owners of the home could view their guests from the upper floor and get a \"sneak peek\" before greeting them, in case they needed to adjust their attire accordingly.\nThe main party room has a tall ceiling with small holes near the top where lanterns were hung at night from the outside to give the appearance of a starlit sky.\nIn 2004, visits by the public were completely suspended due to renovations; some of the stone used in the original construction was weak and had cracked over the years causing structural problems within the building. It is currently completely open, with all restoration work completed in April 2011.\nIt was used in Antonioni's film \"The Passenger\" as a backdrop for the first meeting between Jack Nicholson and Maria Schneider."}
{"id": "59558", "revid": "1450053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59558", "title": "Pierre Brissaud", "text": "French painter (1885\u20131964)\nPierre Brissaud (23 December 1885 \u2013 17 October 1964) was a French Art Deco illustrator, painter, and engraver. He was born in Paris and trained at the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts and Atelier Fernand Cormon in Montmartre, Paris. His father was Dr. \u00c9douard Brissaud, a student of Dr. Jean-Martin Charcot. His fellow students at Cormon were his brother Jacques, Andr\u00e9-\u00c9douard Marty, Charles Martin, and Georges Lepape. Students at the workshop drew, painted and designed wallpaper, furniture and posters. Earlier, Toulouse-Lautrec, van Gogh, and Henri Matisse had studied and worked there. Pierre's older brother Jacques Brissaud was a portrait and genre painter and his uncle Maurice Boutet de Monvel illustrated the fables of La Fontaine, songbooks for children and a life of Joan of Arc. A first cousin was the celebrated artist and celebrity portrait painter Bernard Boutet de Monvel.\nBrissaud is known for his \"pochoir\" (stencil) prints for the fashion magazine \"Gazette du Bon Ton\" published by Lucien Vogel in Paris. Many of Brissaud's illustrations are realistic leisure scenes of the well-to-do. They illustrate the designs of Paris fashion houses such as Jeanne Lanvin, Ch\u00e9ruit, Worth, and Doucet. Brissaud's illustrations appeared in \"Vogue\" after it bought \"Bon Ton\" in 1925, as well as \"House &amp; Garden\" and \"Fortune\", and in books like \"Madame Bovary\", \"Manon Lescaut\", \"M\u00e9moires de Saint-Simon\", the autobiographical novels of Anatole France, \"Two gentlemen of Verona\" and many others.\nIn 1907 he exhibited at the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants and the Salon d'Automne."}
{"id": "59559", "revid": "10913857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59559", "title": "Jugendstil", "text": "Artistic movement; German equivalent of Art Nouveau\n \n (; \"Youth Style\") was an artistic movement, particularly in the decorative arts, that was influential primarily in Germany, Austria, and elsewhere in Europe to a lesser extent from about 1895 until about 1910. It was the German and Austrian counterpart of Art Nouveau. The members of the movement were reacting against the historicism and neo-classicism of the official art and architecture academies. It took its name from the art journal , founded by the German artist Georg Hirth. It was especially active in the graphic arts and interior decoration.\nIts major centers of activity were Munich, Vienna and Weimar and the Darmstadt Artists' Colony founded in Darmstadt in 1901. Important figures of the movement included the Swiss graphic artist Hermann Obrist, Otto Eckmann, the Belgian architect and decorator Henry van de Velde, as well as the Austrians Otto Wagner, Joseph Maria Olbrich, Gustav Klimt, and Koloman Moser, among others. In its earlier years, the style was influenced by the British Modern Style. It was also influenced by Japanese prints. Later, under the Secessionists' influence, it tended toward abstraction and more geometrical forms.\nFrom 1898 to 1903, The Vienna Secession, led by Gustav Klimt and Max Kurzweil published the journal Ver Sacrum (magazine) , an important chronicle of many of the groups artistic contributions to the world of art and design.\nThe Secession Building, completed in 1898 by Joseph Maria Olbrich in Vienna, is widely regarded as one of Europes most noteworthy early modernist buildings in the style of the Vienna Secession.\nHistory.\nThe movement had its origins in Munich with the founding of an association of visual artists in 1892, which broke away from the more formal historical and academic styles of the academy. Georg Hirth chose the name Munich Secession for the association. Later, the Vienna Secession, founded in 1897 and the Berlin Secession took their own names from the Munich group. The journal of the group, \"Jugend\", begun in 1896, along with another Munich publication, \"Simplicissimus\" and \"Pan\" in Berlin, became the most visible showcases of the new style. The leading figures of this movement, including Peter Behrens, Bernhard Pankok, and Richard Riemerschmid, as well as the majority of the founding members of the Munich Secession, all provided illustrations to \"Jugend\".\nIn the beginning, the style was used primarily in illustrations and graphic arts. \"Jugendstil\" combined floral decoration and sinuous curves with more geometric lines, and soon was used for covers of novels, advertisements, and exhibition posters. Designers often created original styles of typeface that worked harmoniously with the image, such as the Arnold B\u00f6cklin typeface created in 1904.\nOtto Eckmann was one of the most prominent German artists associated with both \"Jugend\" and \"Pan\". His favourite animal was the swan, and so great was his influence that the swan came to serve as the symbol of the entire movement. Another prominent designer in the style was Richard Riemerschmid, who made furniture, pottery, and other decorative objects in a sober, geometric style that pointed forward toward Art Deco. The Swiss artist Hermann Obrist, living in Munich, made designs with sinuous double curves, modeled after plants and flowers, which were a prominent motif of the early style.\nJoseph Maria Olbrich and the Darmstadt Artists' Colony.\nThe Darmstadt Artists' Colony is a remarkable collection of \"Jugendstil\" buildings created beginning in 1899 by Ernest Ludwig, Grand Duke of Hesse, a grandson of Queen Victoria, to promote both commerce and the arts. He brought together a group of designers to create his new community, including Peter Behrens, Hans Christiansen, and Joseph Maria Olbrich. The Colony architecture represented a complete break with the earlier floral style, and was much bolder in its design. Behrens and several of the other architects built their own houses there, and designed every detail, from the doorknobs to the dishes.\nThe most impressive building of the Colony is the Ernst-Ludwig House, named for the Grand Duke, which contained the workshops of the artists. It was designed by Olbrich, with an entrance in the form of a three-quarter circle, flanked by two statues, \"Force\" and \"Beauty\", by Ludwig Habich (1901). \n\u00c5lesund.\nThe Norwegian town of \u00c5lesund suffered a disastrous fire on 23 January 1904. With the support of Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany the town was reconstructed in Jugendstil by local Norwegian designers and architects. To honor Wilhelm, one of the most frequented streets of the town is named after him.\nHenry van de Velde and Weimar.\nThe city of Weimar was another important center of the \"Jugendstil\", thanks largely to the Belgian architect and designer Henry van de Velde. Van de Velde had played an important role in the early Belgian Art Nouveau, building his own house and decorating it in Art Nouveau style, with the strong influence of the British Arts and Crafts Movement. He was a known in Germany for his work in Belgium and Paris, and began a new career in Dresden in 1897, with a display at the Dresden Exposition of decorative arts. His work became known in Germany through decorative arts journals, and he received several commissions for interiors in Berlin, for a villa in Chemnitz, the Folkwang Museum in Hagen, and the Nietzsche House in Weimar for Elisabeth F\u00f6rster-Nietzsche, the sister of philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche. He settled in Weimar in 1899 and produced a wide variety of decorative works, including silverware and ceramics, all in strikingly original forms. His silverware was particularly unusual: each piece had its own form, with sleek curving lines, but together they formed a harmonious ensemble. In 1902, he decorated the apartment of Count Harry Kessler, a prominent patron of the Impressionist painters.\nIn 1905, with the patronage of the Grand Duke of Weimar, he created the Grand Ducal School of Arts and Crafts in Weimar. He created a showcase of applied arts for the Dresden Exposition of Applied Arts in 1906, decorated with paintings by Ludwig von Hofmann, intended as the main room of a new museum of decoration in Weimar. He transposed the characteristics of his silverware, dishes, and furniture into the architecture. Van de Velde left off the curling vegetal lines of Art Nouveau decoration and replaced them with much simpler, more stylized curves which were part of the structure of his buildings and decorative works.\nThe importance of Weimar as a cultural center of the \"Jugendstil\" was ended in 1906, when its main patron, Count Harry Kessler, commissioned Rodin to make a nude statue for the Grand Duke. The Grand Duke was scandalized, and Kessler was forced to resign. The Weimar school of design lost its importance until 1919, when it returned as the Bauhaus under Walter Gropius, and played a major part in the emergence of modern architecture.\nPeter Behrens and the German \"Werkbund\".\nThe architect and designer Peter Behrens (1868\u20131940) was a key figure in the final years of the \"Jugendstil\", and in the transition to modern architecture. Born in Hamburg, where he studied painting, Behrens moved to Munich in 1890 and worked as a painter, illustrator and bookbinder. In 1890, he was one of the founders of the Munich Secession. In 1899, he was invited to participate in the Darmstadt Artists' Colony, where he designed his own house and all of its contents, including the furniture, towels and dishes.\nAfter 1900 he became involved in industrial design and the reform of architecture to more functional forms. In 1902, he participated in the Turin International Exposition, one of the first major Europe-wide showcases of Art Nouveau. In 1907, Behrens and a group of other notable \"Jugendstil\" artists, including Hermann Muthesius, Theodor Fischer, Josef Hoffmann, Joseph Maria Olbrich, Bruno Paul, Richard Riemerschmid, and Fritz Schumacher, created the Deutscher Werkbund. Modeled after the Arts and Crafts movement in England, its goal was to improve and modernize the design of industrial products and everyday objects. He first major project was AEG turbine factory in Berlin (1908\u20131909). Behren's assistants and students at this time included Mies van der Rohe, C. E. Jeanerette (the future Le Corbusier), and Walter Gropius, the future head of the Bauhaus. The work of Behrens and the Werkbund effectively launched the transition from the \"Jugendstil\" to modernism in Germany, and the end of the \"Jugendstil\".\nArchitecture and decoration.\nIn Berlin, August Endell was both editor of \"Pan\" magazine and a major figure in \"Jugendstil\" decoration, designing hotels and theaters, such as the interior of Buntes Theater in Berlin (1901), destroyed during World War II. He designed every detail of the interior down to the nails. with each room in a different color, and on a different theme. He also designed the Hackesche H\u00f6fe, a complex of buildings in the centre of Berlin, noted for the imaginative details of the decoration, in spirals and curling forms,\nPosters and graphic arts.\nThe most prominent graphic artist was Otto Eckmann, who produced numerous illustrations for the movement's journal \"Jugend\", in a sinuous, floral style that was similar to the French style. He also created a type style based upon Japanese calligraphy. Joseph Sattler was another graphic artist who contributed to the style through another artistic journal called \"Pan\". Sattler designed a type face often used in \"Jugendstil\".\nAnother important German graphic artist was Josef Rudolf Witzel (1867\u20131925), who produced many early covers for \"Jugend\", with curving, floral forms which helped shape the style.\nThe magazine \"Simplicissimus\", published in Munich, was also noted for its \"Jugendstil\" graphics, as well as for the modern writers it presented, including Thomas Mann and Rainer Maria Rilke. Important illustrators for the magazine included Thomas Theodor Heine.\nFurniture.\nThe ideal of designers of the \"Jugendstil\" was to make a house a complete work of art, with everything inside, from the furniture to the carpets and the dishware, silverware and the art, in perfect harmony. With this ideal in mind, they established their own workshops to produce furniture.\nAugust Endell, Theodor Fischer, Bruno Paul, and especially Richard Riemerschmid were important figures in \"Jugendstil\" furniture. \nMetalware.\nMetallwarenfabrik Straub &amp; Schweizer (WMF) was, by 1900, the world's largest producer of household metalware, mainly in the \"Jugendstil\" style, designed in the WMF Art Studio under Albert Mayer. WMF purchased Orivit, another company known for its \"Jugendstil\" pewter, in 1905.\nNotes and citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59561", "revid": "2175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59561", "title": "Enterprise Objects Framework", "text": "The Enterprise Objects Framework, or simply EOF, was introduced by NeXT in 1994 as a pioneering object-relational mapping product for its NeXTSTEP and OpenStep development platforms. EOF abstracts the process of interacting with a relational database by mapping database rows to Java or Objective-C objects. This largely relieves developers from writing low-level SQL code.\nEOF enjoyed some niche success in the mid-1990s among financial institutions who were attracted to the rapid application development advantages of NeXT's object-oriented platform. Since Apple Inc's merger with NeXT in 1996, EOF has evolved into a fully integrated part of WebObjects, an application server also originally from NeXT. Many of the core concepts of EOF re-emerged as part of Core Data, which further abstracts the underlying data formats to allow it to be based on non-SQL stores.\nHistory.\nIn the early 1990s NeXT Computer recognized that connecting to databases was essential to most businesses and yet also potentially complex. Every data source has a different data-access language (or API), driving up the costs to learn and use each vendor's product. The NeXT engineers wanted to apply the advantages of object-oriented programming, by getting objects to \"talk\" to relational databases. As the two technologies are very different, the solution was to create an abstraction layer, insulating developers from writing the low-level procedural code (SQL) specific to each data source.\nThe first attempt came in 1992 with the release of Database Kit (DBKit), which wrapped an object-oriented framework around any database. Unfortunately, NEXTSTEP at the time was not powerful enough and DBKit had serious design flaws.\nNeXT's second attempt came in 1994 with the Enterprise Objects Framework (EOF) version 1, a complete rewrite that was far more modular and OpenStep compatible. EOF 1.0 was the first product released by NeXT using the Foundation Kit and introduced autoreleased objects to the developer community. The development team at the time was only four people: Jack Greenfield, Rich Williamson, Linus Upson and Dan Willhite. EOF 2.0, released in late 1995, further refined the architecture, introducing the editing context. At that point, the development team consisted of Dan Willhite, Craig Federighi, Eric Noyau and Charly Kleissner.\nEOF achieved a modest level of popularity in the financial programming community in the mid-1990s, but it would come into its own with the emergence of the World Wide Web and the concept of web applications. It was clear that EOF could help companies plug their legacy databases into the Web without any rewriting of that data. With the addition of frameworks to do state management, load balancing and dynamic HTML generation, NeXT was able to launch the first object-oriented Web application server, WebObjects, in 1996, with EOF at its core.\nIn 2000, Apple Inc. (which had merged with NeXT) officially dropped EOF as a standalone product, meaning that developers would be unable to use it to create desktop applications for the forthcoming Mac OS X. It would, however, continue to be an integral part of a major new release of WebObjects. WebObjects 5, released in 2001, was significant for the fact that its frameworks had been ported from their native Objective-C programming language to the Java language. Critics of this change argue that most of the power of EOF was a side effect of its Objective-C roots, and that EOF lost the beauty or simplicity it once had. Third-party tools, such as EOGenerator, help fill the deficiencies introduced by Java (mainly due to the loss of categories).\nThe Objective-C code base was re-introduced with some modifications to desktop application developers as Core Data, part of Apple's Cocoa API, with the release of Mac OS X Tiger in April 2005.\nHow EOF works.\nEnterprise Objects provides tools and frameworks for object-relational mapping. The technology specializes in providing mechanisms to retrieve data from various data sources, such as relational databases via JDBC and JNDI directories, and mechanisms to commit data back to those data sources. These mechanisms are designed in a layered, abstract approach that allows developers to think about data retrieval and commitment at a higher level than a specific data source or data source vendor.\nCentral to this mapping is a model file (an \"EOModel\") that you build with a visual tool \u2014 either EOModeler, or the EOModeler plug-in to Xcode. The mapping works as follows:\nYou can build data models based on existing data sources or you can build data models from scratch, which you then use to create data structures (tables, columns, joins) in a data source. The result is that database records can be transposed into Java objects.\nThe advantage of using data models is that applications are isolated from the idiosyncrasies of the data sources they access. This separation of an application's business logic from database logic allows developers to change the database an application accesses without needing to change the application.\nEOF provides a level of database transparency not seen in other tools and allows the same model to be used to access different vendor databases and even allows relationships across different vendor databases without changing source code. \nIts power comes from exposing the underlying data sources as managed graphs of persistent objects. In simple terms, this means that it organizes the application's model layer into a set of defined in-memory data objects. It then tracks changes to these objects and can reverse those changes on demand, such as when a user performs an undo command. Then, when it is time to save changes to the application's data, it archives the objects to the underlying data sources.\nUsing Inheritance.\nIn designing Enterprise Objects developers can leverage the object-oriented feature known as inheritance. A Customer object and an Employee object, for example, might both inherit certain characteristics from a more generic Person object, such as name, address, and phone number. While this kind of thinking is inherent in object-oriented design, relational databases have no explicit support for inheritance. However, using Enterprise Objects, you can build data models that reflect object hierarchies. That is, you can design database tables to support inheritance by also designing enterprise objects that map to multiple tables or particular views of a database table.\nEnterprise Objects (EOs).\nAn Enterprise Object is analogous to what is often known in object-oriented programming as a business object \u2014 a class which models a physical or conceptual object in the business domain (e.g. a customer, an order, an item, etc.). What makes an EO different from other objects is that its instance data maps to a data store. Typically, an enterprise object contains key-value pairs that represent a row in a relational database. The key is basically the column name, and the value is what was in that row in the database. So it can be said that an EO's properties persist beyond the life of any particular running application.\nMore precisely, an Enterprise Object is an instance of a class that implements the com.webobjects.eocontrol.EOEnterpriseObject interface.\nAn Enterprise Object has a corresponding model (called an EOModel) that defines the mapping between the class's object model and the database schema. However, an enterprise object doesn't explicitly know about its model. This level of abstraction means that database vendors can be switched without it affecting the developer's code. This gives Enterprise Objects a high degree of reusability.\nEOF and Core Data.\nDespite their common origins, the two technologies diverged, with each technology retaining a subset of the features of the original Objective-C code base, while adding some new features.\nFeatures Supported Only by EOF.\nEOF supports custom SQL; shared editing contexts; nested editing contexts; and pre-fetching and batch faulting of relationships, all features of the original Objective-C implementation not supported by Core Data. Core Data also does not provide the equivalent of an EOModelGroup\u2014the NSManagedObjectModel class provides methods for merging models from existing models, and for retrieving merged models from bundles.\nFeatures Supported Only by Core Data.\nCore Data supports fetched properties; multiple configurations within a managed object model; local stores; and store aggregation (the data for a given entity may be spread across multiple stores); customization and localization of property names and validation warnings; and the use of predicates for property validation. These features of the original Objective-C implementation are not supported by the Java implementation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59562", "revid": "545027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59562", "title": "Impedance mismatch", "text": ""}
{"id": "59563", "revid": "50533807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59563", "title": "Judicial independence", "text": "Concept that the judiciary should be independent\nJudicial independence is the concept that the judiciary should be independent from the other branches of government. That is, courts should not be subject to improper influence from the other branches of government or from private or partisan interests. Judicial independence is important for the idea of separation of powers.\nDifferent countries deal with the idea of judicial independence through different means of judicial selection, that is, choosing judges. One method seen as promoting judicial independence is by granting life tenure or long tenure for judges, as it would ideally free them to decide cases and make rulings according to the rule of law and judicial discretion, even if those decisions are politically unpopular or opposed by powerful interests. This concept can be traced back to 18th-century England.\nAdvantages.\nJudicial independence serves as a safeguard for rights and privileges from a limited government and prevents executive and legislative encroachment upon those rights. It serves as a foundation for the rule of law and democracy. The rule of law means that all authority and power must come from an ultimate source of law. Under an independent judicial system, the courts and its officers are free from inappropriate intervention in the judiciary's affairs. With this independence, the judiciary can safeguard people's rights and freedoms which ensure equal protection for all.\nThe effectiveness of the law, and the respect that people have for the law and the government which enacts it, is dependent upon the judiciary's independence to mete out fair decisions. Furthermore, judicial independence is a pillar of economic growth, as multinational businesses and investors have confidence to invest in the economy of a nation which has a strong and stable judiciary that is insulated from interference. The judiciary's role in deciding the validity of presidential and parliamentary elections also necessitates judicial independence.\nEconomic.\nConstitutional economics studies issues such as the proper distribution of national wealth including government spending on the judiciary. In transitional and developing countries, spending on the judiciary may be controlled by the executive. This undermines the principle of judicial independence because it creates a financial dependence of the judiciary on the executive. It is important to distinguish between two methods of corruption of the judiciary: the state (through budget planning and privileges) being the most dangerous, and private. State corruption of the judiciary can impede the ability of businesses to optimally facilitate the growth and development of a market economy.\nIn some countries, the constitution also prohibits the legislative branch from reducing salaries of sitting judges.\nJudicial misconduct.\nThe disadvantages of having a judiciary that is seemingly too independent include possible abuse of power by judges. Self-interest, ideological dedication and even corruption may influence the decisions of judges without any checks and balances in place to prevent this abuse of power if the judiciary is completely independent. The relationship between the judiciary and the executive is a complex series of dependencies and inter-dependencies which counter-check each other and must be carefully balanced. One can be too independent of the other. Furthermore, judicial support of the executive is not as negative as it seems as the executive is the branch of government with the greatest claim to democratic legitimacy. Roger K. Warren writes that if the judiciary and executive are constantly feuding, no government can function well.\nJudicial accountability.\nAn extremely independent judiciary would also lack judicial accountability, which is the duty of a public decision-maker to explain and justify a decision and to make amendments where a decision causes injustice or problems. Judges are not required to give an entire account of their rationale behind decisions, and are shielded against public scrutiny and protected from legal repercussions. Judicial supremacy could potentially promote an elitist autocracy, but this can be balanced through democratization. However judicial accountability can reinforce judicial independence as it could show that judges have proper reasons and rationales for arriving at a particular decision. Warren opines that while indirectly elected judges are not directly democratically accountable to the people, the key is for judges to achieve equilibrium between accountability and independence to ensure that justice is upheld. Judges are directly elected in some cases, including Mexican judicial elections, Bolivian judicial election and . Judicial elections can increase political polarization. Judicial retention elections were found to have an impact on the accountability of judges.\nInternal judicial independence.\n\"Internal judicial independence\" is the autonomy of individual judges from undue influence within the judiciary itself\u2014such as pressure from court leadership or senior colleagues over case assignment, panel composition, promotions, transfers, discipline, or informal guidance\u2014so that adjudication rests solely on law and facts rather than intra-branch hierarchies.\nIn the Czech Republic, for example, scholarship has described how informal practices by senior judges (e.g., in appointments, panel design, and case assignment) may enhance expertise and uniformity yet blur internal checks, coining the term \u201csuperjudges.\u201d\nDevelopment.\nThe development of judicial independence has been argued to involve a cycle of national law having an impact on international law, and international law subsequently impacting national law. This is said to occur in three phases: the first phase is characterized by the domestic development of the concept of judicial independence, the second by the spread of these concepts internationally and their implementation in international law, and the third by the implementation in national law of these newly formulated international principles of judicial independence.\nA notable example illustrating this cycle is the United Kingdom. The first phase occurred in England with the original conception of judicial independence in the Act of Settlement 1701. The second phase was evident when England's concepts regarding judicial independence spread internationally, and were adopted into the domestic law of other countries; for instance, England served as the model for Montesquieu's separation of powers doctrine, and the Founding Fathers of the US Constitution used England as their dominant model in formulating the Constitution's Article III, which is the foundation of American judicial independence. Other common law countries, including Canada, Australia, and India, also adopted the British model of judicial independence.\nIn recent decades the third phase of judicial independence has been evident in the UK, as it has been significantly influenced by judicial independence principles developed by international human rights constitutional documents. The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) has had a significant impact on the conceptual analysis of judicial independence in England and Scotland. This process began in the 1990s with the ECtHR hearing UK cases and, more significantly, in the application of the European Convention on Human Rights in British law through the Human Rights Act 1998, which came into force in the UK in 2000.\nWhere British national law had previously impacted the international development of judicial independence, the British Constitutional Reform Act 2005 marked a shift, with international law now impacting British domestic law. The Constitutional Reform Act dramatically reformed government control over the administration of justice in England and Wales; importantly, it discontinued the position of the Lord Chancellor, one of the country's oldest constitutional offices, who was entrusted with a combination of legislative, executive, and judicial capacities. The Lord Chancellor served as speaker of the Upper House of Parliament, the House of Lords; as a member of the executive branch and member of the senior cabinet; and as the head of the judiciary. Historically, the appellate function had a connection with the executive branch due to the types of cases typically heard \u2013 impeachment and the hearing of felony charges against peers. The Constitutional Reform Act established new lines of demarcation between the Lord Chancellor and the judiciary, transferring all the judicial functions to the judiciary and entrusting the Lord Chancellor only with what are considered administrative and executive matters. In addition, the Constitutional Reform Act replaced the Lord Chancellor by the Lord Chief Justice as head of the judiciary, separated the judicial Appellate Committee of the House of Lords from the legislative parliament, reforming it as the Supreme Court, and creating a Judicial Appointments Commission. The creation of the Supreme Court was important, for it finally separated the highest court of appeal from the House of Lords.\nThus, the United Kingdom, where judicial independence began over three hundred years ago, illustrates the interaction over time of national and international law and jurisprudence in the area of judicial independence. In this process, concepts and ideas have become enriched as they have been implemented in successive judicial and political systems, as each system has enhanced and deepened the concepts and ideas it actualized. In addition to the UK, similar developments of conceptual cross-fertilization can be seen internationally, for example in European Union law, in civil law countries such as Austria, and in other common law jurisdictions including Canada.\nIn recent years, the principle of judicial independence has been described as one of the core values of the justice system.\nInternational standards.\nThe International Association of Judicial Independence and World Peace produced the Mt. Scopus International Standards of Judicial Independence between 2007 and 2012. These built on the same association's New Delhi Minimum Standards on Judicial independence adopted in 1982 and their Montr\u00e9al Universal Declaration on the Independence of Justice in 1983. Other influences they cite for the standards include the UN Basic Principles of Judicial Independence from 1985, the Burgh House Principles of Judicial Independence in International Law (for the international judiciary), Tokyo Law Asia Principles, Council of Europe Statements on judicial independence (particularly the Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers to Member States on the independence, efficiency and role of judges), the Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct 2002, and the American Bar Association's revision of its ethical standards for judges.\nJudicial independence metrics.\nJudicial independence metrics allow a quantitative analysis of judicial independence for individual countries. One judicial independence metric is the high court independence index in the V-Dem Dataset, where higher values indicate higher independence, shown below for individual countries.\nJudicial independence by country.\nAustralia.\nThere was a struggle to establish judicial independence in colonial Australia, but by 1901 it was entrenched in the Australian constitution, including the separation of judicial power such that the High Court of Australia held in 2004 that all courts capable of exercising federal judicial power must be, and must appear to be, independent and impartial. Writing in 2007 Chief Justice of Australia Murray Gleeson stated that Australians largely took judicial independence for granted and the details were not matters of wide interest. No federal judge and only one supreme court judge has been removed for misconduct since 1901. Immunity from suit for judicial acts, security of tenure, and fixed remuneration are all established parts of judicial independence in Australia. The appointment of judges remains exclusively at the discretion of the executive which gives rise to concerns expressed that judicial appointments are political and made for political gain. Issues continue to arise in relation to dealing with judicial misconduct not warranting removal and incapacity of judges. In 2013 Chief Justice of NSW Tom Bathurst identified the way in which judicial and court performance was measured as one of the most substantial risks to the separation of powers in Australia.\nCanada.\nCanada has a level of judicial independence entrenched in its Constitution, awarding superior court justices various guarantees to independence under sections 96 to 100 of the \"Constitution Act, 1867\". These include rights to tenure (although the Constitution has since been amended to introduce mandatory retirement at age 75) and the right to a salary determined by the Parliament of Canada (as opposed to the executive). In 1982 a measure of judicial independence was extended to inferior courts specializing in criminal law (but not civil law) by section 11 of the \"Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms\", although in the 1986 case \"Valente v. The Queen\" it was found these rights are limited. They do, however, involve tenure, financial security and some administrative control.\nThe year 1997 saw a major shift towards judicial independence, as the Supreme Court of Canada in the Provincial Judges Reference found an unwritten constitutional norm guaranteeing judicial independence to all judges, including civil law inferior court judges. The unwritten norm is said to be implied by the preamble to the \"Constitution Act, 1867\". Consequently, judicial compensation committees such as the Judicial Compensation and Benefits Commission now recommend judicial salaries in Canada.\nThere are two types of judicial independence: institutional independence and decisional independence. Institutional independence means the judicial branch is independent from the executive and legislative branches. Decisional independence is the idea that judges should be able to decide cases solely based on the law and facts, without letting the media, politics or other concerns sway their decisions, and without fearing penalty in their careers for their decisions.\nHong Kong.\nIn Hong Kong, independence of the judiciary has been the tradition since the territory became a British crown colony in 1842. After the 1997 transfer of sovereignty of Hong Kong to the People's Republic of China pursuant to the Sino-British Joint Declaration, an international treaty registered with the United Nations, independence of the judiciary, along with continuation of English common law, has been enshrined in the territory's constitutional document, the Basic Law.\nIndia.\nJudicial independence in India refers to the autonomy of the judiciary from the influence or interference of the executive and legislative branches of government. This principle is a cornerstone of the Indian Constitution and a fundamental feature of the country's democratic framework. It ensures that judges are free to make decisions based solely on law and justice, without any external pressures, thereby upholding the rule of law and protecting the rights of citizens.\nConstitutional Provisions.\nThe independence of the judiciary in India is enshrined in several provisions of the Constitution of India:\nAppointment and Tenure of Judges.\nOriginally, the appointment of judges was carried out by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice of India and other senior judges. However, the Collegium System, evolved through Supreme Court judgments (notably the Second Judges Case in 1993), gave primacy to the judiciary (Specifically the CJI and two senior judges of Supreme Court) in appointments and transfers of judges. This system aims to preserve independence by insulating the appointment process from political interference.\nJudges of the Supreme Court and High Courts enjoy security of tenure and can only be removed through a complex impeachment process requiring a two-thirds majority in both Houses of Parliament on grounds of proven misbehavior or incapacity (Article 124(4)).\nFinancial Independence.\nThe Constitution also ensures financial independence by charging the salaries and allowances of Supreme Court and High Court judges to the Consolidated Fund of India or the respective states, meaning they are not subject to vote by the legislature.\nJudicial Review and Activism.\nJudicial independence empowers courts to exercise judicial review, the authority to review laws and executive actions for their constitutionality. The Supreme Court, through landmark judgments such as Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala (1973), upheld the Basic Structure Doctrine, preventing Parliament from altering the Constitution's essential features, including judicial independence.\nIndian courts have also developed a tradition of judicial activism, particularly through Public Interest Litigations (PILs), allowing courts to act on behalf of the public good even in the absence of a traditional legal dispute.\nDuring the Emergency (1975\u20131977).\nOne of the most significant tests of judicial independence in India occurred during the Emergency declared by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi from June 25, 1975, to March 21, 1977. Civil liberties were suspended, political opponents were jailed, and press freedom was severely curtailed. This period highlighted how the judiciary could be vulnerable to executive overreach\u2014and how it responded under pressure.\nThe ADM Jabalpur Case (Habeas Corpus Case).\nAt the center of the judicial controversy during the Emergency was the ADM Jabalpur v. Shivkant Shukla (1976) case, commonly known as the Habeas Corpus case. The question before the Supreme Court was: \"Can a person challenge unlawful detention during the Emergency when the right to life and liberty under Article 21 has been suspended?\"\nIn a 4:1 majority judgment, the Supreme Court held that no person had the right to seek a writ of habeas corpus during the Emergency. This essentially gave the state unchecked power to detain individuals without trial. The lone dissent came from Justice H.R. Khanna, who famously ruled that \"Even in absence of Article 21, the State has no power to deprive a person of life or liberty without authority of law.\" His courageous stand cost him the position of Chief Justice of India, as he was superseded in seniority.\nThis decision is widely regarded as a dark moment in Indian judicial history, where the judiciary was seen to have failed in its duty to protect fundamental rights.\nExecutive influence and supersession of judges.\nThe Emergency also saw executive interference in judicial appointments. In several instances, senior judges were replaced by more pliant ones\u2014particularly those seen as more favorable to the government. This practice undermined the convention of seniority and was viewed as a direct attack on the independence of the judiciary.\nJustice A.N. Ray, who sided with the majority in the Kesavananda Bharati case but dissented from the majority in the https://, was appointed Chief Justice of India by superseding three senior judges in 1973\u2014an event often seen as a precursor to the erosion of judicial independence during the Emergency.\nLegacy and reassessment.\nAfter the Emergency ended and the Janata Party came to power, there was widespread introspection. The ADM Jabalpur judgement was heavily criticized, and many later Supreme Court decisions essentially overruled it in spirit, even if not formally.\nIn 2017, the Supreme Court in the K.S. Puttaswamy v. Union of India (privacy case) declared the ADM Jabalpur ruling to be \"seriously flawed\" and overruled it explicitly. The judgement reaffirmed that fundamental rights cannot be suspended even in times of crisis, thereby restoring the dignity of judicial independence.\nSingapore.\nJudicial independence in Singapore is protected by the Constitution of Singapore, statutes such as the State Courts Act and Supreme Court of Judicature Act, and the common law. To safeguard judicial independence, Singapore law lays down special procedures to be followed before the conduct of Supreme Court judges may be discussed in Parliament and for their removal from office for misconduct, and provides that their remuneration may not be reduced during their tenure. By statute, judicial officers of the State Courts, and the Registrar, Deputy Registrar and assistant registrars of the Supreme Court have immunity from civil suits, and are prohibited from hearing and deciding cases in which they are personally interested. The common law provides similar protections and disabilities for Supreme Court judges.\nThe Chief Justice and other Supreme Court judges are appointed by the President of Singapore acting on the advice of the Cabinet of Singapore. The President must consult the Chief Justice when appointing other judges, and may exercise personal discretion to refuse to make an appointment if he does not concur with the Cabinet's advice. Supreme Court justices enjoy security of tenure up to the age of 65 years, after which they cease to hold office. However, the Constitution permits such judges to be re-appointed on a term basis.\nUnited Kingdom.\nHistory in England and Wales.\nDuring the Middle Ages, under the Norman monarchy of the Kingdom of England, the king and his Curia Regis held judicial power. Judicial independence began to emerge during the early modern period; more courts were created and a judicial profession grew. By the fifteenth century, the king's role in this feature of government became small. Nevertheless, kings could still influence courts and dismiss judges. The Stuart dynasty used this power frequently in order to overpower the Parliament of England. After the Stuarts were removed in the Glorious Revolution of 1688, some advocated guarding against royal manipulation of the judiciary. King William III approved the Act of Settlement 1701, which established tenure for judges unless Parliament removed them.\nContemporary usage.\nUnder the uncodified British Constitution, there are two important conventions which help to preserve judicial independence. The first is that the Parliament of the United Kingdom does not comment on the cases which are before the court. The second is the principle of parliamentary privilege: that Members of Parliament are protected from prosecution in certain circumstances by the courts.\nFurthermore, the independence of the judiciary is guaranteed by the Constitutional Reform Act 2005. In order to try to promote the independence of the judiciary, the selection process is designed to minimize political interference. The process focuses on senior members of the judiciary rather than on politicians. Part 2 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 aims to increase diversity among the judiciary.\nThe pay of judges is determined by an independent pay review body. It makes recommendations to the government after taking evidence from a variety of sources. The government accepts these recommendations and will traditionally implement them fully. As long as judges hold their positions in \"good order\", they remain in post until they wish to retire or until they reach the mandatory retirement age of 70.\nUntil 1 January 2010, the legal profession was self-regulating; with responsibility for implementing and enforcing its own professional standards and disciplining its own members. The bodies which performed this function were the Bar Council and the Law Society. However, this self-regulation came to an end when approved regulators came under the regulation of the Legal Services Board, composed of non-lawyers, following the passage of the Legal Services Act 2007. This saw the establishment of the Solicitors Regulation Authority to regulate solicitors and the Bar Standards Board to regulate barristers.\nUnited States.\nFederal courts.\nArticle III of the United States Constitution establishes the federal courts as part of the federal government.\nThe Constitution provides that federal judges, including judges of the Supreme Court of the United States, are appointed by the President \"by and with the advice and consent of the Senate\". Once appointed, federal judges:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...both of the supreme and inferior Courts, shall hold their Offices during good Behavior, and shall, at stated Times, receive for their Services a Compensation which shall not be diminished during their Continuance in Office.\nFederal judges vacate office only upon death, resignation, or impeachment and removal from office by Congress; only 13 federal judges have been impeached as of 2025[ [update]]. The phrase \"during good behavior\" predates the Declaration of Independence. John Adams equated it with \"\" in a letter to the Boston Gazette published on 11 January 1773, a phrase that first appeared in section 3 of the Act of Settlement 1701 in England.\nThe president, while free to appoint any person to the federal bench, typically consults with the American Bar Association, whose Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary rates each nominee \"Well Qualified\", \"Qualified\" or \"Not Qualified\".\nState courts.\nState courts deal with independence of the judiciary in many ways, and several forms of judicial selection are used for both trial courts and appellate courts (including state supreme courts), varying between states and sometimes within states. In some states, judges are elected (sometime on a partisan ballot, other times on a nonpartisan one), while in others they are appointed by the governor or state legislature.\nThe 2000 case of \"Bush v. Gore\", in which a majority of the Supreme Court, including some appointees of President George H. W. Bush, overruled challenges to the election of George W. Bush then pending in the Florida Supreme Court, whose members had all been appointed by Democratic governors, is seen by many as reinforcing the need for judicial independence, both with regard to the Florida Supreme Court and the US Supreme Court. This case has increased focus and attention on judicial outcomes as opposed to the traditional focus on judicial qualifications.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59564", "revid": "46450117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59564", "title": "Judiciary", "text": "System of courts that interprets and applies the law\nThe judiciary (also known as the judicial system, judicature, judicial branch, judiciative branch, and court or judiciary system) is the system of courts that adjudicates legal disputes/disagreements and interprets, defends, and applies the law in legal cases.\nMeaning.\nThe judiciary is the system of courts that interprets, defends, and applies the law in the name of the state. The judiciary can also be thought of as the mechanism for the resolution of disputes. Under the doctrine of the separation of powers, the judiciary generally does not make statutory law (which is the responsibility of the legislature) or enforce law (which is the responsibility of the executive), but rather interprets, defends, and applies the law to the facts of each case. However, in some countries the judiciary does make common law.\nIn many jurisdictions the judicial branch has the power to change laws through the process of judicial review. Courts with judicial review power may annul the laws and rules of the state when it finds them incompatible with a higher norm, such as primary legislation, the provisions of the constitution, treaties or international law. Judges constitute a critical force for judicial interpretation and constitutional review while avoiding political bias.\nHistory in Europe.\nThis is a more general overview of the development of the judiciary and judicial systems over the course of history.\nRoman judiciary.\nArchaic Roman Law (650\u2013264 BC).\nThe most important part was \"Ius Civile\" (Latin for \"civil law\"). This consisted of \"Mos Maiorum\" (Latin for \"way of the ancestors\") and \"Leges\" (Latin for \"laws\"). \"Mos Maiorum\" was a set of rules of conduct based on social norms created over the years by predecessors. In 451\u2013449 BC, the \"Mos Maiorum\" was written down in the Twelve Tables.\n\"Leges\" were rules set by the leaders, first the kings, later the popular assembly during the Republic. In these early years, the legal process consisted of two phases. The first phase, \"In Iure\", was the judicial process. One would go to the head of the judicial system (at first the priests as law was part of religion) who would look at the applicable rules to the case. Parties in the case could be assisted by jurists. Then the second phase would start, the \"Apud Iudicem\". The case would be put before the judges, which were normal Roman citizens in an uneven number. They were orators rather than jurists. There were no rules of evidence, and little recourse against an adverse judgment.\nPre-classical Roman Law (264\u201327 BC).\nThe most important change in this period was the shift from priest to praetor as the head of the judicial system. The praetor would also make an edict in which he would declare new laws or principles for the year he was elected. This edict is also known as praetorian law.\nPrincipate (27 BC \u2013 284 AD).\nThe Principate is the first part of the Roman Empire, which started with the reign of Augustus. This time period is also known as the \"classical era of Roman Law\" In this era, the praetor's edict was now known as \"edictum perpetuum\" which were all the edicts collected in one edict by Hadrian. Also, a new judicial process came up: \"cognitio extraordinaria\" (Latin for \"extraordinary process\"). This came into being due to the largess of the empire. This process only had one phase, where the case was presented to a professional judge who was a representative of the emperor. Appeal was possible to the immediate superior.\nDuring this time period, legal experts started to come up. They studied the law and were advisors to the emperor. They also were allowed to give legal advice on behalf of the emperor.\nDominate (284\u2013565 AD).\nThis era is also known as the \"post-classical era of Roman law\". The most important legal event during this era was the Codification by Justinianus: the Corpus Iuris Civilis. This contained all Roman Law. It was both a collection of the work of the legal experts and commentary on it, and a collection of new laws. The \"Corpus Iuris Civilis\" consisted of four parts:\nMiddle Ages.\nDuring the late Middle Ages, education started to grow. First education was limited to the monasteries and abbeys, but expanded to cathedrals and schools in the city in the 11th century, eventually creating universities. The universities had five faculties: arts, medicine, theology, canon law and \"Ius Civile\", or civil law. Canon law, or ecclesiastical law are laws created by the Pope, head of the Roman Catholic Church. The last form was also called secular law, or Roman law. It was mainly based on the \"Corpus Iuris Civilis,\" which had been rediscovered in 1070. Roman law was mainly used for \"worldly\" affairs, while canon law was used for questions related to the church.\nThe period starting in the 11th century with the discovery of the \"Corpus Iuris Civilis\" is also called the Scholastics, which can be divided in the early and late scholastics. It is characterised with the renewed interest in the old texts.\nAccording to Kenneth Pennington, an expert of legal history, the sources of medieval law are diverse and include \"consilia\", decretals, conciliar canons, and Spanish procedural tracts. The true mind of medieval judges is unknowable, he says, and \"scholars who know norms that the jurists created in the jurisprudence of procedure have a much better chance of reading the sources correctly than those who do not\".\n\"Ius Civile\".\nEarly scholastics (1070\u20131263).\nThe rediscovery of the Digesta from the \"Corpus Iuris Civilis\" led the university of Bologna to start teaching Roman law. Professors at the university were asked to research the Roman laws and advise the Emperor and the Pope with regards to the old laws. This led to the Glossators to start translating and recreating the \"Corpus Iuris Civilis\" and create literature around it:\nAccursius wrote the \"Glossa Ordinaria\" in 1263, ending the early scholastics.\nLate scholastics (1263\u20131453).\nThe successors of the Glossators were the Post-Glossators or Commentators. They looked at a subject in a logical and systematic way by writing comments with the texts, treatises and \"consilia\", which are advises given according to the old Roman law.\nCanon Law.\nEarly Scholastics (1070\u20131234).\nCanon law knows a few forms of laws: the \"canones\", decisions made by Councils, and the \"decreta\", decisions made by the Popes. The monk Gratian, one of the well-known decretists, started to organise all of the church law, which is now known as the , or simply as \"Decretum\". It forms the first part of the collection of six legal texts, which together became known as the \"Corpus Juris Canonici\". It was used by canonists of the Roman Catholic Church until Pentecost (19 May) 1918, when a revised \"Code of Canon Law\" (\"Codex Iuris Canonici\") promulgated by Pope Benedict XV on 27 May 1917 obtained legal force.\nLate Scholastics (1234\u20131453).\nThe Decretalists, like the post-glossators for \"Ius Civile\", started to write treatises, comments and advises with the texts.\nIus Commune.\nAround the 15th century, a process of reception and acculturation started with both laws. The final product was known as \"Ius Commune\". It was a combination of canon law, which represented the common norms and principles, and Roman law, which were the actual rules and terms. It meant the creation of more legal texts and books and a more systematic way of going through the legal process. In the new legal process, appeal was possible. The process would be partially inquisitorial, where the judge would actively investigate all the evidence before him, but also partially adversarial, where both parties are responsible for finding the evidence to convince the judge.\nAfter the French Revolution, lawmakers stopped interpretation of law by judges, and the legislature was the only body permitted to interpret the law; this prohibition was later overturned by the Napoleonic Code.\nThe rules of procedure supposedly followed by medieval judges were part of the pan-European system of norms known as \"ius commune\", and probably offered a modicum of protection from harsh punishments like torture, Auto-da-f\u00e9 and capital punishment. In practice, medieval judges were influenced by ideology and the interests of the powerful. While procedural rules did not extend judicial protection to heretics, the poor and political opponents, procedural rules contain valuable clues about the substantive norms that drove judicial decisiomaking in the Middle Ages.\nFunctions of the judiciary in different law systems.\nIn common law jurisdictions, courts interpret law; this includes constitutions, statutes, and regulations. They also make law (but in a limited sense, limited to the facts of particular cases) based upon prior case law in areas where the legislature has not made law. For instance, the tort of negligence is not derived from statute law in most common law jurisdictions. The term \"common law\" refers to this kind of law. Common law decisions set precedent for all courts to follow. This is sometimes called \"stare decisis\".\nCountry-specific functions.\nIn the United States court system, the Supreme Court is the final authority on the interpretation of the federal Constitution and all statutes and regulations created pursuant to it, as well as the constitutionality of the various state laws; in the US federal court system, federal cases are tried in trial courts, known as the US district courts, followed by appellate courts and then the Supreme Court. State courts, which try 98% of litigation, may have different names and organization; trial courts may be called \"courts of common plea\", appellate courts \"superior courts\" or \"commonwealth courts\". The judicial system, whether state or federal, begins with a court of first instance, is appealed to an appellate court, and then ends at the court of last resort.\nIn France, the final authority on the interpretation of the law is the Council of State for administrative cases, and the Court of Cassation for civil and criminal cases.\nIn the People's Republic of China, the final authority on the interpretation of the law is the National People's Congress.\nOther countries such as Argentina have mixed systems that include lower courts, appeals courts, a cassation court (for criminal law) and a Supreme Court. In this system the Supreme Court is always the final authority, but criminal cases have four stages, one more than civil law does. On the court sits a total of nine justices. This number has been changed several times.\nJudicial systems by country.\nJapan.\nJapan's process for selecting judges is longer and more stringent than in various countries, like the United States and in Mexico. Assistant judges are appointed from those who have completed their training at the Legal Training and Research Institute located in Wako. Once appointed, assistant judges still may not qualify to sit alone until they have served for five years, and have been appointed by the Supreme Court of Japan. Judges require ten years of experience in practical affairs, as a public prosecutor or practicing attorney. In the Japanese judicial branch there is the Supreme Court, eight high courts, fifty district courts, fifty family courts, and 438 summary courts.\nMexico.\nJustices of the Mexican Supreme Court are appointed by the President of Mexico, and then are approved by the Mexican Senate to serve for a fifteen-year term. Other justices are appointed by the Supreme Court and serve for six years. Federal courts consist of the 11 ministers of the Supreme Court, 32 circuit tribunals and 98 district courts. The Supreme Court of Mexico is located in Mexico City. Supreme Court Judges must be of ages 35 to 65 and hold a law degree during the five years preceding their nomination.\nUnited States.\n \nUnited States Supreme Court justices are appointed by the President of the United States and approved by the United States Senate. The Supreme Court justices serve for life term or until retirement. The Supreme Court is located in Washington, D.C. The United States federal court system consists of 94 federal judicial districts. The 94 districts are then divided up into twelve regional circuits. The United States has five different types of courts that are considered subordinate to the Supreme Court: United States bankruptcy courts, United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, United States Court of International Trade, United States courts of appeals, and United States district courts.\nImmigration courts are not part of the judicial branch; immigration judges are employees of the Executive Office for Immigration Review, part of the United States Department of Justice in the executive branch.\nEach state, district and inhabited territory also has its own court system operating within the legal framework of the respective jurisdiction, responsible for hearing cases regarding state and territorial law. All these jurisdictions also have their own supreme courts (or equivalent) which serve as the highest courts of law within their respective jurisdictions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59565", "revid": "1319860272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59565", "title": "Figure-eight knot (mathematics)", "text": "Unique knot with a crossing number of four\nIn knot theory, a figure-eight knot (also called Listing's knot) is the unique knot with a crossing number of four. This makes it the knot with the third-smallest possible crossing number, after the unknot and the\ntrefoil knot. The figure-eight knot is a prime knot.\nOrigin of name.\nThe name is given because tying a normal figure-eight knot in a rope and then joining the ends together, in the most natural way, gives a model of the mathematical knot.\nDescription.\nA simple parametric representation of the figure-eight knot is as the set of all points (\"x\",\"y\",\"z\") where\nformula_1\nfor \"t\" varying over the real numbers (see 2D visual realization at bottom right).\nThe figure-eight knot is prime, alternating, rational with an associated value\nof 5/3, and is achiral. The figure-eight knot is also a fibered knot. This follows from other, less simple (but very interesting) representations of the knot: \n(1) It is a \"homogeneous\" closed braid (namely, the closure of the 3-string braid \u03c31\u03c32\u22121\u03c31\u03c32\u22121), and a theorem of John Stallings shows that any closed homogeneous braid is fibered. \n(2) It is the link at (0,0,0,0) of an isolated critical point of a real-polynomial map F: R4\u2192R2, so (according to a theorem of John Milnor) the Milnor map of F is actually a fibration. Bernard Perron found the first such F for this knot, namely,\n formula_2\nwhere\n formula_3\nMathematical properties.\nThe figure-eight knot has played an important role historically (and continues to do so) in the theory of 3-manifolds. Sometime in the mid-to-late 1970s, William Thurston showed that the figure-eight was hyperbolic, by decomposing its complement into two ideal hyperbolic tetrahedra. (Robert Riley and Troels J\u00f8rgensen, working independently of each other, had earlier shown that the figure-eight knot was hyperbolic by other means.) This construction, new at the time, led him to many powerful results and methods. For example, he was able to show that all but ten Dehn surgeries on the figure-eight knot resulted in non-Haken, non-Seifert-fibered irreducible 3-manifolds; these were the first such examples. Many more have been discovered by generalizing Thurston's construction to other knots and links.\nThe figure-eight knot is also the hyperbolic knot whose complement has the smallest possible volume, formula_4 (sequence in the OEIS), where formula_5 is the Lobachevsky function. From this perspective, the figure-eight knot can be considered the simplest hyperbolic knot. The figure eight knot complement is a double-cover of the Gieseking manifold, which has the smallest volume among non-compact hyperbolic 3-manifolds.\nThe figure-eight knot and the (\u22122,3,7) pretzel knot are the only two hyperbolic knots known to have more than 6 \"exceptional surgeries\", Dehn surgeries resulting in a non-hyperbolic 3-manifold; they have 10 and 7, respectively. A theorem of Lackenby and Meyerhoff, whose proof relies on the geometrization conjecture and computer assistance, holds that 10 is the largest possible number of exceptional surgeries of any hyperbolic knot. However, it is not currently known whether the figure-eight knot is the only one that achieves the bound of 10. A well-known conjecture is that the bound (except for the two knots mentioned) is 6.\nThe figure-eight knot has genus 1 and is fibered. \nTherefore its complement fibers over the circle, the fibers being Seifert surfaces which are 2-dimensional tori with one boundary component. \nThe monodromy map is then a homeomorphism of the 2-torus, which can be represented in this case by the matrix formula_6.\nInvariants.\nThe Alexander polynomial of the figure-eight knot is\nformula_7\nsince formula_8\nis a possible Seifert matrix, or because of its Conway polynomial, which is\nformula_9\nand the Jones polynomial is\nformula_10\nThe symmetry between formula_11 and formula_12 in the Jones polynomial reflects the fact that the figure-eight knot is achiral.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59566", "revid": "5230548", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59566", "title": "Computer programmer", "text": ""}
{"id": "59567", "revid": "49887303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59567", "title": "Scabbers", "text": ""}
{"id": "59568", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59568", "title": "Lake Zurich", "text": "Major lake in Switzerland\nLake Zurich (, ; ) is a lake in Switzerland, that extends southeast of the city of Zurich. Depending on the context, Lake Zurich or may refer to the entire lake or specifically to the section downstream of the Hurden peninsula and Seedamm causeway (between Pf\u00e4ffikon and Rapperswil). In the latter case, the upstream part of the lake is called \"Obersee\" (lit.\u2009'Upper Lake'), while the lower part is sometimes also referred to as the Lower Lake (), respectively.\nGeography.\nLake Zurich is a glacial lake that was formed by the Rhine-Linth glacier. Its main tributary is the River Linth, which rises in the glaciers of the Glarus Alps. The Linth originally flowed directly into Lake Zurich, but was later diverted by the Escher canal (completed in 1811) into Lake Walen () from where its waters are now carried to the east end of Lake Zurich (near Schmerikon) via the straightened Linth Canal (completed in 1816). Until the early 16th century, there was another lake upstream of \"Obersee\", Lake Tuggen () near Tuggen. Water exits Lake Zurich at its northwestern end (at the level of the Quaibr\u00fccke), passing through the city of Zurich. However, this outflow is known as the Limmat. The Limmat is a tributary of the Aare, which itself is a tributary of the High Rhine. The highest point in the lake's drainage basin is the T\u00f6di, at 3,614 metres (11,857 ft) above sea level.\nIn addition to the River Linth, other tributaries include the Jona, Schmerikoner Aa, Steinenbach, and W\u00e4gitaler Aa, which all flow into the Obersee, along with several creeks. The Seedamm, an artificial causeway and bridge, crosses the narrowest point of the lake at the level of the Hurden Peninsula, carrying a railway line and road from Rapperswil to Pf\u00e4ffikon. The waterway is also crossed by the \"Holzbr\u00fccke Rapperswil-Hurden\", a wooden pedestrian bridge. The eastern section of the lake is known as the \"Obersee\" (lit.\u2009'Upper Lake'). West of the Seedamm lie the small islands of L\u00fctzelau and Ufenau, where in 1523 Ulrich von Hutten took refuge and died. Other islands include Grosser Hafner, Saffa Island and Sch\u00f6nenwerd (near Richterswil). A popular tourist destination is the Au peninsula at the village of Au between W\u00e4denswil and Horgen. The lake shores are well cultivated and fertile. These include nature reserves such as Frauenwinkel and B\u00e4tzimatt. The bay of Rapperswil and reed in Nuolen are wintering areas for birds and popular sites for bird watching.\nTo the east, separated by Z\u00fcrichberg-Adlisberg, Forch, and Pfannenstiel, are two smaller lakes, Greifensee (lit.\u2009'Lake Greifen') and Pf\u00e4ffikersee (lit.\u2009'Lake Pf\u00e4ffikon'). There are several minor lakes and ponds in the vicinity, such as Egelsee, L\u00fctzelsee or T\u00fcrlersee. Zimmerberg, Etzel and Buechberg mountains lie to the west and south of the lake, respectively. Further to the east, the Speer, Ch\u00fcemettler and Federispitz can be seen from the southern part of the lake.\nAdministratively, Lake Zurich is split between the cantons of Zurich (Horgen District), St. Gallen (See-Gaster) and Schwyz (H\u00f6fe and March districts). The lower lake, to the west of the Seedamm, is largely in the canton of Zurich, while the upper lake is shared between the cantons of St. Gallen and Schwyz.\nTributaries of lower lake.\nThe following rivers or streams flow into lower part of Lake Zurich. From the Limmat clockwise, they are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCoastal settlements.\nZurich, at the north-western end of the lake, is the largest city on Lake Zurich. The least populous is Hurden.\nOn the west shore (which gradually becomes the south shore) are Kilchberg, R\u00fcschlikon, Thalwil, Oberrieden, Horgen, Au, W\u00e4denswil and Richterswil in the canton of Zurich, and Freienbach, Pf\u00e4ffikon, Hurden, Altendorf, Lachen, Nuolen and Tuggen in the canton of Schwyz.\nOn the opposite shore, which gradually becomes the northern shore towards east, are Zollikon, K\u00fcsnacht, Erlenbach, Herrliberg, Feldmeilen, Meilen, St\u00e4fa, and Feldbach in the canton of Zurich, and Rapperswil-Jona. The latter includes the medieval town of Rapperswil, whose castle is home to the Polish museum, and the coastal villages of Kempraten, Busskirch and Bollingen. The municipalities of Rapperswil-Jona and Schmerikon, which is close to the east end of the lake, are both in the canton of St. Gallen. A little further east is the larger town of Uznach.\nPrehistoric pile dwellings and historic settlements.\nNine Prehistoric pile dwellings around Z\u00fcrichsee, which are located in the cantons of Schwyz, St. Gallen and Zurich, are among the 56 Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps in Switzerland.\nThese nine sites on the Lake Zurich lakeshore are Freienbach\u2013Hurden Rosshorn, Freienbach\u2013Hurden Seefeld, Rapperswil-Jona/Hombrechtikon\u2013Feldbach, Rapperswil-Jona\u2013Technikum, Erlenbach\u2013Winkel, Meilen\u2013Rorenhaab, W\u00e4denswil\u2013Vorder Au, Zurich\u2013Enge Alpenquai, and Kleiner Hafner. Because the lake has grown in size over time, the original piles are now around to under the water level of . Two other sites are not far away: Greifensee\u2013Storen/Wildsberg at the Greifensee and Wetzikon\u2013Robenhausen at the Pf\u00e4ffikersee.\nAs well as being part of the 56 Swiss sites of the UNESCO World Heritage Site, each of these 11 prehistoric pile dwellings is also listed as a \"Class object\" in the Swiss inventory of cultural property of national and regional significance.\nIn Kempraten (Rapperswil-Jona municipality), there was a Roman vicus named Centum Prata. Another settlement was Turicum in Zurich.\nTransportation.\nThe main public and private transportation nodes around the lake are the city of Zurich and \u2014 given the presence of the Seedamm causeway \u2014 Pf\u00e4ffikon and Rapperswil. Besides Quaibr\u00fccke in Zurich and the Seedamm, there are no bridges across the lake. In addition, the towns of Meilen and Horgen are connected by a car ferry. The lake lies within the Z\u00fcrcher Verkehrsverbund (ZVV) fare zones, but the railway and bus routes around Obersee are partly within the OSTWIND fare zone.\nTrams and buses.\nBus routes on the western shore are operated by Zimmerberg Bus. On the eastern side, the VZO provides bus services along the lake shore and to the Z\u00fcrcher Oberland. VZO also operates the urban bus routes in Rapperswil and Jona. At the northern end of the lake, in Zurich, public transport consists of trams, trolleybuses and motor buses of VBZ.\nRail.\nLeft bank: The towns on the western and southern shores of Lake Zurich are linked by the Lake Zurich left bank railway line, which connects Z\u00fcrich HB with Ziegelbr\u00fccke. This line is served by the , , and of the Zurich S-Bahn and InterRegio (IR) trains. It is also used by EuroCity (EC), Intercity Express (ICE), Intercity (IC) and Railjet (RJX) trains but they do not call at stations along the lake. At W\u00e4denswil, the line connects to the W\u00e4denswil\u2013Einsiedeln railway to Einsiedeln, served by the .\nRight bank: Towns on the eastern shore of the lower lake (also known as the Goldcoast, or ) are connected by the Lake Zurich right bank railway line between Z\u00fcrich HB and Rapperswil. This line is served by S-Bahn services , , and of Zurich S-Bahn.\nThe Rapperswil\u2013Ziegelbr\u00fccke railway line along the northern shore of Obersee is served by St. Gallen S-Bahn services , and , and the \"Voralpen Express\". This line connects Rapperswil with Schmerikon on the eastern end of the lake via Blumenau. Bollingen is a ghost station since 2004.\nSeedamm: The Rapperswil\u2013Pf\u00e4ffikon railway line across the Seedamm and Hurden Peninsula is served by Zurich S-Bahn services and and the \"Voralpen Express\". This short line connects Rapperswil with Pf\u00e4ffikon SZ via Hurden.\nShipping.\nThe Z\u00fcrichsee-Schifffahrtsgesellschaft (ZSG) \u2013 lit.\u2009'the Lake Zurich Navigation Company' \u2013 provides with its 17-passenger ships touristic services on Lake Zurich. There are a number of passenger ferry services, notably the Horgen\u2013Meilen ferry, an auto ferry between Horgen and Meilen.\nSince 2025, the former \"MS Uetliberg\" has a 20 ton battery (the largest ever installed in a ship in Europe) and two electric motors.\nThe ship thus saves 113,000 liters of diesel, or 300 tons of CO\u2082, annually. \nThe batteries are charged overnight with green electricity at the shipyard in Zurich-Wollishofen. The ship, now called \"EMS Uetliberg\", has space for 300 passengers.\nThe sister ships MS Albis and MS Pfannenstiel will also be converted and electrified - one in winter 2025/26 and one in 2026/27.\nRoad.\nThe A3 motorway and follow the western and southern shores of Lake Zurich. The crosses the Seedamm, and the runs along the eastern lake shore.\nThe Lakes Route, one of the national bike routes, runs across the Seedamm and then follows the northern shore of Obersee. There are other bike routes along the eastern and western lake shores.\nFreeze over.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe freezing of Lake Zurich, called \"Seegfr\u00f6rni\" in Swiss German, is a rare and spectacular event. The lake was frozen in the following Common Era/Anno Domini years (1963 was the last time). Years 1223 to 1963 are based on (see list at the end of the article) and, for 1435 see.\nWater quality.\nLake Zurich's water is very clean and reaches, during summer, temperatures well beyond . Swimming in the public baths and beaches is very popular. The lake's water is purified and fed into Zurich's water system; it is potable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59569", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59569", "title": "Putrajaya", "text": "Malaysian government centre\nPutrajaya (), officially the Federal Territory of Putrajaya (), is the administrative centre of Malaysia. The seat of the federal government of Malaysia was moved in 1999 from Kuala Lumpur to Putrajaya because of overcrowding and congestion, whilst the seat of the judiciary of Malaysia was later moved to Putrajaya in 2003. Kuala Lumpur remains as Malaysia's national capital city per the constitution and is still the seat of the head of state (Yang di-Pertuan Agong) and the national legislature (Parliament of Malaysia), as well as being the country's commercial and financial centre.\nThe establishment of Putrajaya was the idea of Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. First thought of in the 1990s, Putrajaya was envisioned to be \u201ca laboratory for a new form of electronic government\" that would emphasize new adoption of and investment in internet,\u00a0media, and digital communications. The development of Putrajaya began in August 1995 and was completed at an estimated cost of US$8.1 billion. On 1 February 2001, Putrajaya became Malaysia's third federal territory, after Kuala Lumpur in 1974 and Labuan in 1984. Putrajaya is also a part of MSC Malaysia, a special economic zone that covers the Klang Valley.\nEtymology.\nPutrajaya was named after the first Prime Minister of Malaysia, Tunku Abdul Rahman Putra Al-Haj. The name is derived from the Sanskrit language, which was then adopted into Malay: \"putra\" (\u092a\u0941\u0924\u094d\u0930) means \"son\" and \"jaya\" (\u091c\u092f\u093e) means \"success\" or \"victory\"; hence \"Putrajaya\" means \"victorious men\" or \"victorious people\". The name was decided upon in late 1994.\nHistory and design.\n\"Prang Besar\" (alternately \"Perang Besar\", which is Malay for \"Great War\"), was founded in 1921 on land that was jungle, as a rubber plantation by British veterans of World War I, hence its name. Its land area of expanded to , and was merged with surrounding estates, including Estet Raja Alang, Estet Galloway and Estet Bukit Prang.\nUntil 1975, what is today Putrajaya, along with adjacent Cyberjaya, was under the administration of Hulu Langat District.\nThe vision of a new Federal Government Administrative Centre to replace Kuala Lumpur as the administrative capital emerged in the late 1980s, during the tenure of Malaysia's fourth prime minister, Mahathir bin Mohamad. A new city adjacent to Kuala Lumpur was envisioned, where the government would systematically locate its government offices within an efficient administrative hub; as opposed having government offices scattered across the congested Kuala Lumpur. The new city was proposed to be located between Kuala Lumpur and the new Kuala Lumpur International Airport (KLIA). Two areas were proposed: Prang Besar and Janda Baik of Pahang. The new name Putrajaya was chosen for the site.\nThe federal government negotiated with the state of Selangor on the prospect of another federal territory. In the mid-1990s, the federal government paid a substantial amount of money to Selangor for approximately of land in Prang Besar, Selangor. As a result of this land purchase, Selangor now surrounds two federal territories: Kuala Lumpur and Putrajaya.\nPlanned as a garden city and an intelligent city, 38% of the area is green spaces in which the natural landscape is enhanced. The plan incorporated a network of open spaces and wide boulevards. Construction began in August 1995; it was Malaysia's biggest project and one of Southeast Asia's largest, with an estimated final cost of US$8.1\u00a0billion. The entire project was designed and constructed by Malaysian companies, with only 10% imported materials. Most buildings in Putrajaya were built with conscious use of particular Islamic elements from the Middle East and Central Asia like those of Baghdad and Damascus, designed to reflect a cosmopolitan pan-Islamic identity emulating those regions espoused by Mahathir's government, rather than taking from homegrown elements that had taken hold in Southeast Asia or those brought from India (like the neo-Mughal buildings of Kuala Lumpur).\nThe 1997 Asian financial crisis somewhat slowed the development of Putrajaya. 300 members of the Prime Minister's office staff moved there in 1999, and the remaining government servants moved in 2005. On 1 February 2001, the city was formally transferred to the federal government and declared Malaysia's third federal territory.\nIn 2002, the KLIA Transit rail line was opened, linking Putrajaya to KLIA in Sepang. The construction of the Putrajaya Monorail, which was intended to be the city's metro system, was suspended owing to high costs. One of the monorail suspension bridges in Putrajaya remains unused.\nIn April 2013, the Putrajaya government signed a letter of intent (LOI) with the government of Sejong City in South Korea to mark co-operation between the two cities.\nGovernment and politics.\nGovernment ministries and bodies remaining in Kuala Lumpur include the Ministry of Investment, Trade and Industry (MITI), Ministry of Defence (MINDEF) and Ministry of Works (KKR), as well as Bank Negara Malaysia, Royal Malaysian Police and Malayan Railways. The Parliament of Malaysia also remained in Kuala Lumpur, as well as the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (King) of Malaysia. Foreign embassies and missions except Brunei still remain in Kuala Lumpur.\nThe local government in Putrajaya is the responsibility of the Putrajaya Corporation (\"Perbadanan Putrajaya\"), a unique local authority. Previously it was administered by the Sepang District Council.\nPutrajaya is represented in the Parliament of Malaysia by one elected MP in the Dewan Rakyat, under the seat of Putrajaya, as well as one appointed senator in the Dewan Negara.\nAs with the other federal territories of Malaysia, Putrajaya does not have a territorial legislature.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2007 the population of Putrajaya was estimated to be over 30,000, which comprised mainly government servants. Government public servants have been encouraged to relocate to the city through various government subsidy and loan programs. The population had increased to 88,300 by 2015. As of Q1 2024, the population of Putrajaya is estimated to be 119,700.\nReligion.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], the population of Putrajaya is 97.2% Muslim, 1.1% Hindu, 0.8% Christian, 0.5% Buddhist, 0.4% unknown and 0.1% other religions.\nInfrastructure.\nEducational institutions.\nKindergarten and Pre-School\nPrimary &amp; Secondary Education in Putrajaya is provided by a few schools such as:\nThere are also two elite fully residential schools in Putrajaya:\nOther universities:\nInternational schools:\nTransport.\nBy car.\nMajor highways.\nPutrajaya is surrounded by federal highways 29 on the western side and 30 on the eastern side. The South Klang Valley Expressway E26, connecting Pulau Indah to Kajang, runs through the northern end of Putrajaya. ELITE E6 exit 607 serves Putrajaya and also nearby Cyberjaya. Highway 29 interchanges with Damansara\u2013Puchong Expressway (LDP) E11 in the northwestern corner of Putrajaya, linking the city with Puchong, Subang Jaya, Kelana Jaya and to Kepong.\nWithin Putrajaya, the following roads serve as the main thoroughfares of the city.\nPublic transport.\nRail.\nPutrajaya is served by two urban rail lines: the KLIA Transit line and the Putrajaya line through the Putrajaya Sentral transportation hub on the western border of Putrajaya. The MRT Putrajaya Line is Malaysia's fifth metro line, and the longest in the Rapid Rail network, with Putrajaya Sentral being the southern most station in the network. The KLIA Transit is one of Malaysia's two operational airport rail links, connecting KL Sentral in Kuala Lumpur to its international airport, calling at 3 stations in between including Putrajaya.\nThe national rail network Keretapi Tanah Melayu (KTM) does not serve Putrajaya. The cancelled Kuala Lumpur\u2013Singapore High Speed Rail was meant to serve Putrajaya with a station at Kampung Dato Abu Bakar Baginda, about halfway between Precinct 14 and Bandar Baru Bangi.\nAround 2003, plans for a monorail in Putrajaya were underway but were halted due to low population. Plans to revive the construction of the Putrajaya Monorail, with proposed connections to Kajang, Bandar Baru Bangi and Cyberjaya, have not yet materialised.\nBuses.\nPutrajaya Corporation provides its own stage bus services through its subsidiary \"Nadi Putra\" using natural gas-powered buses and a few electric buses. The bus service serves the entirety of Putrajaya as well as Cyberjaya and provides express bus routes to Kuala Lumpur through Puduraya and a few other nearby cities from its hubs at Putrajaya Sentral, and P&amp;R Presint 14. Bus stops in Putrajaya are very common too and serves Nadi Putra. Rapid KL, Causeway Link and Cityliner also provides bus services to other areas from Putrajaya Sentral such as Banting, Puchong, Bandar Utama and Petaling Jaya.\nIntercity buses also serve bus routes from Putrajaya Sentral to the northern states.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nPutrajaya is twinned with these cities:\nClimate.\nPutrajaya has a tropical rainforest climate (Af) with heavy rainfall year-round and high temperatures throughout the year. As is typical of cities, towns, and other geographical regions with this climate, Putrajaya does not have a true dry season. The average temperature in Putrajaya is 27.1\u00a0\u00b0C, which is measured at approximately 80.8\u00a0\u00b0F. Over the course of a yearly period, the rainfall averages 2307\u00a0mm in Putrajaya, which is approximately 90.8 inches.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59570", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59570", "title": "Strait of Malacca", "text": "Strait between the Malay Peninsula and the Indonesian island of Sumatra\nThe Strait of Malacca is a narrow stretch of water, long and from wide, between the Malay Peninsula to the northeast and the Indonesian island of Sumatra to the southwest, connecting the Andaman Sea (Indian Ocean) and the South China Sea (Pacific Ocean). As the main shipping channel between the Indian and Pacific oceans, it is one of the most important shipping lanes in the world.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Malacca\" is traditionally associated with the Malacca tree (\"Phyllanthus emblica\"), also known as the Indian gooseberry tree, and is believed to derive from the local Malay word \"Melaka\". According to historical traditions, Parameswara, a Sumatran prince and the founder of the Malacca Sultanate, selected the site for his new kingdom where the city of Malacca now stands. It is said that he named the location \"Melaka\" after the Malacca tree under which he had rested. Over time, the name \"Malacca\" came to refer not only to the city but also to the strategically significant waterway between the Malay Peninsula and the Indonesian island of Sumatra, known as the Malacca Strait.\nExtent.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization define the limits of the Strait of Malacca as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"On the west.\" A line joining Pedropunt, the northernmost point of Sumatra (), and Lem Voalan, the southern extremity of Goh Puket [Phromthep Cape on Phuket Island] in Siam [Thailand] ().\n\"On the east.\" A line joining Tanjong Piai (Bulus), the southern extremity of the Malay Peninsula (), and The Brothers (), and thence to Klein Karimoen ().\n\"On the north.\" The southwestern coast of the Malay Peninsula.\n\"On the south.\" The northeastern coast of Sumatra as far to the eastward as Tanjong Kedabu (), thence to Klein Karimoen.\nHistory.\nEarly traders from Arabia, Africa, Persia, and southern India reached Kedah before arriving at Guangzhou. Kedah served as a western port on the Malay Peninsula. They traded glassware, camphor, cotton goods, brocades, ivory, sandalwood, perfume, and precious stones. These traders sailed to Kedah via the monsoon winds between June and November. They returned between December and May. Kedah provided accommodations, porters, small vessels, bamboo rafts, elephants, as well as tax collections for goods to be transported overland toward eastern ports of the Malay Peninsula such as Langkasuka and Kelantan. After the tenth century, ships from China began to trade at these eastern trading posts and ports. Kedah and Funan were famous ports throughout the 6th century, before shipping began to use the Strait of Malacca itself as a trade route.\nIn the 7th century, the maritime empire of Srivijaya, based in Palembang, Sumatra, rose to power, and its influence expanded to the Malay Peninsula and Java. The empire gained effective control of two major choke points in maritime Southeast Asia: the Strait of Malacca and the Sunda Strait. By launching a series of conquests and raids on potential rival ports on both sides of the strait, Srivijaya ensured its economic and military domination in the region, which lasted about 700 years. Srivijaya gained great benefits from the lucrative spice trade, e.g. the tributary trade system with China, and trade with Indian and Arab merchants. The Strait of Malacca became an important maritime trade route between India and China. The importance of the Strait of Malacca in global trade networks continued well into later centuries with the rise of the Malacca Sultanate in the 15th century, the Johor Sultanate, the Straits Settlements, and the modern city-state of Singapore.\nSince the 17th century, the strait has been the main shipping channel between the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. Various major regional powers have managed the straits during different historical periods.\nEconomic importance.\nFrom an economic and strategic perspective, the Strait of Malacca is one of the most important shipping lanes in the world.\nThe strait is the main shipping channel between the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean, linking major Asian economies such as India, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Vietnam, China, Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea. The Strait of Malacca is part of the Maritime Silk Road that runs from the Chinese coast towards the southern tip of India to Mombasa, from there through the Red Sea via the Suez Canal to the Mediterranean, there to the upper Adriatic region to the northern Italian hub of Trieste with its rail connections to Central Europe and the North Sea. Over 94,000 vessels pass through the strait each year (2008) making it the busiest strait in the world, carrying about 25% of the world's traded goods, including oil, Chinese manufactured products, coal, palm oil and Indonesian coffee. About a quarter of all oil carried by sea passes through the strait, mainly from Persian Gulf suppliers to Asian markets. In 2007, an estimated 13.7 million barrels per day were transported through the strait, increasing to an estimated 15.2 million barrels per day in 2011. In addition, it is also one of the world's most congested shipping choke points because it narrows to only 2.8\u00a0km (1.5 nautical miles) wide at the Phillip Channel (close to southern Singapore).\nThe draught of some of the world's largest ships (mostly oil tankers) exceeds the Strait's minimum depth of . This shallow point occurs in the Singapore Strait. The maximum size of a vessel that can pass through the Strait is referred to as the Malaccamax. The next closest passageway to the east, the Sunda Strait between Sumatra and Java, is even shallower and narrower, meaning that ships exceeding the Malaccamax must detour a few thousand nautical miles and use the Lombok Strait, Makassar Strait, Sibutu Passage, and Mindoro Strait instead.\nThe strategic significance of the strait has led to security concerns for major trading nations, particularly China. In 2003, Chinese president Hu Jintao coined the term \"Malacca dilemma\" to describe China's vulnerability to potential disruptions in energy supplies transiting the strait. With roughly 80% of China's imported crude oil passing through this narrow maritime corridor, Chinese policymakers have identified the strait as a critical chokepoint. The concept has since influenced China\u2019s foreign policy, leading to investments in alternative energy routes and maritime security initiatives.\nUnited Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.\nThe United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) states that each coastal state has their territorial waters from the baseline and 12 nautical miles out. The UNCLOS framework\u2019s legal limits to maritime boundaries has at times heightened tensions in the Strait of Malacca. An example of this can be seen from several pirate attacks in the 1990's and 2000's which took place in the territorial waters of Indonesia and were thus classified as armed robberies, not piracy. Indonesia lacked resources to tackle the pirates and thus territorial rivalry heightened in the area. The increase in tension made it easier for pirates to evade law enforcement by traversing maritime border in order to avoid capture.\nPresent-day maritime security.\nDue to its significant role as a vital sea lane in global trade, security in the Strait of Malacca is of great importance to several countries besides those that border it. Threats in the region are shaped by piracy, smuggling, geopolitical tension, and environmental threats like pollution and ecosystem degradation. Some of these challenges have seen a decrease in numbers, but some challenges still remain. Mainly with regards to international cooperation and environmental stability.\nIn 2005 the Strait of Malacca and Strait of Singapore were declared as high-risk areas due to attacks against passing vessels. The designation was later removed due to regional cooperation and naval patrols. However, in January 2025 it was reported that significant maritime security risks had risen. Passing ships are still advised to proceed with adequate security measures.\nInternational Cooperation.\nSovereignty versus cooperation.\nEfforts to enhance maritime security in the region are often caught in the struggle between state sovereignty and the need to further international security cooperation. The states bordering the Strait of Malacca have historically been reluctant to surrender some of their sovereign control over their territorial waters and exclusive economic zone (EEZ), especially related to safe and free passage of ships, where they are not allowed to interfere.\nRegional cooperation such as with the Cooperative Mechanism have contributed to reducing security threats and pollution, but in order to maintain and have consistent security in the region, greater coordination is needed between the states of the Strait of Malacca to secure the maritime domain.\nShipping hazards.\nPiracy has been a problem in the strait. Piracy had been high in the 2000s, with additional increase after the events of September 11, 2001. After attacks rose again in the first half of 2004, regional navies stepped up their patrols of the area in July\u00a02004. Subsequently, attacks on ships in the Strait of Malacca dropped, to 79 in 2005 and 50 in 2006. Attacks have dropped to near zero in recent years.\nThere are 34\u00a0shipwrecks, some dating to the 1880s, in the local TSS channel (the channel for commercial ships under the global Traffic Separation Scheme). These pose a collision hazard in the narrow and shallow strait.\nOn 20 August 2017, the United States Navy destroyer lost ten of its crew's lives in a collision with the merchant ship \"Alnic MC\" a short distance east of the strait whilst full steering capabilities had been lost. The ship had made a series of errors in attempted mitigation, its external lights being changed to \"red over red\" (\"vessel not under command\").\nAnother risk is the annual haze due to wildfires in Sumatra, Indonesia. It may reduce visibility to , forcing ships to slow in the busy strait. The strait is frequently used by ships longer than.\nProposals to relieve the strait.\nThailand has developed plans to divert much of the strait's traffic and hence some of its economic significance to a shorter route: the Thai government has several times proposed cutting a canal through the Isthmus of Kra, saving around from the journey between the two oceans. China has offered to cover the costs, according to a report leaked to \"The Washington Times\" in 2004. Nevertheless, and despite the support of several Thai politicians, the prohibitive financial and ecological costs suggest that the canal will not be built.\nAn alternative is to install a pipeline across the Isthmus of Kra to carry oil to ships waiting on the other side. Proponents calculate it would cut the cost of oil delivery to Asia by about $0.50/barrel ($3/m3). Myanmar has also made a similar pipeline proposal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59571", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59571", "title": "Nearly Headless Nick", "text": ""}
{"id": "59572", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59572", "title": "Quidditch", "text": "Fictional sport from Harry Potter\nQuidditch () is a fictional sport invented by author J. K. Rowling for her fantasy book series \"Harry Potter\". It first appeared in the novel \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" (1997). In the series, Quidditch is portrayed as a dangerous but popular sport played by witches and wizards riding flying broomsticks.\nMatches are played on a large oval pitch with three ring-shaped goals of different heights on each side, between two opposing teams of seven players each: three Chasers, two Beaters, the Keeper, and the Seeker. The Chasers and the Keeper respectively score with and defend the goals against the Quaffle; the two Beaters bat the Bludgers away from their teammates and towards their opponents; and the Seeker locates and catches the Golden Snitch, whose capture simultaneously wins the Seeker's team 150 points and ends the game. The team with the most points at the end wins.\nHarry Potter plays as Seeker for his house team at Hogwarts. Regional and international Quidditch competitions are mentioned throughout the series. Aspects of the sport's history are revealed in \"Quidditch Through the Ages\", published by Rowling on 12 March 2001 to benefit Comic Relief.\nA real-life version of the game has been created, in which the players use brooms, but run instead of flying.\nDevelopment.\nRowling came up with the sport in a Manchester hotel room after an argument with her then-boyfriend. She explained: \"I had been pondering the things that hold a society together, cause it to congregate and signify its particular character and knew I needed a sport.\" Rowling claims that the word \"Quidditch\" is not derived from any particular etymological root, but was the result of filling five pages of a notebook with different words beginning with \"Q\".\nDespite the sport's popularity with fans, Rowling grew to dislike describing the matches. She commented in an interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To be honest with you, Quidditch matches have been the bane of my life in the \"Harry Potter\" books. They are necessary in that people expect Harry to play Quidditch, but there is a limit to how many ways you can have them play Quidditch together and for something new to happen.\nThe final Quidditch scene in the books appears in \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\". Rowling experienced \"fiendish glee\" writing this scene, which features memorable commentary by Luna Lovegood.\nQuidditch is introduced in \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\", and is a regularly recurring feature throughout the first six books. It is depicted as being played by both professionals (as in tournaments like the Quidditch World Cup) and amateurs. A major motif of five of the \"Harry Potter\" books is the competition among the four Hogwarts houses for the Quidditch Cup each school year; in particular, the rivalry between Gryffindor and Slytherin.\nIn 2014, Rowling started publishing a series of match reports from the Quidditch World Cup on Pottermore, culminating in a short story about the final featuring the return of Harry, Ron, Hermione and their friends as adults. This generated interest from several media outlets, as it was the first new writing about the \"Harry Potter\" characters since the end of the series in 2007.\nRowling published \"Quidditch Through the Ages\" in 2001 to benefit Comic Relief; \"Quidditch Through The Ages Illustrated Edition\" was published in 2020, with banners being presented to 11 towns in the UK and Ireland that in the books have Quidditch teams, including the Ballycastle Bats, Falmouth Falcons, Holyhead Harpies, Montrose Magpies, Pride of Portree and Wigtown Wanderers; two teams based in fictional places, the Chudley Cannons and Puddlemere United, were also celebrated.\nBroomsticks.\nBroomsticks are one of the forms of transportation for wizards and witches, as well as being used for playing Quidditch. The three most prominent broomsticks in the books are the Nimbus 2000, Nimbus 2001, and the Firebolt, all three of which have been produced as merchandise by Warner Bros.\nThe Nimbus is introduced as one of the best broomsticks in the wizarding world. Harry receives a Nimbus 2000 in \"Philosopher's Stone\" so that he can play for Gryffindor house. In \"Chamber of Secrets\", Lucius Malfoy buys a full set of the more advanced Nimbus 2001s for the Slytherin team as a bribe, so they would choose his son Draco as Seeker that year.\nThe Firebolt later supersedes the Nimbus as the fastest and one of the most expensive racing brooms in existence. Harry receives a Firebolt model from his godfather, Sirius Black, after his Nimbus 2000 is destroyed during a Quidditch match in \"Prisoner of Azkaban\". In \"Goblet of Fire\", Harry uses his Firebolt to escape the Hungarian Horntail during the Triwizard Tournament.\nFilms and video games.\nQuidditch appears in five of the eight \"Harry Potter\" films. Some Quidditch subplots, such as Ron's Keeper storyline in \"Order of the Phoenix\", were cut to save time in the films. Video games that feature Quidditch include:\nIn the Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey attraction in the Wizarding World of Harry Potter at the Islands of Adventure theme park, Quidditch is featured near the end where riders are flown through the Quidditch pitch. A storefront near Ollivanders Wand Shop is themed as a Quidditch supply with a Golden Snitch on the sign and a case containing animated Quaffle and Bludgers surrounded by Beaters' bats.\nReception.\nAccording to David K. Steege, the books \"follow very closely the school story tradition of making games and sports central to the boarding school experience; some of the most vivid and popular scenes in the series take place on the playing field.\"\nHowever, some critics have claimed that Rowling's presentation of Quidditch reinforces gender inequality. For example, Heilman and Donaldson argue that the female players ultimately have little impact on the outcome of the game, and it has also been noted that the female players on the Gryffindor Quidditch team have very few lines. This view has been disputed by Mimi R. Gladstein, who points to the presence of female players on the victorious Irish team at the Quidditch World Cup. She argues: \"The inclusion of female Quidditch players at the highest level of the sport is done without a trace of self-consciousness and their inclusion isn't an issue within the minds of the characters.\" On the other hand, D. Bruno Starrs notes Quidditch's rarity as a sport in which males and females compete against each other, and describes it as \"levelling\" the genders.\nQuidditch has been criticised for its emphasis on catching the Snitch. Rowling claims that Quidditch is a sport that \"infuriates\" men in particular, who are bothered by the unrealistic scoring system. Because of the emphasis on the Snitch, legal scholar William Baude called Quidditch \"a really stupid game\".\nNon-fictional Quidditch.\nIn the real world, the word \"Quidditch\", long predating \"Harry Potter\", occurs in some English placenames, and seems to come from Anglo-Saxon \"cw\u01e3\u00f0-d\u012bc\" = \"mud-ditch\".\nA street in Lower Cambourne, Cambridgeshire, England is named Quidditch Lane, supposedly after a type of nearby dry ditch called a Quidditch. Fans have been known to visit the area.\nIn November 2014, a plaque appeared outside the entrance of Bristol Children's Hospital attesting that the famous hooped sculptures which stand in front of the paediatric institution are, in fact, not a interactive installation inaugurated in 2001, but instead the goalposts used in the 1998 Quidditch World Cup.\nIn 2017, \"Quidditch\" was defined by Oxford Dictionaries, following the inclusion of \"Muggle\" in the third (2003) edition of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\". Oxford Dictionaries associate editor Charlotte Buxton explained that Quidditch had gained recognition beyond the books, pointing to its existence as a real-life sport.\nAs a real-life sport.\nIn 2007 the United States Quidditch Association, back then named the Intercollegiate Quidditch Association (or I.Q.A.), was founded to regulate quidditch in the United States and abroad, a very popular sport amongst college students. According to the International Quidditch Association, the current international governing body of the sport, the original rules and regulation of the popular collegiate sport known as quidditch were formed \"... on a sunny Sunday afternoon in 2005 by Xander Manshel and Alex Benepe, students at Middlebury College in Vermont, US\". In contrast to the fictional sport, the game is played on foot while using one hand to hold a broom between the legs.\nSince 2005, many American schools, such as UC Berkeley, have added Quidditch to their list of team sports. In the United States, college teams compete in their respective regions and compete in an annual national tournament, last year held in Texas and won by The University of Texas over runner-ups, The University of California, Berkeley (Cal Quidditch). The sport has since then spread across more than 25 countries and includes multiple international tournaments, including a World Cup. In 2012, the International Quidditch Association held the IQA World Cup, then named the IQA Summer Games, as the torch was passing through Oxford, UK for the Summer Olympics.\nGameplay is based on the description in the books, films, and game adaptations, though the sport has been adapted to suit real-world constraints. Quidditch is still evolving to suit safe play for the members of the teams, male and female. Apart from joining teams registered with their national governing body, individuals are also able to become an official certified referee to officiate tournaments and games throughout the year as teams compete to take part in various national and international tournaments. As the oldest national governing body, USQ has hosted a grand total of ten US Quidditch Cups as of 2017.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Quidditch Premier League is played between 10 teams, split between the North and South divisions. In 2017, West Midlands Revolution won the QPL.\nIn response to allegations of J. K. Rowling's anti-trans positions, and Warner Bros.' ownership of the word \"Quidditch\", US Quidditch and Major League Quidditch announced in 2022 that they were renaming the sport \"Quadball\".\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59573", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59573", "title": "GNUStep", "text": ""}
{"id": "59574", "revid": "1170225486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59574", "title": "Biproduct", "text": "In category theory and its applications to mathematics, a biproduct of a finite collection of objects, in a category with zero objects, is both a product and a coproduct. In a preadditive category the notions of product and coproduct coincide for finite collections of objects. The biproduct is a generalization of finite direct sums of modules.\nDefinition.\nLet C be a category with zero morphisms. Given a finite (possibly empty) collection of objects \"A\"1, ..., \"A\"\"n\" in C, their \"biproduct\" is an object formula_1 in C together with morphisms \nsatisfying\nand such that\nIf C is preadditive and the first two conditions hold, then each of the last two conditions is equivalent to formula_13 when \"n\" &gt; 0. An empty, or nullary, product is always a terminal object in the category, and the empty coproduct is always an initial object in the category. Thus an empty, or nullary, biproduct is always a zero object.\nExamples.\nIn the category of abelian groups, biproducts always exist and are given by the direct sum. The zero object is the trivial group.\nSimilarly, biproducts exist in the category of vector spaces over a field. The biproduct is again the direct sum, and the zero object is the trivial vector space.\nMore generally, biproducts exist in the category of modules over a ring.\nOn the other hand, biproducts do not exist in the category of groups. Here, the product is the direct product, but the coproduct is the free product.\nAlso, biproducts do not exist in the category of sets. For, the product is given by the Cartesian product, whereas the coproduct is given by the disjoint union. This category does not have a zero object.\nBlock matrix algebra relies upon biproducts in categories of matrices.\nProperties.\nIf the biproduct formula_14 exists for all pairs of objects \"A\" and \"B\" in the category C, and C has a zero object, then all finite biproducts exist, making C both a Cartesian monoidal category and a co-Cartesian monoidal category.\nIf the product formula_15 and coproduct formula_16 both exist for some pair of objects \"A\"1, \"A\"2 then there is a unique morphism formula_17 such that\nIt follows that the biproduct formula_21 exists if and only if \"f\" is an isomorphism.\nIf C is a preadditive category, then every finite product is a biproduct, and every finite coproduct is a biproduct. For example, if formula_15 exists, then there are unique morphisms formula_23 such that\nTo see that formula_15 is now also a coproduct, and hence a biproduct, suppose we have morphisms formula_28 for some object formula_29. Define formula_30 Then formula_31 is a morphism from formula_15 to formula_29, and formula_34 for formula_35.\nIn this case we always have\nAn additive category is a preadditive category in which all finite biproducts exist. In particular, biproducts always exist in abelian categories.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59575", "revid": "50938682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59575", "title": "Penang", "text": "State in Malaysia\nPenang is a Malaysian state located on the northwest coast of Peninsular Malaysia. It is divided into two parts by the Strait of Malacca: Penang Island to the west, where the capital city George Town is located, and Seberang Perai on the Malay Peninsula to the east. These two halves are physically connected by the Penang Bridge and the Second Penang Bridge. The state shares borders with Kedah to the north and east, and Perak to the south.\nPenang is one of Malaysia's most developed economic powerhouses, with the highest GDP per capita of all states. It also ranks second among the states in terms of average wages. Penang is Malaysia's leading exporter with nearly RM495 billion (US$ billion) in exports in 2024, primarily through the Penang International Airport which is also the nation's second busiest by aircraft movements.\nEstablished by Francis Light in 1786, Penang became part of the Straits Settlements, a British crown colony also comprising Malacca and Singapore. During World War II, Japan occupied Penang, but the British regained control in 1945. Penang was later merged with the Federation of Malaya (now Malaysia), which gained independence in 1957. Penang's economy shifted from entrep\u00f4t trade to electronics manufacturing and the tertiary sector throughout the late 20th century.\nWith 1.74 million residents and a population density of as of 2020[ [update]], Penang is one of Malaysia's most densely populated and urbanised states. Seberang Perai is Malaysia's third largest city by population. Penang is culturally diverse with a population that includes Chinese, Malays, Indians, Eurasians, Siamese and expatriates.\nEtymology.\nThe name Penang comes from the modern Malay name \"Pulau Pinang\" which means 'areca nut island'. Penang is also colloquially referred to as the \"Pearl of the Orient\" and \"The Island of Pearls\" ().\nOver the course of history, Penang Island had been known by different names by seafarers from various regions. The locals named it \"Pulo Ka Satu\", meaning \"The First Island\", as it was the largest island on the maritime route between Lingga and Kedah. The Siamese, who were the overlords of Kedah, called it \"Ko Mak\" ().\nMaritime explorers also took note of the island's abundance of areca nut. During the 15th century, Admiral Zheng He of Ming China referred to the island as \"B\u012bngl\u00e1ng Y\u01d4\" () in his navigational charts. In the \"Description of Malacca\", Portuguese cartographer Manuel Godinho de Er\u00e9dia named it \"Pulo Pinaom\".\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n British East India Company 1786\u20131858&lt;br&gt;\n British Raj 1858\u20131867&lt;br&gt;\n Straits Settlements 1826\u20131941; 1945\u20131946&lt;br&gt;\n Empire of Japan 1941\u20131945&lt;br&gt;\n Malayan Union 1946\u20131948&lt;br&gt;\n Federation of Malaya 1948\u20131963&lt;br&gt;\n Malaysia 1963\u2013present\nEarly history.\nArchaeologists have discovered human remains such as the \"Penang Woman\", along with seashells, pottery and stone tools, in Seberang Perai. The artefacts indicate that around 5,000 to 6,000 years ago, Penang was inhabited by nomadic Melanesians during the Neolithic era.\nPali inscriptions on the Cherok Tok Kun megalith suggest the Hindu-Buddhist Bujang Valley civilisation, based in present-day Kedah, held authority over parts of Seberang Perai by the 6th century. The entirety of Penang later formed part of Kedah, which came under Siamese suzerainty by the late 18th century.\nEstablishment and British rule.\nPenang's modern history began in 1786 when Francis Light, a representative of the British East India Company (EIC), obtained Penang Island from Sultan Abdullah Mukarram Shah of Kedah in exchange for military aid. Light had been sent to the Malay Peninsula by the EIC to build trade relations in the region, where he saw the strategic potential of Penang Island as a \"convenient magazine for trade\" that could enable the British to check Dutch and French territorial ambitions in Southeast Asia.\nAfter negotiating an agreement with the Sultan, Light and his entourage landed on Penang Island on 17 July that year and took formal possession of the island \"in the name of King George III of England\" on 11 August. The island was renamed Prince of Wales Island after the heir to the British throne and the new settlement of George Town was established in honour of King George III.\nUnbeknownst to Sultan Abdullah, Light had acted without the authority or the consent of his superiors in India. When the EIC reneged on military protection, the Sultan launched an attempt to recapture the Prince of Wales Island in 1791. However, the attempt was defeated by EIC forces and the Sultan sued for peace. An annual payment of 6,000 Spanish dollars was agreed in exchange for British sovereignty over the island.\nIn 1800, Lieutenant-Governor George Leith secured a strip of hinterland across the Penang Strait, which was subsequently named Province Wellesley (now Seberang Perai). The EIC gained permanent sovereignty over both Prince of Wales Island and the new mainland territory, while the annual payment to the Sultan of Kedah was increased to 10,000 Spanish dollars. The British government and, subsequently, the Malaysian government maintained the annual payments to Kedah until 2018, when the Malaysian federal government increased the amount by RM10 million yearly.\nGeorge Town grew rapidly as a free port and a conduit for spice trade, diverting maritime commerce away from Dutch outposts in the region. In 1805, Penang became a separate presidency of British India, sharing similar status with Bombay and Madras. By 1808, George Town had established its local government, while the founding of the Supreme Court of Penang marked the birth of Malaysia's modern judiciary. In 1826, George Town was made the capital of the Straits Settlements which included Singapore and Malacca. As Singapore soon supplanted George Town as the region's premier entrep\u00f4t, Singapore became the capital instead in 1832.\nDespite its secondary importance to Singapore, George Town retained its importance as a vital British entrep\u00f4t. Towards the end of the 19th century, it became a major tin exporter and Malaya's primary financial centre. Penang's prosperity attracted a cosmopolitan population comprising Chinese, Malay, Indian, Peranakan, Siamese and migrants of mixed European-Asian lineage referred to as \"Eurasians\", and led to the development of hitherto rural areas such as Butterworth and Bukit Mertajam. However, the population growth created social problems such as inadequate sanitation, health facilities and rampant crime, culminating in street violence and rioting in 1867.\nThe Straits Settlements became a British crown colony within the same year. Direct British rule led to improved law enforcement, and investments in health care and public transportation in Penang. Owing to enhanced access to education, active participation of Asian residents in municipal affairs and substantial press freedom, George Town was perceived as being more intellectually receptive than Singapore. The settlement attracted intellectuals and revolutionaries, including Rudyard Kipling, Somerset Maugham and Sun Yat-sen. In 1910, Sun selected George Town as the centre for the Tongmenghui's political activities in Southeast Asia, aimed at overthrowing the Qing dynasty.\nWorld wars.\nPenang emerged from World War I relatively unscathed, apart from the Battle of Penang during which the Imperial German Navy cruiser SMS \"Emden\" sank two Allied warships off George Town. During the interwar years, the British had acknowledged the need to fortify their armed forces in northern Malaya. However, complacency and lack of resources left British forces ill-prepared to confront the Japanese invasion at the onset of the Pacific War. Although Penang Island had been designated as a fortress, Penang fell without struggle to the Imperial Japanese Army on 19 December 1941 after daily aerial attacks. The British covertly evacuated Penang's European populace; historian Raymond Callahan since contended that \"the moral collapse of British rule in Southeast Asia came not at Singapore, but at Penang\".\nPenang Island was subsequently renamed \"Tojo-to\" after Prime Minister Hideki Tojo. Japanese military police imposed order by massacring Chinese civilians under the Sook Ching policy, while women were forced into sexual slavery. Swettenham Pier was converted into a major submarine base by the Axis Powers.\nBetween 1944 and 1945, Allied bombers from India targeted naval and administrative buildings in George Town, damaging and destroying several colonial buildings in the process. The Penang Strait was mined to restrict Japanese shipping. Following Japan's surrender, George Town was the first Malayan settlement liberated by British marines through Operation Jurist on 3 September 1945.\nPost-war years.\nPenang was placed under British military administration until 1946, after which the Straits Settlements was abolished. The British sought to consolidate the various political entities in British Malaya, including the Crown Colony of Penang, under a single polity known as the Malayan Union. Initially, the impending annexation of Penang into the vast Malay heartland proved unpopular among Penangites. The Penang Secessionist Committee was formed in 1948 due to economic and ethnic concerns, but their attempt to avert Penang's merger with Malaya was unsuccessful due to British disapproval.\nTo relieve the concerns raised by the secessionists, the British government guaranteed George Town's free port status and reintroduced municipal elections in 1951. George Town became the first fully-elected municipality in Malaya by 1956 and was granted city status by Queen Elizabeth II in the following year. This made George Town the first city within the Federation of Malaya, and by extension, Malaysia.\nPost-independence era.\nGeorge Town's status as a free port was rescinded by the Malaysian federal government in 1969. This led to a loss of maritime trade, causing massive unemployment and brain drain. To revive the economy, Chief Minister Lim Chong Eu established the Bayan Lepas Free Industrial Zone in 1972. Massive industrialisation proved instrumental in reversing Penang's economic slump and led to the state's rapid economic growth until the late 1990s. Under Lim's tenure, the Penang Bridge, the first road link between Penang Island and the Malay Peninsula, was built.\nPersistent brain drain, aggravated by federal policies prioritising the growth of Kuala Lumpur, resulted in Penang losing its leading position in the national economy by the 21st century. This decline, compounded by various issues including incoherent urban planning, poor traffic management and the dilapidation of George Town's heritage enclave following the repeal of the Rent Control Act in 2001, contributed to growing dissatisfaction within Penang's society.\nIn response, civil societies in George Town mobilised public support to rejuvenate the city. Resentment against the Barisan Nasional (BN) administration led to the Pakatan Rakyat bloc (now Pakatan Harapan) rising to power through the 2008 state election. Efforts to preserve George Town's heritage architecture led to the city's historical core being designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site that year.\n Skyline of George Town at night c.\u20092024\nGovernance and politics.\nPenang, a former British crown colony, is one of the four Malaysian states without hereditary monarchies. The Constitution of Penang, codified in 1957, is the state's highest law, consisting of 42 articles that govern the proceedings and powers of the state government. The head of state is the Governor (), who is appointed by the King of Malaysia. Ramli Ngah Talib is the current Governor of Penang, having assumed office in 2025. In practice, the Governor's role is largely symbolic and ceremonial. This includes the authority to appoint the head of government and approve legislation that has been passed by the state's legislature.\nThe Penang state government has its own executive body and legislature, but their powers are limited compared to the Malaysian federal government. According to the Federal Constitution, the state can legislate on matters pertaining to Malay customs, land, agriculture and forestry, local government, civil and water works, and state administration. Matters falling under the joint purview of state and federal authorities include social welfare, wildlife protection and national parks, scholarships, husbandry, town planning, drainage and irrigation, and public health regulations.\nThe 40-member Penang State Legislative Assembly forms the state's legislature and is elected for a maximum term of five years from single-member constituencies through state elections. Compared to the rest of Peninsular Malaysia, Penang's electoral landscape is perceived as being more liberal and distinct due to the state's ethnic diversity and socio-economic development. Unlike other Peninsular states, ethnic Chinese have formed the plurality in Penang for decades, and the state's economic infrastructure is based primarily on commerce and trade rather than agriculture. As of 2023[ [update]], non-Malays formed the majority in 25 of the 40 state constituencies. Thus, non-Malay electoral support is crucial to any political coalition aiming for power in Penang.\nExecutive.\nThe Penang State Executive Council is the executive authority of the Penang state government, similar in function to the federal Cabinet. It is led by the Chief Minister, who serves as the head of government in Penang. To this day, Penang remains the only Malaysian state where the position of the head of government has been continuously held by an ethnic Chinese since the nation's independence. Additionally, Penang was the first state to impose a two-term limit for the head of government's tenure. The current Chief Minister of Penang is Chow Kon Yeow of the Democratic Action Party (DAP), having assumed office after the 2018 state election.\nLegislature.\nThe unicameral 40-seat Penang State Legislative Assembly, whose members are called State Assemblymen, convenes at the neoclassical State Assembly Building in George Town. Penang practises the Westminster system whereby the State Executive Council members are appointed from the elected State Assemblymen. Any amendment to Penang's Constitution requires the support of at least two-thirds of the State Legislative Assembly. Prior to a state election, it is customary to dissolve the legislature, which necessitates the consent of the Governor.\nThe 2023 state election witnessed an unprecedented alliance between Pakatan Harapan (PH) and its erstwhile adversaries Barisan Nasional (BN). The PH\u2013BN alliance currently commands a supermajority in the State Legislative Assembly, controlling 29 out of the 40 seats. However, the election also saw the right-wing Perikatan Nasional (PN) opposition bloc gaining ground in the rural Malay-majority constituencies, occupying the remaining 11 seats in the legislature.\nLocal governments.\nPenang is further divided into two city-level municipalities, each administered by a local government. The local governments exercise power in areas such as planning and development control, public housing, public spaces, waste disposal, business licensing, markets, local transport, and municipal roads.\nPenang is also divided into five administrative districts \u2013 two in George Town and three in Seberang Perai. Each district is headed by a district officer. The lands and district office in each district deals with land taxation, thus differing from local governments that manage urban administration and maintenance of infrastructure.\nAfter Pakatan Rakyat was voted into power in 2008, the newly-elected state government attempted to reinstate local government elections within Penang, which have been suspended since the 1960s. At the time, the Barisan Nasional-controlled federal government objected to the move, which eventually led to the Federal Court's decision that local government elections do not fall under the jurisdiction of state governments.\nJudiciary.\nThe present-day Malaysian judicial system traces its roots to 19th-century George Town. In 1807, Penang was granted a Royal Charter which paved the way for the establishment of a Supreme Court. In the following year, the Supreme Court of Penang (now Penang High Court) was inaugurated at Fort Cornwallis with the appointment of Edmond Stanley as the first Recorder.\nThe Penang High Court serves as the highest court in the state. Notable lawyers who served the high court include Tunku Abdul Rahman, Cecil Rajendra and Karpal Singh. There are also four Magistrates Courts and two Sessions Courts throughout Penang.\nForeign relations.\nPenang is home to the largest contingent of foreign diplomatic missions among Malaysian states. As of 2023[ [update]], a total of 27 countries have either established consulates or appointed honorary consuls within Penang. The Penang state government has also inked a sister state agreement with Japan's Kanagawa Prefecture and a friendship state partnership with China's Hainan Province.\nConsulates.\nThis list is based on information from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, unless otherwise cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Australia\nSecurity.\nIn 1861, the Penang and Province Wellesley Volunteer Corps (P&amp;PWVC) was established as the second volunteer military force in Malaya after the Singapore Volunteer Corps. Initially, the unit was exclusively formed by Europeans, with other races being barred until 1899. Over time, the P&amp;PWVC transformed into the 3rd Battalion of the Straits Settlements Volunteer Force (SSVF) and by 1937, the unit also contained a European machine gun platoon, a Malay rifle company, a medical section and headquarters reserve. Although enlistment increased prior to the Japanese invasion of Malaya, 3rd Battalion SSVF was eventually evacuated from Penang without engaging in any combat.\nSince independence, the Malaysian federal government assumes sole responsibility for the country's defence. Penang houses the Malaysian Army's 2nd Battalion of the Royal Malay Regiment and Rejimen 509 Askar Wataniah, which traces its lineage back to the P&amp;PWVC. The Royal Malaysian Navy maintains a volunteer reserve base in George Town. RMAF Butterworth Air Base also serves as the headquarters of the Five Power Defence Arrangements Integrated Area Defence System (HQIADS). The air base continues to host Australian air force and army units on a rotational basis, including Rifle Company Butterworth.\nGeography.\nWith a land area of only , Penang is the second smallest state in Malaysia after Perlis. It is located on the northwestern coastline of Peninsular Malaysia, lying between latitudes 5.59\u00b0 and 5.12\u00b0N, and longitudes 100.17\u00b0 and 100.56\u00b0E. The state is divided into two major halves by the Penang Strait, which is only wide at the narrowest point and at its widest.\nThe state capital, George Town, encompasses the entirety of Penang Island and a few surrounding islets, including Jerejak, Betong, Kendi, Rimau and Andaman islands. On the other hand, the city of Seberang Perai covers the mainland side of Penang.\nTopography.\nPenang Island is irregularly shaped, with a hilly and mostly forested interior. The island's coastal plains are narrow, with the most extensive plain located at the northeastern cape. George Town, which started off as a small settlement at the northeastern tip of the island, has expanded over the centuries to encompass the entire island, although the marshy western coast remains relatively underdeveloped. The highest point of the state is Penang Hill, which stands at a height of at the centre of the island. On the other hand, Seberang Perai has mostly flat topography, save for a hilly region along the eastern border with Kedah.\nDue to land scarcity in George Town, land reclamation projects have been undertaken at high-demand areas, particularly along the island's east coast. In 2023, a massive reclamation project commenced off the city's southern coast to build the Silicon Island, envisioned as a new hub for high-tech manufacturing and commerce. Following years of reclamation works, the Gurney Drive shoreline is also being transformed into Gurney Bay, intended as \"a new iconic waterfront destination for Penang\".\nThe major rivers within Penang include the Pinang, Perai, Muda and Kerian rivers. The Muda River serves as the northern border between Seberang Perai and Kedah, while the Kerian River forms part of the southern boundary between Seberang Perai, Kedah and Perak.\nClimate.\nPenang has a tropical rainforest climate under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification (\"Af\"). The state experiences relatively consistent temperatures throughout the course of the year, with an average high of about 32\u00a0\u00b0C and an average low of 24\u00b0C. Penang's proximity to Sumatra makes it susceptible to dust particles carried by wind from transient forest fires that create the perennial Southeast Asian haze. The Penang Meteorological Office at Bayan Lepas is the primary weather forecast facility for northwestern Malaysia.\nNature.\nIn spite of rapid urbanisation, Penang has managed to preserve a significant portion of its natural environment. Within the state, have been designated as protected forest reserves. In 2021, the Penang Hill Biosphere Reserve was designated a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve in recognition of the area's biodiversity. The gazetted nature reserve includes the Penang National Park, which covers of the northwestern tip of the island. It has been identified as one of the state's ecotourism destinations, alongside the Penang Botanic Gardens and the Tropical Spice Garden.\nEconomy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDespite its small size, Penang has one of the most robust economies in Malaysia. The state's tertiary-based economy is largely driven by the manufacturing and services sectors. In 2023, Penang's GDP was worth nearly RM128.593 billion (US$28.016 billion) with a growth rate of 3.3%. Penang's GDP per capita of RM72,586 (US$15,814) was the highest among Malaysian states, surpassing the World Bank's threshold of US$14,005 to be considered a high-income economy. In addition, the George Town Conurbation had a GDP worth US$30 billion in 2020, making it the second largest metropolitan economy in Malaysia after the Klang Valley.\nPenang contributed approximately RM7 billion (US$ billion) of Malaysia's yearly tax revenue and consistently records one of the lowest unemployment rates in the nation \u2013 at 2.2% as of 2023[ [update]]. Average monthly salaries rose to RM3,557 (US$), the second highest among Malaysian states after Selangor, while labour force participation rate increased to 71.3% from 70.1% in the previous year.\nPenang is the top destination in Malaysia for foreign investors, capturing US$13.4 billion \u2013 or nearly 33% \u2013 of the country's inbound foreign direct investments (FDI) in 2023. As of 2023[ [update]], the bulk of Penang's FDI originated from the Netherlands, Cayman Islands and Singapore. The state has also attracted hundreds of multinational corporations (MNCs) to its shores and plays a growing role in the global electronics supply chain, holding a share of more than 5% in the world's semiconductor sales. Penang is concurrently Malaysia's largest exporter, accounting for nearly RM495 billion (US$ billion) \u2013 or 32.8% \u2013 of the country's exports in 2024. The services sector has been growing in tandem as well, with Penang being the second most popular hub in Malaysia for Global Business Services (GBS) and the financial heart of the country's northwestern region, complemented by the state's traditional popularity as a destination for tourism, business events and health care.\nPenang's economic renaissance, particularly since 2008, was described by Bloomberg as Malaysia's \"biggest economic success\", in spite of the federal government's focus on other states such as Johor and Sarawak. The Penang state government has also managed to pare down public debt to RM41.1 million (US$ million) by 2022. In addition, Penang's Human Development Index (HDI) value increased to 0.839 as of 2023[ [update]], the second highest of all Malaysian states excluding the federal territories.\nThe booming economy has also led to a considerable interest in real estate in Penang. In 2016, George Town was ranked Malaysia's most attractive destination for commercial property investment by Knight Frank, surpassing even Kuala Lumpur. In 2023, Penang's residential market was ranked the second most popular in Southeast Asia after Singapore.\nManufacturing.\nIn the early years following Malaya's independence, Penang's industrialisation efforts were limited to import substitution. This was when George Town still enjoyed its free port status. The first industrial estates were built in the 1960s at Mak Mandin and Perai during the tenure of Penang's first Chief Minister Wong Pow Nee.\nHowever, the revocation of George Town's free port status and the fall of Wong's administration in 1969 marked a turning point in Penang's economic fortunes. Wong's successor, Lim Chong Eu, initiated a massive transformation of Penang's economy. The Bayan Lepas Free Industrial Zone (Bayan Lepas FIZ) in George Town was established in 1972, followed by the Perai Free Industrial Zone (Perai FIZ) in 1980. The zones played a critical role in reviving Penang's economy and driving the state's economic growth in the late 20th century. The Penang state government has since embarked on building newer industrial parks within Seberang Perai where land is more readily available, such as at Seberang Jaya, Bukit Minyak and Batu Kawan.\nPenang's manufacturing sector attracted US$13.1 billion of foreign direct investments (FDI) in 2023, accounting for almost 47% of Malaysia's total that year. Among the hundreds of MNCs with manufacturing operations in Penang are technology firms such as AMD, Bosch, Broadcom, Dell, HP Inc., Intel, Motorola, Osram and Renesas. According to Financial Times in 2024, Penang is well-positioned to benefit from the ongoing China\u2013United States trade war, as restrictions push businesses to adopt the China Plus One strategy.\nServices.\nThe services sector contributed 48% of Penang's GDP as of 2023[ [update]] and employed almost &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20445 of the state's workforce. George Town is the commercial hub of northern Malaysia. As of 2023[ [update]], finance and ancillary services contributed 9% of Penang's GDP. The Penang International Airport (PIA) is the country's second busiest in terms of aircraft movements and in 2023, handled RM365 billion (US$ billion) worth of exports, the highest of all entry points nationwide. In 2024, the Port of Penang processed over 1.4 million TEUs of cargo, the third highest among Malaysia's seaports.\nTraditionally one of Malaysia's most popular tourist destinations, Penang has embarked on economic diversification by expanding its tourism offerings in areas such as health care, business events, ecotourism and cruise arrivals. Penang is the leading destination in Malaysia for medical tourism. The state's business events industry generated an economic impact of nearly RM1.3 billion (US$ billion) in 2024. Penang's retail sector is characterised by a diverse range of establishments, including modern shopping malls and traditional shophouses that specialise in local delicacies and produce.\nPenang is also a major hub for shared services and outsourcing (SSO). By 2016, the state attracted RM4.1 billion of investments for global business services (GBS), the second largest share in the country after Kuala Lumpur. The offshore expansion of multinational firms to Penang has led to the creation of thousands of jobs and an increased demand for new office spaces within the state. In addition, Penang is home to a thriving startup community, driven by home-grown companies like Piktochart and DeliverEat.\nUtilities.\nWater supply, which comes under the jurisdiction of the Penang state government, is wholly managed by the Penang Water Supply Corporation (PBAPP). The state enjoys the lowest domestic water tariff in Malaysia, at RM0.32 (US$) per 1,000 litres, but also records the highest domestic water consumption per capita in Malaysia at in 2018. Over 80% of Penang's water supply comes from the Muda River, which forms the northern border between Seberang Perai and Kedah. This leaves the state vulnerable to effluents from upstream Kedah, as well as constant political disputes between the neighbouring states over the river. To counter water supply disruptions, PBAPP has contingency plans in place to draw water from alternative sources such as the Ayer Itam, Teluk Bahang and Mengkuang dams. The state government has also been negotiating with neighbouring Perak to secure additional water supply.\nIn 1904, George Town became the first city within British Malaya to be supplied with electricity. At present, electricity for industrial and domestic consumption is provided by Tenaga Nasional (TNB). In 2024, TNB built a RM500 million (US$ million) overhead power grid comprising 31 monopole transmission towers across the Penang Strait, boosting power transmission to George Town to 2,000 MW. Collaboration between TNB and the two city governments in Penang to replace existing street lighting with energy-efficient LED street lights is ongoing.\nMunicipal solid waste is disposed at the Pulau Burung landfill in Seberang Perai. The amount of solid waste generated in Penang has been steadily increasing over the years, from 838,365 metric tons in 2009 to 1,518,010 metric tons in 2019, with an average increase of 6.5%. However, Penang boasts the highest recycling rate in the country, standing at 47% as of 2019[ [update]]. To streamline the waste management process, the two city governments reintroduced a waste sorting policy in 2024.\nIn 2020, Penang had become the first Malaysian state to require the installation of fibre-optic communication infrastructure for all development projects. As of September\u00a02023[ [update]], 5G coverage had reached 73.4% of the populated areas in the state. In 2024, DE-CIX inaugurated the Penang Internet Exchange (PIX), with internet traffic being routed through a data centre at Bayan Baru. State government agencies have been promoting the digital economy and intensifying efforts to attract high-value technology players to further boost the state's economic growth.\nTransportation.\nLand.\nPenang Island is physically connected to mainland Seberang Perai by two road bridges \u2013 the Penang Bridge and the Second Penang Bridge. Seberang Perai is accessible through the North-South Expressway, a expressway that stretches along the western part of Peninsular Malaysia. Other major toll routes in the state include the Butterworth Outer Ring Road (BORR) and the Butterworth-Kulim Expressway.\nIn addition, the Keretapi Tanah Melayu (KTM) West Coast Line runs through Seberang Perai, with the Butterworth railway station serving as the principal terminal in northwestern Malaysia. Aside from regular KTM services, Butterworth is also one of the main stops of the Eastern and Oriental Express service between Bangkok and Singapore. Penang Sentral is the main transit hub within Penang, located in close proximity to the Sultan Abdul Halim Ferry Terminal and the Butterworth railway station.\nExcluding toll routes, Penang's road system covered a distance of as of 2023[ [update]]. Within George Town, the Tun Dr Lim Chong Eu Expressway is a coastal highway that runs along the city's eastern seaboard, connecting the city centre with the Penang Bridge, the Bayan Lepas Free Industrial Zone and the Second Penang Bridge. The Federal Route 6 is a pan-island trunk road that circles the city, while the George Town Inner Ring Road serves as the main thoroughfare within the city centre.\nPublic transportation.\nUnder British rule, George Town was a pioneer in public transportation within Malaya. The city's first tram system, originally powered by steam, began operations in the 1880s, but the trams became obsolete by 1936. The trishaw from the colonial era still plies the city's streets, catering primarily to tourists.\nPublic buses form the backbone of public transportation in Penang. Established in 2007, Rapid Penang is the state's main public transport operator, with 47 active routes throughout the George Town Conurbation including interstate routes into the neighbouring towns of Sungai Petani, Kulim and Kerian. Since 2024, Rapid Penang has introduced demand-responsive transport services within the state, utilising vans to address last mile connectivity.\nThe only rail-based transportation system within Penang is the century-old Penang Hill Railway, a funicular service to the peak of Penang Hill. A cable car system is being constructed as of 2025[ [update]] to reduce overreliance on the railway. The Penang state government has also planned to introduce urban rail throughout the state as part of the Penang Transport Master Plan. In 2024, the Malaysian federal government assumed control of the Mutiara LRT line from the state government. Spanning a distance of , the line is the first domestic light rail system outside the Klang Valley, and will link the cities of George Town and Seberang Perai. Construction commenced in 2025 and is expected to be complete by 2031.\nTo promote urban mobility, pedestrian and cycling infrastructure throughout the state are also being upgraded. In 2016, George Town became the first city in Malaysia to operate a public bicycle-sharing service with the inauguration of LinkBike.\nAir.\nThe Penang International Airport (PIA) is located south of downtown George Town. It serves as the main airport for northwestern Malaysia, with services to major regional cities such as Kuala Lumpur, Singapore, Bangkok, Taipei, Hong Kong, Xiamen, Shanghai, Doha and Dubai. PIA is Malaysia's second busiest airport for aircraft movements and recorded more than 7.6 million passengers in 2024. It is also the country's second busiest in terms of cargo tonnage and handles the largest export volume of all entry points nationwide. As of 2025[ [update]], the airport is being upgraded to raise its annual capacity from 6.5 million passengers to 12 million by 2028.\nSea.\nFormerly a vital British entrep\u00f4t, Penang's maritime trade has significantly declined due to the loss of George Town's free-port status in 1969 and the concurrent development of Port Klang near the federal capital Kuala Lumpur. Despite this, the Port of Penang remains the primary harbour for northwestern Malaysia and southern Thailand. It handled more than 1.4 million TEUs of cargo in 2024, the third highest among Malaysia's seaports.\nSwettenham Pier, situated within downtown George Town, accommodates cruise ships and is one of the major entry points into the city. In 2017, Swettenham Pier recorded 125 port calls, surpassing Port Klang as the busiest cruise shipping terminal in Malaysia. The pier has attracted some of the world's largest cruise liners, such as the \"Queen Mary 2\", and also sees occasional port visits by warships.\nThe cross-strait Penang ferry service connects George Town and Seberang Perai, and was formerly the only transportation link between the island city and the mainland until the completion of the Penang Bridge in 1985. At present, four ferries ply the Penang Strait between both cities daily.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2020[ [update]], Penang had a population of 1,740,405 and the highest population density of all Malaysian states at . Penang is Malaysia's second most urbanised state, with an urbanisation level of 92.5%. Residents of Penang are colloquially known as Penangites or \"Penang-lang\".\n54% of Penang's population resided in Seberang Perai, Malaysia's third largest city, while George Town was home to the remaining 46%. George Town serves as the core city of the George Town Conurbation, Malaysia's second largest metropolitan area.\nIn 2020, Penang recorded negative migration rate with more people leaving the state than it received. However, between 2015 and 2016, Penang had the highest migration effectiveness ratio among Malaysian states, due to the state's diversified economy. Most interstate immigrants came from Perak, Selangor, Kedah, Johor and Kuala Lumpur.\nEthnicities.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], ethnic Chinese and the \"Bumiputeras\", which include Malays and indigenous East Malaysians, each constituted about 41% of Penang's population, while Indians made up nearly 9%. The Chinese community in Penang includes the Peranakan Chinese, a hybrid ethnicity known for their distinctive architecture, costumes and cuisine. The state is also home to a cosmopolitan mix of ethnic Eurasians, Siamese and Arabs.\nForeigners comprised 8% of Penang's population in 2020. Over 38% of Penang's expatriates resided within downtown George Town, Paya Terubong and Bayan Lepas. George Town's affordable living costs, natural destinations, health care infrastructure, an established ecosystem of multinational companies (MNCs) and the widespread use of English have been cited as pull factors for expatriates.\nLanguages.\nMalay is the official language of Penang. English once served as the official language during British rule and recently there have been calls to reinstate it as one of Penang's official languages. Tamil is the most widely spoken language among ethnic Indians, while Penang's Chinese population uses a variety of Chinese dialects such as Teochew, Hakka and Cantonese. Penang Hokkien serves as the \"lingua franca\" between the different ethnic groups in Penang, with efforts being made at the grassroots level to preserve its relevance.\nReligions.\nPenang, like other Peninsular states, has Islam as its official religion. Even so, Penang is one of two states in Malaysia where Islam is not in the majority, the other being Sarawak. As of 2020[ [update]], Muslims constituted over 45% of Penang's population, followed by Buddhists at nearly 38%, Hindus at more than 8% and Christians at 4%.\nPenang allows freedom of religion and religious assembly, and is one of three states to have a dedicated department for non-Muslim affairs. In 2021, the Penang state government formed the Penang Harmony Corporation to further enhance interreligious harmony in the state.\nEducation.\n As with the rest of Malaysia, Penang's education system falls under the purview of the federal government. While Malay and English are mandatory subjects in all schools, vernacular schools are also permitted to use either Mandarin or Tamil as the medium of instruction. Penang's literacy rate is the third highest in Malaysia after Kuala Lumpur and Selangor, standing at 99.5% as of 2014[ [update]]. Moreover, Penang's Human Development Index (HDI) value of 0.839 is also the second highest among Malaysian states.\nPenang is home to 49 tertiary institutions (including universities, colleges, medical colleges, industrial training institutes and teaching schools), 13 international and expatriate schools, 128 secondary schools, 271 primary schools and 609 kindergartens. George Town is home to some of Malaysia's oldest schools. Established in 1816, Penang Free School (PFS) is the oldest English school in Southeast Asia. British colonial rule had also encouraged the growth of mission schools in George Town such as St. Xavier's Institution, St. George's Girls' School and Methodist Boys' School.\nPenang is also a pioneer in Malaysia's present-day Chinese education system, with the establishment of its first Chinese school in 1819. Prominent Chinese schools in the state include Chung Ling High School, Penang Chinese Girls' High School, Heng Ee High School and Jit Sin High School, among others. In addition, George Town has 13 international and expatriate schools that offer either British, American or International Baccalaureate syllabuses.\nUniversiti Sains Malaysia (USM) is the premier public university in Penang. As of 2025[ [update]], it is ranked 146th in the QS World University Rankings, third in Malaysia after Universiti Malaya and Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. Most of the other tertiary institutions in the state are privately-run, including Wawasan Open University, Han Chiang University College of Communication, DISTED College and RCSI &amp; UCD Malaysia Campus. RECSAM, one of the 26 specialist institutions of the Southeast Asian Ministers of Education Organization, is headquartered in George Town.\nThe Penang Public Library Corporation is the state government body tasked with the operation of public libraries throughout the state. In 2016, the Penang state government launched Malaysia's first digital library, situated within the grounds of PFS. Similar digital libraries have since been built at various locations throughout the state.\nHealthcare.\nHealth care in Penang is provided by a two-tier system consisting of public and private hospitals. The Penang General Hospital, administered and funded by the Malaysian Ministry of Health, is the main tertiary referral hospital within northwestern Malaysia. It is supported by five other public hospitals in Penang, all of which also come under the administration of the country's Ministry of Health.\nIn addition, Penang has 19 private hospitals that offer specialist services, making the state the leading hub for medical tourism in Malaysia. The total number of beds in public and private hospitals in Penang is 4,329, or nearly 248.7 beds per 10,000 people, higher than the national average. While private hospitals in Penang operate independently of the Ministry of Health, there have been instances of public-private cooperation, such as during the COVID-19 pandemic which saw private hospitals sharing equipment and taking in non-COVID-19 patients in need of urgent medical procedures.\nThe infant mortality rate in Penang has decreased significantly, dropping by 85% between 1970 and 2000 to 5.7 per 1,000 live births. Similarly, the neonatal mortality rate has also decreased by 84.7% during the corresponding period to 4.1 per 1,000 live births. As of 2023[ [update]], the life expectancy at birth in Penang is 71.9 years for men and 77.2 years for women. According to an official survey in 2019, Penang recorded one of the lowest obesity rates in Malaysia, with an obesity rate of 18.6%.\nCulture.\nFestivals.\nPenang's cosmopolitan society results in a great number of celebrations and festivities throughout the year. The state hosts major cultural and religious events, including Chinese New Year, Eid al-Fitri, Diwali, Thaipusam, Vaisakhi, Christmas, Vesak and Songkran. Chinese New Year celebrations last for 15 days and are marked with festivities unique to the state, such as the birthday of the Jade Emperor, and the annual opening of Chinese ancestral halls and associations in George Town. The 15th and final day of Chinese New Year is celebrated with a Peranakan Chinese-inspired Lantern Festival.\nGeorge Town is credited as the origin of a unique form of the Chingay procession, which involves participants balancing oversized flags on their heads or hands. A state-held Chingay parade takes place in George Town annually, although Chingay performances are also frequently included in Chinese festivals and significant state events throughout Penang.\nExpatriates residing in Penang have introduced their celebrations to the state. Bon Odori, a Japanese festival celebrated annually in George Town, has gained popularity among locals. St. Patrick's Day and Oktoberfest, traditionally celebrated by ethnic Irish and German communities respectively, are also celebrated in the city.\nPenang also hosts several major festivals each year, including the George Town Festival which has become one of the largest arts events in Southeast Asia since its inaugural event in 2010. In 2018, the George Town Literary Festival became the first Southeast Asian literary event to achieve the international Literary Festival Award at the London Book Fair.\nArts.\nBangsawan is a form of Malay theatre that originated in Penang at the end of the 19th century, and incorporates Indian, Western, Islamic, Chinese and Indonesian influences. It was a popular outdoor performance in the 1920s. Another unique form of theatre that began in Penang is boria, which features singing accompanied by violin, maracas and tabla. Boria reached the height of its popularity in the 1930s and was typically performed as a form of satire. While the British imposed a ban on boria in Singapore and Malacca, the art form was never banned in Penang.\nApart from traditional forms of art, the Penang Philharmonic Orchestra, funded by the state, was established in 2010 to elevate the standard of classical music in Penang. Dewan Sri Pinang and Setia SPICE in George Town are the main venues for performing arts and concerts within the state.\nGeorge Town is a hub for the arts and culture scene in Malaysia. The inscription of parts of George Town as a UNESCO World Heritage Site has enhanced cultural and creative industries within the city. In 2012, Lithuanian artist Ernest Zacharevic created a series of six wall paintings depicting local culture, inhabitants and lifestyles as part of the George Town Festival. The city is also adorned with 52 wrought iron caricatures and 18 wall murals that showcase the city's history and the daily lives of the local community. Additionally, art exhibitions are held at the city's event spaces like the Hin Bus Depot and Sia Boey.\nPenang's literary heritage stems from the colonial-era Peranakan Chinese literature and its role as a translation hub in Malaya, where prior to World War II, the publishing industry facilitated the translation of Chinese and Western literary works into Malay. Post-independence, the state's literary scene has diversified, with independent local publishers and retailers such as Areca Books, Gerakbudaya and the George Town World Heritage Incorporated running alongside major bookstore chains like Popular Holdings and MPH Group.\nMedia.\nGeorge Town was once the hub of Malaysia's print press. The nation's first newspaper, the \"Prince of Wales Island Gazette\", was founded in the city in 1806. Under British rule, Penang had relatively more press freedom as compared to Singapore, which had a stronger government apparatus.\n\"The Star\", one of Malaysia's top English dailies, started as a regional newspaper that was first published in George Town in the 1970s, while the country's oldest Chinese newspaper, \"Kwong Wah Yit Poh\", was also established in the city in 1910. In addition, the Penang state government publishes its own multi-lingual newspaper, \"Buletin Mutiara\", which is distributed for free every fortnight. The newspaper focuses on current issues within Penang, providing valuable information and insights for the local community.\nThe well-preserved colonial-era cityscape has made George Town a popular filming location for movies and television series that depict Asian culture. Films and series that were filmed within the city include \"Crazy Rich Asians\", \"Anna and the King\", \"Lust, Caution\", \"The Little Nyonya\" and \"You Mean the World to Me\"; the latter was the first movie to be produced entirely in Penang Hokkien. George Town was also featured as a pit-stop in \"The Amazing Race 16\", \"The Amazing Race Asia 5\" and \"The Amazing Race Australia 7\".\nArchitecture.\nIn 2008, UNESCO gazetted nearly within downtown George Town as a World Heritage Site. The city centre is recognised by UNESCO for its \"unique architectural and cultural townscape without parallel anywhere in East and Southeast Asia\". Shophouses sit alongside Anglo-Indian bungalows, mosques, temples, churches, and European-style administrative and commercial complexes, forming the city's multicultural framework. Elsewhere within the city, Siamese and Burmese cultures are prominently displayed at places of worship such as Wat Chayamangkalaram, Dhammikarama Burmese Temple and Kek Lok Si.\nApart from the colonial-era architecture, George Town is home to most of Penang's skyscrapers, including Komtar Tower, Marriott Residences and Muze @ PICC. There has been rising demand for residential high-rises at the suburbs since 2015, driven by the growing need for strata housing and the city's thriving economy.\nCuisine.\nPenang's culinary scene incorporates Malay, Chinese, Indian, Peranakan and Thai influences, evident in the variety of street food that includes char kway teow, asam laksa and nasi kandar. Described by \"CNN\" as \"the food capital of Malaysia\", George Town was also listed by \"Time\" and \"Lonely Planet\" as one of the best in Asia for street food. According to \"Time\" in 2004, only in the city \"could food this good be this cheap\". Robin Barton of the \"Lonely Planet\" remarked that the city was a \"culinary epicentre of the many cultures that arrived after it was set up as a trading port in 1786, from Malays to Indians, Acehenese to Chinese, Burmese to Thais\".\nOver the years, Penang's culinary scene has expanded to include fine dining establishments, adding to its already diverse street food options. In 2022, the \"Michelin Guide\" made its debut in the state, in recognition of its \"small-scale restaurants and street food that embodies Malaysia's distinctive streetside dining culture\". The 2025 edition of the \"Michelin Guide\" features 69 eateries throughout the state.\nSports.\nDespite its small size, Penang has hosted regional and international sporting events, such as the 2001 SEA Games, 2013 Women's World Open Squash Championship and Asia's first Masters Games in 2018. The state represents itself with its own sports teams in the interstate Sukma Games.\nPenang is home to a variety of sports facilities. The Penang State Stadium in Seberang Perai is the state's main stadium, while the City Stadium in George Town is the home ground of Penang FC. Setia SPICE in George Town is another major sporting venue, consisting of an indoor arena and an aquatics centre. The city is also home to Malaysia's oldest equestrian centre \u2013 the Penang Turf Club, which was established in 1864.\nMajor annual sporting events in Penang include the Penang International Dragon Boat Festival and the Penang Bridge International Marathon. The Penang International Dragon Boat Festival takes place every December and attracts participants from abroad. The Penang Bridge International Marathon, which features the iconic Penang Bridge as its route, has also gained international recognition, attracting about 20,000 participants from 61 countries in 2023.\nNotable people.\nPenang is the birthplace of illustrious Malaysian and Singaporean personalities, professionals and politicians, including:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59578", "revid": "50652803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59578", "title": "Seven Sages of Greece", "text": "Group of philosophers\nThe Seven Sages or Seven Wise Men was the title given to seven philosophers, statesmen, and law-givers of the 7th\u20136th centuries BCE who were renowned for their wisdom.\nThe Seven Sages.\nThe list of the seven sages given in Plato's \"Protagoras\" comprises:\nDiogenes La\u00ebrtius points out, however, that there was among his sources great disagreement over which figures should be counted among the seven. Perhaps the two most common substitutions were to exchange Periander of Corinth or Anacharsis the Scythian for Myson. On Diogenes' first list of seven, which he introduces with the words \"These men are acknowledged wise\", Periander appears instead of Myson; the same substitution appears in \"The Masque of the Seven Sages\" by Ausonius. Both Ephorus and Plutarch (in his \"Banquet of the Seven Sages\") substituted Anacharsis for Myson. Elsewhere, Plutarch claims that Epimenides the Ph\u00e6stian \"is counted the seventh wise man by those who would not admit Periander into the number\". Diogenes La\u00ebrtius further states that Dicaearchus gave ten possible names, Hippobotus suggested twelve names, and Hermippus enumerated seventeen possible sages from which different people made different selections of seven. Leslie Kurke contends that \"Aesop was a popular contender for inclusion in the group\"; an epigram of the 6th century CE poet Agathias (\"Palatine Anthology\" 16.332) refers to a statue of the Seven Sages, with Aesop standing before them.\nInterpretations.\nIn Plato's \"Protagoras\", Socrates says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There some, both at present and of old, who recognized that Spartanizing is much more a love of wisdom than a love of physical exercise, knowing that the ability to utter such [brief and terse] remarks belongs to a perfectly educated man. Among these were Thales of Miletus, and Pittacus of Mytilene, and Bias of Priene, and our own Solon, and Cleobulus of Lindus, and Myson of Chenae, and the seventh of them was said to be Chilon of Sparta. They all emulated and admired and were students of Spartan education, could tell their wisdom was of this sort by the brief but memorable remarks they each uttered when they met and jointly the first fruits of their wisdom to Apollo in his shrine at Delphi, writing what is on every man's lips: \"Know thyself\", and \"Nothing too much\". Why do I say this? Because this was the manner of philosophy among the ancients, a kind of laconic brevity.\nThe section of the \"Protagoras\" in which this passage appears is \"elaborately ironical\", making it unclear which of its parts may be taken seriously.\nDiogenes La\u00ebrtius writes in his account of the life of Pyrrho, the founder of Pyrrhonism, that the Seven Sages of Greece were considered to be precursors of Pyrrho's philosophical skepticism because the Delphic Maxims were skeptical. \"The maxims of the Seven Wise Men, too, they call skeptical; for instance, 'Observe the Golden Mean', and 'A pledge is a curse at one's elbow', meaning that whoever plights his troth steadfastly and trustfully brings a curse on his own head.\"\nSources and legends.\nThe oldest explicit mention on record of a standard list of seven sages is in Plato's \"Protagoras\", quoted above.\nDiogenes La\u00ebrtius reported that there were seven individuals who were held in high esteem for their wisdom well before Plato's time. According to Demetrius Phalereus, it was during the archonship of Damasias (582/81 BCE) that the seven first become known as \"the wise men\", Thales being the first so acknowledged.\nLater tradition ascribed to each sage a pithy saying of his own, but ancient as well as modern scholars have doubted the legitimacy of such ascriptions. A compilation of 147 maxims, inscribed at Delphi, was preserved by the fifth century CE scholar Stobaeus as \"Sayings of the Seven Sages\", but \"the actual authorship of the\u00a0... maxims set up on the Delphian temple may be left uncertain. Most likely they were popular proverbs, which tended later to be attributed to particular sages.\"\nIn addition to being credited for pithy sayings, the wise men were also apparently famed for practical inventions; in Plato's \"Republic\" (600a), it is said that it \"befits a wise man\" to have \"many inventions and useful devices in the crafts or sciences\" attributed to him, citing Thales and Anacharsis the Scythian as examples.\nAccording to a number of moralistic stories, there was a golden tripod (or, in some versions of the story, a bowl or cup) which was to be given to the wisest. Allegedly, it passed in turn from one of the seven sages to another, beginning with Thales, until one of them (either Thales or Solon, depending on the story) finally dedicated it to Apollo who was held to be wisest of all.\nAccording to Diogenes, Dicaearchus claimed that the seven \"were neither wise men nor philosophers, but merely shrewd men, who had studied legislation.\" And according to at least one modern scholar, the claim is correct: \"With the exception of Thales, no one whose life is contained in [Diogenes'] Book I [i.e. none of the above] has any claim to be styled a philosopher.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59581", "revid": "51024297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59581", "title": "Pledge of Allegiance", "text": "Loyalty oath to the flag and republic of the U.S.\nThe U.S. Pledge of Allegiance is a patriotic recited verse that promises allegiance to the flag of the United States and the republic of the United States. The first version was written in 1885 by Captain George Thatcher Balch, a Union army officer in the Civil War who later wrote a book on how to teach patriotism to children in public schools. In 1892, Francis Bellamy revised Balch's verse as part of a magazine promotion surrounding the World's Columbian Exposition, which celebrated the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus' arrival in the Americas. \nBellamy, the circulation manager for \"The Youth's Companion\" magazine, helped persuade then-president Benjamin Harrison to institute Columbus Day as a national holiday and lobbied Congress for a national school celebration of the day. The magazine sent leaflets containing part of Bellamy's Pledge of Allegiance to schools across the country and on October 21, 1892, over 10,000 children recited the verse together.\nBellamy's version of the pledge is largely the same as the one formally adopted by Congress 50 years later, in 1942. The official name of \"The Pledge of Allegiance\" was adopted in 1945. The most recent alteration of its wording came on Flag Day (June 14) in 1954, when the words \"under God\" were added. However, Bellamy's authorship has been contested, as evidence has come out contradicting his claim.\nRecital.\nCongressional sessions open with the recital of the Pledge, as do many government meetings at local levels, and meetings held by many private organizations. All states except Nebraska, Hawaii, Vermont, and Wyoming require a regularly scheduled recitation of the pledge in public schools. Many states give a variety of exemptions from reciting the pledge, such as California which requires a \"patriotic exercise\" every day, which would be satisfied by the Pledge, but it is not enforced. The Supreme Court has ruled in \"West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette\" that students cannot be compelled to recite the Pledge, nor can they be punished for not doing so. In several states, state flag pledges of allegiance are required to be recited after the pledge to the American flag.\nThe current United States Flag Code says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag: \"I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one Nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all,\" should be rendered by standing at attention facing the flag with the right hand over the heart. When not in uniform, men should remove any non-religious headdress with their right hand and hold it at the left shoulder, the hand being over the heart. Persons in uniform should remain silent, face the flag, and render the military salute. Members of the Armed Forces not in uniform and veterans may render the military salute in the manner provided for persons in uniform.\nOrigins.\nHistorians point to surges in American patriotic oaths and pledges to the flag after the Civil War, when tensions surrounding political loyalties persisted, and in the 1880s, as rates of immigration increased dramatically.\nBalch pledge.\nAn early pledge was created in 1887 by Captain George T. Balch, a veteran of the Civil War, who later became auditor of the New York Board of Education. Balch's pledge, which was recited contemporaneously with Bellamy's until the 1923 National Flag Conference, read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We give our heads and hearts to God and our country; one country, one language, one flag!\nBalch was a proponent of teaching children, especially those of immigrants, loyalty to the United States, even going so far as to write a book on the subject and work with both the government and private organizations to distribute flags to every classroom and school. Balch's pledge, which predates Francis Bellamy's by five years and was embraced by many schools, by the Daughters of the American Revolution until the 1910s, and by the Grand Army of the Republic until the 1923 National Flag Conference, is often overlooked when discussing the history of the Pledge.\nBellamy pledge.\nThe pledge that later evolved into the form used today was composed in August 1892 by Francis Bellamy (1855\u20131931) for the popular children's magazine \"The Youth's Companion\". Francis Bellamy, who was a Baptist minister, a Christian socialist, and the cousin of Edward Bellamy (1850\u20131898), described the text of Balch's pledge as \"too juvenile and lacking in dignity.\" The Bellamy \"Pledge of Allegiance\" was first published in the September 8, 1892, issue of \"The Youth's Companion\" as part of the National Public-School Celebration of Columbus Day, a celebration of the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's arrival in the Americas. The event was conceived and promoted by James B. Upham, a marketer for the magazine, as a campaign to instill the idea of American nationalism in students and to encourage children to raise flags above their schools. According to author Margarette S. Miller, this campaign was in line both with Upham's patriotic vision as well as with his commercial interest. According to Miller, Upham \"would often say to his wife: 'Mary, if I can instill into the minds of our American youth a love for their country and the principles on which it was founded, and create in them an ambition to carry on with the ideals which the early founders wrote into The Constitution, I shall not have lived in vain.'\" In 1957, Kenneth Keating instigated a report by Congress' Legislative Research Service that it was Francis Bellamy, and not James B. Upham, who wrote the September 8, 1892, article; Keating represented New York's 38th congressional district, which included Bellamy's birthplace, Mount Morris.\nBellamy's original Pledge:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Pledge was supposed to be quick and to the point. Bellamy designed it to be recited in 15 seconds. As a socialist, he had initially also considered using the words \"equality\" and \"fraternity\" but decided against it.\nFrancis Bellamy and Upham had lined up the National Education Association to support the \"Youth's Companion\" as a sponsor of the Columbus Day observance and the use in that observance of the American flag. By June 29, 1892, Bellamy and Upham had arranged for Congress and President Benjamin Harrison to announce a proclamation making the public school flag ceremony the center of the Columbus Day celebrations. This arrangement was formalized when Harrison issued Presidential Proclamation 335. Subsequently, the Pledge was first used in public schools on October 12, 1892, during Columbus Day observances organized to coincide with the opening of the World's Columbian Exposition (the Chicago World's Fair), Illinois.\nFrancis Bellamy's account.\nIn his recollection of the creation of the Pledge, Francis Bellamy said, \"At the beginning of the nineties patriotism and national feeling was [sic] at a low ebb. The patriotic ardor of the Civil War was an old story\u00a0... The time was ripe for a reawakening of simple Americanism and the leaders in the new movement rightly felt that patriotic education should begin in the public schools.\" James Upham \"felt that a flag should be on every schoolhouse,\" so his publication \"fostered a plan of selling flags to schools through the children themselves at cost, which was so successful that 25,000 schools acquired flags in the first year (1892\u201393).\nAs the World's Columbian Exposition was set to celebrate the 400th anniversary of the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the Americas, Upham sought to link the publication's flag drive to the event, \"so that every school in the land\u00a0... would have a flag raising, under the most impressive conditions.\" Bellamy was placed in charge of this operation and was soon lobbying \"not only the superintendents of education in all the States, but [he] also worked with governors, Congressmen, and even the President of the United States.\" The publication's efforts paid off when Benjamin Harrison declared Wednesday, October 12, 1892, to be Columbus Day for which \"The Youth's Companion\" made \"an official program for universal use in all the schools.\" Bellamy recalled that the event \"had to be more than a list of exercises. The ritual must be prepared with simplicity and dignity.\"\nEdna Dean Proctor wrote an ode for the event: \"There was also an oration suitable for declamation.\" Bellamy held that \"Of course, the nub of the program was to be the raising of the flag, with a salute to the flag recited by the pupils in unison.\" He found \"There was not a satisfactory enough form for this salute. The Balch salute, which ran, \"I give my heart and my hand to my country, one country, one language, one flag,\" seemed to him too juvenile and lacking in dignity.\" After working on the idea with Upham, Bellamy concluded, \"It was my thought that a vow of loyalty or allegiance to the flag should be the dominant idea. I especially stressed the word 'allegiance'. ...\u00a0Beginning with the new word allegiance, I first decided that 'pledge' was a better school word than 'vow' or 'swear'; and that the first person singular should be used, and that 'my' flag was preferable to 'the.'\" Bellamy considered the words \"country, nation, or Republic,\" choosing the last as \"it distinguished the form of government chosen by the founding fathers and established by the Revolution. The true reason for allegiance to the flag is the Republic for which it stands.\" Bellamy then reflected on the sayings of Revolutionary and Civil War figures, and concluded, \"All that pictured struggle reduced itself to three words, one Nation indivisible.\"\nBellamy considered the slogan of the French Revolution, (\"liberty, equality, fraternity\"), but held that \"fraternity was too remote of realization, and \u2026 [that] equality was a dubious word.\" Concluding \"Liberty and justice were surely basic, were undebatable, and were all that any one Nation could handle if they were exercised for all. They involved the spirit of equality and fraternity.\"\nAfter being reviewed by Upham and other members of \"The Youth's Companion\", the Pledge was approved and put in the official Columbus Day program. Bellamy noted that \"in later years the words 'to my flag' were changed to 'to the flag of the United States of America' because of the large number of foreign children in the schools.\" Bellamy disliked the change, as \"it did injure the rhythmic balance of the original composition.\"\nContested Authorship of the Pledge.\nAn alternative theory is that the pledge was submitted to an 1890 patriotic competition in \"The Youth's Companion\" by a 13-year-old Kansas schoolboy, coincidentally named Frank E. Bellamy. A May 1892 newspaper from Hays, Kansas reported on an April 30 school flag-raising that was accompanied by an almost identical pledge. This ceremony would have taken place months before Francis supposedly created the pledge during August of that same year, according to his own testimony. The discovery was made by the noted amateur lexicographer Barry Popik, who collaborated with Fred Shapiro, an associate library director at the Yale School of Law. Shapiro previously attributed the pledge to Francis Bellamy in \"The Yale Book of Quotations\", which he edits, but now regards Popik's discovery as favoring Frank E. Bellamy rather than Francis Bellamy as the originator and intends to update future versions of the book to reflect this.\nChanges.\nIn 1906, The Daughters of the American Revolution's magazine, \"The American Monthly\", used the following wording for the pledge of allegiance, based on Balch's Pledge:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn subsequent publications of the Daughters of the American Revolution, such as in 1915's \"Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Continental Congress of the Daughters of the American Revolution\" and 1916's annual \"National Report,\" the previous pledge (adjusted to read \"I pledge my head, my hand, my heart...\"), listed as official in 1906, is now categorized as \"Old Pledge\" with Bellamy's version under the heading \"New Pledge.\" The \"Old Pledge\" was still taken in other organizations until the National Flag Conference established uniform flag procedures in 1923.\nIn 1923, the National Flag Conference called for the words \"my Flag\" to be changed to \"the Flag of the United States,\" so that foreign-born people would not confuse loyalties between their birth countries and the US. The words \"of America\" were added a year later. Congress officially recognized the Pledge for the first time, in the following form, on June 22, 1942:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one Nation indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.\nAddition of \"under God\".\nLouis Albert Bowman, an attorney from Illinois, was the first to suggest the addition of \"under God\" to the pledge. The National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution gave him an Award of Merit as the originator of this idea. He spent his adult life in the Chicago area and was chaplain of the Illinois Society of the Sons of the American Revolution. At a meeting on February 12, 1948, he led the society in reciting the pledge with the two words \"under God\" added. He said that the words came from Lincoln's Gettysburg Address. Although not all manuscript versions of the Gettysburg Address contain the words \"under God,\" all the reporters' transcripts of the speech as delivered do, as perhaps Lincoln may have deviated from his prepared text and inserted the phrase when he said \"that the nation shall, under God, have a new birth of freedom.\" Bowman repeated his revised version of the Pledge at other meetings.\nDuring the Cold War era, many Americans wanted to distinguish the United States from the state atheism promoted by communist countries, a view that led to support for the words \"under God\" to be added to the Pledge of Allegiance.\nIn 1951, the Knights of Columbus, the world's largest Catholic fraternal service organization, also began including the words \"under God\" in the Pledge of Allegiance. In New York City, on April 30, 1951, the board of directors of the Knights of Columbus adopted a resolution to amend the text of their Pledge of Allegiance at the opening of each of the meetings of the 800 Fourth Degree Assemblies of the Knights of Columbus by addition of the words \"under God\" after the words \"one nation.\" Over the next two years, the idea spread throughout Knights of Columbus organizations nationwide. On August 21, 1952, the Supreme Council of the Knights of Columbus at its annual meeting adopted a resolution urging that the change be made universal, and copies of this resolution were sent to the President, the Vice President (as Presiding Officer of the Senate), and the Speaker of the House of Representatives. The National Fraternal Congress meeting in Boston on September 24, 1952, adopted a similar resolution upon the recommendation of its president, Supreme Knight Luke E. Hart. Several State Fraternal Congresses acted likewise almost immediately thereafter. This campaign led to several official attempts to prompt Congress to adopt the Knights of Columbus policy for the entire nation. These attempts were eventually a success.\nAt the suggestion of a correspondent, Representative Louis C. Rabaut (D\u2013MI), sponsored a resolution to add the words \"under God\" to the Pledge in 1953.\nBefore February 1954, no endeavor to get the pledge officially amended had succeeded. The final successful push came from George MacPherson Docherty. Some American presidents honored Lincoln's birthday by attending services at the church Lincoln attended, New York Avenue Presbyterian Church by sitting in Lincoln's pew on the Sunday nearest February 12. On February 7, 1954, with President Dwight D. Eisenhower sitting in Lincoln's pew, Docherty, the church's pastor, delivered a sermon based on the Gettysburg Address entitled \"A New Birth of Freedom.\" He argued that the nation's might lay not in arms but rather in its spirit and higher purpose. He noted that the Pledge's sentiments could be those of any nation: \"There was something missing in the pledge, and that which was missing was the characteristic and definitive factor in the American way of life.\" He cited Lincoln's words \"under God\" as defining words that set the US apart from other nations.\nPresident Eisenhower had been baptized a Presbyterian very recently, just a year before. He responded enthusiastically to Docherty in a conversation following the service. Eisenhower acted on his suggestion the next day and on February 8, 1954, Rep. Charles Oakman (R\u2013MI), introduced a bill to that effect. Congress passed the necessary legislation and Eisenhower signed the bill into law on Flag Day, June 14, 1954. Eisenhower said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From this day forward, the millions of our school children will daily proclaim in every city and town, every village and rural school house, the dedication of our nation and our people to the Almighty... In this way we are reaffirming the transcendence of religious faith in America's heritage and future; in this way we shall constantly strengthen those spiritual weapons which forever will be our country's most powerful resource, in peace or in war.\nThe phrase \"under God\" was incorporated into the Pledge of Allegiance on June 14, 1954, by a Joint Resolution of Congress amending \u00a7\u00a04 of the Flag Code enacted in 1942.\nOn October 6, 1954, the National Executive Committee of the American Legion adopted a resolution, first approved by the Illinois American Legion Convention in August 1954, which formally recognized the Knights of Columbus for having initiated and brought forward the amendment to the Pledge of Allegiance.\nSalute.\nSwearing of the Pledge is accompanied by a salute. An early version of the salute, adopted in 1887, accompanied the Balch pledge and was known as the Balch Salute. This salute instructed students to stand with their right hand outstretched toward the flag, the fingers of which are then brought to the forehead, followed by being placed flat over the heart, and finally falling to the side.\nIn 1892, Francis Bellamy created what was known as the Bellamy salute to accompany his own version of the Pledge of Allegiance. It started with the hand outstretched toward the flag, palm down, and ended with the palm up. Many decades later, during World War II, controversy arose because of the similarity between the Bellamy salute and the Nazi salute, which was adopted in Germany in the 1930s (although, unlike the Bellamy salute, this one did not end with the palm up). As a result, the US Congress stipulated that the hand-over-the-heart gesture would instead be rendered by civilians during the Pledge of Allegiance and the national anthem, thereby replacing the Bellamy salute. Removal of the Bellamy salute occurred on December 22, 1942, when Congress amended the Flag Code language first passed into law on June 22, 1942. Attached to bills passed in Congress in 2008 and then in 2009 (Section 301(b)(1) of title 36, United States Code), language was included which authorized all active duty military personnel and all veterans in civilian clothes to render a proper hand salute during the raising and lowering of the flag, when the colors are presented, and during the National Anthem.\nSarah Churchwell has argued that the term \"salute\", as it relates to the Bellamy and Balch salutes, historically referred to the words of the pledges themselves, not a physical gesture.\nMusic.\nA musical setting for \"The Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag\" was created by Irving Caesar, at the suggestion of Congressman Louis C. Rabaut whose House Resolution 243 to add the phrase \"under God\" was signed into law on Flag Day, June 14, 1954.\nThe composer Irving Caesar wrote and published over 700 songs in his lifetime. Dedicated to social issues, he donated all rights of the musical setting to the U.S. government, so that anyone can perform the piece without owing royalties.\nIt was sung for the first time on the floor of the House of Representatives on Flag Day, June 14, 1955, by the official Air Force choral group the \"Singing Sergeants\". A July 29, 1955, House and Senate resolution authorized the U.S. Government Printing Office to print and distribute the song sheet together with a history of the pledge.\nOther musical versions of the Pledge have since been copyrighted, including by Beck (2003), Lovrekovich (2002 and 2001), Roton (1991), Fijol (1986), and Girardet (1983).\nControversy.\nIn 1940, the Supreme Court, in \"Minersville School District v. Gobitis\", ruled that students in public schools, including the respondents in that case\u2014Jehovah's Witnesses who considered the flag salute to be idolatry\u2014could be compelled to swear the Pledge. In 1943, in \"West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette\", the Supreme Court reversed its decision. Justice Robert H. Jackson, writing for the 6 to 3 majority, went beyond simply ruling in the precise matter presented by the case to say that public school students are not required to say the Pledge on narrow grounds, and asserted that such ideological dogmata are antithetical to the principles of the country, concluding with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If there is any fixed star in our constitutional constellation, it is that no official, high or petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics, nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion or force citizens to confess by word or act their faith therein. If there are any circumstances which permit an exception, they do not now occur to us.\nIn 2004, the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals held that students are also not required to stand for the Pledge.\nRequiring or promoting of the Pledge on the part of the government has continued to draw criticism and legal challenges on several grounds.\nOne objection is that a constitutional republic built on freedom of dissent should not require its citizens to pledge allegiance to it, and that the First Amendment to the United States Constitution protects the right to refrain from speaking or standing, which itself is also a form of speech in the context of the ritual of pledging allegiance. Another objection is that the people who are most likely to recite the Pledge every day, small children in schools, cannot really give their consent or even completely understand the Pledge they are making. Another criticism is the belief that a government requiring or promoting the phrase \"under God\" violates protections against the establishment of religion guaranteed in the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.\nIn 2004, linguist Geoffrey Nunberg said the original supporters of the addition thought that they were simply quoting Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, but to Lincoln and his contemporaries, \"under God\" meant \"God willing\", so they would have found its use in the Pledge of Allegiance grammatically incorrect and semantically odd.\nIn popular culture, the pledge has been mocked or altered by several movies and television series including, but not limited to, the Simpsons' inscription above the Springfield county courthouse's door of \"Liberty and Justice for Most\", first appearing in the twelfth episode of the first series in 1990.\nLegal challenges.\nProminent legal challenges were brought in the 1930s and 1940s by Jehovah's Witnesses, a denomination whose beliefs preclude swearing loyalty to any power other than God, and who objected to policies in public schools requiring students to swear an oath to the flag. They said requiring the pledge violated their freedom of religion guaranteed by the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment. The first case was in 1935, when two children, Lillian and William Gobitis, ages ten and twelve, were expelled from the Minersville, Pennsylvania, public schools that year for failing to salute the flag and recite the Pledge of Allegiance. The issue was finally settled in favor of the Witnesses by the 1943 Supreme Court ruling, \"West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette\".\nIn a 2002 case brought by atheist Michael Newdow, whose daughter was being taught the Pledge in school, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled the phrase \"under God\" an unconstitutional endorsement of monotheism when the Pledge was promoted in public school. In 2004, the Supreme Court heard \"Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow\", an appeal of the ruling, and rejected Newdow's claim on the grounds that he was not the custodial parent, and therefore lacked standing, thus avoiding ruling on the merits of whether the phrase was constitutional in a school-sponsored recitation. On January 3, 2005, a new suit was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California on behalf of three unnamed families. On September 14, 2005, District Court Judge Lawrence Karlton ruled in their favor. Citing the precedent of the 2002 ruling by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, Judge Karlton issued an order stating that, upon proper motion, he would enjoin the school district defendants from continuing their practices of leading children in pledging allegiance to \"one Nation under God.\"\nIn 2006, in the Florida case \"Frazier v. Alexandre\", a federal district court in Florida ruled that a 1943 state law requiring students to stand and recite the Pledge of Allegiance violates the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution. As a result of that decision, a Florida school district was ordered to pay $32,500 to a student who chose not to say the pledge and was ridiculed and called \"unpatriotic\" by a teacher.\nIn 2009, a Montgomery County, Maryland, teacher berated and had school police remove a 13-year-old girl who refused to say the Pledge of Allegiance in the classroom. The student's mother, assisted by the American Civil Liberties Union of Maryland, sought and received an apology from the teacher, as state law and the school's student handbook both prohibit students from being forced to recite the Pledge.\nOn March 11, 2010, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the words \"under God\" in the Pledge of Allegiance in the case of \"Newdow v. Rio Linda Union School District\". In a 2\u20131 decision, the appellate court ruled that the words were of a \"ceremonial and patriotic nature\" and did not constitute an establishment of religion. Judge Stephen Reinhardt dissented, writing that \"the state-directed, teacher-led daily recitation in public schools of the amended 'under God' version of the Pledge of Allegiance... violates the Establishment Clause of the Constitution.\"\nOn November 12, 2010, in a unanimous decision, the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston affirmed a ruling by a New Hampshire lower federal court which found that the pledge's reference to God does not violate non-pledging students' rights if student participation in the pledge is voluntary. A United States Supreme Court appeal of this decision was denied on June 13, 2011.\nIn September 2013, a case was brought before the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court, arguing that the pledge violates the Equal Rights Amendment of the Constitution of Massachusetts. In May 2014, Massachusetts' highest court ruled that the pledge does not discriminate against atheists, saying that the words \"under God\" represent a patriotic, not a religious, exercise.\nIn February 2015 New Jersey Superior Court Judge David F. Bauman dismissed a lawsuit, ruling that \"\u2026 the Pledge of Allegiance does not violate the rights of those who don't believe in God and does not have to be removed from the patriotic message.\" The case against the Matawan-Aberdeen Regional School District had been brought by a student of the district and the American Humanist Association that argued that the phrase \"under God\" in the pledge created a climate of discrimination because it promoted religion, making non-believers \"second-class citizens.\" In a 21-page decision, Bauman wrote, \"Under [the association members'] reasoning, the very constitution under which [the members] seek redress for perceived atheistic marginalization could itself be deemed unconstitutional, an absurd proposition which [association members] do not and cannot advance here.\" Bauman said the student could skip the pledge, but upheld a New Jersey law that says pupils must recite the pledge unless they have \"conscientious scruples\" that do not allow it. He noted, \"As a matter of historical tradition, the words 'under God' can no more be expunged from the national consciousness than the words 'In God We Trust' from every coin in the land, than the words 'so help me God' from every presidential oath since 1789, or than the prayer that has opened every congressional session of legislative business since 1787.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59584", "revid": "49887303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59584", "title": "Bilbo Baggins", "text": "Protagonist in J. R. R. Tolkien's The Hobbit\nBilbo Baggins (Westron: \"Bilba Labingi\") is the title character and protagonist of J. R. R. Tolkien's 1937 novel \"The Hobbit\", a supporting character in \"The Lord of the Rings\", and the fictional narrator (along with Frodo Baggins) of many of Tolkien's Middle-earth writings. The Hobbit is selected by the wizard Gandalf to help Thorin and his party of Dwarves reclaim their ancestral home and treasure, which has been seized by the dragon Smaug. Bilbo sets out in \"The Hobbit\" timid and comfort-loving and, through his adventures, grows to become a useful and resourceful member of the quest.\nBilbo's way of life in the Shire, defined by features like the availability of tobacco and postal service, recalls that of the English middle class during the Victorian to Edwardian eras. This is not compatible with the much older world of Dwarves and Elves. Tolkien appears to have based Bilbo on the designer William Morris's travels in Iceland; Morris liked his home comforts but grew through his adventurous journeying. Bilbo's quest has been interpreted as a \"pilgrimage of grace\", in which he grows in wisdom and virtue, and as a psychological journey towards wholeness.\nBilbo has appeared in numerous radio and film adaptations of \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\", and video games based on them.\nAppearances.\n\"The Hobbit\".\nThe protagonist of \"The Hobbit\", Bilbo Baggins, is a hobbit in comfortable middle age. He is hired as a \"burglar\", despite his initial objections, on the recommendation of the wizard Gandalf and 13 Dwarves led by their king in exile, Thorin Oakenshield. The company of dwarves are on a quest to reclaim the Lonely Mountain and its treasures from the dragon Smaug. The adventure takes Bilbo and his companions through the wilderness, to the elves haven, Rivendell, across the Misty Mountains where, escaping from goblins, he meets Gollum and acquires a magic ring. His journey continues via a lucky escape from wargs, goblins, and fire, to the house of Beorn the shapeshifter, through the black forest of Mirkwood, to Lake-town in the middle of Long Lake, and eventually to the Mountain itself.\nAs burglar, Bilbo is sent down the secret passage to the dragon's lair. He steals a golden cup and takes it back to the Dwarves. Smaug awakes and instantly notices the theft and a draught of cold air from the opened passage. He flies out, nearly catches the Dwarves outside the door, and eats their ponies. Bilbo and the Dwarves hide inside the passage. Bilbo goes down to Smaug's lair again to steal some more, but the dragon is now only half-asleep. Wearing his magic ring, Bilbo is invisible, but Smaug at once smells him. Bilbo has a riddling conversation with Smaug, and notices that the dragon's armour does indeed have a gap. He escapes the dragon's flames as he runs up the passage, and tells the Dwarves about the gap in Smaug's armour. An old thrush hears what he says, and flies off to tell Bard in Lake-town.\nSmaug realizes that Lake-town must have helped Bilbo, and flies off in a rage to destroy the town. The Dwarves and Bilbo hear that Smaug has been killed in the attack. The Dwarves reclaim the Lonely Mountain, and horrify Bilbo by refusing to share the dragon's treasure with the lake-men or the wood-elves. Bilbo finds the Arkenstone of Thrain, the most precious heirloom of Thorin's family, but hides it. Thorin calls his relative D\u00e1in to bring an army of Dwarves. Thorin and his dwarves fortify the entrance to the mountain hall, and are besieged by the Wood-elves and Lake-men. Bilbo tries to ransom the Arkenstone to prevent fighting, but Thorin sees his action as betrayal, and banishes Bilbo. Dain arrives, and the army of Dwarves faces off against the armies of Elves and Men. As battle is joined, a host of goblins and wargs arrive to take over the mountain, now that Smaug is dead. The armies of Elves, Men, and Dwarves, with the help of Eagles and Beorn, defeat the goblins and wargs. Thorin is fatally wounded, but has time to make peace with Bilbo. Bilbo accepts only a little of the treasure which was his share, though it still represents great wealth for a Shire hobbit. Bilbo returns to his home in the Shire to find that several of his relatives, believing him to be dead, are trying to claim his home and possessions.\n\"The Lord of the Rings\".\n\"The Lord of the Rings\" begins with Bilbo's \"eleventy-first\" (111th) birthday, 60\u00a0years after the beginning of \"The Hobbit\". The main character of the novel is Frodo Baggins, Bilbo's cousin, who celebrates his 33rd\u00a0birthday and legally comes of age on the same day. Bilbo has kept the magic ring, with no idea of its significance, all that time; it has prolonged his life, leaving him feeling \"thin and stretched\". At the party, Bilbo tries to leave with the ring, but Gandalf persuades him to leave it behind for Frodo. Bilbo travels to Rivendell and visits the dwarves of the Lonely Mountain before returning to retire at Rivendell and write books. Gandalf discovers that Bilbo's magic ring is the One Ring forged by the Dark Lord Sauron, and sets in motion the quest to destroy it. Frodo and his friends set off on the quest, finding Bilbo, now obviously old, but spry, in Rivendell. When they have destroyed the Ring, they return to the Shire, via Rivendell, where Bilbo looks \"very old, but peaceful, and sleepy\". Two years later Bilbo accompanies Gandalf, Elrond, Galadriel, and Frodo to the Grey Havens, there to board ship bound for Tol Eress\u00eba across the sea.\nNarrator.\nIn Tolkien's narrative conceit, in which all the writings of Middle-earth are translations from the fictitious volume of the \"Red Book of Westmarch\", Bilbo is the author of \"The Hobbit\", translator of various \"works from the elvish\", and the author of the following poems and songs:\nAnalysis.\nName.\nThe philologist and Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey notes that \"Baggins\" is close to the spoken words \"b\u00e6ggin\", \"b\u00e6gginz\" in the dialect of Huddersfield, Yorkshire. where it means a substantial meal eaten between main meals, most particularly at teatime in the afternoon; and Mr Baggins is definitely, Shippey writes, \"partial to\u00a0... his tea\". Tolkien worked in Yorkshire early in his career, at the University of Leeds; from 1920 he was a reader in the school of English studies, and he rose to become a full professor there. More specifically, he wrote the foreword to Walter E. Haigh's 1928 \"A new glossary of the dialect of the Huddersfield district\", which included these spoken words. \nIn addition, \"Baggins\", while not a name by etymology, sounds very much like one of a class of English surnames such as Dickens, Jenkins, and Huggins. These names, Shippey notes, are formed from personal names, in the diminutive form; and Tolkien uses Huggins as the name of one of the Trolls in \"The Hobbit\".\nTolkien's choice of the surname Baggins may be connected to the name of Bilbo's house, Bag End, also the actual name of Tolkien's aunt's farmhouse, which Shippey notes was at the bottom of a lane with no exit. This is called a \"cul-de-sac\" in England; Shippey describes this as \"a silly phrase\", a piece of \"French-oriented snobbery\". \nShippey observes that the socially aspiring Sackville-Bagginses have similarly attempted to \"Frenchify\" their family name, \"Sac[k]-ville\" = \"Bag Town\", as a mark of their bourgeois status. The journalist Matthew Dennison, writing for St Martin's Press, calls Lobelia Sackville-Baggins \"Tolken's unmistakable nod to Vita Sackville-West\", an aristocratic novelist and gardening columnist as passionately attached to her family home, Knole House, which she was unable to inherit, as Lobelia was to Bag End. The opposite of a bourgeois is a burglar who breaks into bourgeois houses, and in \"The Hobbit\" Bilbo is asked to become a burglar (of Smaug the dragon's lair), Shippey writes, showing that the Bagginses and the Sackville-Bagginses are \"connected opposites\". He comments that the name Sackville-Baggins, for the snobbish branch of the Baggins family, is \"an anomaly in Middle-earth and a failure of tone\".\nPeriod.\nBilbo's distinctly anachronistic period, compared to the characters he meets, can be defined, Shippey notes, by the presence of tobacco, brought to Europe in 1559, and a postal service, introduced in England in 1840. Like Tolkien himself, Bilbo was \"English, middle class; and roughly Victorian to Edwardian\", something that as Shippey observes, does not belong to the much older world of elves, dwarves, and wizards.\nCharacter.\nMarjorie Burns, a medievalist, writes that Bilbo's character and adventures match the fantasy writer and designer William Morris's account of his travels in Iceland in the early 1870s in numerous details. Like Bilbo's, Morris's party set off enjoyably into the wild on ponies. He meets a \"boisterous\" man called \"Biorn the boaster\" who lives in a hall beside Eyja-fell, and who tells Morris, tapping him on the belly, \"...\u00a0besides, you know you are so fat\", just as Beorn pokes Bilbo \"most disrespectfully\" and compares him to a plump rabbit. Burns notes that Morris was \"relatively short, a little rotund, and affectionately called 'Topsy', for his curly mop of hair\", all somewhat hobbit-like characteristics. Further, she writes, \"Morris in Iceland often chooses to place himself in a comic light and to exaggerate his own ineptitude\", just as Morris's companion, the painter Edward Burne-Jones, gently teased his friend by depicting him as very fat in his Iceland cartoons. Burns suggests that these images \"make excellent models\" for the Bilbo who runs puffing to the Green Dragon inn or \"jogs along behind Gandalf and the dwarves\" on his quest. Another definite resemblance is the emphasis on home comforts: Morris enjoyed a pipe, a bath, and \"regular, well-cooked meals\"; Morris looked as out of place in Iceland as Bilbo did \"over the Edge of the Wild\"; both are afraid of dark caves; and both grow through their adventures.\nQuest.\nThe Christian writer Joseph Pearce describes \"The Hobbit\" as \"a pilgrimage of grace, in which its protagonist, Bilbo Baggins, becomes grown up ... in wisdom and virtue\". Dorothy Matthews sees the story rather as a psychological journey, the anti-heroic Bilbo being willing to face challenges while firmly continuing to love home and discovering himself. Along the way, Matthews sees Jungian archetypes, talismans, and symbols at every turn: the Jungian wise old man Gandalf; the devouring mother of the giant spider, not to mention Gollum's \"long grasping fingers\"; the Jungian circle of the self, the ring; the escape from the dark underground imprisoning chambers of the wood-elves and Bilbo's symbolic rebirth into the sunlight and the waters of the woodland river; and the dragon guarding the contested treasure, itself \"an archetype of the self, of psychic wholeness\". Later research has extended Matthews' analysis using alternative psychological frameworks such as Erik Erikson's theory of development.\nGenealogy.\nThe Tolkien scholar Jason Fisher notes that Tolkien stated that hobbits were extremely \"clannish\" and had strong \"predilections for genealogy\". Accordingly, Tolkien's decision to include the Baggins and other hobbit family trees in \"Lord of the Rings\" gives the book, in Fisher's view, a strongly \"hobbitish perspective\". The tree also, he notes, serves to show Bilbo's and Frodo's connections and familial characteristics, including that Bilbo was both \"a Baggins and a Took\". Fisher observes that Bilbo is, like Aragorn: a \"distillation of the best of two families\"; he notes that in \"The Quest of Erebor\", a manuscript of Tolkien's collected in the \"Unfinished Tales\", Gandalf is given the lines \"So naturally, thinking over the hobbits that I knew, I said to myself, 'I want a dash of the [adventurous] Took ... and I want a good foundation of the stolider sort, a Baggins perhaps.' That pointed at once to Bilbo\".\nThe Tolkien critic Tom Shippey notes that Tolkien was very interested in such names, describing Shire names at length in \"The Lord of the Rings\" \"Appendix F\". One category was the names that meant nothing to the hobbits \"in their daily language\", like Bilbo and Bungo; a few of these, like Otho and Drogo in the family tree, were \"by accident, the same as modern English names\".\nAdaptations.\nIn the 1955\u20131956 BBC Radio serialization of \"The Lord of the Rings\", Bilbo was played by Felix Felton. In the 1968 BBC Radio serialization of \"The Hobbit\", Bilbo was played by Paul Daneman.\nThe 1969 parody \"Bored of the Rings\" by \"Harvard Lampoon\" (i.e. its co-founders Douglas Kenney and Henry Beard) modifies the hobbit's name to \"Dildo Bugger\".\nIn the 1977 Rankin/Bass animated version of \"The Hobbit\", Bilbo was voiced by Orson Bean. Bean also voiced both the aged Bilbo and Frodo in the same company's 1980 adaptation of \"The Return of the King\".\nThe 1976 Russian translation of \"The Hobbit\" was illustrated with drawings by Mikhail Belomlinsky; he based his Bilbo character on the actor Yevgeny Leonov, who he described as \"good-natured, plump, with hairy legs\".\nIn Ralph Bakshi's 1978 animated version of \"The Lord of the Rings\", Bilbo was voiced by Norman Bird. Billy Barty was the model for Bilbo in the live-action recordings Bakshi used for rotoscoping. The 3000th story to be broadcast in the BBC's long-running children's programme Jackanory was \"The Hobbit\", in 1979. Four narrators told the story with Bilbo's part being played by Bernard Cribbins.\nIn the BBC's 1981 radio serialization of \"The Lord of the Rings\", Bilbo is played by John Le Mesurier. In the unlicensed 1985 Soviet version on the Leningrad TV channel, \"\u0425\u043e\u0431\u0431\u0438\u0442\u0430\" (\"The Hobbit\"), Bilbo was played by Mikhail Danilov. In the 1993 television miniseries \"Hobitit\" by Finnish broadcaster Yle, Bilbo is portrayed by Martti Suosalo.\nIn Peter Jackson's films ' (2001) and ' (2003), Bilbo is played by Ian Holm, who had played Frodo in the BBC radio series 20\u00a0years earlier.\nThroughout the 2003 video game \"The Hobbit\", the players control Bilbo, voiced by Michael Beattie. The game follows the plot of the book, but adds the elements of platform gameplay and various side-objectives along the main quests. \nIn \"The Lord of the Rings Online\" (2007) Bilbo resides in Rivendell, mostly playing riddle games with the Elf Lindir in the Hall of Fire.\nIn Peter Jackson's \"The Hobbit\" film series, a prequel to \"The Lord of the Rings\", the young Bilbo is portrayed by Martin Freeman, while Ian Holm reprises his role as an older Bilbo in ' (2012) and ' (2014).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59585", "revid": "21878292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59585", "title": "German submarine U-238", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-238\" was a Type VIIC U-boat of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" built for service in the Second World War. She was laid down on 21 April 1942, by Germaniawerft of Kiel as yard number 668, launched on 7 January 1943 and commissioned on 20 February, with \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Horst Hepp in command. Hepp commanded her for her entire career, receiving promotion to \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" in the process.\nDesign.\nGerman Type VIIC submarines were preceded by the shorter Type VIIB submarines. \"U-238\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. She had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft F46 four-stroke, six-cylinder supercharged diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two AEG GU 460/8\u201327 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-238\" was fitted with five torpedo tubes (four fitted at the bow and one at the stern), fourteen torpedoes, one SK C/35 naval gun, 220 rounds, and two twin C/30 anti-aircraft guns. The boat had a complement of between forty-four and sixty.\nService history.\n\"U-238\" was a member of four wolfpacks; she was a successful, if short lived boat, sinking four freighters and damaging another during her operations against Allied convoys in the Battle of the Atlantic. She had the misfortune, however, of serving at the turning point of the war, when Allied countermeasures were taking a heavy toll on the U-boat force. She conducted three war patrols, beginning in September 1943, following her warm-up trials in the Baltic Sea.\nWar Patrols.\n\"U-238\"'s first patrol was conducted from Trondheim in Norway as part of the 1st U-boat Flotilla, and entailed the submarine exiting the North Sea via the Denmark Strait and operating against Allied shipping in the so-called \"air cover gap\" in the Central Atlantic, where Allied aircraft had insufficient range, on account of fuel limitations, to effectively operate against German U-boats. This first patrol was by far the most successful, as on 20 September 1943, the boat attacked a large convoy, sinking one 7,176 GRT cargo ship and damaging another. This was followed by three more victims on 23 September, when two Norwegian ships and a British freighter were sunk from the same convoy.\n\"U-238\"'s second patrol was less successful. Two weeks after leaving Brest, on the French Atlantic coast, she was attacked by a Grumman TBF Avenger torpedo bomber from the escort carrier , whose rockets killed two crew members and wounded five more, prompting the submarine to return to Brest with severe damage, which put her out of service for a month. It was during this patrol that the submarine captured two British Royal Air Force personnel whose Vickers Wellington bomber had been shot down by .\n\"U-238\"'s third and last patrol began in January 1944, and lasted a fruitless month, until on 9 February, she was caught by convoy escorts of SL-147 and MKS-38 off Cape Clear. She counter-attacked, unsuccessfully, and was sunk by the sloops , and . There were no survivors.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-238\" took part in four wolfpacks, namely:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59586", "revid": "50783174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59586", "title": "Slovak Republic (disambiguation)", "text": "Following states have had Slovak Republic in their name:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59587", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59587", "title": "Anti-lock braking system", "text": "Safety anti-skid braking system used on aerospace and land vehicles\nAn anti-lock braking system (ABS) is a safety anti-skid braking system used on aircraft and on land vehicles, such as cars, motorcycles, trucks, and buses. ABS operates by preventing the wheels from locking up during braking, thereby maintaining tractive contact with the road surface and allowing the driver to maintain more control over the vehicle.\nABS is an automated system that uses the principles of threshold braking and cadence braking, techniques which were once practiced by skillful drivers before ABS was widespread. ABS operates at a much faster rate and more effectively than most drivers could manage. Although ABS generally offers improved vehicle control and decreases stopping distances on dry and some slippery surfaces, on loose gravel or snow-covered surfaces ABS may significantly increase braking distance, while still improving steering control. Since ABS was introduced in production vehicles, such systems have become increasingly sophisticated and effective. Modern versions may not only prevent wheel lock under braking, but may also alter the front-to-rear brake bias. This latter function, depending on its specific capabilities and implementation, is known variously as electronic brakeforce distribution, traction control system, emergency brake assist, or electronic stability control (ESC).\nHistory.\nEarly systems.\nThe concept for ABS predates the modern systems that were introduced in the 1950s. In 1908, for example, J.E. Francis introduced his 'Slip Prevention Regulator for Rail Vehicles'.\nIn 1920 the French automobile and aircraft pioneer Gabriel Voisin experimented with systems that modulated the hydraulic braking pressure on his aircraft brakes to reduce the risk of tire slippage, as threshold braking on aircraft is nearly impossible. These systems used a flywheel and valve attached to a hydraulic line that feeds the brake cylinders. The flywheel is attached to a drum that runs at the same speed as the wheel. In normal braking, the drum and flywheel should spin at the same speed. However, when a wheel slows down, then the drum would do the same, leaving the flywheel spinning at a faster rate. This causes the valve to open, allowing a small amount of brake fluid to bypass the master cylinder into a local reservoir, lowering the pressure on the cylinder and releasing the brakes. The use of the drum and flywheel meant the valve only opened when the wheel was turning. In testing, a 30% improvement in braking performance was noted, because the pilots immediately applied full brakes instead of slowly increasing pressure in order to find the skid point. An additional benefit was the elimination of burned or burst tires.\nThe first proper recognition of the ABS system came later with the German engineer Karl W\u00e4ssel, whose system for modulating braking power was officially patented in 1928. W\u00e4ssel, however, never developed a working product and neither did Robert Bosch who produced a similar patent eight years later.\nA similar braking system called Decelostat that used direct-current generators to measure wheel slippage was used in railroads in the 1930s. By 1951, flywheel-based Decelostat was used in aircraft to provide anti skid in landings. The device was on trials first in the United States and later by the British. In 1954, \"Popular Science\" revealed that there was preliminary testing of the Decelostat system to prevent car swirling on a heavy brake by the US car manufacturers in Detroit. However, there was no public information of the test results.\nBy the early 1950s, the Dunlop Maxaret anti-skid system was in widespread aviation use in the UK, with aircraft such as the Avro Vulcan and Handley Page Victor, Vickers Viscount, Vickers Valiant, English Electric Lightning, de Havilland Comet 2c, de Havilland Sea Vixen, and later aircraft, such as the Vickers VC10, Hawker Siddeley Trident, Hawker Siddeley 125, Hawker Siddeley HS 748 and derived British Aerospace ATP, and BAC One-Eleven, and the Dutch Fokker F27 Friendship (which unusually had a Dunlop high pressure (200 Bar) pneumatic system in lieu of hydraulics for braking, nose wheel steering and landing gear retraction), being fitted with Maxaret as standard. Maxaret, while reducing braking distances by up to 30% in icy or wet conditions, also increased tire life, and had the additional advantage of allowing take-offs and landings in conditions that would preclude flying at all in non-Maxaret equipped aircraft.\nIn 1958, a Royal Enfield Super Meteor motorcycle was used by the Road Research Laboratory to test the Maxaret anti-lock brake. The experiments demonstrated that anti-lock brakes can be of great value to motorcycles, for which skidding is involved in a high proportion of accidents. Stopping distances were reduced in most of the tests compared with locked wheel braking, particularly on slippery surfaces, in which the improvement could be as much as 30%. Enfield's technical director at the time, Tony Wilson-Jones, saw little future in the system, however, and it was not put into production by the company.\nA fully-mechanical system saw limited automobile use in the 1960s in the Ferguson P99 racing car, the Jensen FF, and the experimental all-wheel drive Ford Zodiac, but saw no further use; the system proved expensive and unreliable.\nThe first fully-electronic anti-lock braking system was developed in the late-1960s for the Concorde aircraft.\nThe modern ABS system was invented in 1971 by Mario Palazzetti (known as 'Mister ABS') in the Fiat Research Center and has become standard in almost every car. The system was called Antiskid and the patent was sold to Bosch who named it ABS.\nModern systems.\nChrysler, together with the Bendix Corporation, introduced a computerized, three-channel, four-sensor all-wheel ABS called \"Sure Brake\" for its 1971 Imperial. It was available for several years thereafter, functioned as intended, and proved reliable. In 1969, Ford introduced an anti-lock braking system called \"Sure-Track\" to the rear wheels of the Lincoln Continental Mark III and Ford Thunderbird, as an option; it became standard in 1971. The Sure-Track braking system was designed with help from Kelsey-Hayes. In 1971, General Motors introduced the \"Trackmaster\" rear-wheel only ABS as an option on their rear-wheel drive Cadillac models and called the option the True-Track Braking System on the Oldsmobile Toronado. In 1972, the option was made available in all Cadillacs. In 1971, Nissan offered an EAL (Electro Anti-lock System) developed by Japanese company Denso as an option on the Nissan President, which became Japan's first electronic ABS.\n1971: The Imperial became the first production car with a 4 wheel computer-operated anti-lock braking system. Toyota introduced electronically controlled anti-skid brakes on Toyota Crown labeled as ESC (Electronic Skid Control).\n1971: First truck application: \"Antislittamento\" system developed by \"Fiat Veicoli Industriali\" and installed on Fiat truck model 691N1.\n1972: four-wheel-drive Triumph 2500 Estates were fitted with Mullard electronic systems as standard. Such cars were rare however and very few remain.\n1976: WABCO began the development of the anti-locking braking system on commercial vehicles to prevent locking on slippery roads, followed in 1986 by the electronic braking system (EBS) for heavy-duty vehicles.\n1978: Mercedes-Benz W116 As one of the firsts, used an electronic four-wheel multi-channel anti-lock braking system (ABS) from Bosch as an option from 1978 on.\n1982: Honda introduced electronically controlled multi-channel ALB (Anti Locking Brakes) as an option for the second generation of Prelude, launched worldwide in 1982. Additional info: the general agent for Honda in Norway required all Preludes for the Norwegian market to have the ALB-system as a standard feature, making Honda Prelude be the first car delivered in Europe with ABS as a standard feature. The Norwegian general agent also included a sunroof and other options to be standard equipment in Norway, adding more luxury to the Honda brand. However, the Norwegian tax system made the well-equipped car very expensive, and the sales suffered from high costs. From 1984 the ALB-system, as well as the other optional features from Honda, was no longer a standard feature in Norway.\nIn 1985 the Ford Scorpio was introduced to the European market with a Teves electronic system throughout the range as standard. For this the model was awarded the coveted European Car of the Year Award in 1986, with very favorable praise from motoring journalists. After this success, Ford began research into Anti-Lock systems for the rest of their range, which encouraged other manufacturers to follow suit.\nSince 1987 ABS has been standard equipment on all Mercedes-Benz automobiles. Lincoln followed suit in 1993.\nIn 1988, BMW introduced the first motorcycle with an electro-hydraulic ABS: the BMW K100. Yamaha Introduced the FJ1200 model with optional ABS in 1991. Honda followed suit in 1992 with the launch of its first motorcycle ABS on the ST1100 Pan European. In 2007, Suzuki launched its GSF1200SA (Bandit) with an ABS. In 2005, Harley-Davidson began offering an ABS option on police bikes.\nOperation.\nThe anti-lock brake controller is also known as the CAB (Controller Anti-lock Brake).\nTypically ABS includes a central electronic control unit (ECU), four wheel speed sensors, and at least two hydraulic valves within the brake hydraulics. The ECU constantly monitors the rotational speed of each wheel; if it detects the wheel rotating significantly slower than the speed of the vehicle, a condition indicative of impending wheel lock, it actuates the valves to reduce hydraulic pressure to the brake at the affected wheel, thus reducing the braking force on that wheel; the wheel then turns faster. Conversely, if the ECU detects a wheel turning significantly faster than the others, brake hydraulic pressure to the wheel is increased so the braking force is reapplied, slowing down the wheel. This process is repeated continuously and can be detected by the driver via brake pedal pulsation. Some anti-lock systems can apply or release braking pressure 15 times per second. Because of this, the wheels of cars equipped with ABS are practically impossible to lock even during panic braking in extreme conditions.\nThe ECU is programmed to disregard differences in wheel rotative speed below a critical threshold because when the car is turning, the two wheels towards the center of the curve turn slower than the outer two. For this same reason, a differential is used in virtually all roadgoing vehicles.\nIf a fault develops in any part of the ABS, a warning light will usually be illuminated on the vehicle instrument panel, and the ABS will be disabled until the fault is rectified.\nModern ABS applies individual brake pressure to all four wheels through a control system of hub-mounted sensors and a dedicated micro-controller. ABS is offered or comes standard on most road vehicles and is the foundation for electronic stability control systems, which are rapidly increasing in popularity due to the great reduction in the price of vehicle electronics over the years.\nModern electronic stability control (ESC) systems are an evolution of the ABS concept. Here, a minimum of two additional sensors are added to help the system work: these are a steering wheel angle sensor and a gyroscopic sensor. The theory of operation is simple: when the gyroscopic sensor detects that the direction taken by the car does not coincide with what the steering wheel sensor reports, the ESC software will brake the necessary individual wheel(s) (up to three with the most sophisticated systems), so that the vehicle goes the way the driver intends. The steering wheel sensor also helps in the operation of Cornering Brake Control (CBC), since this will tell the ABS that wheels on the inside of the curve should brake more than wheels on the outside, and by how much.\nABS equipment may also be used to implement a traction control system (TCS) on the acceleration of the vehicle. If, when accelerating, the tire loses traction, the ABS controller can detect the situation and take suitable action so that traction is regained. More sophisticated versions of this can also control throttle levels and brakes simultaneously.\nThe speed sensors of ABS are sometimes used in indirect tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS), which can detect under-inflation of the tire(s) by the difference in the rotational speed of wheels.\nComponents.\nThere are four main components of ABS: wheel speed sensors, valves, a pump, and a controller.\nThe majority of problems with the valve system occur due to clogged valves. When a valve is clogged it is unable to open, close, or change position. An inoperable valve will prevent the system from modulating the valves and controlling pressure supplied to the brakes.\nUse.\nThere are many different variations and control algorithms for use in ABS. One of the simpler systems works as follows:\nBrake types.\nAnti-lock braking systems use different schemes depending on the type of brakes in use. They can be differentiated by the number of channels: that is, how many valves that are individually controlled\u2014and the number of speed sensors.\nEffectiveness.\nA 2004 Australian study by Monash University Accident Research Centre found that ABS:\nOn high-traction surfaces such as bitumen, or concrete, many (though not all) ABS-equipped cars are able to attain braking distances better (i.e. shorter) than those that would be possible without the benefit of ABS. In real-world conditions, even an alert and experienced driver without ABS would find it difficult to match or improve on the performance of a typical driver with a modern ABS-equipped vehicle. ABS reduces the chances of crashing, and/or the severity of impact. The recommended technique for non-expert drivers in an ABS-equipped car, in a typical full-braking emergency, is to press the brake pedal as firmly as possible and, where appropriate, to steer around obstructions. In such situations, ABS will significantly reduce the chances of a skid and subsequent loss of control.\nIn gravel, sand, and deep snow, ABS tends to increase braking distances. On these surfaces, locked wheels dig in and stop the vehicle more quickly. ABS prevents this from occurring. Some ABS calibrations reduce this problem by slowing the cycling time, thus letting the wheels repeatedly briefly lock and unlock. Some vehicle manufacturers provide an \"off-road\" button to turn the ABS function off. The primary benefit of ABS on such surfaces is to increase the ability of the driver to maintain control of the car rather than go into a skid, though the loss of control remains more likely on soft surfaces such as gravel or on slippery surfaces such as snow or ice. On a very slippery surface such as sheet ice or gravel, it is possible to lock multiple wheels at once, and this can defeat ABS (which relies on comparing all four wheels and detecting individual wheels skidding). The availability of ABS relieves most drivers from learning threshold braking.\nA June 1999 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) study found that ABS increased stopping distances on loose gravel by an average of 27.2 percent.\nAccording to the NHTSA,\n\"ABS works with your regular braking system by automatically pumping them. In vehicles not equipped with ABS, the driver has to manually pump the brakes to prevent wheel lockup. In vehicles equipped with ABS, your foot should remain firmly planted on the brake pedal, while ABS pumps the brakes for you so you can concentrate on steering to safety.\"\nWhen activated, some earlier ABSes caused the brake pedal to pulse noticeably. As most drivers rarely or do not brake hard enough to cause brake lock-up, and drivers typically do not read the vehicle's owner's manual, this may not be noticeable until an emergency. Some manufacturers have therefore implemented a brake assist system that determines that the driver is attempting a \"panic stop\" (by detecting that the brake pedal was depressed very quickly, unlike a normal stop where the pedal pressure would usually be gradually increased. Some systems additionally monitor the rate at the accelerator was released, and/or the time between accelerator release and brake application) and the system automatically increases braking force where not enough pressure is applied. Hard or panic braking on bumpy surfaces, because of the bumps causing the speed of the wheel(s) to become erratic may also trigger the ABS, sometimes causing the system to enter its ice mode, where the system severely limits maximum available braking power. Nevertheless, ABS significantly improves safety and control for drivers in most on-road situations.\nAnti-lock brakes are the subject of some experiments centred around risk compensation theory, which asserts that drivers adapt to the safety benefit of ABS by driving more aggressively. In a Munich study, half a fleet of taxicabs was equipped with anti-lock brakes, while the other half had conventional brake systems. The crash rate was substantially the same for both types of cab, and Wilde concludes this was due to drivers of ABS-equipped cabs taking more risks, assuming that ABS would take care of them, while the non-ABS drivers drove more carefully since ABS would not be there to help in case of a dangerous situation.\nThe Insurance Institute for Highway Safety released a study in 2010 that found motorcycles with ABS 37% less likely to be involved in a fatal crash than models without ABS.\nABS on motorcycles.\nOn a motorcycle, an anti-lock brake system prevents the wheels of a motorcycle from locking during braking situations. Based on information from wheel speed sensors the ABS unit adjusts the pressure of the brake fluid in order to keep traction during deceleration to avoid accidents. Motorcycle ABS helps the rider to maintain stability during braking and to decrease the stopping distance. It provides traction even on low friction surfaces.\nWhile older ABS models are derived from cars, recent Motorcycle ABS is the result of research, oriented to the specifics of motorcycles in case of size, weight, and functionality. National and international organizations have evaluated Motorcycle ABS to be an important factor in increasing safety and reducing the number and severity of motorcycle crashes and collisions. The European Commission passed legislation in 2012 that made the fitment with ABS for all new motorcycles above 125cc to be mandatory from 1 January 2016. \"Consumer Reports\" said in 2016 that \"ABS is commonly offered on large, expensive models, but it has been spreading to several entry-level sportbikes and midsized bikes\".\nHistory of motorcycle ABS.\nIn 1988, BMW introduced an electronic/hydraulic ABS for motorcycles, ten years after Daimler Benz and Bosch released the first four-wheel vehicle ABS for series production. Motorcycles of BMW K100 series were optionally equipped with the ABS, which added 11\u00a0kg to the bike. It was developed together with FAG Kugelfischer and regulated the pressure in the braking circuits via a plunger piston. Japanese manufacturers followed with an ABS option by 1992 on the Honda ST1100 and the Yamaha FJ1200.\nContinental presented its first Motorcycle Integral ABS (MIB) in 2006. It has been developed in cooperation with BMW and weighed 2.3\u00a0kg.\nWhile the first generation of motorcycle ABS weighed around 11\u00a0kg, the generation (2011) presented by Bosch in 2009 weighs 0.7\u00a0kg (ABS base) and 1.6\u00a0kg (ABS enhanced) with integral braking.\nBasic principle.\nWheel speed sensors mounted on the front and rear wheel constantly measures the rotational speed of each wheel and delivers this information to an Electronic Control Unit (ECU). The ECU detects two things: 1) if the deceleration of one wheel exceeds a fixed threshold and 2) whether the brake slip, calculated based on information of both wheels, rises above a certain percentage and enters an unstable zone. These are indicators for a high possibility of a locking wheel. To countermeasure these irregularities the ECU signals the hydraulic unit to hold or to release pressure. After signals show the return to the stable zone, the pressure is increased again. Past models used a piston for the control of the fluid pressure. Most recent models regulate the pressure by rapidly opening and closing solenoid valves.\nWhile the basic principle and architecture has been carried over from passenger car ABS, typical motorcycle characteristics have to be considered during the development and application processes.\nOne characteristic is the change of the dynamic wheel load during braking. Compared to cars, the wheel load changes are more drastic, which can lead to a wheel lift up and a fall over. This can be intensified by a soft suspension. Some systems are equipped with a rear-wheel lift-off mitigation functionality. When the indicators of a possible rear lift-off are detected, the system releases brake pressure on the front wheel to counter this behavior.\nAnother difference is that in the case of the motorcycle the front wheel is much more important for stability than the rear wheel. If the front wheel locks up between 0.2-0.7s, it loses gyrostatic forces and the motorcycle starts to oscillate because of the increased influence of side forces operating on the wheel contact line. The motorcycle becomes unstable and falls.\nAnti-lock Braking System (ABS).\n\"Piston Systems\": The pressure release in this system is realized through the movement of a spring-tensioned piston. When pressure should be released, a linear motor pulls back the plunger piston and opens up more space for the fluid. The system was used for example in the ABS I (1988) and ABS II (1993) of BMW. The ABS II differed in size and an electronically controlled friction clutch was mounted on the shaft instead of a plunger. Further displacement sensors record the travel distance of the piston to allow the control unit a more precise regulation. Honda also uses this system of pressure modulation for big sports and touring bikes.\n\"Valve and Pump Systems\": The main parts which are part of the pressure modulation system are solenoid inlet and outlet valves, a pump, motor, and accumulators/reservoirs. The number of the valves differs from model to model due to additional functionalities and the number of brake channels. Based on the input of the ECU, coils operate the inlet and outlet valves. During pressure release, the brake fluid is stored in accumulators. In this open system approach, the fluid is then brought back in the brake circuit via a pump operated by a motor that is felt through pulsation on the brake lever.\nRegenerative Anti-Lock Braking for Electric 2-wheel vehicles (eABS).\nElectric vehicles can recapture the energy from rear wheel braking.\nCombined Braking System (CBS).\nContrary to how the wheels on cars and trains react collectively to brakes when applied, on motorcycles the rear wheel brake and front wheel brake are controlled separately. If the rider only brakes with one wheel, this braked wheel tends to lock up faster than if both brakes had been applied. A Combined Braking System therefore distributes the brake force also to the non-braked wheel to lower the possibility of a lock-up, increase deceleration and reduce suspension pitch.\nWith a single [rear] CBS the brake pressure applied on the rear brake (pedal) is simultaneously distributed to the front wheel. A delay valve cuts the hydraulic pressure to assure that only when strong braking is applied, the pressure is also created at the front wheel. Honda's first street motorcycle with a combined braking system (then called Unified Braking) was the 1983 GL1100. This system was derived from the 1970s RCB1000 world endurance race bike.\nLarger models with two front discs use a dual CBS System. The system was first installed by Moto Guzzi in 1975. Here, applied brake pressure at the front is also applied to the rear wheel and vice versa. If the front lever is applied, the pressure is built up at 4 of the 6 pots in the 2 calipers at the front. A secondary master cylinder at the front wheel distributes remaining pressure to the rear wheel through a proportional control valve and acts on 2 of the 3 calipers. If a strong brake force is applied at the rear wheel force is also distributed to 2 of the 6 pots of the front wheel. More modern dual CBS use front and rear calipers (and all pots) according to a preset load ratio of front to rear. The proportioning was originally controlled by complex all-hydraulic systems interlinking the front and rear, with a fixed delay or by sensing weight distribution changes. As early as 2001 an electrohydraulic system was introduced by BMW.\nCBS and ABS.\nCBS helps to reduce the danger of wheel locks and fall downs but in certain situations, it is possible that CBS causes a fall down. If brake pressure is distributed from the rear wheel to the front wheel and the friction of the surfaces changes suddenly (puddle, ice on the street) the front wheel might lock even if only the rear brake has been applied. This would lead to a loss of stability and a fall down. CBS is therefore combined with ABS to avoid this on a motorcycle.\nDifferent approaches are possible to realize this combination:\n\"Without active pressure Build up\"\nSingle Version: A third additional channel links the rear wheel circuit through a delay valve to the front brake. Strong brake pressure at the rear wheel (or both wheels) pressurizes both brake circuits however this pressure is adjusted according to wheel speed and brake slip.\nThe dual version combines Hondas Dual CBS with a secondary master cylinder and a proportional control valve [with Piston ABS] A modulator regulates the pressure for each\n\"With Active Pressure Build up\"\nIn 2009, Honda introduced the electronic controlled combined ABS for its high-performance sports bikes which utilize brake by wire technology. The brake input of the rider is measured by pressure sensors and the information is provided to an ECU. Together with the information of the wheel speed sensors, the ECU calculates the optimal distribution of pressure to prevent lockups and to provide the best possible deceleration. Based on this output a motor for each wheel operates a pump that builds up and regulates the brake pressure on the wheel. This system offers a fast reaction time because of the brake by wire functionality.\nThe MIB (Motorcycle integral Braking system) from Continental Teves and the eCBS (electronic CBS) in the enhanced Motorcycle ABS from Bosch are results of another approach. These systems are based on the pump and valve approach. Through additional valves, stronger pumps and a more powerful motor the system can actively build up pressure. The input pressure of the rider is measured with pressure sensors at the lever and pedal. The pump then builds up additional pressure adjusted to riding conditions. A partial integral system is designed for working in one direction only: front\u2192rear or rear\u2192front. A fully integrated system works in both directions.\nBecause these systems are electronically controlled and are able to build up pressure actively, they offer the opportunity to adjust the motorcycle braking behavior to the rider. CBS and ABS can be switched off by experienced riders and also different regulation modes with higher and lower thresholds can be chosen, such as the rain or slick mode in the BMW S1000RR.\nSafety and legislation.\nSafety.\nThe Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) conducted a study on the effectiveness of ABS for motorcycles and came to the conclusion that motorcycles above 250\u00a0cm3 without ABS are 37 percent more likely to be involved in fatal crashes and a study of the Swedish Road Administration came to the conclusion that 48 percent of all severe and fatal motorcycle accidents above 125\u00a0cm3 could be avoided due to motorcycle ABS.\nThese studies caused the EU commission to initiate a legislative process in 2010 that was passed in 2012 and led to ABS for motorcycles above 125\u00a0cm3 becoming mandatory from 2016 onwards. Organizations like the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de l'Automobile and the Institute of advanced Motorists (IAM) demanded the implementation of this legislation already for 2015.\nOn the other hand, some motorcycle riders are protesting against a compulsory ABS for all bikes because they call for a possibility to switch the system off, for off-road usage or for other reasons.\nIn 2011 the United Nations (UN) started the Decade of Action for Road Safety. The main goal is to save 5 million lives until 2020 through global cooperation.\nOne part of their global plan is to: Encourage universal deployment of crash avoidance technologies with proven effectiveness such as Electronic Stability Control and Anti-Lock Braking Systems in motorcycles.\nLaws and regulations.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the NHTSA has mandated ABS in conjunction with electronic stability control under the provisions of FMVSS 126 as of September 1, 2012.\nEuropean and other international markets.\nABS is required in all new passenger cars produced in the EU since 2003.\nSince 2016, the EU has required ABS on all new scooters, motorcycles, tricycles, and quads from 125 cc, otherwise CBS (or ABS).\nUN Regulation No. 78, related to the braking of vehicles of categories L1, L2, L3, L4 and L5 (motorbikes) is applied by the European Union, Russia, Japan, Turkey, Ukraine, Australia and the United Kingdom.\nGlobal technical regulation number 3 related to Motorcycle brake systems is applied by Canada, the European Union, Japan, Russia, and the United States.\nIndia.\nSince 1 April 2019, India has required at least single-channel ABS on all new two-wheelers from 125 cc, otherwise CBS (or ABS). ABS has also been mandatory on all new cars and mini-buses from the same date.\nSouth American markets.\nSince 1 January 2019, Brazil has required ABS on all new motorcycles from 300 cc. ABS has been mandatory on all new cars since January 2014.\nSince 1 January 2024, Argentina has required ABS on all new motorcycles from 250 cc, otherwise CBS (or front wheel ABS) for on-road between 50 and 250cc or their electric equivalents. ABS has been mandatory on all new normal cars since January 2014.\nFrom February 2025, Chile will require ABS on all new motorcycles from 150 cc or 11\u00a0kW, otherwise CBS (or ABS) from 50 cc or 4\u00a0kW from February 2026. ABS has been mandatory on all new cars since October 2020.\nFrom October 2025, Colombia will require ABS on all new motorcycles from 150 cc or 11\u00a0kW, otherwise CBS (or ABS) from 50 cc or 4\u00a0kW.\nFrom March 2027, Colombia will require ABS on all new motorcycles from 125 cc, below that with CBS (or ABS).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59588", "revid": "18915484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59588", "title": "U-238", "text": "U238 or U-238 may be:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "59589", "revid": "151897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59589", "title": "Meciar", "text": ""}
{"id": "59590", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59590", "title": "Vladim\u00edr Me\u010diar", "text": "Prime Minister of Slovakia (1990\u20131991; 1992\u20131994; 1994\u20131998)\nVladim\u00edr Me\u010diar (; born 26 July 1942) is a Slovak former politician who served as the prime minister of Slovakia from June 1990 to May 1991, June 1992 to March 1994, and again from December 1994 to October 1998. He was the leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), a populist party in Slovakia.\nMe\u010diar led Slovakia during the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1992\u201393 and was one of the leading presidential candidates in Slovakia in 1999 and 2004. During his time in office, he was criticized for his autocratic style of governance and connections to organized crime, which became known as \"Me\u010diarizmus\" (\"Me\u010diarism\").\nEarly life.\nMe\u010diar was born in Zvolen in 1942 as the eldest of four boys. His father was a tailor, and his mother was a housewife.\nCareer.\nEarly period.\nStarting in the Communist Party of Slovakia, the only road to prominence in Communist Czechoslovakia, he became committee chairman in the town of \u017diar nad Hronom, only to be dismissed in the year after the 1968 Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia, when he delivered a pro-reform speech to the National Congress in 1969 and was thrown out. A year later he was also expelled from the Communist Party and then added to the Communist Party Central Committee's long list of enemies of the socialist regime. He put himself through the Faculty of Law of the Comenius University while working in a glass factory.\nVelvet Revolution.\nIn late 1989, during the fast-paced anti-Communist Velvet Revolution, he joined the new political party, Public Against Violence (Verejnos\u0165 proti n\u00e1siliu, VPN), which was the Slovak counterpart to the better-known Czech Civic Forum. On 11 January 1990, when the VPN was looking for professionals to participate in the government of Slovakia, Me\u010diar was appointed as Minister of the Interior and Environment of Slovakia on a recommendation of Alexander Dub\u010dek, who was impressed by Me\u010diar's thorough knowledge in all relevant fields.\nPrime minister.\nFirst term.\nAfter the first democratic elections in Czechoslovakia in June 1990, he was named Slovak prime minister (representing the VPN) of a coalition government of VPN and the Christian Democratic Movement. He advocated economic reform and continued federation with the Czechs.\nIn 1990 the political landscape of the Czech Republic and Slovakia started to develop and many new political parties were formed, mainly from the Civic Forum and the VPN. By the end of 1990, some of Me\u010diar's partners in the VPN began distancing themselves from him. First, the party split into two fractions in early March 1991: Me\u010diar supporters (mostly members of his cabinet) and Me\u010diar opponents (led by the VPN chairman Fedor G\u00e1l). On 23 April 1991, the Presidium of the Slovak parliament (Slovak National Council) deposed him as premier of Slovakia and he was replaced by J\u00e1n \u010carnogursk\u00fd, the leader of the Christian Democratic Movement. Three days later, the VPN officially split in two: the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) and the remaining VPN (since October 1991 called OD\u00da-VPN, later just OD\u00da). Me\u010diar was elected HZDS chairman in June 1991.\nSecond term.\nIn 1991 and 1992, there were frequent, but fruitless, negotiations between the Czech Republic and Slovak Republic concerning the future relations between the two constituent republics of Czechoslovakia. The winners of the June 1992 elections in Czechoslovakia and new prime ministers were the Civic Democratic Party led by V\u00e1clav Klaus in the Czech Republic and the HZDS led by Vladim\u00edr Me\u010diar in Slovakia. Before and shortly after this election, the HZDS supported the creation of a looser federation\u2014a confederation\u2014between the two republics. However, its Czech counterpart wanted an even more centralized Czechoslovakia than was the case in 1992 or two separate countries. Since these two concepts were irreconcilable, Me\u010diar and Klaus agreed (after intense negotiations, but without having consulted the population in a referendum) on 23 July in Bratislava to dissolve Czechoslovakia and to create two independent states. As a result, Me\u010diar and Klaus became the prime ministers of two independent states on 1 January 1993. Me\u010diar also opposed the free-market shock therapy proposed by Prague and Klaus' party to all of Czechoslovakia.\nAfter eight members of the parliament left the HZDS in March 1993, Me\u010diar lost his parliamentary majority. At the same time Me\u010diar's HZDS also lost the support of the president, Michal Kov\u00e1\u010d, who was originally nominated by the HZDS. However, it was only in March 1994 that he was unseated as prime minister by the parliament (National Council of the Slovak Republic) and the opposition parties created a new government under Jozef Morav\u010d\u00edk's lead. However, after the elections held at the turn of September and October 1994, in which his HZDS won 35% of the votes, he became prime minister again \u2014 in a coalition with the far-right Slovak National Party headed by the controversial J\u00e1n Slota, and the radical-left Zdru\u017eenie robotn\u00edkov Slovenska headed by the colourful J\u00e1n \u013dupt\u00e1k, a mason.\nThird term.\nDuring the following period, he was constantly criticized by his opponents and Western countries for an autocratic style of administration, lack of respect for democracy, misuse of state media for propaganda, corruption and the shady privatization of national companies that occurred during his rule. Privatization during the 1990s in both Slovakia and the Czech Republic was harmed by widespread unlawful asset stripping (also described by the journalistic term of \"tunnelling\").\nAt the same time relations between Me\u010diar and the President of Slovakia, Michal Kov\u00e1\u010d were rather strained. He was also blamed for having engaged the Slovak secret service (SIS) in the abduction of the President's son Michal Kov\u00e1\u010d, Jr. \u2014 wanted on a warrant for a financial crime in Germany \u2014 to Hainburg, Austria, in August 1995, but his guilt has not been proven. However, after Kova\u010d's term expired in March 1998 the Slovak parliament was unable to elect a successor, so Me\u010diar also temporarily assumed the role of acting president. As president, he issued an amnesty for some of those accused of the abduction. As a result, Slovakia under his rule became partially isolated from the West and the pace of EU and NATO accession negotiations was much slower than in the case of neighboring countries, although Me\u010diar supported both EU and NATO memberships for his country and submitted Slovakia's applications to both organisations.\nMe\u010diar and HZDS narrowly finished first in the 1998 elections, with 27% of the votes. However, he was unable to create a coalition, and Mikul\u00e1\u0161 Dzurinda from the opposition became the new Prime Minister. Afterwards, Me\u010diar was one of the two leading candidates for the first direct election of the president of Slovakia in 1999, but he was defeated by Rudolf Schuster. In 2000, Me\u010diar's HZDS was renamed \"People's Party \u2014 Movement for a Democratic Slovakia\".\nPost-premiership.\nIn 2000 Me\u010diar ostensibly gave up his political ambitions. His HZDS colleague August\u00edn Mari\u00e1n H\u00faska said: \"The NATO-War against Yugoslavia in 1999 was also a signal to us, to not pursue any vision of political independence anymore. We have seen what will happen to forces that want to be independent.\" In 2000, Me\u010diar was arrested by Slovak police on charges of fraud dating from his term in office.\nMe\u010diar was heavily favored to win the 2002 election, but it was thought that if he became prime minister again, it would end any chance of Slovakia getting into the EU. The 2002 elections saw the HZDS score a high percentage (20%) again. However, as in 1998, no other party was willing to serve under him. The result was another term in government for Dzurinda. The lower percentage of Me\u010diar's HZDS (20%) compared to the 1998 result (27%) was due to internal disputes within the organization shortly before the election, which caused many traditional HZDS members to leave the party. Some of them created the HZD (Movement for Democracy) party led by Ivan Ga\u0161parovi\u010d. In 2003, further traditional HZDS members left the party and most of them created the People's Union (\u013dudov\u00e1 \u00fania).\nIn the 2004 presidential election, Me\u010diar tried to become Slovak president again, but was defeated in the second round by his former, long-standing ally Ivan Ga\u0161parovi\u010d. In the 2006 parliamentary election in Slovakia, HZDS had the worst election result in its history, just 8.79%. Me\u010diar requested an examination of the election results. While HZDS became part of Robert Fico's coalition, Me\u010diar was not a Cabinet member. He declined to participate in the 2009 presidential election but also denied considering political retirement.\nIn the 2010 parliamentary election, Me\u010diar's HZDS dropped to 4%, leaving it out of parliament for the first time in its history. In the 2012 elections, the HZDS saw its vote collapse to 0.93%, leaving it again outside of parliament. Eventually, the party was dissolved in 2014.\nPersonal life.\nHis wife Margita is a medical doctor, and they have three children.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59592", "revid": "50718763", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59592", "title": "Kawasaki Heavy Industries", "text": "Japanese multinational manufacturing company\n is a Japanese public multinational corporation manufacturer of motorcycles, engines, heavy equipment, aerospace and defense equipment, rolling stock and ships, headquartered in Minato, Tokyo, Japan. It is also active in the production of industrial robots, gas turbines, pumps, boilers and other industrial products. The company is named after its founder, Sh\u014dz\u014d Kawasaki. KHI is known as one of the three major heavy industrial manufacturers of Japan, alongside Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and IHI. Prior to the Second World War, KHI was part of the Kobe Kawasaki \"zaibatsu\", which included Kawasaki Steel and Kawasaki Kisen. After the conflict, KHI became part of the DKB Group (\"keiretsu\").\nHistory.\nSh\u014dz\u014d Kawasaki, born in 1836, was involved with the marine industry from a young age. He was involved with two offshore disasters but accredited his survival to the modernization of the ships. This led to the decision to create technological innovations for the Japanese shipping industry. In 1878, after struggling to find business, his first order was placed. This is marked as the company's start in the industry.\nIn 1886, Kawasaki moved the business from Tokyo to Hyogo. This allowed space for the rise of orders placed to his company and the renaming to Kawasaki Dockyard. The new and improved company went public as Kawasaki Dockyard Co., Ltd when the demand for ships rose during the Sino-Japanese War of 1894. Kojiro Matsukata was announced as the company's first president.\nAfter opening a new factory in 1906, Kawasaki began diversifying its products. They began to produce parts for the railroad, automotive, and airplane industry by the end of World War 1. After the war, along with the Allied arms-limitation agreement in 1912, Kawasaki faced a huge decline in shipbuilding. In 1929, the Depression caused a large amount of financial problems with the company.\nDuring World War 2, Kawasaki was a major builder of combat aircraft like the Ki-61, which killed many Allied aircrew. Just afterwards, they adapted air intakes from combat aircraft to high speed motorcycles. In 1947, the government introduced a new shipbuilding agenda and gave Kawasaki a rise in profits and helped restore the company. The company was able to resume all operations and by the 1950s, Japan was leading as the world's largest shipbuilder.\nBy the late 1960s into the 1970s Kawasaki had begun to withdraw from the shipbuilding industry and diversified its company, producing motorcycles, jet skis, bridges, tunnel-boring machines, and aircraft. They also supplied technologically advanced railroad cars to the New York subway system.\nIn 1995, Kawasaki Heavy Industries came to an agreement with China to produce the largest containerships ever. This led to the company announcing higher than expected profits in 1996. However, shortly after the profits, the company saw a long decline in business forcing them to find a solution.\nWith the company seeing continuous losses into the 21st century, it formed a joint venture with Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Co. However, by the end of 2001, the agreement was terminated. In the following years, Kawasaki Heavy Industries Co. have seen a fluctuation of profits and losses.\nProducts.\nAerospace.\nKawasaki is active in a diverse range of the aerospace industry. The company is a contractor for the Japanese ministry of defence and has built aircraft such as the C-1 transport aircraft, T-4 intermediate jet trainer, and the P-3C antisubmarine warfare patrol airplane. Since 2007, it has built the P-1 maritime patrol aircraft, and since 2010, it has built the C-2 transport aircraft. Kawasaki also builds helicopters, including the BK117, jointly developed and manufactured with MBB. It also produces the CH-47J / JA helicopter.\nIn the commercial aviation business, the company is involved in the joint international development and production of large passenger aircraft. It is involved in joint development and production of the Boeing 767, Boeing 777 and Boeing 787 with The Boeing Company, and the 170, 175, 190 and 195 jets with Empresa Brasileira de Aeron\u00e1utica. It is also involved in the joint international development and production of turbofan engines for passenger aircraft such as the V2500, the RB211/Trent, the PW4000 and the CF34.\nKawasaki also works for the JAXA. The company was responsible for the development and production of the payload fairings, payload attach fittings (PAF) and the construction of the launch complex for the H-II rocket. It continues to provide services for the H-IIA rocket.\nKawasaki has also participated in projects such as the development of reusable launch vehicles for spacecraft that will handle future space transport, space robotics projects such as the Japanese Experiment Module for the International Space Station, the cancelled HOPE-X experimental orbiting plane and the docking mechanism for the ETS-VII. According to a document from July 1997, they would have been a major manufacturer of the Kankoh-maru space tourism vehicle (also known as the Kawasaki S-1), which never saw production.\nIn 2022, Kawasaki and Airbus signed a memorandum of understanding to address hydrogen needs in aviation, and to focus on airport hydrogen hubs development.\nMain products\nRolling stock.\nKawasaki is Japan's largest manufacturer of rolling stock. It began operations in the industry in 1906. It manufactures express and commuter trains, subway cars, freight trains, locomotives, monorails and new transit systems. Kawasaki is also involved in the development and design of high-speed trains such as Japan's Shinkansen.\nMain Products\nShipbuilding.\nShipbuilding is the historical industry in which Kawasaki Heavy Industries was created and developed, as from the company's 1878 founding as the Kawasaki Dockyard Co.\nKawasaki Shipbuilding Corporation is a wholly owned subsidiary of Kawasaki Heavy Industries. Its product range include high-performance LNG and LPG carriers, container ships, bulk carriers and VLCCs, as well as submarines. The company is also involved in the development of offshore structures and research vessels.\nKawasaki also produces marine machinery and equipment, including main engines, propulsion systems, steering gears, deck and fishing machinery.\nKawasaki has shipyards at Kobe and Sakaide, Kagawa. (Kagawa Prefecture). The company also builds ships as a part of joint ventures with COSCO in China, i.e. the Nantong COSCO KHI Ship Engineering Co., Ltd.(NACKS), in Nantong, China, and the Dalian COSCO KHI Ship Engineering Co., Ltd.(DACKS), in Dalian, China.\nOn 3 July 2024, the Japanese Defence Ministry announced an investigation into bribery allegations between Kawasaki and Maritime Self-Defence Force personnel over submarine repair contracts. Kawasaki will also set up its own inspection panel to look into fictitious transactions and slush funds.\nMain products\nEnergy plants and facilities.\nKawasaki's key offering are high-performance gas turbines. The company is also involved in development of new energy sources as an alternative to fossil fuels such as wind power generation, biomass power generation, photovoltaic systems and rechargeable batteries.\nMain products\nIndustrial equipment.\nKawasaki develops and builds a vast array of industrial plants and equipment, including large cement, chemical and nonferrous metal plants, prime movers, and compact precision machinery. It also offers industrial plant engineering from design to sales.\nKawasaki also develops automation systems. Industrial robots for processes such as assembly, handling, welding, painting and sealing, as well as automation systems for distribution and logistics such as automated product- and cargo-handling systems for plants and airports.\nMain products\nEnvironment and recycling.\nKawasaki is involved in the development of equipment that prevents pollution in a wide range of industries. Among the leading products are fuel gas desulfurization and denitrification systems, and ash handling systems. The company also supplies municipal refuse incineration plants, gasification and melting systems, sewage treatment and sludge incineration plants.\nKawasaki has also been developing systems that enable a wide range of municipal and industrial waste to be recovered, recycled and put to new use. Such systems include refuse paper and plastic fuel production facilities that convert wastepaper/plastics into an easy-to-handle solid fuel, equipment that converts old tires into highway paving materials and tiles, and machinery that sorts glass bottles by size and color.\nMain products\nInfrastructure.\nKawasaki's history of building steel structures spans more than a century, with bridge-building among its first businesses. The company offers of storage management for LNG,\nKawasaki's portfolio also includes retractable roofs, floors and other giant structures, the Sapporo Dome's retractable surface is one example.\nFor construction, Kawasaki produces products such as wheel loaders, tunnel machines, rollers, snowplows and purpose-specific loaders. The tunnel boring machines used to excavate the Channel Tunnel and the 14.14 m diameter shield machines used in the Tokyo Bay Aqua-Line construction are two well-known examples.\nMain products\nTransportation.\nKawasaki produces motorcycles, Jet Skis and ATVs. Kawasaki's motorcycle include the Ninja sport bikes, and cruisers, dual-purpose and motocross motorcycles, as well as utility vehicles, ATVs and general-purpose gasoline engines. Kawasaki's \"Jet Ski\" has become a genericized trademark for any type of personal watercraft.\nControversies.\nMarine engine test data misconduct.\nIn August 2024, Kawasaki Heavy Industries said it had deliberately manipulated test data of 674 ship engines built since 2000 and that such cheating had lasted for 20 years.\nA report released on Aug. 29, 2025 said the investigative committee had informed Kawasaki of the possibility that fuel efficiency test data from Japan Maritime Self-Defense Forces' Soryu-class and Taigei-class submarines were tampered with after discovering alleged irregularities in engines manufactured before 2021 and later reported the issue to the Ministry of Defense. The company said it was not yet known when and how the misconduct occurred and that the investigative committee would continue its investigation and produce a final report by the end of the year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59593", "revid": "47554771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59593", "title": "German submarine U-2 (1935)", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-2\" was a Type IIA U-boat of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\". Her keel was laid down 11 February 1935 by Deutsche Werke of Kiel as yard number 237; she was launched on 1 July and commissioned on 25 July 1935 with \"Oberleutnant zur See\" (\"Oblt.z.S.\") Hermann Michahelles in command.\nDesign.\nGerman Type II submarines were based on the . \"U-2\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. Officially, the standard tonnage was , however. The U-boat had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two MWM RS 127 S four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines of for cruising, and two Siemens-Schuckert PG VV 322/36 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The U-boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-2\" was fitted with three torpedo tubes at the bow, five torpedoes or up to twelve Type A torpedo mines, and a anti-aircraft gun. The boat had a complement of 25.\nService history.\nShe had several commanders over her long career. Michahelles was relieved on 30 September 1936, by \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" (\"Kptlt.\") Heinrich Liebe. Liebe turned command over on 31 January 1938 to \"Oblt.z.S.\" Herbert Schultze. On 16 March 1939, \"Kptlt.\" Helmut Rosenbaum assumed command and on 7 July 1940, \"Oblt.z.S.\" Hans Heidtmann joined Rosenbaum as deputy commander. On 6 August 1940, Georg von Wilamowitz-Moellendorf relieved Rosenbaum and Heidtmann and commanded until October 1941 when Karl K\u00f6lzer took over. On 16 May 1942, \"Oblt.z.S.\" Werner Schwaff relieved K\u00f6lzer, and on 20 November 1942, was relieved by \"Oblt.z.S.\" Helmut Herglotz. On 12 December 1943, \"Oblt.z.S.\" Wolfgang Schwarzkopf took over and commanded the boat until she was lost.\nShe was used as a school boat and trainer for her entire career except for two completely uneventful combat patrols in early 1940.\nFate.\n\"U-2\" suffered no casualties to any of her numerous crews until 8 April 1944 when she collided with the German steam trawler \"Helmi S\u00f6hle\" west of Pillau (today's Baltiysk, Russia) and sank. 17 of her crew were killed; 18 survived. The wreck was raised the next day and stricken.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59594", "revid": "50528451", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59594", "title": "Margaret Rutherford", "text": "English actress (1892\u20131972)\nDame Margaret Taylor Rutherford (11 May 1892 \u2013 22 May 1972) was an English actress of stage, film and television.\nRutherford came to national attention following World War II in the film adaptations of No\u00ebl Coward's \"Blithe Spirit\", and Oscar Wilde's \"The Importance of Being Earnest\". In 1948, she was awarded with a Special Tony Award for Outstanding Foreign Company as a cast member of \"The Importance of Being Earnest\" and she later won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress and a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress \u2013 Motion Picture for her role as the Duchess of Brighton in \"The V.I.P.s\" (1963). In the early 1960s, she starred as Agatha Christie's character Miss Marple in a series of four George Pollock films. She was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 1961 and a Dame Commander (DBE) in 1967.\nEarly life and education.\nRutherford's early life was overshadowed by tragedies involving both of her parents. Her father, journalist and poet William Rutherford Benn, married Florence Nicholson on 16 December 1882 in Wandsworth, south London. One month after the marriage, he suffered a nervous breakdown and was admitted to Bethnal House Lunatic Asylum. Released to travel under his family's supervision, he murdered his father, the Reverend Julius Benn, a Congregational Church minister, by bludgeoning him to death with a chamber pot, before cutting his own throat with a pocket knife at an inn in Matlock, Derbyshire on 4 March 1883.\nFollowing the inquest, William Benn was certified insane and removed to Broadmoor Criminal Lunatic Asylum. Seven years later, on 26 July 1890, he was discharged from Broadmoor and reunited with his wife. He legally dropped his surname.\nMargaret Taylor Rutherford, the only child of William and Florence, was born in 1892 in Balham, south London. Margaret's uncle, Sir John Benn, 1st Baronet, was a politician, and her first cousin once removed was the Labour politician Tony Benn. Hoping to start a new life far from the scene of their recent troubles, the Rutherfords emigrated to Madras, India, but Margaret was sent back to Britain when she was three years old to live with her aunt Bessie Nicholson in Wimbledon, south London, after her pregnant mother hanged herself from a tree.\nYoung Margaret had been told that her father died of a broken heart soon afterward. When she was 12 years old, she was shocked to learn that her father had actually been readmitted to Broadmoor Hospital in 1903, where he remained until his death on 4 August 1921. Her parents' mental afflictions gave rise to a fear that she might succumb to similar maladies, a fear that haunted her for the rest of her life. She suffered intermittent bouts of depression and anxiety.\nRutherford was educated at Wimbledon High School (now a theatre space, the Rutherford Centre, named after her) and, from the age of 13, at Raven's Croft School, a boarding school in Sutton Avenue, Seaford. While she was there, she developed an interest in the theatre and performed in amateur dramatics. After she left school, her aunt paid for her to have private acting lessons. When her aunt died, she left a legacy that allowed Rutherford to secure entry to the Old Vic School. In her autobiography, Rutherford called her Aunt Bessie her \"adoptive mother and one of the saints of the world\".\nActing career.\nStage.\nRutherford, a talented pianist, first found work as a piano teacher and a teacher of elocution. She developed an acting career relatively late, making her stage debut only in 1925, aged 33, at the Old Vic. As her \"spaniel jowls\" and bulky frame made being cast in romantic heroine roles impossible, she established her name in comedy, appearing in many of the most successful British plays and films. \"I never intended to play for laughs. I am always surprised that the audience thinks me funny at all\", Rutherford wrote in her autobiography. Rutherford made her first appearance in London's West End in 1933, but her talent was not recognised by the critics until her performance as Miss Prism in John Gielgud's production of \"The Importance of Being Earnest\" at the Globe Theatre in 1939.\nIn 1941 No\u00ebl Coward's \"Blithe Spirit\" opened on the London stage at the Piccadilly Theatre, with Coward directing. Rutherford received rave reviews from audiences and critics alike for her lusty portrayal of the bumbling medium Madame Arcati, a role for which Coward had envisioned her. Theatre critic Kenneth Tynan once said of her performances: \"The unique thing about Margaret Rutherford is that she can act with her chin alone.\"\nAnother theatrical success during the war years included her part as the sinister housekeeper Mrs. Danvers in Daphne du Maurier's \"Rebecca\" at the Queen's Theatre in 1940. Her post-war theatre credits included Miss Prism in \"The Importance of Being Earnest\" again at the Haymarket Theatre in 1946 and Lady Bracknell when the same play transferred to New York City in 1947. She played an officious headmistress in \"The Happiest Days of Your Life\" at the Apollo Theatre in 1948 and classical roles such as Madame Desmortes in \"Ring Round the Moon\" at the Globe Theatre, 1950, Lady Wishfort in \"The Way of the World\" at Lyric Hammersmith, 1953 and Saville Theatres, in 1956, and Mrs. Candour in \"The School for Scandal\" at the Haymarket Theatre in 1962. Her final stage performance came in 1966 when she played Mrs. Malaprop in \"The Rivals\" at the Haymarket Theatre, alongside Sir Ralph Richardson. Her declining health meant she had to give up the role.\nFilm.\nAlthough she made her film debut in 1936, it was Rutherford's turn as Madame Arcati in David Lean's film of \"Blithe Spirit\" (1945) that established her in films. Her jaunty performance, cycling about the Kent countryside, head held high, back straight, and cape fluttering behind her, established the model for portraying that role thereafter. She was Nurse Carey in \"Miranda\" (1948) and the sprightly Medieval expert Professor Hatton-Jones in \"Passport to Pimlico\" (1949), one of the Ealing Comedies. She reprised her stage roles of the headmistress alongside Alastair Sim in \"The Happiest Days of Your Life\" (1950) and Miss Prism in Anthony Asquith's film adaptation of \"The Importance of Being Earnest\" (1952).\nMore comedies followed, including \"Castle in the Air\" (1952) with David Tomlinson, \"Trouble in Store\" (1953), with Norman Wisdom, \"The Runaway Bus\" (1954) with Frankie Howerd and \"An Alligator Named Daisy\" (1955) with Donald Sinden and Diana Dors. Rutherford worked with Norman Wisdom again in \"Just My Luck\" (1957) and co-starred in \"The Smallest Show on Earth\" with Virginia McKenna, Peter Sellers and Leslie Phillips (both 1957). She starred alongside Ian Carmichael and Peter Sellers, in the Boulting Brothers satire \"I'm All Right Jack\" (1959).\nIn the early 1960s, she appeared as Miss Jane Marple in a series of four George Pollock films loosely based on novels by Agatha Christie. The films depicted Marple as a colourful character, respectable but bossy and eccentric. Authors Marion Shaw and Sabine Vanacker in their book \"Reflecting on Miss Marple\" (1991) complained that the emphasis on the \"dotty element in the character\" missed entirely \"the quietness and sharpness\" so admired in the novels. The actress, then aged in her 70s, insisted on wearing her own clothes for the parts and having her husband appear alongside her. In 1963 Christie dedicated her novel \"The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side\" \"To Margaret Rutherford in admiration\", though the novelist was critical of the films for diverging from her original plots and playing dramatic scenes for laughs. Rutherford reprised the role of Miss Marple in a very brief, uncredited cameo in the 1965 film \"The Alphabet Murders\".\nRutherford played the absent-minded, impoverished, pill-popping Duchess of Brighton \u2013 the only comedy relief \u2013 in \"The V.I.P.s\" (1963) from a screenplay by Terence Rattigan. The film features a star-studded cast led by Maggie Smith, Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton. For her performance, she won an Academy Award and Golden Globe Awards for Best Supporting Actress. At the time she set a record for the oldest woman and last born in the nineteenth century to win an Oscar.\nShe appeared as Mistress Quickly in Orson Welles' film \"Chimes at Midnight\" (1965) and was directed by Charlie Chaplin in \"A Countess from Hong Kong\" (1967), starring Marlon Brando and Sophia Loren, which was one of her final films. She started work on \"The Virgin and the Gypsy\" (1970), but illness caused her to be replaced by Fay Compton.\nPersonal life, illness, death and legacy.\nIn 1945, Rutherford, 53, married character actor Stringer Davis, 46, after a courtship that lasted 15 years. Davis' mother reportedly considered Rutherford an unsuitable match for her son, and their wedding was postponed until after Mrs. Davis had died. Subsequently, the couple appeared in many productions together. Davis adored Rutherford, with one friend noting: \"For him she was not only a great talent but, above all, a beauty.\" The actor and former serviceman rarely left his wife's side, serving Rutherford as private secretary. He also nursed and comforted her through periodic debilitating depression. These illnesses, sometimes involving stays in mental hospitals and electric shock treatment, were kept hidden from the press during Rutherford's lifetime.\nIn the 1950s, Rutherford and Davis unofficially adopted writer Gordon Langley Hall (later Dawn Langley Simmons), then in her twenties, who later wrote a biography of Rutherford in 1983.\nRutherford suffered from Alzheimer's disease at the end of her life and was unable to work. Davis cared for his wife at their Buckinghamshire home until her death on 22 May 1972, aged 80. Many of Britain's top actors, including John Gielgud, Ralph Richardson, Flora Robson, and Joyce Grenfell, attended a memorial Service of Thanksgiving at the Actors' Church, St. Paul's, Covent Garden, on 21 July 1972, where 90-year-old Sybil Thorndike praised her friend's enormous talent and recalled that Rutherford had \"never said anything horrid about anyone\".\nRutherford and Davis (who died in 1973) are interred at the graveyard of St. James's Church, Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire. \"A Blithe Spirit\" is inscribed on the base of Margaret Rutherford's memorial stone, a reference to the No\u00ebl Coward play that helped to make her name.\nPerformances and works.\nRecordings.\nThe English PEN International Centre included several readings of poems by Rutherford on a list entitled http:// (1953). The works listed were:\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "59595", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59595", "title": "Heine\u2013Borel theorem", "text": "Subset of Euclidean space is compact if and only if it is closed and bounded\nIn real analysis, the Heine\u2013Borel theorem, named after Eduard Heine and \u00c9mile Borel, states:\nFor a subset formula_1 of Euclidean space formula_2, the following two statements are equivalent:\nHistory and motivation.\nThe history of what today is called the Heine\u2013Borel theorem starts in the 19th century, with the search for solid foundations of real analysis. Central to the theory was the concept of uniform continuity and the theorem stating that every continuous function on a closed and bounded interval is uniformly continuous. Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet was the first to prove this and implicitly he used the existence of a finite subcover of a given open cover of a closed interval in his proof. He used this proof in his 1852 lectures, which were published only in 1904. Later Eduard Heine, Karl Weierstrass and Salvatore Pincherle used similar techniques. \u00c9mile Borel in 1895 was the first to state and prove a form of what is now called the Heine\u2013Borel theorem. His formulation was restricted to countable covers. Pierre Cousin (1895), Lebesgue (1898) and Schoenflies (1900) generalized it to arbitrary covers.\nProof.\nIf a set is compact, then it must be closed.\nLet formula_1 be a subset of formula_2. Observe first the following: if formula_8 is a limit point of formula_1, then any finite collection formula_10 of open sets, such that each open set formula_11 is disjoint from some neighborhood formula_12 of formula_8, fails to be a cover of formula_1. Indeed, the intersection of the finite family of sets formula_12 is a neighborhood formula_16 of formula_8 in formula_2. Since formula_8 is a limit point of formula_1, formula_16 must contain a point formula_22 in formula_1. This formula_24 is not covered by the family formula_10, because every formula_26 in formula_10 is disjoint from formula_12 and hence disjoint from formula_16, which contains formula_22.\nIf formula_1 is compact but not closed, then it has a limit point formula_32. Consider a collection formula_33 consisting of an open neighborhood formula_34 for each formula_24, chosen small enough to not intersect some neighborhood formula_36 of formula_8. Then formula_33 is an open cover of formula_1, but any finite subcollection of formula_33 has the form of formula_10 discussed previously, and thus cannot be an open subcover of formula_1. This contradicts the compactness of formula_1. Hence, every limit point of formula_1 is in formula_1, so formula_1 is closed.\nThe proof above applies with almost no change to showing that any compact subset formula_1 of a Hausdorff topological space formula_48 is closed in formula_48.\nIf a set is compact, then it is bounded.\nLet formula_1 be a compact set in formula_2, and formula_52 a ball of radius 1 centered at formula_53. Then the set of all such balls centered at formula_24 is clearly an open cover of formula_1, since formula_56 contains all of formula_1. Since formula_1 is compact, take a finite subcover of this cover. This subcover is the finite union of balls of radius 1. Consider all pairs of centers of these (finitely many) balls (of radius 1) and let formula_59 be the maximum of the distances between them. Then if formula_60 and formula_61 are the centers (respectively) of unit balls containing arbitrary formula_62, the triangle inequality says:\nformula_63\nSo the diameter of formula_1 is bounded by formula_65.\nLemma: A closed subset of a compact set is compact.\nLet formula_66 be a closed subset of a compact set formula_67 in formula_2 and let formula_69 be an open cover of formula_66. Then formula_71 is an open set and\nformula_72\nis an open cover of formula_67. Since formula_67 is compact, then formula_75 has a finite subcover formula_76, that also covers the smaller set formula_66. Since formula_26 does not contain any point of formula_66, the set formula_66 is already covered by formula_81, that is a finite subcollection of the original collection formula_69. It is thus possible to extract from any open cover formula_69 of formula_66 a finite subcover.\nIf a set is closed and bounded, then it is compact.\nIf a set formula_1 in formula_2 is bounded, then it can be enclosed within an formula_87-box\nformula_88\nwhere formula_89. By the lemma above, it is enough to show that formula_90 is compact.\nAssume, by way of contradiction, that formula_90 is not compact. Then there exists an infinite open cover formula_10 of formula_90 that does not admit any finite subcover. Through bisection of each of the sides of formula_90, the box formula_90 can be broken up into formula_96 sub formula_87-boxes, each of which has diameter equal to half the diameter of formula_90. Then at least one of the formula_96 sections of formula_90 must require an infinite subcover of formula_10, otherwise formula_10 itself would have a finite subcover, by uniting together the finite covers of the sections. Call this section formula_103.\nLikewise, the sides of formula_103 can be bisected, yielding formula_96 sections of formula_103, at least one of which must require an infinite subcover of formula_10. Continuing in like manner yields a decreasing sequence of nested formula_87-boxes:\nformula_109\nwhere the side length of formula_110 is formula_111, which tends to 0 as formula_112 tends to infinity. Let us define a sequence formula_113 such that each formula_114 is in formula_110. This sequence is Cauchy, so it must converge to some limit formula_116. Since each formula_110 is closed, and for each formula_112 the sequence formula_113 is eventually always inside formula_110, we see that formula_121 for each formula_112.\nSince formula_10 covers formula_90, then it has some member formula_11 such that formula_126. Since formula_26 is open, there is an formula_87-ball formula_129. For large enough formula_112, one has formula_131, but then the infinite number of members of formula_10 needed to cover formula_110 can be replaced by just one: formula_26, a contradiction.\nThus, formula_90 is compact. Since formula_1 is closed and a subset of the compact set formula_90, then formula_1 is also compact (see the lemma above).\nGeneralization of the Heine\u2013Borel theorem.\nIn general metric spaces, we have the following theorem:\nFor a subset formula_1 of a metric space formula_140, the following two statements are equivalent:\nThe above follows directly from Jean Dieudonn\u00e9, theorem 3.16.1, which states:\nFor a metric space formula_140, the following three conditions are equivalent:\nHeine\u2013Borel property.\nThe Heine\u2013Borel theorem does not hold as stated for general metric and topological vector spaces, and this gives rise to the necessity to consider special classes of spaces where this proposition is true. These spaces are said to have the Heine\u2013Borel property.\nIn the theory of metric spaces.\nA metric space formula_147 is said to have the Heine\u2013Borel property if each closed bounded set in formula_48 is compact.\nMany metric spaces fail to have the Heine\u2013Borel property, such as the metric space of rational numbers (or indeed any incomplete metric space). Complete metric spaces may also fail to have the property; for instance, no infinite-dimensional Banach spaces have the Heine\u2013Borel property (as metric spaces). Even more trivially, if the real line is not endowed with the usual metric, it may fail to have the Heine\u2013Borel property.\nA metric space formula_147 has a Heine\u2013Borel metric which is Cauchy locally identical to formula_150 if and only if it is complete, formula_151-compact, and locally compact.\nIn the theory of topological vector spaces.\nA topological vector space formula_48 is said to have the Heine\u2013Borel property (R.E. Edwards uses the term \"boundedly compact space\") if each closed bounded set in formula_48 is compact. No infinite-dimensional Banach spaces have the Heine\u2013Borel property (as topological vector spaces). But some infinite-dimensional Fr\u00e9chet spaces do have, for instance, the space formula_154 of smooth functions on an open set formula_155 and the space formula_156 of holomorphic functions on an open set formula_157. More generally, any quasi-complete nuclear space has the Heine\u2013Borel property. All Montel spaces have the Heine\u2013Borel property as well.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59597", "revid": "50507318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59597", "title": "Disc brake", "text": "Mechanism using friction to resist rotation of a circular plate\nA disc brake is a type of brake that uses the calipers to squeeze pairs of pads against a disc (sometimes called a [brake] rotor) to create friction. There are two basic types of brake pad friction mechanisms: abrasive friction and adherent friction. This action slows the rotation of a shaft, such as a vehicle axle, either to reduce its rotational speed or to hold it stationary. The energy of motion is converted into heat, which must be dissipated to the environment. Disc brakes are found in more sophisticated automobiles and are more expensive to manufacture than a drum brake. Disc brakes are also found on a higher end bicycle.\nHydraulically actuated disc brakes are the most commonly used mechanical device for slowing motor vehicles. The principles of a disc brake apply to almost any rotating shaft. The components include the disc, master cylinder, and caliper, which contain at least one cylinder and two brake pads on both sides of the rotating disc.\nDesign.\nThe development of disc-type brakes began in England in the 1890s. In 1902, the Lanchester Motor Company designed brakes that looked and operated similarly to a modern disc-brake system even though the disc was thin and a cable activated the brake pad. Other designs were not practical or widely available in cars for another 60 years. Successful application began in airplanes before World War II. The German Tiger tank was fitted with discs in 1942. After the war, technological progress began in 1949, with caliper-type four-wheel disc brakes on the Crosley line and a Chrysler non-caliper type. In the 1950s, there was a demonstration of superiority at the 1953 24 Hours of Le Mans race, which required braking from high speeds several times per lap. The Jaguar racing team won, using disc brake-equipped cars, with much of the credit being given to the brakes' superior performance over rivals equipped with drum brakes. Mass production began with the 1949\u20131950 inclusion in all Crosley production, with sustained mass production starting in 1955 Citro\u00ebn DS.\nDisc brakes offer better stopping performance than drum brakes because the disc is more readily cooled. Consequently, discs are less prone to the brake fade caused when brake components overheat. Disc brakes also recover more quickly from immersion (wet brakes are less effective than dry ones).\nMost drum brake designs have at least one leading shoe, which gives a servo-effect. By contrast, a disc brake has no self-servo effect, and its braking force is always proportional to the pressure placed on the brake pad by the braking system via any brake servo, brake pedal, or lever. This tends to give the driver a better \"feel\" and helps to avoid impending lockup. Drums are also prone to \"bell mouthing\" and trap worn lining material within the assembly, causing various braking problems.\nThe disc is usually made of cast iron. In some cases, it may be made of composites such as reinforced carbon\u2013carbon or ceramic matrix composites. This is connected to the \"wheel\" and the \"axle\". To slow down the wheel, friction material in the form of brake pads, mounted on the brake caliper, is forced mechanically, hydraulically, pneumatically, or electromagnetically against both sides of the disc. Friction causes the disc and attached wheel to slow or stop.\nOperation.\nThe brake disc is the rotating part of a wheel's disc brake assembly, against which the brake pads are applied. The material is typically gray iron, a form of cast iron. The design of the discs varies. Some are solid, but others are hollowed out with fins or vanes joining the disc's two contact surfaces (usually included in the casting process). The weight and power of the vehicle determine the need for ventilated discs. The \"ventilated\" disc design helps to dissipate the generated heat and is commonly used on the more heavily loaded front discs.\nDiscs for motorcycles, bicycles, and many cars often have holes or slots cut through the disc. This is done for better heat dissipation, to aid surface-water dispersal, to reduce noise, to reduce mass, or purely for non-functional aesthetics.\nSlotted discs have shallow channels machined into the disc to aid in removing dust and gas. Slotting is preferred in most racing environments to remove gas and water and deglaze brake pads. Some discs are both drilled and slotted. Slotted discs are generally not used on standard vehicles because they quickly wear down brake pads; however, removing of material is beneficial to race vehicles since it keeps the pads soft and avoids vitrification of their surfaces. On the road, drilled or slotted discs still have a positive effect in wet conditions because the holes or slots prevent a film of water from building up between the disc and the pads.\nTwo-piece discs consist of a central section combined with a separately manufactured outer friction ring. The central section is often called a bell or hat because of its shape. It is commonly manufactured from an alloy such as a 7075 alloy and hard anodised for a lasting finish. The outer disc ring is usually made of grey iron. They can also be made of steel or carbon ceramic for particular applications. These materials originated from motorsport use and are available in high-performance vehicles and aftermarket upgrades. Two-piece discs can be supplied as a fixed assembly with regular nuts, bolts, and washers or a more complicated floating system where drive bobbins allow the two parts of the brake disc to expand and contract at different rates, therefore reducing the chance of a disc warping from overheating. Key advantages of a two-piece disc are a reduction of critical un-sprung weight and the dissipation of heat from the disc surface through the alloy bell (hat). Both fixed and floating options have their drawbacks and advantages. Floating discs are prone to rattle and collection of debris and are best suited to motorsport, whereas fixed discs are best for road use.\nHistory.\nEarly experiments.\nThe development of disc brakes began in England in the 1890s. The first caliper-type automobile disc brake was patented by Frederick William Lanchester in his Birmingham factory in 1902 and used successfully on Lanchester cars. However, the limited choice of metals in this period meant he used copper as the braking medium acting on the disc. The poor state of the roads at this time, no more than dusty, rough tracks, meant that the copper wore quickly, making the system impractical.\nIn 1921, the Douglas motorcycle company introduced a form of disc brake on the front wheel of their overhead-valve sports models. Patented by the British Motorcycle &amp; Cycle-Car Research Association, Douglas described the device as a \"novel wedge brake\" working on a \"beveled hub flange\". A Bowden cable operated the brake. Front and rear brakes of this type were fitted to the machine on which Tom Sheard rode to victory in the 1923 Senior TT.\nSuccessful application began on railroad streamliner passenger trains, airplanes, and tanks before and during World War II. In the US, the Budd Company introduced disc brakes on the General Pershing Zephyr for the Burlington Railroad in 1938. By the early 1950s, disc brakes were regularly applied to new passenger rolling stock. In Britain, the Daimler Company used disc brakes on its Daimler Armoured Car of 1939. The disc brakes, made by the Girling company, were necessary because in that four-wheel drive (4\u00d74) vehicle the epicyclic final drive was in the wheel hubs and therefore left no room for conventional hub-mounted drum brakes.\nAt Germany's Argus Motoren, Hermann Klaue (1912-2001) had patented disc brakes in 1940. Argus supplied wheels fitted with disc brakes e.g. for the Arado Ar 96. The German Tiger I heavy tank, was introduced in 1942 with a 55\u00a0cm Argus-Werke disc on each drive shaft.\nThe American Crosley Hot Shot had four-wheel disc brakes in 1949 and 1950. However, these quickly proved troublesome and were removed. Crosley returned to drum brakes, and drum brake conversions for Hot Shots were popular. Lack of sufficient research caused reliability problems, such as sticking and corrosion, especially in regions using salt on winter roads. Crosley four-wheel disc brakes made the cars, and Crosley-based specials, popular in SCCA H-Production and H-modified racing in the 1950s. The Crosley disc was a Goodyear-Hawley design, a modern caliper \"spot\" type with a modern disc, derived from a design from aircraft applications.\nChrysler developed a unique braking system, offered from 1949 until 1953. Instead of the disc with caliper squeezing on it, this system used twin expanding discs that rubbed against the inner surface of a cast-iron brake drum, which doubled as the brake housing. The discs spread apart to create friction against the inner drum surface through the action of standard wheel cylinders. Because of the expense, the brakes were only standard on the Chrysler Crown and the Town and Country Newport in 1950. They were optional, however, on other Chryslers, priced around $400, at a time when an entire Crosley Hot Shot retailed for $935. This four-wheel disc brake system was built by Auto Specialties Manufacturing Company (Ausco) of St. Joseph, Michigan, under patents of inventor H.L. Lambert, and was first tested on a 1939 Plymouth. Chrysler discs were \"self-energizing,\" in that some of the braking energy itself contributed to the braking effort. This was accomplished by small balls set into oval holes leading to the braking surface. When the disc made initial contact with the friction surface, the balls would be forced up the holes forcing the discs further apart and augmenting the braking energy. This made for lighter braking pressure than with calipers, avoided brake fade, promoted cooler running, and provided one-third more friction surface than standard Chrysler twelve-inch drums. Today's owners consider the Ausco-Lambert very reliable and powerful, but admit its grabbiness and sensitivity.\nIn 1953, 50 aluminum-bodied Austin-Healey 100S (Sebring) models, built primarily for racing, were the first European cars sold to the public to have disc brakes, fitted to all four wheels.\nFirst impact in racing.\nThe Jaguar C-Type racing car won the 1953 24 Hours of Le Mans, the only vehicle in the race to use disc brakes, developed in the UK by Dunlop, and the first car at Le Mans ever to average over 100\u00a0mph. \"Rivals' large drum brakes could match discs' ultimate stopping, but not their formidable staying power.\"\nBefore this, in 1950, a Crosley HotShot with stock four-wheel disc brakes won the Index of Performance in the first race at Sebring (six hours rather than 12) on New Year's Eve in 1950.\nMass production.\nThe Citro\u00ebn DS was the first sustained mass production use of modern automotive disc brakes, in 1955. The car featured caliper-type front disc brakes among its many innovations. These discs were mounted inboard near the transmission and were powered by the vehicle's central hydraulic system. This model went on to sell 1.5 million units over 20 years with the same brake setup.\nDespite early experiments in 1902, from British Lanchester Motor Company, and in 1949 from Americans Chrysler and Crosley, the costly, trouble-prone technology was not ready for mass production. Attempts were soon withdrawn.\nThe Jensen 541, with four-wheel disc brakes, followed in 1956. Triumph exhibited a 1956 TR3 with disc brakes to the public, but the first production cars with Girling front-disc brakes were made in September 1956. Jaguar began to offer disc brakes in February 1957 on the XK150 model, soon to follow with the Mark 1 sports saloon and in 1959 with the Mark IX large saloon.\nDisc brakes were most popular on sports cars when they were first introduced since these vehicles are more demanding about brake performance. Discs have now become the more common form in most passenger vehicles. However, many (lightweight vehicles) use drum brakes on the rear wheels to keep costs and weight down as well as to simplify the provisions for a parking brake. This can be a reasonable compromise because the front brakes perform most of the braking effort.\nMany early implementations for automobiles located the brakes on the inboard side of the driveshaft, near the differential, while most brakes today are located inside the wheels. An inboard location reduces the unsprung weight and eliminates a source of heat transfer to the tires.\nHistorically, brake discs were manufactured worldwide with a concentration in Europe and America. Between 1989 and 2005, the manufacturing of brake discs migrated predominantly to China.\nIn the U.S..\nIn 1963, the Studebaker Avanti was factory-equipped with front disc brakes as standard equipment. This Bendix system licensed from Dunlop was also optional on some of the other Studebaker models. Front disc brakes became standard equipment on the 1965 Rambler Marlin. The Bendix units were optional on all American Motors' Rambler Classic and Ambassador models as well as on the Ford Thunderbird, and the Lincoln Continental. A four-wheel disc brake system was also introduced in 1965 on the Chevrolet Corvette Stingray. Most U.S. cars switched from front drum brakes to front disc brakes in the late 1970s and early 1980s.\nMotorcycles and scooters.\nLambretta introduced the first high-volume production use of a single, floating, front disc brake, enclosed in a ventilated cast alloy hub and actuated by cable, on the 1962 TV175. This was followed by the GT200 in 1964. \nMV Agusta was the second manufacturer to offer a front disc brake motorcycle to the public on a small scale in 1965, on their expensive 600 touring motorcycle featuring cable-operated mechanical actuation. In 1969, Honda introduced the more affordable CB750, which had a single hydraulically actuated front disc brake (and a rear drum brake), and which sold in huge numbers.\nUnlike cars, disc brakes that are located within the wheel, bike disc brakes are in the airstream and have optimum cooling. Although cast iron discs have a porous surface that provides superior braking performance, such discs rust in the rain and become unsightly. Accordingly, motorcycle discs are usually stainless steel, drilled, slotted, or wavy to disperse rainwater. Modern motorcycle discs tend to have a floating design whereby the disc \"floats\" on bobbins and can move slightly, allowing better disc centering with a fixed caliper. A floating disc also avoids disc warping and reduces heat transfer to the wheel hub. \nCalipers have evolved from simple single-piston units to two-, four- and even six-piston items. Compared to cars, motorcycles have a higher center of mass:wheelbase ratio, so they experience more weight transfer when braking. Front brakes absorb most of the braking forces, while the rear brake serves mainly to balance the motorcycle during braking. Modern sports motorcycles typically have twin large front discs, with a much smaller single rear disc. Motorcycles that are particularly fast or heavy may have vented discs.\nEarly disc brakes (such as on the early Honda Fours and the Norton Commando) sited the calipers on top of the disc, ahead of the fork slider. Although this gave the brake pads better cooling, it is now almost universal practice to site the caliper behind the slider (to reduce the angular momentum of the fork assembly). Rear disc calipers may be mounted above (e.g. BMW R1100S) or below (e.g. Yamaha TRX850) the swinging arm: a low mount provides for a marginally lower center of gravity, while an upper siting keeps the caliper cleaner and better-protected from road obstacles.\nOne problem with motorcycle disc brakes is that when a motorcycle gets into a violent tank-slapper (high-speed oscillation of the front wheel) the brake pads in the calipers are forced away from the discs, so when the rider applies the brake lever, the caliper pistons push the pads towards the discs without actually making contact. The rider then brakes harder, forcing the pads onto the disc much more aggressively than standard braking. An example of this was the Michele Pirro incident at Mugello, Italy 1 June 2018. At least one manufacturer has developed a system to counter the pads being forced away.\nA modern development, particularly on inverted (\"upside down\", or \"USD\") forks is the radially mounted caliper. Although these are fashionable, there is no evidence that they improve braking performance or add to the fork's stiffness. (Lacking the option of a fork brace, USD forks may be best stiffened by an oversized front axle).\nBicycles.\nBike disc brakes may range from simple, mechanical (cable) systems, to expensive and powerful, multi-piston hydraulic disc systems, commonly used on downhill racing bikes. Improved technology has seen the creation of vented discs for use on mountain bikes, similar to those on cars, introduced to help avoid heat fade on fast alpine descents. Discs are also used on road bicycles for all-weather cycling with predictable braking. By 2024, almost all road bikes are equipped with disc brakes, just like Mountain bikes. Drums are sometimes preferred as harder to damage in crowded parking, where discs are sometimes bent. Most bicycle brake discs are made of steel. Stainless steel is preferred due to its anti-rust properties. Discs are thin, often about 2\u00a0mm. Some use a two-piece floating disc style, others use a one-piece solid metal disc. Bicycle disc brakes use either a two-piston caliper that clamps the disc from both sides or a single-piston caliper with one moving pad that contacts the disc first, and then pushes the disc against the non-moving pad. Because energy efficiency is so important in bicycles, an uncommon feature of bicycle brakes is that the pads retract to eliminate residual drag when the brake is released. In contrast, most other brakes drag the pads lightly when released to minimize initial operational travel.\nHeavy vehicles.\nDisc brakes are increasingly used on very large and heavy road vehicles, where previously large drum brakes were nearly universal. One reason is that the disc's lack of self-assist makes brake force much more predictable, so peak brake force can be raised without more risk of braking-induced steering or jackknifing on articulated vehicles. Another is disc brakes fade less when hot, and in a heavy vehicle air and rolling drag and engine braking are small parts of total braking force, so brakes are used harder than on lighter vehicles, and drum brake fade can occur in a single stop. For these reasons, a heavy truck with disc brakes can stop in about 120% of the distance of a passenger car, but with drums, stopping takes about 150% of the distance. In Europe, stopping distance regulations essentially require disc brakes for heavy vehicles. In the U.S., drums are allowed and are typically preferred for their lower purchase price, despite higher total lifetime cost and more frequent service intervals.\nRail and aircraft.\nStill-larger discs are used for railroad cars, trams, and some airplanes. Passenger rail cars and light rail vehicles often use disc brakes outboard of the wheels, which helps ensure a free flow of cooling air. Some modern passenger rail cars, such as the Amfleet II cars, use inboard disc brakes. This reduces wear from debris and provides protection from rain and snow, which would make the discs slippery and unreliable. However, there is still plenty of cooling for reliable operation. Some airplanes have the brake mounted with very little cooling, and the brake gets hot when stopping. This is acceptable as there is sufficient time for cooling, where the maximum braking energy is very predictable. Should the braking energy exceed the maximum, for example during an emergency occurring during take-off, aircraft wheels can be fitted with a fusible plug to prevent the tire bursting. This is a milestone test in aircraft development.\nAutomotive use.\nFor automotive use, disc brake discs are commonly made of grey iron. The SAE maintains a specification for the manufacture of grey iron for various applications. For normal car and light-truck applications, SAE specification J431 G3000 (superseded to G10) dictates the correct range of hardness, chemical composition, tensile strength, and other properties necessary for the intended use. Some racing cars and airplanes use brakes with carbon fiber discs and carbon fiber pads to reduce weight. Wear rates tend to be high, and braking may be poor or grabby until the brake is hot.\nRacing.\nIn racing and high-performance road cars, other disc materials have been employed. Reinforced carbon discs and pads inspired by aircraft braking systems such as those used on Concorde were introduced in Formula One by Brabham in conjunction with Dunlop in 1976. Carbon\u2013carbon braking is now used in most top-level motorsport worldwide, reducing unsprung weight, giving better frictional performance and improved structural properties at high temperatures, compared to cast iron. Carbon brakes have occasionally been applied to road cars, by the French Venturi sports car manufacturer in the mid-1990s for example, but need to reach a very high operating temperature before becoming truly effective and so are not well suited to road use. The extreme heat generated in these systems is visible during night racing, especially on shorter tracks. It is not uncommon to see the brake discs glowing red during use.\nCeramic composites.\nCeramic discs are used in some high-performance cars and heavy vehicles.\nThe first development of the modern ceramic brake was made by British engineers for TGV applications in 1988. The objective was to reduce weight, and the number of brakes per axle, as well as provide stable friction from high speeds and all temperatures. The result was a carbon-fiber-reinforced ceramic process which is now used in various forms for automotive, railway, and aircraft brake applications.\nDue to the high heat tolerance and mechanical strength of ceramic composite discs, they are often used on exotic vehicles where the cost is not prohibitive. They are also found in industrial applications where the ceramic disc's lightweight and low-maintenance properties justify the cost. Composite brakes can withstand temperatures that would damage steel discs.\nPorsche's Composite Ceramic Brakes (PCCB) are siliconized carbon fiber, with high-temperature capability, a 50% weight reduction over iron discs (hence reducing the vehicle's unsprung weight), a significant reduction in dust generation, substantially extended maintenance intervals, and enhanced durability in corrosive environments. Found on some of their more expensive models, it is also an optional brake for all street Porsches at added expense. They can be recognized by the bright yellow paintwork on the aluminum six-piston calipers. The discs are internally vented much like cast-iron ones, and cross-drilled.\nAdjustment mechanism.\nIn automotive applications, the piston seal has a square cross-section, also known as a square-cut seal.\nAs the piston moves in and out, the seal drags and stretches on the piston, causing the seal to twist. The seal distorts approximately 1/10 of a millimeter. The piston is allowed to move out freely, but the slight amount of drag caused by the seal stops the piston from fully retracting to its previous position when the brakes are released, and so takes up the slack caused by the wear of the brake pads, eliminating the need for return springs.\nIn some rear disc calipers, the parking brake activates a mechanism inside the caliper that performs some of the same functions.\nDisc damage modes.\nDiscs are usually damaged in one of four ways: scarring, cracking, warping, or excessive rusting. Service shops will sometimes respond to any disc problem by changing out the discs entirely, This is done mainly where the cost of a new disc may be lower than the cost of labor to resurface the old disc. Mechanically this is unnecessary unless the discs have reached the manufacturer's minimum recommended thickness, which would make it unsafe to use them, or vane rusting is severe (ventilated discs only). Most leading vehicle manufacturers recommend brake disc skimming (US: turning) as a solution for lateral run-out, vibration issues, and brake noises. The machining process is performed in a brake lathe, which removes a very thin layer off the disc surface to clean off minor damage and restore uniform thickness. Machining the disc as necessary will maximize the mileage out of the current discs on the vehicle.\nRun-out.\nRun-out is measured using a dial indicator on a fixed rigid base, with the tip perpendicular to the brake disc's face. It is typically measured about from the outside diameter of the disc. The disc is spun. The difference between the minimum and maximum value on the dial is called lateral run-out. Typical hub/disc assembly run-out specifications for passenger vehicles are around . Runout can be caused either by deformation of the disc itself or by runout in the underlying wheel hub face or by contamination between the disc surface and the underlying hub mounting surface. Determining the root cause of the indicator displacement (lateral runout) requires the disassembly of the disc from the hub. Disc face runout due to hub face runout or contamination will typically have a period of 1 minimum and 1 maximum per revolution of the brake disc.\nDiscs can be machined to eliminate thickness variation and lateral run-out. Machining can be done in situ (on-car) or off-car (bench lathe). Both methods will eliminate the thickness variation. Machining on-car with the proper equipment can also eliminate lateral run-out due to hub-face non-perpendicularity.\nIncorrect fitting can distort (warp) discs. The disc's retaining bolts (or the wheel/lug nuts, if the disc is sandwiched in place by the wheel) must be tightened progressively and evenly. The use of air tools to fasten lug nuts can be bad practice unless a torque wrench is used for final tightening. The vehicle manual will indicate the proper pattern for tightening as well as a torque rating for the bolts. Lug nuts should never be tightened in a circle. Some vehicles are sensitive to the force the bolts apply and tightening should be done with a torque wrench.\nOften uneven pad transfer is confused for disc warping. The majority of brake discs diagnosed as \"warped\" are the result of uneven transfer of pad material. Uneven pad transfer can lead to thickness variation of the disc. When the thicker section of the disc passes between the pads, the pads will move apart and the brake pedal will raise slightly; this is pedal pulsation. The thickness variation can be felt by the driver when it is approximately or greater (on automobile discs).\nThickness variation has many causes, but three primary mechanisms contribute to the propagation of disc thickness variations. The first is the improper selection of brake pads. Pads that are effective at low temperatures, such as when braking for the first time in cold weather, often are made of materials that decompose unevenly at higher temperatures. This uneven decomposition results in the uneven deposition of material onto the brake disc. Another cause of uneven material transfer is the improper break-in of a pad/disc combination. For proper break-in, the disc surface should be refreshed (either by machining the contact surface or by replacing the disc) every time the pads are changed. Once this is done, the brakes are heavily applied multiple times in succession. This creates a smooth, even interface between the pad and the disc. When this is not done properly the brake pads will see an uneven distribution of stress and heat, resulting in an uneven, seemingly random, deposition of pad material. The third primary mechanism of uneven pad material transfer is \"pad imprinting.\" This occurs when the brake pads are heated to the point that the material begins to break down and transfer to the disc. In a properly broken-in brake system (with properly selected pads), this transfer is natural and is a major contributor to the braking force generated by the brake pads. However, if the vehicle comes to a stop and the driver continues to apply the brakes, as is customary in cars with an automatic transmission, the pads will deposit a layer of material in the shape of the brake pad. This small thickness variation can begin the cycle of uneven pad transfer.\nOnce the disc has some level of variation in thickness, uneven pad deposition can accelerate, sometimes resulting in changes to the crystal structure of the metal that composes the disc. As the brakes are applied, the pads slide over the varying disc surface. As the pads pass by the thicker section of the disc, they are forced outwards. The foot of the driver applied to the brake pedal naturally resists this change, and thus more force is applied to the pads. The result is that the thicker sections see higher levels of stress. This causes uneven heating of the surface of the disc, which causes two major issues. As the brake disc heats unevenly it also expands unevenly. The thicker sections of the disc expand more than the thinner sections due to seeing more heat, and thus the difference in thickness is magnified. Also, the uneven distribution of heat results in the further uneven transfer of pad material. The result is that the thicker-hotter sections receive even more pad material than the thinner-cooler sections, contributing to a further increase in the variation in the disc's thickness. In extreme situations, this uneven heating can cause the crystal structure of the disc material to change. When the hotter sections of the discs reach extremely high temperatures ( ), the metal can undergo a phase transformation and the carbon which is dissolved in the steel can precipitate out to form carbon-heavy carbide regions known as cementite. This iron carbide is very different from the cast iron the rest of the disc is composed of. It is extremely hard, brittle, and does not absorb heat well. After cementite is formed, the integrity of the disc is compromised. Even if the disc surface is machined, the cementite within the disc will not wear or absorb heat at the same rate as the cast iron surrounding it, causing the uneven thickness and heating characteristics of the disc to return.\nScarring.\nScarring (US: Scoring) can occur if brake pads are not changed promptly when they reach the end of their service life and are considered worn out. Once enough of the friction material has worn away, the pad's steel backing plate (for glued pads) or the pad retainer rivets (for riveted pads) will bear upon the disc's wear surface, reducing braking power and making scratches on the disc. Generally, a moderately scarred or scored disc, which operated satisfactorily with existing brake pads, will be equally usable with new pads. If the scarring is deeper but not excessive, it can be repaired by machining off a layer of the disc's surface. This can only be done a limited number of times as the disc has a minimum rated safe thickness. The minimum thickness value is typically cast into the disc during manufacturing on the hub or the edge of the disc. In Pennsylvania, which has one of the most rigorous auto safety inspection programs in North America, an automotive disc cannot pass a safety inspection if any scoring is deeper than , and must be replaced if machining will reduce the disc below its minimum safe thickness.\nTo prevent scarring, it is prudent to periodically inspect the brake pads for wear. A tire rotation is a logical time for inspection, since rotation must be performed regularly based on vehicle operation time and all wheels must be removed, allowing ready visual access to the brake pads. Some types of alloy wheels and brake arrangements will provide enough open space to view the pads without removing the wheel. When practical, pads that are near the wear-out point should be replaced immediately, as complete wear-out leads to scarring damage and unsafe braking. Many disc brake pads will include some sort of soft steel spring or drag tab as part of the pad assembly, which drags on the disc when the pad is nearly worn out. This produces a moderately loud squealing noise, alerting the driver that service is required. This will not normally scar the disc if the brakes are serviced promptly. A set of pads can be considered for replacement if the thickness of the pad material is the same or less than the thickness of the backing steel. In Pennsylvania, the standard is for riveted pads and 2/32\" for bonded pads.\nCracking.\nCracking is limited mostly to drilled discs, which may develop small cracks around the edges of holes drilled near the edge of the disc due to the disc's uneven rate of expansion in severe-duty environments. Manufacturers that use drilled discs as OEM typically do so for two reasons: appearance, if they determine that the average owner of the vehicle model will prefer the look while not overly stressing the hardware; or as a function of reducing the unsprung weight of the brake assembly, with the engineering assumption that enough brake disc mass remains to absorb racing temperatures and stresses. A brake disc is a heat sink, but the loss of heat sink mass may be balanced by increased surface area to radiate away heat. Small hairline cracks may appear in any cross-drilled metal disc as a normal wear mechanism, but in severe cases, the disc will fail catastrophically. No repair is possible for the cracks, and if the cracking becomes severe, the disc must be replaced. These cracks occur due to the phenomenon of low cycle fatigue as a result of repeated hard braking.\nRusting.\nThe discs are commonly made from cast iron and a certain amount of surface rust is normal. The disc contact area for the brake pads will be kept clean by regular use, but a vehicle that is stored for an extended period can develop significant rust in the contact area that may reduce braking power for a time until the rusted layer is worn off again. Rusting can also lead to disc warping when brakes are re-activated after storage because of differential heating between unrusted areas left covered by pads and rust around the majority of the disc area surface. Over time, vented brake discs may develop severe rust corrosion inside the ventilation slots, compromising the strength of the structure and needing replacement.\nCalipers.\nThe brake caliper is the assembly that houses the brake pads and pistons. The pistons are usually made of plastic, aluminium or chrome-plated steel.\nCalipers are of two types, floating or fixed. A fixed caliper does not move relative to the disc and is thus less tolerant of disc imperfections. It uses one or more pairs of opposing pistons to clamp from each side of the disc and is more complex and expensive than a floating caliper.\nA floating caliper (also called a \"sliding caliper\") moves side to side to the disc, along a line parallel to the axis of rotation of the disc; a piston on one side of the disc pushes the inner brake pad until it makes contact with the braking surface, then pulls the caliper body with the outer brake pad so the pressure is applied to both sides of the disc. Floating caliper (single piston) designs are subject to sticking failure, caused by dirt or corrosion entering at least one mounting mechanism and stopping its normal movement. This can lead to the caliper's pads rubbing on the disc when the brake is not engaged or engaging it at an angle. Sticking can result from infrequent vehicle use, failure of a seal or rubber protection boot allowing debris entry, dry-out of the grease in the mounting mechanism, and subsequent moisture incursion leading to corrosion, or some combination of these factors. Consequences may include reduced fuel efficiency, extreme heating of the disc, or excessive wear on the affected pad. A sticking front caliper may also cause steering vibration.\nAnother type of floating caliper is a swinging caliper. Instead of a pair of horizontal bolts that allow the caliper to move straight in and out respective to the car body, a swinging caliper utilizes a single, vertical pivot bolt located somewhere behind the axle centerline. When the driver presses the brakes, the brake piston pushes on the inside brake pad and rotates the whole caliper inward, when viewed from the top. Because the swinging caliper's piston angle changes relative to the disc, this design uses wedge-shaped pads that are narrower in the rear on the outside and narrower in the front on the inside.\nVarious types of brake calipers are also used on bicycle rim brakes.\nPistons and cylinders.\nThe most common caliper design uses a single hydraulically actuated piston within a cylinder, although high-performance brakes use as many as twelve. Modern cars use different hydraulic circuits to actuate the brakes on each set of wheels as a safety measure. The hydraulic design also helps multiply braking force. The number of pistons in a caliper is often referred to as the number of 'pots', so if a vehicle has 'six pot' calipers it means that each caliper houses six pistons.\nBrake failure can result from the failure of the piston to retract, which is usually a consequence of not operating the vehicle during prolonged storage outdoors in adverse conditions. On high-mileage vehicles, the piston seals may leak, which must be promptly corrected.\nBrake pads.\nBrake pads are designed for high friction with brake pad material embedded in the disc in the process of bedding while wearing evenly. Friction can be divided into two parts. They are: adhesive and abrasive.\nDepending on the properties of the material of both the pad and the disc and the configuration and the usage, pad and disc wear rates will vary considerably. The properties that determine material wear involve trade-offs between performance and longevity.\nThe brake pads must usually be replaced regularly (depending on pad material and driving style), and some are equipped with a mechanism that alerts drivers that replacement is needed, such as a thin piece of soft metal that rubs against the disc when the pads are too thin causing the brakes to squeal, a soft metal tab embedded in the pad material that closes an electric circuit and lights a warning light when the brake pad gets thin, or an electronic sensor.\nGenerally, road-going vehicles have two brake pads per caliper, while up to six are installed on each racing caliper, with varying frictional properties in a staggered pattern for optimum performance.\nEarly brake pads (and linings) contained asbestos, producing dust that should not be inhaled. Although newer pads can be made of ceramics, Kevlar, and other plastics, inhalation of brake dust should still be avoided regardless of material.\nCommon problems.\nSqueal.\nSometimes a loud noise or high-pitched squeal occurs when the brakes are applied. It mostly occurs on cars which were produced or acquired some time ago. Most brake squeal is produced by vibration (resonance instability) of the brake components, especially the pads and discs (known as \"force-coupled excitation\"). This type of squeal should not negatively affect stopping performance. Techniques include adding chamfer pads to the contact points between the caliper pistons and the pads, the bonding insulators (damping material) to the pad backing plate, the brake shims between the brake pad and pistons, etc. All should be coated with an extremely high temperature, high solids lubricant to help reduce squeal. This allows the metal-to-metal parts to move independently of each other and thereby eliminate the buildup of energy that can create a frequency that is heard as brake squeal, groan, or growl. It is inherent that some pads are going to squeal more given the type of the pad and its usage case. Pads typically rated to withstand very high temperatures for extended periods tend to produce high amounts of friction leading to more noise during brake application.\nCold weather combined with high early-morning humidity (dew) often worsens brake squeal. However, the squeal generally stops when the lining reaches regular operating temperatures. This more strongly affects pads meant to be used at higher temperatures. Dust on the brakes may also cause squeal and commercial brake cleaning products are designed to remove dirt and other contaminants. Pads without a proper amount of transfer material could also squeal, this can be remedied by bedding or re-bedding the brake pads to brake discs.\nSome lining wear indicators, located either as a semi-metallic layer within the brake pad material or with an external \"sensor\", are also designed to squeal when the lining is due for replacement. The typical external sensor is fundamentally different from the noises described above (when the brakes are applied) because the wear sensor noise typically occurs when the brakes are not used. The wear sensor may only create a squeal under braking when it first begins to indicate wear but is still a fundamentally different sound and pitch.\nJudder or shimmy.\nA brake judder is usually perceived by the driver as minor to severe vibrations transferred through the chassis during braking.\nThe judder phenomenon can be classified into two distinct subgroups: \"hot\" (or \"thermal\"), or \"cold\" judder.\nHot judder is usually produced as a result of longer, more moderate braking from high speed where the vehicle does not come to a complete stop. It commonly occurs when a motorist decelerates from speeds of around to about , which results in severe vibrations being transmitted to the driver. These vibrations are the result of uneven thermal distributions, or \"hot spots\". Hot spots are classified as concentrated thermal regions that alternate between both sides of a disc that distort it in such a way that produces a sinusoidal waviness around its edges. Once the brake pads (friction material/brake lining) come in contact with the sinusoidal surface during braking, severe vibrations are induced, and can produce hazardous conditions for the person driving the vehicle.\nCold judder, on the other hand, is the result of uneven disc wear patterns or disc thickness variation (DTV). These variations in the disc surface are usually the result of extensive vehicle road usage. DTV is usually attributed to the following causes: waviness and roughness of disc surface, misalignment of axis run-out, elastic deflection, wear and friction material transfers.\nEither type could potentially be fixed by ensuring a clean mounting surface on either side of the brake disc between the wheel hub and brake disc hub before usage and paying attention to imprinting after extended usage by leaving the brake pedal heavily depressed at the end of heavy usage. Sometimes a bed in procedure can clean and minimize DTV and lay a new even transfer layer between the pad and brake disc. However, it will not eliminate hot spots or excessive run-out.\nDust.\nWhen braking force is applied, the act of abrasive friction between the brake pad and the disc wears both the disc and pad away. The brake dust that is seen deposited on wheels, calipers, and other braking system components consists mostly of the disc material. Brake dust can damage the finish of most wheels if not washed off. Generally, a brake pad that aggressively abrades more disc material away, such as metallic pads, will create more brake dust. Some higher-performing pads for track use or towing use may wear away much quicker than a typical pad, thus causing more dust due to the increased brake disc and brake pad wear.\nBrake fade.\nBrake fade is a phenomenon that decreases braking efficiency. It causes the braking power to reduce. When this occurs, the driver feels that the brakes are not being applied with the force they were being applied at the time of starting. This occurs due to the heating of brake pads. The heated brake pads emit some gaseous substances which cover the area between the disc and the brake pads. These gases disturb the contact between the brake pads and the disc and hence decrease the braking effectiveness.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59598", "revid": "74100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59598", "title": "British Telecommunications Group plc", "text": ""}
{"id": "59599", "revid": "37828773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59599", "title": "Mission San Diego de Alcal\u00e1", "text": "18th-century Spanish mission in California\nMission Basilica San Diego de Alcal\u00e1 (, lit. The Mission of Saint Didacus of Acal\u00e1) was the second Franciscan-founded mission in the Californias (after San Fernando de Velicata), a province of New Spain. Located in present-day San Diego, California, it was founded on July 16, 1769, by Spanish friar Jun\u00edpero Serra, in an area long inhabited by the Kumeyaay people. The current church, built in the early 19th century, is the fifth to stand on this location. The mission site is a National Historic Landmark.\nThe mission and the surrounding area were named for the Catholic saint Didacus of Alcal\u00e1, a Spaniard more commonly known as \"San Diego\". The mission was the site of the first Christian burial in Alta California. The original mission burned in 1775 during an uprising by local natives. San Diego is also generally regarded as the site of the region's first public execution, in 1778. Father Luis Jayme, California's first Christian martyr who was among those killed during the 1775 uprising against the mission, lies entombed beneath the chancel floor.\nHistory.\nThe former Spanish settlement at the Kumeyaay \"Nipawai\" lies within that area occupied during the late Paleoindian period and continuing into the present day by the Native society commonly known as the \"Diegue\u00f1o\"; the name denotes those people who were served by the padres at Mission San Diego de Alcal\u00e1. Relatively, much is known about the native inhabitants in recent centuries, thanks in part to the efforts of Juan Rodr\u00edguez Cabrillo, who explored the coast in the service of Spain. He documented his travels in the coastal villages he encountered along the Southern California coast in October 1542. Cabrillo was the first European to set foot in what is now the state of California and the first to encounter San Diego Bay. On the evening of September 28, 1542, the ships \"San Salvador\" and \"Victoria\" sailed into the harbor, whereupon Cabrillo christened it \"San Miguel\". During that expedition a landing party went ashore and briefly interacted with a small group of natives. Some sixty years later another Spanish explorer, Sebasti\u00e1n Vizca\u00edno, made landfall some ten miles from the present Mission site. Under Vizca\u00edno's command the \"San Diego\", \"Santo Tom\u00e1s\", and frigate \"Tres Reyes\" dropped anchor on November 10, 1602, and the port was renamed \"San Diego de Alcal\u00e1\". It would be another 167 years before the Spanish returned to San Diego.\nEver since the voyages of Christopher Columbus, the Kingdom of Spain sought to establish missions to convert the pagans in \"Nueva Espa\u00f1a\" (\"New Spain\") to Roman Catholicism to save souls and to facilitate colonization of these lands. However, it was not until 1741\u2014the time of the Vitus Bering expedition, when the territorial ambitions of Tsarist Russia towards North America became known\u2014that King Philip V felt such installations were necessary for Upper California. In 1769, \"Visitador General\" Jos\u00e9 de G\u00e1lvez sent the expedition of Jun\u00edpero Serra and Gaspar de Portol\u00e0 to found missions and presidios at San Diego and Monterey (see Timeline of the Portol\u00e0 expedition), thereby securing Spain's claim to the Pacific coast harbors recommended by Cabrillo and Vizcaino. Two groups traveled from Lower California on foot, while a pair of packet ships (bearing supplies) traveled up the coast from the Baja California peninsula.\nThe original mission church was destroyed by fire in 1775 during an uprising by local indigenous people. An estimated 800 \"American Indians\" pillaged the mission, burned it to the ground and massacred a blacksmith, a carpenter (mortally wounded), and Father Jayme, who became California's first Catholic Martyr. Father Jayme is buried next to the altar in the present church. Survivors of the night-long attack were one corporal and three Leather Jacket soldiers, one blacksmith, two children who were the son and nephew of the Presidio commandant, and Associate Pastor Father Vicente Fuster. Father Serra then returned to the site of the original structure in 1776 to oversee the rebuilding of the mission. However, the scarce amount of water and the difficulty of making the land until (feasible for preparing crops to be planted by plowing and fertilizing) made the re-establishment of the mission a long and difficult process. From 1778 to 1795, the mission focused on horse and mule breeding, providing other missions in Alta and Baja California an average of 16 animals per year. After it was restored as a Catholic mission, Mission San Diego de Alcal\u00e1 saw a record number of spiritual results recorded when 567 baptisms were performed, and neophytes numbered 908.\nRancho period (1834\u20131849).\nOn August 9, 1834, Governor Figueroa issued his \"Decree of Confiscation\". The missions were offered for sale to citizens, who were unable to come up with the price, so all mission property was broken up into \"ranchos\" and given to ex-military officers who had fought in the War of Independence against Spain. On June 8, 1846, Mission San Diego de Alcal\u00e1 was given to Santiago Arg\u00fcello by Governor P\u00edo Pico \"for services rendered to the government\". After the United States invaded California, the Mission was used by the military from 1846 to 1862.\nCalifornia statehood (1850\u20131900).\nPresident Abraham Lincoln signed a proclamation on May 23, 1862, that restored ownership of the Mission proper to the Roman Catholic Church. When Mission San Diego de Alcal\u00e1 was granted back to the Church, it was in ruins. Starting as early as 1891, Father Antonio Ubach made efforts to find funds for restoration of the old Mission buildings.\n20th century and beyond (1901 \u2013 present).\nFather Ubach died in 1907 and restoration work ceased until 1931. In 1941, the Mission once again became a parish church, in what is still an active parish serving the Diocese of San Diego. In 1976, Pope Paul VI designated the Mission church as a minor basilica.\nMission San Diego de Alcal\u00e1 is located within San Diego city limits, near the intersection of Interstate 8 and Interstate 15, and approximately one mile east of Snapdragon Stadium.\nMission industries.\nThe goal of the missions was, above all, to become self-sufficient in relatively short order. Farming, therefore, was the most important industry of any mission. Before the establishment of the missions, the native peoples knew how to utilize bone, seashells, stone, and wood for building, tool making, weapons, and much more. The missionaries discovered that the Indians, who regarded labor as degrading to men, had to be taught industry to learn how to be self-supportive. The result was the establishment of a manual training school that comprised agriculture, the mechanical arts, and the raising and care of livestock. Everything consumed and otherwise utilized by the natives was produced at the missions under the supervision of the padres; thus, the neophytes not only supported themselves, but after 1811 sustained the entire military and civil government of California. Wheat, corn, wine grapes, barley, beans, cattle, horses, and sheep were the major crops at San Diego. In 1795, construction on a system of aqueducts was begun to bring water to the fields and the Mission (the first irrigation project in Upper California). The building manager was , who was poisoned by his Indian cook \"Nazario\" before the project was completed. In his testimony, in the trial that followed, Nazario stated that he had poisoned the friar due to constant beatings inflicted by Friar Panto.\nThe Mission San Diego was primarily supported from lands included in a Spanish royal land grant, encompassing roughly the eastern third of the current City of San Diego, as well as most of the cities of La Mesa and Lemon Grove. While not exact, its boundaries are roughly Interstate 805, Miramar Road, California State Route 125, Skyline Drive, and Division Street. Boundary Street (which parallels Interstate 805 in the neighborhood of North Park) lies directly on one portion of the boundary and draws its name from it.\nWine.\nThe first vineyards planted in California were planted at the mission in 1769. Father Jun\u00edpero Serra planted these initial vines. The vines were of the Mission variety, which were brought to Mexico in the 16th century. Unfortunately, the initial plantings did not survive, with Mission San Juan Capistrano having the first surviving plantings. By at least 1781, wine was being produced at the mission. One source claims that the vineyard on mission lands reached up to fifty thousand acres. The mission vineyards were around until at least 1823.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59600", "revid": "30111254", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59600", "title": "Charles Bukowski", "text": "American writer (1920\u20131994)\nHenry Charles Bukowski ( ; born Heinrich Karl Bukowski, ; August 16, 1920 \u2013 March 9, 1994) was a German-American poet, novelist, and short story writer. His writing was influenced by the social, cultural, and economic ambience of his adopted home city of Los Angeles. Bukowski's work addresses the ordinary lives of poor Americans, the act of writing, alcohol, relationships with women, and the drudgery of work.\nThe FBI kept a file on him as a result of his column \"Notes of a Dirty Old Man\" in the LA underground newspaper \"Open City\".\nBukowski published extensively in small literary magazines and with small presses beginning in the early 1940s and continuing on through the early 1990s. He wrote thousands of poems, hundreds of short stories and six novels, eventually publishing over sixty books during the course of his career, including his \"Poems Written Before Jumping Out of an 8 Story Window\", published by his friend and fellow poet Charles Potts, and \"Burning in Water, Drowning in Flame\". His poems and stories were republished by John Martin's Black Sparrow Press (now HarperCollins/Ecco Press) as collected volumes of his work. As a reviewer noted, \"Bukowski continued to be, thanks to his antics and deliberate clownish performances, the king of the underground ... stressing his loyalty to those small press editors who had first championed his work.\"\n\"Time\" called Bukowski a \"laureate of American lowlife\". Adam Kirsch of \"The New Yorker\" wrote, \"the secret of Bukowski's appeal [is that] he combines the confessional poet's promise of intimacy with the larger-than-life aplomb of a pulp-fiction hero.\"\nDuring his lifetime, Bukowski received little attention from academic critics in the United States, but was better received in Western Europe, particularly the United Kingdom, and especially Germany, where he was born. Since his death in March 1994, Bukowski's life and writings have been the subject of a number of articles and books.\nLife and career.\nFamily and early years.\nCharles Bukowski was born Heinrich Karl Bukowski in Andernach, Prussia, Weimar Germany. His father was Heinrich (Henry) Bukowski, an American of German descent who had served in the U.S. army of occupation after World War I and had remained in Germany after his army service. His mother was Katharina (n\u00e9e Fett). His paternal grandfather, Leonard Bukowski, had moved to the United States from Imperial Germany in the 1880s. In Cleveland, Ohio, Leonard met Emilie Krause, an ethnic German, who had emigrated from Danzig (now Gda\u0144sk, Poland). They married and settled in Pasadena, California, where Leonard worked as a successful carpenter. The couple had four children, including Heinrich (Henry), Charles Bukowski's father. His mother, Katharina Bukowski, was the daughter of Wilhelm Fett and Nannette Israel. The name \"Israel\" is widespread among Catholics in the Eifel region. Bukowski assumed his paternal ancestor had moved from Poland to Germany around 1780, as \"Bukowski\" is a Polish last name. As far back as Bukowski could trace, his whole family was German.\nBukowski's parents met in Andernach following World War I. His father was German-American and a sergeant in the United States Army serving in Germany after the empire's defeat in 1918. He had an affair with Katharina, a German friend's sister, and she subsequently became pregnant. Bukowski repeatedly claimed to be born out of wedlock, but Andernach marital records indicate that his parents married one month before his birth.\nAfterwards, Bukowski's father became a building contractor, set to make great financial gains in the aftermath of the war, and after two years moved the family to Pfaffendorf (today part of Koblenz). However, given the crippling postwar reparations being required of Germany, which led to a stagnant economy and high levels of inflation, he was unable to make a living and decided to move the family to the U.S. On April 18, 1923, they sailed from Bremerhaven to Baltimore, Maryland, where they settled.\nHis family moved to Mid-City, Los Angeles, in 1930. Bukowski's father was often unemployed. In the autobiographical \"Ham on Rye\", Bukowski says that, with his mother's acquiescence, his father was frequently abusive, both physically and mentally, beating his son for the smallest imagined offense. He later told an interviewer that his father beat him with a razor strop three times a week from the ages of six to 11 years. He says that it helped his writing, as he came to understand undeserved pain.\nYoung Bukowski spoke English with a strong German accent and was taunted by his childhood playmates with the epithet \"Heini,\" German diminutive of Heinrich, in his early youth. He was shy and socially withdrawn, a condition exacerbated during his teen years by an extreme case of acne. Neighborhood children ridiculed his accent and the clothing his parents made him wear. The Great Depression bolstered his rage as he grew, and gave him much of his voice and material for his writings.\nIn his early teen years, Bukowski had an epiphany when he was introduced to alcohol by his friend William \"Baldy\" Mullinax, depicted as \"Eli LaCrosse\" in \"Ham on Rye\", son of an alcoholic surgeon. \"This [alcohol] is going to help me for a very long time,\" he later wrote, describing a method (drinking) he could use to come to more amicable terms with his own life. Bukowski attended Susan Miller Dorsey High School for one year before transferring to Los Angeles High School. After graduating from high school in 1939, Bukowski attended Los Angeles City College for two years, taking courses in art, journalism, and literature, before quitting at the start of World War II. He then moved to New York City to begin a career as a financially pinched blue-collar worker with hopes of becoming a writer.\nOn July 22, 1944, with the war ongoing, Bukowski was arrested by FBI agents in Philadelphia, where he lived at the time, on suspicion of draft evasion. At a time when the U.S. was at war with Nazi Germany, and many Germans and German-Americans on the home front were suspected of disloyalty, Bukowski's German birth troubled the authorities. He was held for seventeen days in Philadelphia's Moyamensing Prison. Sixteen days later, he failed a psychological examination that was part of his mandatory military entrance physical test and was given a Selective Service Classification of 4-F (unfit for military service).\nEarly writing.\nWhen Bukowski was aged 23 (March-April 1944), his short story \"Aftermath of a Lengthy Rejection Slip\" was published in \"Story\" magazine. Two years later, another short story, \"20 Tanks from Kasseldown\", was published by the Black Sun Press in Issue III of \"\", a limited-run, loose-leaf broadside collection printed in 1946 and edited by Caresse Crosby. Failing to break into the literary world, Bukowski grew disillusioned with the publication process and quit writing for almost a decade, a time that he referred to as a \"ten-year drunk\". These \"lost years\" formed the basis for his later semiautobiographical chronicles, and there are fictionalized versions of Bukowski's life through his highly stylized alter-ego, Henry Chinaski. However, Bukowski never fully gave up writing and had occasional pieces published during this period. The \"ten-year drunk\" was part of the Chinaski Legend, similar to Jack Kerouac\u2019s Duluoz Legend. \nDuring part of this period he continued living in Los Angeles, working at a pickle factory for a short time but also spending some time roaming about the U.S., working sporadically and staying in cheap rooming houses. In the early 1950s, he took a job as a fill-in letter carrier with the United States Post Office Department in Los Angeles, but resigned just before he reached three years' service.\nIn the spring of 1954, Bukowski was treated for a near-fatal bleeding ulcer. After leaving the hospital he began to write poetry. The next year he agreed to marry small-town Texas poet Barbara Frye, but they divorced in 1958. According to Howard Sounes's \"\", she later died under mysterious circumstances in India. Following his divorce, Bukowski resumed drinking and continued writing poetry.\nSeveral of Bukowski's poems were published in the late 1950s in \"Gallows\", a small poetry magazine published briefly (the magazine lasted for two issues) by Jon Griffith. The small \"avant-garde\" literary magazine \"Nomad\", published by Anthony Linick and Donald Factor (the son of Max Factor Jr.), offered a home to Bukowski's early work. \"Nomad\"'s inaugural issue in 1959 featured two of his poems. A year later, \"Nomad\" published one of Bukowski's best-known essays, \"Manifesto: A Call for Our Own Critics\".\n1960s.\nBy 1960, Bukowski had returned to the post office in Los Angeles and began work as a letter filing clerk, a position he held for more than a decade. In 1962, he was distraught over the death of Jane Cooney Baker, his first serious girlfriend. Bukowski turned his inner devastation into a series of poems and stories lamenting her death.\nE.V. Griffith, editor of Hearse Press, published Bukowski's first separately printed publication, a broadside titled \"His Wife, the Painter,\" in June 1960. This event was followed by Hearse Press's publication of \"Flower, Fist and Bestial Wail,\" Bukowski's first chapbook of poems, in October 1960. \"His Wife, the Painter\" and three other broadsides (\"The Paper on the Floor\", \"The Old Man on the Corner\" and \"Waste Basket\") formed the centerpiece of Hearse Press's \"Coffin 1\", an innovative small-poetry publication consisting of a pocketed folder containing forty-two broadsides and lithographs which was published in 1964. Hearse Press continued to publish poems by Bukowski through the 1960s, 1970s, and early 1980s.\nJon and Louise Webb, publishers of the literary magazine \"The Outsider\", featured some of Bukowski's poetry in its pages. Under the Loujon Press imprint, the Webbs published Bukowski's \"It Catches My Heart in Its Hands\" in 1963 and \"Crucifix in a Deathhand\" in 1965.\nIn 1964 a daughter, Marina Louise Bukowski, was born to Bukowski and his live-in girlfriend Frances Smith. She would be his only child.\nBukowski was published by the independent British poetry magazine Iconolatre in 1966. The editor, artist John Wilson McCracken, sent a copy of the magazine to Carl Weissner who would later become Bukowski\u2019s longtime West German translator.\nBeginning in 1967, Bukowski wrote the column \"Notes of a Dirty Old Man\" for Los Angeles' \"Open City\", an underground newspaper. When \"Open City\" was shut down in 1969, the column was picked up by the \"Los Angeles Free Press\" as well as the hippie underground paper \"NOLA Express\" in New Orleans. In 1969, Bukowski and Neeli Cherkovski launched their own short-lived mimeographed literary magazine, \"Laugh Literary and Man the Humping Guns\". They produced three issues over the next two years.\nBlack Sparrow years.\nIn 1969, Bukowski accepted an offer from Black Sparrow Press publisher John Martin and quit his post office job to dedicate himself to full-time writing. He was then 49 years old. As he explained in a letter at the time, \"I have one of two choices \u2013 stay in the post office and go crazy ... or stay out here and play at writer and starve. I have decided to starve.\" Less than one month after leaving the postal service he finished his first novel, \"Post Office\". As a measure of respect for Martin's financial support and faith in a relatively unknown writer, Bukowski published almost all of his subsequent major works with Black Sparrow Press, which became a highly successful enterprise. An avid supporter of small independent presses, Bukowski continued to submit poems and short stories to innumerable small publications throughout his career.\nBukowski embarked on a series of love affairs and one-night trysts. One of these relationships was with Linda King, a sculptor and poet. Critic Robert Peters reported seeing Bukowski as an actor in King's play \"Only a Tenant\", in which she and Bukowski stage-read the first act at the Pasadena Museum of the Artist. This was a one-off performance of what was a shambolic work. Bukowski's other affairs were with a recording executive and a twenty-three-year-old redhead; he wrote a book of poetry as a tribute to his love for the latter, titled, \"Scarlet\" (Black Sparrow Press, 1976). His various affairs and relationships provided material for his stories and poems. Another important relationship was with \"Tanya\", pseudonym of \"Amber O'Neil\" (also a pseudonym), described in Bukowski's \"Women\" as a pen-pal that evolved into a weekend tryst at Bukowski's residence in Los Angeles in the 1970s. \"Amber O'Neil\" later self-published a chapbook about the affair entitled \"Blowing My Hero\".\nIn 1976, Bukowski met Linda Lee Beighle, a health food restaurant owner, rock-and-roll groupie, aspiring actress, heiress to a small Philadelphia \"Main Line\" fortune and devotee of Meher Baba. Two years later he moved from the East Hollywood area, where he had lived for most of his life, to the harborside community of San Pedro, the southernmost district of Los Angeles. Beighle followed him and they lived together intermittently over the next two years. They were eventually married by Manly Palmer Hall, a Canadian-born author, mystic, and spiritual teacher, in 1985. Beighle is referred to as \"Sara\" in Bukowski's novels \"Women\" and \"Hollywood\".\nIn the 1980s, Bukowski collaborated with cartoonist Robert Crumb on a series of comic books, with Bukowski supplying the writing and Crumb providing the artwork. Through the 1990s Crumb also illustrated a number of Bukowski's stories, including the collection \"The Captain Is Out to Lunch and the Sailors Have Taken Over the Ship\" and the story \"Bring Me Your Love\".\nBukowski was also published in \"Beloit Poetry Journal\".\nLive poetry readings.\nBukowski's live readings were legendary, with the drunk raucous crowd fighting with the drunk angry poet. In 1972, Joe Wolberg, who was the manager of City Lights Books in San Francisco, rented a hall and paid Bukowski to read his poems. A vinyl album was released by City Lights, which was re-issued by Takoma Records in 1980.\nIn May 1978, Bukowski traveled to West Germany and gave a live poetry reading of his work before an audience in Hamburg. This was released as a double 12\" L.P. stereo record titled \"CHARLES BUKOWSKI 'Hello. It's good to be back.'\"\nHis last international performance was in October 1979 in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, and was released on DVD as \"There's Gonna Be a God Damn Riot in Here\". The reading was produced by fan/friend Dennis Del Torre, who rented a venue, Viking Hall, paid Bukowski and his wife Linda to fly up, hired a video crew, promoted the event, and sold tickets. The crowd and Bukowski were very drunk for the event. A heckler was near the stage and can be heard clearly. Del Torre later went to Bukowski's widow, Linda Bukowski, for permission to license it. He thought it was the last reading Bukowski gave, but Linda told him there was another reading after that in Redondo Beach, CA, in early 1980.\nIn March 1980 he gave his very last reading at the Sweetwater music venue in Redondo Beach, California, which was released as \"Hostage\" on vinyl and audio CD, and \"The Last Straw\" on DVD, filmed and produced by Jon Monday for mondayMEDIA. In 2010 the unedited versions of both \"The Last Straw\" and \"Riot\" were released as \"One Tough Mother\" on DVD.\nDeath and legacy.\nBukowski died of leukemia on March 9, 1994, in San Pedro, aged 73, shortly after completing his last novel, \"Pulp\". The funeral rites, orchestrated by his widow, were conducted by Buddhist monks. He is interred at Green Hills Memorial Park in Rancho Palos Verdes. An account of the proceedings can be found in Gerald Locklin's book \"Charles Bukowski: A Sure Bet\". His gravestone reads: \"Don't Try\", a phrase which Bukowski uses in one of his poems, advising aspiring writers and poets about inspiration and creativity. Bukowski explained the phrase in a 1963 letter to John William Corrington: \"Somebody at one of these places [...] asked me: 'What do you do? How do you write, create?' You don't, I told them. You don't try. That's very important: \"not\" to try, either for Cadillacs, creation or immortality. You wait, and if nothing happens, you wait some more. It's like a bug high on the wall. You wait for it to come to you. When it gets close enough you reach out, slap out and kill it. Or, if you like its looks, you make a pet out of it.\"\nBukowski's work was subject to controversy throughout his career. Hugh Fox claimed that his sexism in his poetry, at least in part, translated into his life. In 1969, Fox published the first critical study of Bukowski in \"The North American Review\", and mentioned his attitude toward women: \"When women are around, he has to play Man. In a way it's the same kind of 'pose' he plays at in his poetry\u2014Bogart, Eric Von Stroheim. Whenever my wife Lucia would come with me to visit him he'd play the Man role, but one night she couldn't come I got to Buk's place and found a whole different guy\u2014easy to get along with, relaxed, accessible.\"\nIn June 2006, Bukowski's literary archive was donated by his widow to the Huntington Library in San Marino, California. Copies of all editions of his work published by the Black Sparrow Press are held at Western Michigan University, which purchased the archive of the publishing house after its closure in 2003.\nEcco Press continues to release new collections of his poetry, culled from the thousands of works published in small literary magazines. According to Ecco Press, the 2007 release \"The People Look Like Flowers at Last\" will be his final posthumous release, as now all his once-unpublished work has been made available.\nWriting.\nWriters including John Fante, Knut Hamsun, Louis-Ferdinand C\u00e9line, Ernest Hemingway, Robinson Jeffers, Henry Miller, D. H. Lawrence, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Du Fu Li Bai, and James Thurber are noted as influences on Bukowski's writing.\nBukowski often spoke of Los Angeles as his favorite subject. In a 1974 interview he said, \"You live in a town all your life, and you get to know every bitch on the street corner and half of them you have already messed around with. You've got the layout of the whole land. You have a picture of where you are... Since I was raised in L.A., I've always had the geographical and spiritual feeling of being here. I've had time to learn this city. I can't see any other place than L.A.\"\nBukowski also performed live readings of his works, beginning in 1962 on radio station KPFK in Los Angeles and increasing in frequency through the 1970s. Drinking was often a featured part of the readings, along with a combative banter with the audience. Bukowski could also be generous; for example, after a sold-out show at Amazingrace Coffeehouse in Evanston, Illinois, on November 18, 1975, he signed and illustrated over 100 copies of his poem \"Winter,\" published by No Mountains Poetry Project. By the late 1970s, Bukowski's income was sufficient to give up live readings.\nOne critic has described Bukowski's fiction as a \"detailed depiction of a certain taboo male fantasy: the uninhibited bachelor, slobby, anti-social, and utterly free\", an image he tried to live up to with sometimes riotous public poetry readings and boorish party behavior.\nA few critics and commentators also supported the idea that Bukowski was a cynic, as a man and a writer. Bukowski denied being a cynic, stating: \"I've always been accused of being a cynic. I think cynicism is sour grapes. I think cynicism is a weakness.\"\nPoetry editorial controversy.\nOver half of Bukowski's collections have been published posthumously. Posthumous collections have been remarked as 'John Martinized', with the poems having been highly edited, at a level which was not present during Bukowski's lifetime. One example of a popular poem, \"Roll the Dice\" (when comparing the original manuscript to \"What Matters Most Is How Well You Walk Through the Fire\"), themes such as hell and alcoholism are removed. The creative editing present includes changing lines from \"against total rejection and the highest of odds\" to \"despite rejection and the worst odds\".\nSelected works.\nPoetry collections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nShort story chapbooks and collections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNonfiction books.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59601", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59601", "title": "German submarine U-760", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-760\" was a Type VIIC U-boat of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II.\nHer keel was laid down 5\u00a0August 1940 by the Kriegsmarinewerft of Wilhelmshaven, and she was commissioned 15\u00a0October 1942 with \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Otto-Ulrich Blum in command. Blum commanded her for her entire career in the \"Kriegsmarine\".\nDesign.\nGerman Type VIIC submarines were preceded by the shorter Type VIIB submarines. \"U-760\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. She had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft F46 four-stroke, six-cylinder supercharged diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Garbe, Lahmeyer &amp; Co. RP 137/c double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-760\" was fitted with five torpedo tubes (four fitted at the bow and one at the stern), fourteen torpedoes, one SK C/35 naval gun, 220 rounds, and two twin C/30 anti-aircraft guns. The boat had a complement of between forty-four and sixty.\nService history.\n\"U-760\" conducted two war patrols, but never sank or damaged a ship. On 26 February 1943 \"Obermaschinist\" Jakob Ippendorf died during an air attack in Wilhelmshaven. On 12 August 1943 \"Matrosenenobergefreiter\" G\u00fcnter Werner was lost during an air attack in the North Atlantic.\nOn 8 September 1943, about off Cape Finisterre, \"U-760\" was sailing on the surface alongside when they were attacked by Allied aircraft. \"U-760\" fled into Vigo harbour and was taken under the guns of the .\nFate.\nInternational neutrality agreements allowed ships to spend up to 24 hours in neutral harbours to make emergency repairs, but \"U-760\" was unable to get underway in time. She was interned at Ferrol for the remainder of World War II. The submarine engine was dismantled and used to generate electric energy for the city of Vigo's tram network. On 23 July 1945, the boat was taken to the United Kingdom for Operation Deadlight and was scuttled on 13 December 1945.\nOne other U-boat was interned in Spain during World War II: .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59602", "revid": "1255878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59602", "title": "Local loop", "text": "In telephony, the last part of the connection to the customer\nIn telephony, the local loop (also referred to as the local tail, subscriber line, or in the aggregate as the last mile) is the physical link or circuit that connects from the demarcation point of the customer premises to the edge of the common carrier or telecommunications service provider's network.\nAt the edge of the carrier access network in a traditional public telephone network, the local loop terminates in a circuit switch housed in an incumbent local exchange carrier or telephone exchange.\nInfrastructure.\nTraditionally, the local loop was an electrical circuit in the form of a single pair of conductors from the telephone on the customer's premises to the local telephone exchange. Single-wire earth return lines had been used in some countries until the introduction of electric tramways from the 1900s made them unusable.\nHistorically the first section was often an aerial open-wire line, with several conductors attached to porcelain insulators on cross-arms on \"telegraph\" poles. Hence party line service was often given to residential customers to minimise the number of local loops required. Usually all these circuits went into aerial or buried cables with a twisted pair for each local loop nearer the exchange, see outside plant.\nModern implementations may include a digital loop carrier system segment or fiber optic transmission system. The local loop may terminate at a circuit switch owned by a competitive local exchange carrier and housed in a point of presence (POP), which typically is an incumbent local exchange carrier telephone exchange. A local loop supports voice and/or data communications applications in the following ways:\nThe term \"local loop\" is sometimes used for any \"last mile\" connection to the customer, regardless of technology or intended purpose. Local loop interrelations in this sense include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59604", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59604", "title": "Epiphenomenon", "text": "Secondary phenomenon that occurs alongside or in parallel to a primary phenomenon\nAn epiphenomenon (plural: epiphenomena) is a secondary phenomenon that occurs alongside or in parallel to a primary phenomenon. The word has two senses: one that connotes known causation and one that connotes absence of causation or reservation of judgment about it.\nExamples.\nMetaphysics.\nIn the philosophy of causality, an epiphenomenon is any effect of a cause apart from the effect under primary consideration. In situations in which an event of interest E is caused by (or, is said to be caused by) an event C, which also causes (or, is said to cause) an event F, then F is an epiphenomenon. The problem of epiphenomena is often a counterexample to theories of causation. For example, take a simplified Lewisian counterfactual analysis of causation that the meaning of propositions about causal relationships between two events A and B can be explained in terms of counterfactual conditionals of the form \"if A had not occurred then B would not have occurred\". Suppose that C causes E and that C has an epiphenomenon F. We then have that if E had not occurred, then F would not have occurred, either. But then according to the counterfactual analysis of causation, the proposition that there is a causal dependence of F on E is true; that is, on this view, E caused F. Since this is not in line with how we ordinarily speak about causation (we would not say that E caused F), a counterfactual analysis seems to be insufficient.\nPhilosophy of mind and psychology.\nAn epiphenomenon can be an effect of primary phenomena, but cannot affect a primary phenomenon. In the philosophy of mind, epiphenomenalism is the view that mental phenomena are epiphenomena in that they can be caused by physical phenomena, but cannot cause physical phenomena. In strong epiphenomenalism, epiphenomena that are mental phenomena can \"only\" be caused by physical phenomena, not by other mental phenomena. In weak epiphenomenalism, epiphenomena that are mental phenomena can be caused by both physical phenomena and other mental phenomena, but mental phenomena cannot be the cause of any physical phenomenon. \nThe physical world operates independently of the mental world in epiphenomenalism; the mental world exists as a derivative parallel world to the physical world, affected by the physical world (and by other epiphenomena in weak epiphenomenalism), but not able to have an effect on the physical world. Instrumentalist versions of epiphenomenalism allow some mental phenomena to cause physical phenomena, when those mental phenomena can be strictly analyzable as summaries of physical phenomena, preserving causality of the physical world to be strictly analyzable by other physical phenomena.\nMedicine.\nIn the more general use of the word, a causal relationship between the phenomena is implied; the epiphenomenon is a consequence of the primary phenomenon. This is the sense that is related to the noun \"epiphenomenalism\".\nHowever, in medicine, this relationship is typically \"not\" implied, and the word is usually used in its second sense: an epiphenomenon may occur independently, and is called an epiphenomenon because it is not the primary phenomenon under study or because only correlation, not causation, is known or suspected. In this sense, saying that X is associated with Y as an epiphenomenon is preserving an acknowledgment that correlation does not imply causation. Signs, symptoms, syndromes (groups of symptoms), and risk factors can all be epiphenomena in this sense. For example, having an increased risk of breast cancer concurrent with taking an antibiotic is an epiphenomenon. It is not the antibiotic that is causing the increased risk, but the increased inflammation associated with the bacterial infection that prompted the taking of an antibiotic. The metaphor of a tree is one way of helping to explain the difference to someone struggling to understand. If the infection is the root of the tree, and the inflammation is the trunk, then the cancer and the antibiotic are two branches; the antibiotic is not the trunk.\nElectromagnetism.\nAlthough electronics is said to be due to the influence of electrons, the standard approach to the study of electrical phenomena due to James Clerk Maxwell views these particles as secondary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Maxwell's theory, charge and current are 'epiphenomena' (secondary appearances) of underlying processes in what he termed, following Faraday, the electric and magnetic fields. Indeed, Maxwell's mature theory stays completely away from microstructure of matter and from any consideration of \u2018electric substance\u2019. Instead he proposed that certain quantities should be defined at every point in space, such that relations between them (the Maxwell equations) and functions of them (such as energy functions) determine phenomena. These quantities (the fields) may depend on microphysical events, and indeed Maxwell did expend some effort in his early papers on attempting to explain qualitatively how their relations could result in mechanical motions. However, the theory explains only large-scale phenomena, and it is not necessary to have the microscopic model in mind in order to work successfully with it.\nPropositional theory.\nZenon Pylyshyn suggested a propositional model of cognition where people do not conceptualize ideas in images but rather in meaningful relationships. In this theory, epiphenomena refer to images because they are merely products people conceptualize from their actual thought processes. Pylyshyn defends his claim by explaining that we only see images when we envision the form of an object. While visualizing objects or actions is a frequent process in our mind, it does not occur when we are considering the meaning behind an action or the non-visual properties of an object. There are many concepts we simply cannot envision. Additionally, when envisioning an image, it changes based on our preconceived notions, suggesting that semantic relations precede visual images. Unfortunately, the idea of epiphenomena in propositional theory is largely subjective and not falsifiable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
