{"id": "72451", "revid": "42154491", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72451", "title": "Ghezo", "text": "King of Dahomey from 1818 to 1858\nGhezo, also spelled Gezo, was King of Dahomey (present-day Republic of Benin) from 1818 until 1858. Ghezo replaced his brother Adandozan (who ruled from 1797 to 1818) as king through a coup with the assistance of the Brazilian slave trader Francisco F\u00e9lix de Sousa. He ruled over the kingdom during a tumultuous period, punctuated by the British blockade of the ports of Dahomey in order to stop the Atlantic slave trade.\nGhezo ended Dahomey's tributary status to the Oyo Empire. Afterwards, he dealt with significant domestic dissent, as well as pressure from the British Empire, to end the slave trade. He promised to end the slave trade in 1852, but resumed slave efforts in 1857. Ghezo was assassinated in 1858, and his son Glele became the new king.\nRise to power.\nGhezo was a son born with the name Gakpe to King Agonglo and was a younger brother to Adandozan. When Agonglo died in 1797, there was a succession struggle between his sons before Adandozan was enthroned. An oral tradition which developed during Ghezo's rule, to largely erase Adandozan from official history, says that Adandozan was merely named regent and that he refused to step down for Ghezo when the latter was old enough. This is generally doubted by historians.\nInformation about the final years of Adandozan's administration is very limited, providing only a partial understanding of the situation that resulted in Ghezo's rule. What is known is that around 1818, Adandozan imprisoned Francisco F\u00e9lix de Sousa, a powerful Afro-Brazilian slave trader, when the latter demanded repayment for money loaned to Adandozan. With the help, reportedly, of Nicola d'Olveira, the son of the Afro-Dutch wife of Agonglo, de Sousa escaped from imprisonment and relocated to Grand-Popo.\nWhile in exile, de Sousa sent gifts and money to Ghezo that Ghezo used to establish support for a challenge to the throne. In the 1818 Annual Customs, it is said that Ghezo appeared holding the war drum in the palace. Upon seeing this, the \"Migan\" and \"Mehu\" (prime ministers) removed the royal sandals from Adandozan and named Ghezo the king. It is quite likely that the initial struggle was more violent than this story relates.\nAccording to some versions, Ghezo was not named the ruler at this point, but instead was named the regent to rule until Adandozan's son Dakpo was old enough to rule. The story says that this understanding lasted until 1838, when Ghezo instead named his own son, the future king Glele, as the crown prince. At that point Dakpo and Adandozan led a brief fight within the palaces. The fight resulted in a fire that burned part of a palace and killed Dakpo, making Ghezo the clear king of Dahomey.\nRule.\nGhezo's rule was defined by some important military victories, domestic dissent, and transformation of the slave trade economy. Ghezo's rule is often remembered as one of the most significant in terms of reform and change to the political order of the kingdom (although some of this is ascribing reforms that happened under Adandozan to Ghezo as part of the erasure of Adandozan's rule). In addition to the military victories, domestic dissent, and slave trade, Ghezo is also credited with expanding the arts significantly and giving royal status to many artisans to move to the capital of Abomey.\nMilitary expansion.\nHis most significant military victory was over the depleted Oyo empire in 1823. Since 1730, Dahomey had provided yearly tribute to the Oyo empire and some of its economic and military policy was controlled by Oyo interests. However, the Oyo empire had been significantly weakened over the previous 30 years and, with the rise of the Islamic jihad to the north in the Sokoto Caliphate, the empire was unable to secure its tribute from Dahomey.\nIn the early 1820s, Ghezo refused to pay the annual tribute to Oyo. Oyo and Dahomey fought a small war early in the 1820s. Violence escalated in 1823 when Oyo sent an ambassador to demand tribute and Ghezo killed him. The Oyo responded by organizing a force made up of the Mahi and other regional forces to attack Dahomey. Ghezo defeated these forces at a battle near Paouingnan. Oyo then sent a larger force that was 4,000 strong, including cavalry, and camped near the village of Kpaloko. Ghezo defeated this force by organizing a night raid which resulted in the death of the Oyo leader, Ajanaku, and caused the Oyo troops to retreat.\nAlthough the victories over the Oyo were important, other military engagements in the early years of Ghezo's reign were less effective. He suffered losses to the Mahi people to the north of Dahomey and was unable to secure enough individuals to meet slave demands, leading him to sell citizens of Dahomey, a quite unpopular decision.\nWith the further reduction of Oyo power in the region, Ghezo was more able to expand militarily against the Mahi and the Gbe people to the southwest of Dahomey after the mid-1820s. Following victories in these areas, Ghezo focused the military power on a region which had been between the Oyo empire and Dahomey and had been the target of significant slave raiding. After some significant victories in this area by Dahomey, the city of Abeokuta was founded as a safe-haven for people to be free of slave raiding in an easily defended location. By the 1840s, Abeokuta had become a major power in the area and wars between Abeokuta and Dahomey became regular.\nIn 1849\u201350, under the direction of British Governor William Winniett, British naval officer Frederick E. Forbes went on two missions to the court of King Ghezo \"in an unsuccessful attempt to convince him to end involvement in the slave trade.\"\nIn 1851, Ghezo organized a direct attack on the city of Abeokuta, but it did not succeed. Ghezo suspended large-scale military operations when he ended the slave trade (1852). However, by 1858, a conservative faction pressured Ghezo to begin large-scale military operations again with an assault on Abeokuta to follow. It is possible that this renewed warfare between the two states led to Ghezo's death, with some accounts stating that Abeokuta paid for an assassination of Ghezo (other accounts disagree).\nGhezo is credited with the formation of the Mino as an actual war fighting force. Although the female bodyguard for the king had existed for many kings, Ghezo is said often as the king who transformed them into a force for battle. Historian Edna Bay contends that this may have been a result of a need to gain the support of the female palace guard after they had opposed Ghezo's coup against Adandozan. Ghezo did this by raising the status of the female guards, providing them uniforms, giving them additional weapons, and making them a crucial part of war policy.\nDomestic dissent.\nDomestic dissent was a significant problem throughout Ghezo's reign with different forces contesting his rule. Initially, after the coup against Adandozan, Ghezo had to secure support from a number of different individuals who helped bring him to power. Although he had initially presented himself as able to restore militaristic practices to Dahomey, which he argued Adandozan was unable to do, the early losses in his reign to the Mahi made him very unpopular. It is even reported that in 1825, he offered to return Adandozan to power but that Adandozan refused, hoping for a popular uprising against Ghezo.\nTo secure the support of different powerful people, Ghezo provided many of them with important positions. To secure the support of other princes, he appointed two of his brothers as the \"Migan\" and \"Mehu\" and transformed these into hereditary positions which they could pass to their sons. Since de Sousa was of crucial importance in Ghezo's rise to power, he named de Sousa the \"Chacha\" at Whydah, a position which would be the principal trade official in that port (and would also be passed to de Sousa's son). As a symbolic strike against Adandozan's legacy, Ghezo appointed Agontime his \"Kpojito\" (or queen-mother, an important post in the Kingdom of Dahomey). Agontime was a wife of Agonglo, sometimes claimed to be the mother of Ghezo, who was sold into slavery when Adandozan came to power because she supported a rival to the throne. In S\u00e3o Lu\u00eds, in the state of Maranh\u00e3o, she would have founded the Casa das Minas (House of Minas), an important temple that originated the Tambor de Mina, an Afro-Brazilian religion, establishing the cult of the ancestors of the royal family (voduns). According to some versions, Ghezo was able to secure her release from Brazil and bring her back to the kingdom, although evidence of this is not clear.\nWhen ending the slave trade became the crucial issue in the 1840s and 1850s, there developed two distinct factions which historian John C. Yoder has called the \"Elephant\" and the \"Fly\" parties. Ghezo was the head of the Elephant faction which supported opposition to the British demands to end the slave trade and was supported by key officials and the representatives of de Sousa. The Fly faction, in contrast, supported ending the slave trade and accommodating British demands. The Fly faction grew more powerful with the British naval blockade of 1852 and Ghezo eventually agreed to end the slave trade; however, the Elephant faction and the interests of de Souza's family remained important for the rest of his reign. Historian Robin Law largely believes that the elite factionalism to Ghezo developed in 1856 when he had reduced the slave trade. In that year, a faction for the resumption of the slave trade formed, headed by the \"Migan\" and \"Yovogan\" (governor of Whydah) which pushed Ghezo toward resuming the slave trade in 1857.\nOne additional way that Ghezo maintained domestic support was by lengthening the ceremony cycle in the 1850s with additions to the Annual Customs including a ceremony for the palm oil trade, one to celebrate ending tribute to the Oyo empire, and one dedicated to Ghezo himself (but to the time when he was a prince).\nSlave trade.\nWhen King Ghezo ascended the throne in 1818, he was confronted by two immediate obstacles: the Kingdom of Dahomey was in political turmoil, and it was financially unstable. First, he needed to gain political independence by removing the hold that the Yoruba empire of Oyo had over the Dahomey since 1748. Secondly, he needed to revitalize the Dahomey economy. Both of these objectives relied on the slave trade. King Ghezo implemented new military strategies, which allowed them to take a physical stand against the Oyo, who were also a major competitor in the slave trade. He also put stipulations on Dahomey's participation in the slave trade. Under his reign, the Dahomeans (Fon people) would no longer be sold, as they were under his brother's, Adandozan, leadership. Dahomey would focus on capturing people from enemy territories and trading them instead. \nWhile Brazil's demand for slaves increased in 1830, the British started a campaign to abolish the slave trade in Africa. The British government began putting significant pressure on King Ghezo in the 1840s to end the slave trade in Dahomey. King Ghezo responded to these requests by saying he was unable to end the slave trade because of domestic pressure. Ghezo added:\nThe slave trade is the ruling principle of my people. It is the source and the glory of their wealth\u2026the mother lulls the child to sleep with notes of triumph over an enemy reduced to slavery He additionally explained to the British that the entire region had become dependent on the trans-Atlantic slave trade for profit, so ending it in one day would destabilize his kingdom and lead to anarchy. King William Dappa Pepple of Bonny and Kosoko took the same stance towards the British requests. Instead, King Ghezo proposed an expansion of palm oil trade, which according to historian Augustus Adeyinka, would have led to the gradual abolishment of the slave trade. However, Dahomey's palm oil production ran on domestic slavery.\nHis domestic support had shifted as well, with the declining power of Francisco Felix de Sousa and his death in 1849. By 1850, King Ghezo was on the verge of war with the Egbas of Abeokuta, the new Yoruba capital that arose after the Oyo Empire dissolved. The Egbas, who did not participate in slavery, had set their sights on becoming the new palm oil capital of the region; a title King Ghezo needed to steer the Dahomey Kingdom away for slavery. Ebgas gained the advantage by welcoming Europeans, including missionaries and traders, into Abeokuta. This strategy allowed the Egba to obtain new firearms and other weapons that the Dahomey Amazons did not yet possess. Jealous of the attention and goods that the Egba were received from the British and fearful of what it would mean for Dahomey, King Ghezo decided to act. That same year, he told Consul Beecroft and Commander Forbes that he planned to attack Abeokuta, and if the British did not help him end the palm oil trade in Abeokuta by evacuating the capital, Dahomey would also see the British as an enemy. The issue with this demand is that Abeokuta and Badagry had become headquarters for British missionaries, who sought to \"civilize\" the Yoruba locals. Thus, Britain sided with the Egba, effectively undermining King Ghezo and the Dahomey's ability to flourish in the palm oil trade and leaving them no means to end their involvement in the slave trade without dissolving the Kingdom of Dahomey.\nVastly outnumbered and outgunned, King Ghezo joined forces with King Kosoko, the Oba of Lagos. Together, they created a plan for the Dahomey to attack Abeokuta while Lagos attacked Badagry simultaneously. In March 1851, the attack was carried out, and the Egba triumphed with British support. It became known as the Battle of Abeokuta. Following the defeat of Dahomey against Abeokuta and the establishment of a British naval blockade on the ports of Dahomey, King Ghezo appealed to the British government and proposed to end the slave trade immediately if the British were willing to pay reparations to Dahomey for their loss of income from slave trading, as Britain had done to slave owners in its Caribbean colonies for freeing their slaves. After they rejected his offer, King Ghezo continued to trade slaves, since palm oil was no longer a lucrative option.\nBy January 1852, British pressure forced Ghezo to sign an agreement (along with both the \"Migan\" and the \"Mehu\") with the British. The agreement specified that Ghezo was to end the slave trade from Dahomey. The British believed that Ghezo never implemented the provisions of this treaty, although he believed he did comply by stopping slave trade through Dahomey's ports even though he allowed slaves to be traded from Dahomey to other ports and then sold into the slave trade.\nThe decrease in the slave trade resulted in additional reforms during the last years of Ghezo's rule. He significantly reduced the wars and slave raids by the kingdom and in 1853 told the British that he reduced the practice of human sacrifice at the Annual Customs (possibly ending sacrifice of war captives completely and only sacrificing convicted criminals) However, these positions were reversed dramatically in 1857 and 1858 as Ghezo became hostile to the British; he revived slave trade through the port of Whydah, and in 1858, Dahomey attacked Abeokuta. The decision to attack Abeokuta had been resisted by Ghezo, but there was significant domestic pressure on Ghezo that the attack had been allowed to happen.\nDeath and succession.\nThe details of Ghezo's death are different depending on the historical source. It is claimed that there was a prophecy made in the early 1850s that if Ghezo attacked the city of Ekpo, under the control of Abeokuta, he would die as a result. This may explain his resistance to the war against them in 1858. Regardless, he died very soon after the campaign in 1859. Various causes of death have been suggested, including poisoning by Dahomey priests upset at the ending of human sacrifice, smallpox, or death in battle. However, he was likely assassinated by a sniper hired by his enemies from Abeokuta.\nDuring the last years of his life, his heir Glele became the leader of the faction that wanted the resumption of the slave trade. Glele was the official heir, but he was not the oldest son; he was challenged in his attempt to rule but was supported by the conservative faction. Many of the reforms attempted by Ghezo were partially undermined by Glele, who began slave trading, warfare, and human sacrifice to some extent.\nIn popular culture.\nGhezo is featured in the novel \"Flash for Freedom!\" by George MacDonald Fraser, as well as in Frank Yerby's 1971 novel, \"The Dahomean.\" He is also mentioned in the historical novel \"Segu\" by Maryse Cond\u00e9, which notes the prophecy that he would die of smallpox. King Gezo is mentioned in Anni Domingo\u2019s 2021 novel \"Breaking the Maafa Chain\", in which the Royal Navy rescues a young slave from sacrifice in his kingdom. In the 1957 film \"Band of Angels\", former slave trader Hamish Bond (Clark Gable) tells stories about Ghezo's exploits, referring to the origins of the slave trade in Dahomey.\nToday, a major Benin Armed Forces base in Cotonou is named 'Camp Ghezo' after the former king.\nActor John Boyega portrays a fictionalized Ghezo in the 2022 American historical epic film \"The Woman King\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72452", "revid": "33842945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72452", "title": "Glele", "text": "King of Dahomey (d. 1889)\nGlele, or Badohou (died December 29, 1889), was the tenth King of Dahomey, ruling from 1858 until his suicide in 1889.\nLife.\nBadohou, who took the throne name Glele, is considered (if Adandozan is not counted) to be the tenth King of the Aja kingdom of Dahomey (part of modern-day Benin). He succeeded his father, Ghezo, and ruled from 1858 to 1889. \nGlele continued his father's successful war campaigns, in part to avenge his father's death, and to capture slaves. During his rule he sustained Dahomey's renaissance as a center of palm oil sales and slave trade. Glele also signed treaties with the French, who had previously acquired a concession in Porto-Novo from its king. The French were successful in negotiating with Glele and receiving a grant for a customs and commerce concession in Cotonou during his reign. Glele resisted British diplomatic overtures, however, distrusting their manners and noting that they were much more activist in their opposition to the slave trade: though revolutionary France itself had outlawed slavery at the end of the 18th century it allowed the trade to continue elsewhere; Britain outlawed slavery in the United Kingdom and its overseas possessions in 1833, and had its navy make raids against slavers along the West African coast starting in 1840.\nGlele's symbols are the lion and the ritual knife of the adepts of Gu (Vodou of fire, iron, war, and cutting edges). His favorite wife was Visesegan. Another wife was the Yoruba-speaking high official Miagbe, with whom he had three sets of twin offspring, the eldest of whom was Yaya Migansi; Miagbe was rewarded by being honoured with an independent household, land and servants.\nGlele, despite the formal end of the slave trade and its interdiction by the Europeans, and New World powers, continued slavery as a domestic institution: his fields were primarily cared for by slaves, and slaves became a major source of 'messengers to the ancestors' (sacrificial victims) in ceremonies. In 1860, he met with William Foster, captain of the \"Clotilda\", the final ship to (illegally) take slaves to the United States, presumably to approve the sale.\nNear the end of Glele's reign, relations with France deteriorated due to Cotonou's growing commercial influence and differences of interpretation between Dahomey and France over the extent and terms of the Cotonou concession grant. Glele died suddenly just before the French arrived for negotiations, possibly by suicide. Glele's son Prince Kondo handled negotiations with the French.\nGlele died on December 29, 1889, to be succeeded by his son Kondo, who took the name B\u00e9hanzin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72453", "revid": "26386571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72453", "title": "Signs (film)", "text": "2002 film by M. Night Shyamalan\nSigns is a 2002 American science fiction horror thriller film written and directed by M. Night Shyamalan and produced by Shyamalan, Frank Marshall, Kathleen Kennedy and Sam Mercer. The film was produced by Touchstone Pictures, Blinding Edge Pictures and The Kennedy/Marshall Company. It was distributed by Buena Vista Pictures. Starring Mel Gibson and Joaquin Phoenix, the story focuses on a former Episcopal priest named Graham Hess who discovers a series of crop circles in his cornfield and that the phenomenon is a result of extraterrestrial life. \"Signs\" explores the themes of faith, kinship, and extraterrestrials.\n\"Signs\" premiered in theaters on August 2, 2002. The film was a financial success, grossing $408 million on a $72 million budget, becoming the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2002, and was met with positive reviews from critics, with many praising its atmosphere, performances, cinematography, score and story, but others criticizing aspects of the script. The film was nominated for multiple awards, including those from the Online Film Critics Society and the Empire Awards. The film also won an award from the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. The high definition Blu-ray Disc edition of the film featuring the director's audio commentary, the making of the film and deleted scenes was released in the United States on June 3, 2008. The original motion picture soundtrack, which was composed by James Newton Howard, was released on the opening day by the Hollywood Records label.\nPlot.\nFormer Episcopal priest Graham Hess lives on a rural farm in Doylestown, Pennsylvania, with his asthmatic preteen son, Morgan, and young daughter, Bo. Graham's younger brother Merrill, a failed minor league baseball player, has been helping the family since Graham's wife Colleen died in a traffic collision six months earlier. Graham abandoned the church in the aftermath of the incident.\nWhen large crop circles appear in the Hesses' cornfield, they are initially attributed to vandals. However, other crop circles, and lights from invisible objects hovering over many of Earth's cities, begin appearing globally. One night, Graham and Merrill chase a figure into the field. Over the next several days, Graham glimpses another among the corn stalks, followed by strange clicking noises broadcast through Bo's old baby monitor. To the family's continued terror, news footage emerges out of Brazil showing, undeniably at that point, an alien that can blend into its surroundings.\nAfter receiving a phone call from Ray Reddy, the man responsible for his wife's death, Graham travels to Reddy's home, finding him sitting in his car outside. Expressing remorse for Colleen's death, he warns Graham that one of the aliens is locked inside his pantry. Believing the aliens avoid water, he leaves for a lakeside. Graham enters the house and uses a kitchen knife to peer under the pantry door. A clawed hand emerges and swipes at Graham; he cuts off the fingers in a panic.\nAs the aliens' worldwide invasion begins, the family barricades themselves inside their house, taking shelter in the basement when the aliens break in. Morgan has an asthma attack and the family doesn't have his medication, but he survives the night. The family emerges the next morning after the radio reports the aliens have abruptly abandoned Earth as if something scared them off.\nThe alien previously trapped inside Reddy's pantry enters the house and takes Morgan hostage. Recalling Colleen's dying words, Graham tells Merrill to \"swing away\" using his baseball bat. The alien sprays Morgan with toxic gas from its wrist. Graham recovers his stricken son as Merrill engages the creature, discovering during the fight that water is toxic to the aliens. Merrill gradually weakens the alien by smashing several glasses of water, left by Bo throughout the house, at the creature, eventually killing it with a strike to the head that spills water from a glass on the creature's face. Outside, Graham administers Morgan's medication, realizing that his son's constricted lungs prevented him from inhaling the toxins, an act that Graham attributes to the intervention of a higher power.\nMonths later, the Hess family has recovered from the ordeal and Graham returns to the church.\nProduction.\nM. Night Shyamalan was a fan of the film \"You Can Count on Me\" and cast Rory Culkin and Mark Ruffalo. Ruffalo required surgery for a tumor behind his ear and was unable to work on the film, so a week before filming the role was recast with Joaquin Phoenix. The role of Graham was originally written to be an older man. Shyamalan approached Paul Newman for the role, but he declined due to lack of interest, and he also approached Clint Eastwood, who declined due to scheduling conflicts.\nShyamalan has said that the film's concept is the combination of two ideas \u2013 a family finding a crop circle on their property, and an \"end of the world\" premise.\n\"Signs\" was filmed in 2001. All scenes shot on location were filmed in Bucks County, Pennsylvania. The scenes of the house and cornfield were shot inside the campus of Delaware Valley University, an agricultural college, where they had of land to use. The scenes in the bookstore and the pizza shop were filmed in Newtown, Pennsylvania, and the pharmacy scene was shot in Morrisville, Pennsylvania.\nSoundtrack.\nAll music was composed by James Newton Howard. The score was conducted by Pete Anthony and performed by the Hollywood Studio Symphony.\nCritical reception for soundtrack.\nThe soundtrack generally received positive reviews. William Ruhlmann of Allmusic stated in his review that: With \"Signs\", composer James Newton Howard again joins director M. Night Shyamalan for their third collaboration following \"The Sixth Sense\" and \"Unbreakable\", and clearly the film presents another thrilling encounter with the supernatural. From his opening \"Main Theme,\" Howard ratchets up the tension, and his music thereafter alternates only between the ominous and the suspenseful. He overloads his lower tones, employing eight basses, five percussionists, and even a tuba, but also uses a large string section for short, fast, repetitive figures meant to keep viewers on the edges of their seats. This is not particularly imaginative music, just good old Saturday afternoon scary movie fare, the only distinguishing characteristic about it \u2013 consistent with Shyamalan's style \u2013 that it is so relentless. There's just no let up; dread pervades every moment of the director's films, to the point of emotional exhaustion for some, and the score has to have the same uncompromising approach, which can make it a little hard to take when listened to all the way through. \nReception.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 76% based on reviews from 241 critics, with an average rating of 6.80/10. The site's critical consensus reads: \"With \"Signs\", Shyamalan proves once again an expert at building suspense and giving audiences the chills.\" On Metacritic, the film scored 59 out of 100 based on 36 reviews, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"B\" on an A+ to F scale.\nRoger Ebert gave the film four out of four stars, writing: \"M. Night Shyamalan's \"Signs\" is the work of a born filmmaker, able to summon apprehension out of thin air. When it is over, we think not how little has been decided, but how much has been experienced ... At the end of the film, I had to smile, recognizing how Shyamalan has essentially ditched a payoff. He knows, as we all sense, that payoffs have grown boring.\" Geoff Pevere of The Toronto Star gave the film a scoring of three out of five stars, saying \"Ultimately, \"Signs\"\u00a0\u2013 as original, interesting and ambitious as it is\u00a0\u2013 is a post-9/11 movie of possibly the most dubious sort.\" Nell Minow of Common Sense Media gave the film four out of five stars; she praised the casting and Shyamalan's direction, saying his \"only flaw was not leaving anything to the audience's imagination\".\nMick LaSalle of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" gave the film one star out of four, thinking that the film had \"few thoughts and no thrills.\" \"Variety\"'s Todd McCarthy criticized the film for its lack of originality, writing: \"After the overwrought \"Unbreakable\" and now the meager \"Signs\", it's fair to speculate whether Shyamalan's persistence in replicating the otherworldly formula of \"The Sixth Sense\" might not be a futile and self-defeating exercise.\" A.O. Scott of \"The New York Times\" wrote that \"Mr. Shyamalan is undone by his pretensions\" and that the theme of paternal grief \"is articulated here with a heavy-handed, incoherent sentimentality that smothers real emotion.\" On the theme of faith, he concludes: \"Mr. Shyamalan never gives us anything to believe in, other than his own power to solve problems of his own posing, and his command of a narrative logic is as circular\u00a0\u2013 and as empty\u00a0\u2013 as those bare patches out in the cornfield.\"\nIn 2004, the Brazilian birthday party scene was ranked at No. 77 on Bravo's \"The 100 Scariest Movie Moments.\"\nIn a 2007 interview, Bong Joon-ho cited the film as an inspiration for his 2006 monster film \"The Host\". He added: \"Even though it deals with the alien invasion rather than creatures, I liked the fact that the film focused on the Mel Gibson's family, not on the aliens.\"\nBox office.\n\"Signs\" grossed $60,117,080 from 3,264 theaters in its opening weekend. At the time of its release, the film had the second-highest August opening weekend, behind \"Rush Hour 2\". It was the biggest opening weekend of Mel Gibson's career, surpassing \"Ransom\", and earned more than Disney's previous best for a live-action non-sequel, not based on existing popular source material, held by \"Pearl Harbor\". The film went on to gross $227,966,634 domestically and $180,281,283 internationally, for a total of $408,247,917 worldwide. It ranked only behind \"The Sixth Sense\" in Shyamalan's box office success and grossing more than \"The Village\" and \"Split\".\nHome media.\n\"Signs\" was released on VHS and DVD on January 7, 2003.\nThe DVD release includes some deleted scenes:\nIn addition to being a THX certified release, the DVD also featured a documentary and storyboards. It was the second top DVD video rental in the United States during the first quarter of 2003, earning $ in US DVD rental revenue by March 2003.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72456", "revid": "93143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72456", "title": "Abkhaz-Adygh languages", "text": ""}
{"id": "72458", "revid": "43854074", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72458", "title": "B\u00e9hanzin", "text": "King of Dahomey from c. 1890 to c. 1894\nGbehanzin also known as B\u00e9hanzin (c.\u20091845 \u2013 10 December 1906) is considered the eleventh (if Adandozan is not counted) King of Dahomey, modern-day Republic of Benin. Upon taking the throne, he changed his name from Kondo.\nFollowing his father Glele's suicide, B\u00e9hanzin ascended the throne in January 1890 and ruled until 1894, when he was defeated by the French in the Second Franco-Dahomean War and exiled to Martinique. B\u00e9hanzin was Dahomey's last independent ruler established through traditional power structures. He led the resistance to French colonization of his kingdom, during the Dahomey Wars.\nBiography.\nB\u00e9hanzin was seen by his people as intelligent and courageous. He saw that the Europeans were gradually encroaching on this section of the West African Coast, and as a result attempted a foreign policy of isolating the Europeans and rebuffing them. As prince just before the death of his father Glele, B\u00e9hanzin declined to meet French envoy Jean Bayol, claiming conflicts in his schedule due to ritual and ceremonial obligations.\nFirst Franco-Dahomean War.\nIn March 1889, Dahomey attacked a village on the Ou\u00e9m\u00e9 whose chief was under the protection of the French. After remarking that the flag of the tricolour would protect him, the Fon commanded one of his Dahomey Amazons to behead him and wrap his head in the flag. France responded by fortifying the city of Cotonou, which had been ceded to them by a Dahomey representative in Ouidah, increasing its forces with French Senegalese and Gabonese soldiers, and arresting local Dahomey officials who had been continuing to collect customs in the port. Skirmishes also broke out with local militias. On March 4, 1890, a Dahomey army of several thousand charged the log stockade around Cotonou at approximately 5 in the morning. The French army stood fast due to superior weaponry, strategy and the advantageous position they had prepared. Eventually B\u00e9hanzin's forces were forced to withdraw. While there were few losses on the French side, the Dahomey suffered the loss of several hundred soldiers (129 within French lines).\nAfter regrouping, Dahomey sent its forces south to attack the French-protected city of Porto-Novo ruled by King Toffa I. A force of 350 French soldiers assisted by 500 of King Toffa's soldiers intercepted B\u00e9hanzin's force of 9000 warriors in the Battle of Atchoukpa. While the local Porto-Novo soldiers were routed during the initial Dahomey charge, the French forces formed infantry squares to protect themselves and successfully repelled the Dahomey, suffering only 8 casualties to the Dahomey's 1500.\nOn 3 October 1890, Dahomey signed a treaty recognizing the kingdom of Porto-Novo as a French protectorate. B\u00e9hanzin was also forced to definitely cede Cotonou.\nSecond Franco-Dahomean War.\nThe peace lasted two years, but both sides continued to buy arms in preparation for another battle. In 1892, the soldiers of Abomey attacked villages near Grand Popo and Porto-Novo in an effort to reassert the older boundaries of Dahomey. King B\u00e9hanzin rejected complaints by the French, who proceeded to declare war.\nThe French further justified the annexation of Dahomey by characterizing the Dahomeans as savages in need of civilizing, and pointing to the human sacrifice of slaves made to the royal ancestors at the annual ceremonies known as annual customs and at a king's death, as evidence of this savagery. Dahomey was already at odds with other colonial empires for their practice of attacking and enslaving neighboring kingdoms, both for domestic slaves (including human sacrifice), and trans-atlantic trade, which came at odds with the British Empire's anti-slavery campaign during the 19th century.\nThe French also pointed to the existence of the women's militia that protected the king, whom the Fon referred to simply as \"Minon\" (or \"mothers\"), but the French called Amazons after the fierce women warriors of Greek mythology. These women soldiers were thought to have become common in the Fon army due to the extreme losses suffered by Dahomey during wars with neighboring kingdoms. Some official French propaganda from the period may be seen in prints depicting these so-called Amazons. One source claims that in one of the battles an Amazon killed a French officer by ripping out his throat with her sharpened teeth. Parallel accounts of the event handed down in Benin describe the Amazon as a trusted wife of B\u00e9hanzin who had sworn to avenge members of the royal family who had been executed by B\u00e9hanzin for treachery after divulging battle plans in return for bribes from French agents. The French officer she is said to have killed was allegedly the head of French military intelligence who committed the 'savage' act of corrupting family members to betray their own. The Amazon was reduced to using her teeth after her ammunition ran out at the battle's peak.\nThrough superior intelligence gathering, superior strategy, superior weaponry, bribery, and a campaign of psychological warfare that included cutting down most of the sacred trees in the Oueme and Zou, the French defeated Dahomey, one of the last African kingdoms to succumb to European colonization, with very few French losses. Instead of attacking Abomey directly by marching straight north from Calavi just north of Cotonou, French General Alfred Dodds attacked from Porto-Novo, moving up the Oueme valley until he was within striking distance of Abomey, via Cove and Bohicon, while the Fon continued to pattern their attacks in predictable melee combat style just before dawn, with shorter machete weapons and swords that had difficulty breaking disciplined French Bayonet lines.\nOver a series of battles and guerilla warfare by the Fon attempting to slow the French march towards the Dahomey capital of Abomey, the French were victorious, sustaining only 85 casualties to the estimated 2000 to 4000 killed among the Fon. On November 5, 1892, following the loss of the royal palace, B\u00e9hanzin sent a truce mission to the French forces, but it failed. King B\u00e9hanzin, refusing to let the capital fall into enemy hands, burned and evacuated the city. He and the remnants of the Dahomey army fled north as the French entered the capital on 17 November, and installed B\u00e9hanzin's brother Agoli-agbo as the new King. After failing to rebuild his army, King B\u00e9hanzin eventually surrendered to the French on 15 January 1894. He lived out the remainder of his life in exile in Martinique and Algeria. \nAfter his death, his remains were returned to Abomey. His throne and his sculptures of wood, copper, iron and silver are now in the Musee Quai Branly, and have been the topic of important discussions about their return to the Republic of Benin.\nB\u00e9hanzin was succeeded by Agoli-agbo, his brother and one-time Army Chief of Staff, the only potential ruler with whom the French were willing to negotiate.\nArtistic representation.\nEach of Dahomey's kings was represented in sculpture with images that referred to the proverbs, associations, and wordplay attached to his royal name. The images that symbolize Behanzin (or Gbehanzin) include an egg held by a hand, as the words for these in the Fon language form a rebus, or pun, of the royal name. As may be seen in the large wooden statue from the royal palace at Abomey, the shark is a metaphor for Behanzin; as does the shark, the king guards the coast of the kingdom of Dahomey. \nA captive hanging from a flagpole is a reference to a man from the Nago, or Yoruba, city of Ketou, a powerful rival state. This prisoner had boasted that he could attack the king with magic, but Behanzin hanged him from a flagpole as punishment for his rebellion. The king's most famous symbol is the smoking pipe. This is because he claimed that there wasn't a minute in his life, even when he was a baby, that he was not smoking tobacco.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72459", "revid": "46232267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72459", "title": "Oswald von Wolkenstein", "text": "German poet, composer and diplomat\nOswald von Wolkenstein (1376 or 1377 in Pfalzen \u2013 August 2, 1445, in Meran) was a poet, composer and diplomat. In his diplomatic capacity, he traveled through much of Europe to as far as Georgia (as recounted in \"Durch Barbarei, Arabia\").\nHe was dubbed a Knight of the Holy Sepulchre and was also inducted into the Order of the Jar and the Order of the Dragon. He lived for a time in Seis am Schlern.\nLife.\nOswald's father was Friedrich von Wolkenstein and his mother was Katharina von Villanders. When he was ten years old, Oswald left his family and became a squire of a knight errant. Oswald described the journeys undertaken by him in the following 14 years in his autobiographical song \"Es f\u00fcgt sich...\". He mentioned his travels to Crete, Prussia, Lithuania, Crimea, Turkey, the Holy Land, France, Lombardy (i.e. what is known today as Northern Italy) and Spain, as well as being shipwrecked in the Black Sea.\nAfter the death of his father in 1399, Oswald returned to the County of Tyrol and began a quarrel with his older brother Michael about their inheritance. From 1401 to 1402, Oswald participated in the failed Italian expedition of King Rupert of Germany. In 1407 he and his brother agreed on how to split the inheritance: Oswald received a third of Castle Hauenstein and the accompanying estates in Seis am Schlern. The other two-thirds of the castle belonged to a knight named Martin J\u00e4ger, but Oswald did not respect the property situation, occupying the entire castle and appropriating J\u00e4ger's share of the tithe. In 1408, in preparation for a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, Oswald paid for a memorial stone to be installed on the wall of the cathedral in Brixen. The stone has survived and shows him in the garb of a Crusader, with the long beard associated with pilgrims. Before he left, he wrote several songs for his beloved, Anna Hausmann, the wife of the Brixner burgher Hans Hausmann. After his return in 1410, he acquired the right to take up residence in Neustift Monastery, an Augustiner-Chorherren cloister near Brixen.\nIn 1414 Oswald became a member of the entourage of Friedrich IV, Duke of Austria and Count of Tyrol, at the Council of Constance (1414\u201318); a portrait of Oswald can be found in the council's chronicle (by Ulrich von Richental). Oswald entered as a diplomat in the service of Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Hungary. His first diplomatic voyage brought him to England, Scotland and Portugal, where he participated in the conquest of the Moorish city of Ceuta. In 1416 he joined King Sigismund in France and they traveled together back to Constance.\nIn 1417 Oswald married Margarete von Schwangau, with whom he would have seven children. Later that year he returned to Tyrol, where he joined the \"Elefantenbund\", an alliance of noblemen against Friedrich IV, who had been banned by King Sigismund for aiding the flight of Antipope John XXIII from the Council of Constance. With the help of the local population, especially the peasants, Friedrich was able to resist the King and the nobles and from 1418 onwards Friedrich pursued his enemies within Tyrol vigorously. In September 1421 Oswald was lured by his lover Anna Hausmann into a trap and apprehended by Martin J\u00e4ger, who brought Oswald to Innsbruck and handed him over to Count Friedrich. In March 1422 Friedrich, in exchange for a surety of 6,000 ducats and an oath to abjure all vengeance, released Oswald for five months so that Oswald could settle his debts with Martin J\u00e4ger and other nobles. Oswald could not reach an agreement with his enemies and did not show up in Tirol Castle on August 24, 1422, opting rather to ride to Hungary, where he met King Sigismund. Together they plotted a war against Friedrich. The war was started by Oswald's brother Michael who wrote to Friedrich on September 5, 1422: \"Therefore I want to be your enemy and be in an alliance with your enemies.\"\nIn 1423 open hostilities culminated in the siege of Castle Greifenstein, during which Oswald with both his brothers was part of the castle's garrison. The siege was lifted in November 1423 through a successful sally. However, because the burghers and peasants of Tyrol and the bishop of Brixen supported Count Friedrich, most of the nobles, including both brothers of Oswald, surrendered on December 17, 1423. Few nobles chose to continue to fight. The most prominent were Hans von Villanders, the brothers Ulrich and Wilhelm von Starkenberg, who successfully defended Castle Greifenstein for years to come, and Oswald, who was the last to surrender.\nIn 1424 things calmed down and Oswald commissioned the Neustift Monastery to create a manuscript of his songs. The calmness of the year was due to the new \"Binger Kurverein\" (Alliance of Bingen) by the Empire's Kurf\u00fcrsten against Sigmund, who could not afford to fight three wars at once: the planned one against Friedrich, the brewing one against the \"Kurverein\" and the ongoing one against the Hussites. On February 17, 1425, King and Count made peace at Castle Hornstein; Oswald was present.\nOswald returned to Tyrol to find himself completely penniless. Count Friedrich insisted on the payment of the 6,000 ducat surety. Oswald tried in vain to get hold of the money and fled Tyrol. In 1425 he resided in Castle Neuhaus near Gais, which at this point was not yet part of the County of Tyrol, but part of the County of G\u00f6rz. Friedrich immediately used the peace with King Sigismund to renew the siege of Castle Greifenstein.\nAfter Wilhelm von Starkenberg's capitulation on November 26, 1426, Oswald was the last nobleman feuding with Count Friedrich, and was summoned to the Landtag in Bolzano. Oswald again fled Tyrol, but his flight was discovered. He was apprehended near Wasserburg on Lake Constance, brought back to Tyrol, and imprisoned in Castle Vellenberg (later Castle Sonnenburg) in Innsbruck. Oswald now had no choice but to make peace with Count Friedrich, who forced him to pay Martin J\u00e4ger a compensation in exchange for the stolen tithes, and in the process allowed Oswald to acquire full ownership of Castle Hauenstein and its estates. Furthermore, Oswald had to swear to refrain from any contact with nobles from outside Tyrol unless sanctioned by Count Friedrich.\nIn 1428, Oswald broke his oath and traveled to Heidelberg to meet Kurf\u00fcrst Ludwig von der Pfalz, Archbishop of Cologne, Count Dietrich II von Moers and Duke Adolf VII von J\u00fclich, with the aim to garner the help of the League of the Holy Court in a dispute with his cousin Hans von Villanders, who owed Oswald 2,200 ducats. While there, Oswald entered into a fray between the Domkapitel of Brixen and the new Prince-Bishop of Brixen, Ulrich Putsch (died 1437), who was a friend of Martin J\u00e4ger, a confidante of Count Friedrich, and soon-to-be bishop chancellor of the County of Tyrol. The clash culminated in a coup on October 30, 1429, supported by Friedrich and led by Oswald against the bishop, who while being a prisoner of Oswald was beaten publicly by him. Initially, King Sigismund backed Oswald, but when informed by the other side in the dispute, both Sigismund and Friedrich switched sides and reinstated bishop Ulrich.\nIn 1430 King Sigismund summoned the nobles of the Holy Roman Empire to a Reichstag in the city of Nuremberg and Oswald with his brother Michael immediately left Tyrol to meet the King, who instead of going directly to Nuremberg undertook a two-month detour to the South German cities of \u00dcberlingen and Constance to celebrate Christmas. During this period, Oswald wrote many songs of an erotic nature, the most famous being \"Ain Graserin\" (KL 76) about a bathing maid, whose \"frizzy hair\" between her legs leads a man to have sex with her on the spot. In Nuremberg, Oswald became a member of the first rank of the Order of the Dragon, a rank King Sigismund awarded only to two dozen nobles. Along with the honor came the obligation to participate in Sigismund's disastrous expedition against the Hussites in Bohemia in 1431. Oswald experienced firsthand the mass flight of the 130,000-strong Imperial army on August 14, 1431, when the entire army panicked after sighting the 50,000-strong Hussite army approaching and singing.\nSigismund sent Oswald back to Tyrol to prepare the county for an expected Hussite invasion of the Empire and invited the Hussites to the Council of Basel to negotiate. Sigismund himself fled to Milan and later to Piacenza under the pretext that he had to go to Rome to be crowned emperor. During this time Oswald commissioned the Neustift Monastery to create a second manuscript collection of his songs. Sigismund called him to join him in Piacenza and Oswald obliged. The unpleasantness of his visit inspired him to write the complaint-song \"Wer die ougen vil versch\u00fcren\", which he set to a French melody. In May of the same year, Oswald was sent by Sigismund to Basel. After over a year of negotiations, Sigismund was crowned Holy Roman Emperor on May 31, 1433, by Pope Eugenius IV, with Oswald probably in attendance.\nDuring the next years, Oswald's life settled down, and almost no reports of fights, brawls or trials are preserved. This changed with the death of Count Friedrich on June 24, 1439. As the heir Sigismund was only twelve years old at the time, a guardian had to be found until Sigismund came of age. The Landst\u00e4nde of Tyrol choose Sigismund's uncle Friedrich V, Duke of Austria. The contracts of the guardianship were put in Oswald's care. Oswald used the opportunity to seek the assistance of Friedrich V in his eighteen-year-long legal wrangling with Hans von Villanders over bonds Oswald had given his cousin to hold.\nWhen the guardianship of Sigismund ended on July 25, 1443, and Friedrich, now King Friedrich III of the Holy Roman Empire, decided to prolong it for another six years, the Landst\u00e4nde of Tyrol organized an open revolt. Oswald became one of five military commanders and was tasked with the defense of the most important of all positions, the \"M\u00fchlbacher Klause\" (M\u00fchlbach fortress), which blocked the most likely invasion route from Styria, where King Friedrich had taken up residence. The cities of Merano and Bolzano provided funds and troops to reinforce the fortress, and all other passes and entrances into Tyrol were blocked by troops. As the city of Trento backed the King, an army of 3,000 men was sent south to besiege the city. On December 10, a Tyrolean delegation arrived in Graz to demand the release of Sigismund and the return of the county's treasures, taken by Friedrich in 1440. Friedrich refused and threatened war. The Tyroleans responded by sacking Trento and electing Johann R\u00f6ttel as the new bishop on January 4, 1440. R\u00f6ttel's first declaration was to fully support the Landst\u00e4nde against the King. Oswald was one of the electors and the main instigator of this election. The next session by the Landst\u00e4nde began in Merano on May 16, 1445, and as it was now clear that King Friedrich was not planning an attack, options were discussed on how to bring Sigismund to Tyrol.\nOswald died on August 2, 1445, in Merano, succumbing to an intense heatwave. His offices were taken over by Ulrich von Matsch. His body was brought to Neustift Monastery in Vahrn and buried near the font in the monastery's church, where his grave was rediscovered in 1973.\nOswald's right eye.\nAll extant portraits of Oswald depict him with a closed right eye. An examination of his skull from a 1973 exhumation revealed that this was due to a congenital defect: his right eye socket was smaller than the left, which meant that his right eyeball was under constant pressure, resulting in ptosis, or a withering of the right eyelid muscles. However, Franz Daxecker concludes that the ptosis was probably caused by an injury sustained in childhood. Dieter K\u00fchn's biography of Oswald, which attributes the \"loss\" of the right eye to an archery mishap when the boy was eight years old, is now generally discredited. A popular theory that the eye was lost during the siege of Greifenstein Castle in 1423 is also implausible, as portraits of Oswald from 1408 already depict him with a drooping eyelid.\nCompositions.\nHe is one of the most important German composers of the Middle Ages. There are three main topics of his work: travel, God and sex.\nOswald's poems are preserved in three manuscripts:\nMSs A and B were completed under the supervision of Oswald himself, and both contain a depiction of the author, qualifying as one of the earliest authentic depictions of a German author.\nSources.\nThis article is based on the 600-page biography \"Ich Wolkenstein\" by Dieter K\u00fchn; Insel Taschenbuch 497; Erweiterte Ausgabe 1980; Insel Verlag Frankfurt am Main 1977; .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72462", "revid": "20992698", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72462", "title": "Northwest Caucasian languages", "text": "Language family\nThe Northwest Caucasian languages, also called West Caucasian, Abkhazo\u2013Adyghean, Abkhazo\u2013Circassian, Circassic, or sometimes Pontic languages (from Ancient Greek, \"pontos\", referring to the Black Sea, in contrast to the Northeast Caucasian languages as the \"Caspian languages\"), is a family of languages spoken in the northwestern Caucasus region, chiefly in three Russian republics (Adygea, Kabardino-Balkaria, Karachay-Cherkessia), the disputed territory of Abkhazia, Georgia, and Turkey, with smaller communities scattered throughout the Middle East.\nThe group's relationship to any other language family is uncertain and unproven. One language, Ubykh, became extinct in 1992, while all of the other languages are in some form of endangerment, with UNESCO classifying all as either \"vulnerable\", \"endangered\", or \"severely endangered\". Within the Northwest Caucasian languages, only Abkhaz has a first-set code in the ISO 639 standard.\nThe Northwest Caucasian languages possess highly complex sets of consonant distinctions paired with a lack of vowel distinctions, often providing archetypical cases of vertical vowel systems, also known as \"linear\" vowel systems.\nMain features.\nPhonetics.\nLinguistic reconstructions suggest that both the richness of the consonantal systems and the poverty of the vocalic systems may be the result of a historical process, whereby vowel features such as labialization and palatalization were reassigned to adjacent consonants. For example, ancestral may have become and may have become , losing the old vowels and but gaining the new consonants and . The linguist John Colarusso has further postulated that some instances of this may also be due to the levelling of an old grammatical class prefix system (so may have become ), on the basis of pairs like Ubykh vs. Kabardian and Abkhaz \"heart\". This same process is claimed by some to lie behind the development of labiovelars in Proto-Indo-European, which once neighboured Proto-NWC.\nLack of distinctive vowels and wealth of distinctive consonants.\nThe entire family is characterised by a paucity of phonemic vowels (two or three, depending upon the analysis) coupled with rich consonantal systems that include many forms of secondary articulation. Ubykh (Ubyx), for example, had two vowels and probably the largest inventory of consonants outside Southern Africa.\nGrammar.\nNorthwest Caucasian languages have rather simple noun systems, with only a handful of cases at the most, coupled with highly agglutinative verbal systems that can contain almost the entire syntactic structure of the sentence. All finite verbs are marked for agreement with three arguments: absolutive, ergative, and indirect object, and there are also a wide range of applicative constructions. There is a split between \"dynamic\" and \"stative\" verbs, with dynamic verbs having an especially complex morphology. A verb's morphemes indicate the subject's and object's person, place, time, manner of action, negative, and other types of grammatical categories.\nAll Northwest Caucasian languages are left-branching, so that the verb comes at the end of the sentence and modifiers such as relative clauses precede a noun.\nNorthwest Caucasian languages do not generally permit more than one finite verb in a sentence, which precludes the existence of subordinate clauses in the Indo-European sense. Equivalent functions are performed by extensive arrays of nominal and participial non-finite verb forms, though Abkhaz appears to be developing limited subordinate clauses, perhaps under the influence of Russian.\nClassification.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThere are five recognized languages in the Northwest Caucasian family: Abkhaz, Abaza, Kabardian or East Circassian, Adyghe or West Circassian, and Ubykh. They are classified as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCircassian dialect continuum.\nCircassian (Cherkess) is a cover term for the series of dialects that include the literary languages of Adyghe and Kabardian.\nAdyghe.\nAdyghe is one of the more widely spoken Northwest Caucasian languages. It has 500,000 speakers spread throughout Russia and the Middle East: 280,000 in Turkey; 125,000 in Russia, where it is official in the Republic of Adygea; 45,000 in Jordan, 25,000 in Syria, 20,000 in Iraq, and 4,000 in Israel. There is even a small community in the United States. Four main dialects are recognised: Temirgoy, Abadzekh, Shapsugh and Bzhedugh, as well as many minor ones such as Hakuchi spoken by the last speakers of Ubykh in Turkey. Adyghe has many consonants: between 50 and 60 consonants in the various Adyghe dialects but it has only three phonemic vowels. Its consonants and consonant clusters are less complex than the Abkhaz\u2013Abaza dialects.\nKabardian.\nKabardian has just over one million speakers: 550,000 in Turkey and 450,000 in Russia, where it is an official language of the republics of Kabardino-Balkaria and Karachay-Cherkessia. Kabardian has the fewest consonants of any North-Western Caucasian language, with 48, including some rather unusual ejective fricatives and a small number of vowels. Kabardian itself has several dialects, including Terek, the literary standard, and Besleney, which is intelligible with both Terek and Adyghe. Unlike the Adyghe, Kabardian lost many of the consonants that existed in the Proto-Circassian language, for example, the consonants became .\nAbkhaz\u2013Abaza dialect continuum.\nAbkhaz.\nAbkhaz has 100,000 speakers in Abkhazia (a \"de facto\" independent republic, but a \"de jure\" autonomous entity within Georgia), where it is the official language, and an unknown number of speakers in Turkey. It has been a literary language from the beginning of the 20th century. Abkhaz and Abaza may be said to be dialects of the same language, but each preserves phonemes which the other has lost. Abkhaz is characterised by unusual consonant clusters and one of the world's smallest vowel inventories: It has only two distinctive vowels, an open vowel /a/ and a mid vowel /\u0259/. Next to palatalized or labialized consonants, /a/ is realized as [e] or [o], and /\u0259/ as [i] or [u]. There are three major dialects: Abzhuy and Bzyp in Abkhazia and Sadz in Turkey.\nAbaza.\nAbaza has some 45,000 speakers, 35,000 in Russia and 10,000 in Turkey. It is a literary language, but nowhere official. It shares with Abkhaz the distinction of having just two phonemic vowels. Abaza is phonologically more complex than Abkhaz, and is characterised by large consonant clusters, similar to those that can be found in Georgian. There are two major dialects, Tapant and Ashkhar. Some are partially intelligible with Abkhaz.\nUbykh.\nUbykh forms a third branch, with parallels to both Adyghe and Abkhaz. The population switched to speaking Adyghe, and Ubykh became extinct on 7 October 1992, with the death of Tevfik Esen\u00e7. A dialectal division within Ubykh was suspected by Georges Dum\u00e9zil, but the divergent form he described in 1965 was never investigated further. With eighty-one consonants, Ubykh had perhaps the largest inventory in the world aside from the Kx'a and Tuu families of southern Africa with their extensive system of clicks. There are pharyngealised consonants and a four-way place contrast among sibilants. It was the only Northwest Caucasian language never to have a literary form.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72463", "revid": "40747662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72463", "title": "Agoli-agbo", "text": "Last King of Dahomey from 1894 to 1900\nAgoli-agbo was the twelfth and final King of Dahomey from 1894 to 1900.\nBiography.\nHe took the throne after the previous king, B\u00e9hanzin, went into exile after being defeated in the invasion of Dahomey by France in the Second Franco-Dahomean War.\nThe exile of B\u00e9hanzin did not legalize the French colonization. The French general Alfred-Am\u00e9d\u00e9e Dodds offered the throne to every one of the immediate royal family, in return for a signature on a treaty establishing a French protectorate over the Kingdom; all refused.\nFinally, on January 15, 1894, B\u00e9hanzin's Army Chief of Staff Prince Agoli-agbo (whose name meaning \"the dynasty has not fallen\"), brother of B\u00e9hanzin and son of King Gl\u00e9l\u00e9, signed. He was appointed to the throne, as a 'traditional chief' rather than head of state of a sovereign nation, by the French when he agreed to sign the instrument of surrender.\nHe 'reigned' for six years, assisted by a French Viceroy. The French prepared for direct administration, which they achieved on 12 February 1900. As the Indig\u00e9nat exacerbated the exploitation, Agoli-agbo went into exile in Gabon.\nIn 1910, he was allowed to return and to live in the Save Region. He occasionally returned to Abomey in order to perform ancestor worship for the departed kings.\nAgoli-agbo's symbols are a leg kicking a rock, a bow (a symbol of the return to traditional weapons under the new rules established by the colonial administrators), and a broom, and the last king of Dahomey.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72464", "revid": "3488865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72464", "title": "387 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 387 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Papirius, Fidenas, Mamercinus, Lanatus and Poplicola (or, less frequently, year 367 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 387 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n* Peace of Antalcidas (or \"the king's peace\") is brokered by Artaxerxes II. Under the Peace, all the Asiatic mainland and Cyprus remain under Persian control, Lemnos, Imbros, and Scyros remain Athenian dependencies, and all the other Greek states are to receive autonomy.By the King's Peace, the Persians become key players in Greek politics.\n* Under the threat of Spartan intervention, Thebes disbands its league, and Argos and Corinth end their shared government. Corinth is incorporated back into Sparta's Peloponnesian League.\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72465", "revid": "507787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72465", "title": "Tributary", "text": "Stream or river that flows into a main stem river or lake\nA tributary, or an affluent, is a stream or river that flows into a larger stream (\"main stem\" or \"parent\"), river, or a lake. A tributary does not flow directly into a sea or ocean. Tributaries, and the main stem river into which they flow, drain the surrounding drainage basin of its surface water and groundwater, leading the water out into an ocean, another river, or into an endorheic basin.\nThe Irtysh, a tributary of the Ob river, is the longest tributary river in the world with a length of .\nThe Madeira River is the largest tributary river by volume in the world with an average discharge of .\nA confluence, where two or more bodies of water meet, usually refers to the joining of tributaries.\nThe opposite to a tributary is a distributary, a river or stream that branches off from and flows away from the main stream. Distributaries are most often found in river deltas.\nTerminology.\n\"Right tributary\", or \"right-bank tributary\", and \"left tributary\", or \"left-bank tributary\", describe the orientation of the tributary relative to the flow of the main stem river. These terms are defined from the perspective of looking downstream, that is, facing the direction the water current of the main stem is going. In a navigational context, if one were floating on a raft or other vessel in the main stream, this would be the side the tributary enters from as one floats past; alternately, if one were floating down the tributary, the main stream meets it on the \"opposite\" bank of the tributary. This information may be used to avoid turbulent water by moving towards the opposite bank before approaching the confluence.\nAn \"early tributary\" is a tributary that joins the main stem river closer to its source than its mouth, that is, before the river's midpoint; a \"late tributary\" joins the main stem further downstream, closer to its mouth than to its source, that is, after the midpoint.\nForks.\nIn the United States, where tributaries sometimes have the same name as the river into which they feed, they are called forks. These are typically designated by compass direction. For example, the American River in California receives flow from its North, Middle, and South forks. The Chicago River's North Branch has the East, West, and Middle Fork; the South Branch has its South Fork, and used to have a West Fork as well (now filled in). Forks are sometimes designated as right or left. Here, the handedness is from the point of view of an observer facing upstream. For instance, Steer Creek has a left tributary which is called Right Fork Steer Creek.\nThese naming conventions are reflective of the circumstances of a particular river's identification and charting: people living along the banks of a river, with a name known to them, may then float down the river in exploration, and each tributary joining it as they pass by appears as a new river, to be given its own name, perhaps one already known to the people who live upon its banks. Conversely, explorers approaching a new land from the sea encounter its rivers at their mouths, where they name them on their charts, then, following a river upstream, encounter each tributary as a forking of the stream to the right and to the left, which then appear on their charts as such; or the streams are seen to diverge by the cardinal direction (north, south, east, or west) in which they proceed upstream, sometimes a third stream entering between two others is designated the \"middle\" fork; or the streams are distinguished by the relative height of one to the other, as one stream descending over a cataract into another becomes the \"upper\" fork, and the one it descends into, the \"lower\"; or by relative volume: the smaller stream designated the \"little\" fork, the larger either retaining its name unmodified, or receives the designation \"big\".\nOrdering and enumeration.\nTributaries are sometimes listed starting with those nearest to the source of the river and ending with those nearest to the mouth of the river. The Strahler stream order examines the arrangement of tributaries in a hierarchy of first, second, third and higher orders, with the first-order tributary being typically the least in size. For example, a second-order tributary would be the result of two or more first-order tributaries combining to form the second-order tributary.\nAnother method is to list tributaries from mouth to source, in the form of a tree structure, stored as a tree data structure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72466", "revid": "1248865885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72466", "title": "385 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 385 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Capitolinus, Cornelius, Capitolinus, Papirius, Capitolinus and Fidenas (or, less frequently, year 369 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 385 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nAstronomy.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72467", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72467", "title": "Distributary", "text": "Stream branching off from main stream channel\nA distributary, or a distributary channel is a stream channel that branches off and flows away from a main stream channel. It is the opposite of a \"tributary\", a stream that flows towards and into another stream or river. Distributaries are a result of river bifurcation and are often found where a river approaches a lake or an ocean and divides into distributary networks; as such they are a common feature of river deltas. They can also occur inland, on alluvial fans, or where a tributary stream bifurcates as it nears its confluence with a larger stream. In some cases, a minor distributary can divert so much water from the main channel that it can later become the main route.\nRelated terms.\nCommon terms to name individual river distributaries in English-speaking countries are \"arm\" and \"channel\". These terms may refer to a distributary that does not rejoin the channel from which it has branched (e.g., the North, Middle, and South Arms of the Fraser River, or the West Channel of the Mackenzie River), or to one that does (e.g. Annacis Channel and Annieville Channel of the Fraser River, separated by Annacis Island).\nIn Australia, the term \"anabranch\" is used to refer to a distributary that diverts from the main course of the river and rejoins it later. In North America such a branching river is called a \"braided river\".\nNorth America.\nIn Louisiana, the Atchafalaya River is an important distributary of the Mississippi River. Because the Atchafalaya takes a steeper route to the Gulf of Mexico than does the Mississippi, over several decades the Atchafalaya has captured more and more of the Mississippi's flow, after the Mississippi meandered into the Red River of the South. The Old River Control Structure, a dam which regulates the outflow from the Mississippi into the Atchafalaya, was completed by the Army Corps of Engineers in 1963. The dam is intended to prevent the Atchafalaya from capturing the main flow of the Mississippi and stranding the ports of Baton Rouge and New Orleans.\nIn British Columbia, Canada, the Fraser River has numerous sloughs and side-channels which may be defined as distributaries. This river's final stretch has three main distributaries: the North Arm and the South Arm, and a few smaller ones adjoining them.\nExamples of inland distributaries:\nSouth America.\nThe Casiquiare canal is an inland distributary of the upper Orinoco, which flows southward into the Rio Negro, forming a unique natural canal between the Orinoco and Amazon river systems. It is the largest river on the planet that links two major river systems.\nAsia.\nEastern Asia.\nThe Huai River in China splits into three streams. The main stream passes through the Sanhe Sluice, goes out of the Sanhe river, and enters the Yangtze River through Baoying Lake and Gaoyou Lake. On the east bank of Hongze Lake, another stream goes out of Gaoliangjian Gate and enters the Yellow Sea at the port of Bidan through Subei Guan'gai Zongqu, the main irrigation channel of Northern Jiangsu); its total length is 168 kilometers. The third stream leaves the Erhe lock on the northeast bank of Hongze Lake, passes the Huaishuhe River to the north of Lianyungang city, and flows into Haizhou Bay through the Hongkou.\nSoutheast Asia.\nThe Tha Chin River and Noi River are distributaries of the Chao Phraya River in Thailand, splitting off from the latter about 200 kilometers upstream from the Bay of Bangkok.\nThe Brantas River in East Java, Indonesia, branches off into two distributaries, Mas River, also known as Surabaya River, and Porong River.\nThe Hong River in Northern Vietnam has notable distributaries such as the Day River, Ninh Co River and the Luoc River. All of these rivers empty into the Gulf of Tonkin.\nSee History of the Nile Delta.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nA number of the rivers that flow inland from Australia's Great Dividing Range form distributaries, most of which flow only intermittently during times of high river levels and end in shallow lakes or simply peter out in the deserts. Yarriambiack Creek, which flows from the Wimmera River into Lake Coorong, and Tyrrell Creek, which flows from the Avoca River into Lake Tyrrell, are two distributaries in Victoria. The Narran River flows from the Balonne River in Queensland into Narran Lake in New South Wales.\nPapua New Guinea.\nMany of Papua New Guinea's major rivers flow into the Gulf of Papua through marshy, low-lying country, allowing for wide, many-branched deltas. These include the Fly River, which splits into three major and several minor rivers close to its mouth. The Bamu River splits into several channels close to its mouth, among them the \"Bebea\", \"Bina\", \"Dibiri\", and \"Aramia\". The Kikori River also splits into a multitude of channels as it crosses the plains close to the Gulf of Papua. The Purari River splits into three major channels as it approaches its mouth.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand's second-longest river, the Clutha River, splits into two arms, the \"Matau\" and the \"Koua\", some 10 kilometres from the South Island's Pacific Coast. A large island, Inch Clutha, lies between the two arms. Many of the rivers crossing the Canterbury Plains in the central South Island are braided rivers, and several of these split into separate branches before reaching the coast. Notable among these is the Rangitata River, the two arms of which are separated by the low-lying Rangitata Island.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72468", "revid": "36188177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72468", "title": "384 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 384 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Cornelius, Poplicola, Camillus, Rufus, Crassus and Capitolinus (or, less frequently, year 370 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 384 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nGreece.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72469", "revid": "45068091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72469", "title": "Aristoteles", "text": ""}
{"id": "72471", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72471", "title": "383 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 383 BC was of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Poplicola, Capitolinu, Rufus, Flavus, Mamercinus and Trebonius (or, less frequently, year 371 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 383 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72472", "revid": "1254514237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72472", "title": "382 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 382 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Crassus, Mugillanus, Cornelius, Fidenas, Camerinus and Mamercinus (or, less frequently, year 372 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 382 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72475", "revid": "23257138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72475", "title": "Wheel of Time, the", "text": ""}
{"id": "72476", "revid": "45072851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72476", "title": "Abomey", "text": "Abomey, or Agbome, is the capital of the Zou Department of Benin. The commune of Abomey covers an area of 142 square kilometres and, as of 2025, it has a population of 96,974 people.\nAbomey houses the Royal Palaces of Abomey, a collection of small traditional houses that were inhabited by the Kings of Dahomey from 1600 to 1900, and which were designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1985.\nHistory.\nAbomey was founded in the 17th century as the capital of the Kingdom of Dahomey (1600\u20131904), on the site of the former village of Kana. Traditional legends state that the town was founded by Do-Aklin, a son of the king of Allada who ventured north to found his own kingdom; the name is thought to come from Danhom\u00e9, also spelled Danxom\u00e9, meaning \"belly of Dan\", Dan being the original chief of the village.\nDahomey expanded rapidly in the 1700s, absorbing many of the surrounding kingdoms, and growing rich from the slave trade. In the late 18th century, Abomey was surrounded only by dry ditch which was crossed by bridges that were protected by a garrison. The royal palaces were fortified with a nearly square mudbrick wall that was 20 feet high. The flanks reached almost 1 mile as blockhouses were built on each wall. By the 1840s it had an estimated population of 24,000.\nAfter several attempts, the French conquered the kingdom on 16 November 1892, prompting King B\u00e9hanzin to torch the city and flee northward. Thereafter the town declined in importance, a process hastened when the French built the new administrative centre of Bohicon immediately to the east. Today, the city is of less importance, but is still popular with tourists and as a centre for crafts. Since 1985, Abomey has maintained its complex of royal palaces as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nThe Royal Palaces of Abomey.\nThe Royal Palaces of Abomey are a group of earthen structures built by the Fon people between the mid-17th and late 19th Centuries. One of the most famous and historically significant traditional sites in West Africa, the palaces form a UNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nDuring the reign of B\u00e9hanzin, the palaces covered some 44ha and it was surrounded by a 10 meter high wall reaching 4\u00a0km in length. Only 2 of the original 12 palace survived the 1892 burning by B\u00e9hanzin, Dahomey's last king. The French colonial administration rebuilt the town and connected it with the coast by a railroad.\nWhen UNESCO designated the royal palaces of Abomey as a World Heritage Site in 1985 it stated:\nFrom 1625 to 1900 twelve kings succeeded one another at the head of the powerful Kingdom of Abomey. With the exception of King Akaba, who used a separate enclosure, they each had their palaces built within the same cob-wall area, in keeping with previous palaces as regards the use of space and materials. The royal palaces of Abomey are a unique reminder of this vanished kingdom.\nFrom 1993, 50 of the 56 bas-reliefs that formerly decorated the walls of King Gl\u00e8l\u00e8 (now termed the \"Salle des Bijoux\") have been located and replaced on the rebuilt structure. The bas-reliefs carry an iconographic program expressing the history and power of the Fon people.\nThreats.\nAs reported by UNESCO, on 21 January 2009 the Royal Palaces of Abomey suffered from a fire \"which destroyed several buildings.\" The fire was the most recent disaster to have plagued the site, coming after a powerful tornado damaged the site in 1984.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72477", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72477", "title": "362 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 362 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ahala and Aventinensis (or, less frequently, year 392 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 362 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72478", "revid": "49993792", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72478", "title": "Marathi", "text": "Marathi may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "72479", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72479", "title": "359 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 359 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Laenas and Imperiosus (or, less frequently, year 395 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 359 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nMacedonia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72480", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72480", "title": "Annegret Richter", "text": "German athlete\nAnnegret Richter (born 13 October 1950) is a German (former West German) athlete and the 1976 Olympic 100\u00a0m champion.\nBiography.\nBorn Annegret Irrgang, she won her first international title at the 1971 European Championships, as a part of her country's 4 \u00d7 100\u00a0m relay team. The next year, at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, she finished 5th in the 100\u00a0m, in front of her home crowd. As she had married hurdler Manfred Richter, she now ran under that name. With the relay team, Richter ran a new world record, beating rivals East Germany for the gold medal.\nShe took the 60 meter title at the European Indoor Championships in 1973. After taking a bronze in 1971 and a silver in 1972 (over 50 meters).\nAt the 1974 European Championships in Rome she was again a member of the national 4 \u00d7 100\u00a0m relay team, this time winning the silver medal. She was fourth in the 100 metre final.\nBefore the 1976 Summer Olympics, everybody's attention was not directed at Richter, but at fellow Dortmunder Inge Helten, who had set a new world record of 11.04 just prior to the Games. Richter beat the defending champion Renate Stecher of East Germany in the first round, and ran 11.05 in the second round and set a world record of 11.01 in the semifinals. In the final, Richter, Stecher and Helten finished within one metre of each other, with Richter winning the gold and vanquishing Stecher. Three days later she won a silver medal in the 200\u00a0m and another one in the 4 \u00d7 100\u00a0m relay, being beaten by East Germany this time.\nRichter ran the 3rd leg of the winning relay squad at the first World Cup of Track and Field in 1977, she had the second fastest time of the year for the 100 meters of 11.03. She would finish 3rd in the 100 meters and 4th in the 200 meters at the second World Cup in 1979, again running the 3rd leg of the victorious European relay squad, and retired after the boycott of the 1980 Moscow games. During her career she won 28 national titles. Her daughter Daniela and son Marcus also competed in athletics, at the national level.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72481", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72481", "title": "356 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 356 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ambustus and Laenas (or, less frequently, year 398 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 356 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72482", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72482", "title": "Annegret Irrgang", "text": ""}
{"id": "72483", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72483", "title": "Philip of Macedon (disambiguation)", "text": "Philip was the name of several Macedonian monarchs:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "72484", "revid": "47947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72484", "title": "Alexandretta, Syria", "text": ""}
{"id": "72486", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72486", "title": "Kingdom of Dahomey", "text": ""}
{"id": "72487", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72487", "title": "Nonprofit organization", "text": "Organization operated for a collective benefit\nA nonprofit organization (NPO), also known as a nonbusiness entity, nonprofit institution, not-for-profit organization (NFPO), or simply a nonprofit, is a non-governmental legal entity that operates for a collective, public, or social benefit, rather than to generate profit for private owners. Nonprofit organisations are subject to a non-distribution constraint, meaning that any revenue exceeding expenses must be used to further the organization\u2019s purpose. Depending on local laws, nonprofits may include charities, political organizations, schools, hospitals, business associations, churches, foundations, social clubs, and cooperatives. Some nonprofit entities obtain tax-exempt status and may also qualify to receive tax-deductible contributions; however, an organization can still be a nonprofit without having tax exemption. \nKey aspects of nonprofit organisations are their ability to fulfill their mission with respect to accountability, integrity, trustworthiness, honesty, and openness to every person who has invested time, money, and faith into the organization. Nonprofit organizations are accountable to the donors, founders, volunteers, program recipients, and the public community. Theoretically, for a nonprofit that seeks to finance its operations through donations, public confidence is a factor in the amount of money that a nonprofit organization is able to raise. Presumably, the more a nonprofit focuses on their mission, the more public confidence they will gain. This may result in more money for the organization.\nFundraising.\nNonprofit organizations are not driven by generating profit, but they must bring in enough income to pursue their social goals. Nonprofits are able to raise money in different ways. This includes income from donations from individual donors or foundations, sponsorship from corporations, government funding, programs, services, merchandise sales, and investments. With an increase in NPOs since 2010, some organizations have adopted competitive advantages to create revenue for themselves to remain financially stable. Donations from private individuals or organizations can change each year and government grants have diminished. With changes in funding from year to year, many nonprofit organizations have been moving toward increasing the diversity of their funding sources. For example, many nonprofits that have relied on government grants have started fundraising efforts to appeal to individual donors.\nManagement.\nMost nonprofits have staff that work for the organization, possibly using volunteers to perform the nonprofit's services under the direction of the paid staff. Nonprofits must be careful to balance the salaries paid to staff against the money paid to provide services to the nonprofit's beneficiaries. Organizations whose salary expenses are too high relative to their program expenses may face regulatory scrutiny.\nSome have the misconception that nonprofit organizations may not make a profit. Although the goal of nonprofits is not specifically to maximize profits, they still have to operate as a fiscally responsible business. They must manage their income (grants, donations, and income from services) and expenses so as to remain a fiscally viable entity. Nonprofits have the responsibility of focusing on being professional and financially responsible, replacing self-interest and profit motive with mission motive.\nThough nonprofits are managed differently from for-profit businesses, they have felt pressure to be more businesslike. To combat private and public business growth in the public service industry, some nonprofits have modeled their business management and mission, shifting their reason of existing to establish sustainability and growth.\nSetting effective missions is a key for the successful management of nonprofit organizations. There are three important conditions for effective mission: opportunity, competence, and commitment.\nOne way of managing the sustainability of nonprofit organizations is to establish strong relations with donor groups. This requires a donor marketing strategy, something many nonprofits lack. Nonprofit organizations need to motivate staff, maintain and communicate a vision, set a strategic direction, manage change effectively, and provide a safe working environment for employees, volunteers, and visitors. These issues are comparable to those affecting a commercial business but factors which place a nonprofit organization at risk have been identified such as lack of direction or clear purpose, over-centralized management and decision-making, and lack of engagement with staff.\nFunctions.\nSome nonprofit organizations provide public goods that are undersupplied by government. NPOs have a wide diversity of structures and purposes. For legal classification, there are, nevertheless, some elements of importance:\nSome of the above must be (in most jurisdictions in the US at least) expressed in the organization's charter of establishment or constitution. Others may be provided by the supervising authority at each particular jurisdiction.\nWhile affiliations will not affect a legal status, they may be taken into consideration by legal proceedings as an indication of purpose. Most countries have laws that regulate the establishment and management of NPOs and that require compliance with corporate governance regimes. Most larger organizations are required to publish their financial reports detailing their income and expenditure publicly.\nIn many aspects, they are similar to corporate business entities though there are often significant differences. Both non-profit and for-profit corporate entities must have board members or trustees who owe the organization a fiduciary duty of loyalty and trust. A notable exception to this involves churches, which are often not required to disclose finances to anyone, including church members.\nFormation and structure.\nIn the United States, nonprofit organizations are formed by filing bylaws, articles of incorporation, or both in the state in which they expect to operate. The act of incorporation creates a legal entity enabling the organization to be treated as a distinct body (corporation) by law and to enter into business dealings, form contracts, and own property as individuals or for-profit corporations can.\nThere is an important distinction in the US between non-profit and not-for-profit organizations (NFPOs); while an NFPO does not profit its owners, and money goes into running the organization, it is not required to operate for the public good. An example is a sports club, whose purpose is its members' enjoyment. The names used and precise regulations vary from one jurisdiction to another. Nonprofits can have members, but many do not. The nonprofit may also be a trust or association of members. The organization may be controlled by its members who elect the board of directors, board of governors, or board of trustees. A nonprofit may have a delegate structure to allow for the representation of groups or corporations as members. Alternatively, it may be a non-membership organization and the board of directors may elect its own successors.\nThe two major types of nonprofit organizations are membership and board-only. A membership organization elects the board and has regular meetings and the power to amend the bylaws. A board-only organization typically has a self-selected board and a membership whose powers are limited to those delegated to it by the board. A board-only organization's bylaws may even state that the organization does not have any membership, although the organization's literature may refer to its donors or service recipients as 'members'. Examples of such organizations are FairVote and the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws. The Model Nonprofit Corporation Act imposes many complexities and requirements on membership decision-making. Accordingly, many organizations, such as the Wikimedia Foundation, have formed board-only structures. The National Association of Parliamentarians has generated concerns about the implications of this trend for the future of openness, accountability, and understanding of public concerns in nonprofit organizations. Specifically, they note that nonprofit organizations, unlike business corporations, are not subject to market discipline for products and shareholder discipline of their capital; therefore, without membership control of major decisions such as the election of the board, there are few inherent safeguards against abuse. A rebuttal to this might be that as nonprofit organizations grow and seek larger donations, the degree of scrutiny increases, including expectations of audited financial statements. A further rebuttal might be that NPOs are constrained, by their choice of legal structure, from financial benefit as far as distribution of profit to members and directors is concerned.\nTax exemption.\nIn many countries, nonprofits may apply for tax-exempt status so that the organization itself may be exempt from income tax and other taxes.\nIn the United States, to be exempt from federal income taxes, the organization must meet the requirements set forth in the Internal Revenue Code (IRC). Granting nonprofit status is done by the state, while granting tax-exempt designation (such as IRC 501(c)) is granted by the federal government via the IRS. This means that not all nonprofits are eligible to be tax-exempt. For example, employees of non-profit organizations pay taxes from their salaries, which they receive according to the laws of the country. NPOs use the model of a double bottom line in that furthering their cause is more important than making a profit, though both are needed to ensure the organization's sustainability.\nAn advantage of nonprofits registered in the UK is that they benefit from some reliefs and exemptions. Charities and nonprofits are exempt from Corporation Tax as well as the trustees being exempt from Income Tax. There may also be tax relief available for charitable giving, via Gift Aid, monetary donations, and legacies.\nIn United States.\nAccording to the National Center for Charitable Statistics (NCCS), there are more than 1.5 million nonprofit organizations registered in the United States, including public charities, private foundations, and other nonprofit organizations. According to the Giving USA 2025 report, which details philanthropic data from 2024, charitable giving in the United States reached an estimated $557.08 billion. In addition to financial support, volunteering remains a cornerstone of the sector. A 2025 report from AmeriCorps found that 56.7 million adults formally volunteered with an organization, contributing an estimated $145 billion in economic value to their communities.\nIn the United States, both nonprofit organizations and not-for-profit organizations may be tax-exempt. There are various types of nonprofit exemptions, such as 501(c)(3) organizations that are a religious, charitable, or educational-based organization that does not influence state and federal legislation, and 501(c)(7) organizations that are for pleasure, recreation, or another nonprofit purpose.\nThere is an important distinction in the US between non-profit and not-for-profit organizations (NFPOs). While an NFPO does not profit its owners, and money goes into running the organization, it is not required to operate for the public good. An example is a club whose purpose is its members' enjoyment. Other examples of NFPOs include credit unions, sports clubs, and advocacy groups. Nonprofit organizations provide services to the community such as aid and development programs, medical research, education, and health services. Some nonprofits are both member-serving and community-serving. Examples of these are homeowners associations, the American Red Cross, and Habitat for Humanity. These types of organizations serve their members specifically but also serve their communities with broader services and programs.\nOnline presence.\nIn 2020, some nonprofit organizations began using microvlogging (brief videos with short text formats) on TikTok to reach Gen Z, engage with community stakeholders, and overall build community. TikTok allowed for innovative engagement between nonprofit organizations and younger generations. During COVID-19, TikTok was specifically used to connect rather than inform or fundraise, as its fast-paced, tailored For You page separates itself from other social media apps such as Facebook and X (formerly known as Twitter).\nAlternative names.\nSome organizations offer new, positive-sounding alternative terminology to describe the sector. The term \"civil society organization\" (CSO) has been used by a growing number of organizations, including the \"Center for the Study of Global Governance\". The term \"citizen sector organization\" (CSO) has also been advocated to describe the sector\u00a0\u2013 as one of citizens, for citizens\u00a0\u2013 by organizations including . Advocates argue that these terms describe the sector in its own terms, without relying on terminology used for the government or business sectors. However, use of terminology by a nonprofit of self-descriptive language that is not legally compliant risks confusing the public about nonprofit abilities, capabilities, and limitations.\nCriticism.\nFounder's syndrome.\nFounder's syndrome is an issue some organizations experience as they expand. Dynamic founders, who have a strong vision of how to operate the project, try to retain control of the organization, even as new employees or volunteers want to expand the project's scope or change policy.\nFinancial mismanagement.\nFinancial mismanagement is a particular problem with NPOs because the employees are not accountable to anyone who has a direct stake in the organization. For example, an employee may start a new program without disclosing its complete liabilities. The employee may be rewarded for improving the NPO's reputation, making other employees happy, and attracting new donors. Liabilities promised on the full faith and credit of the organization but not recorded anywhere constitute accounting fraud. But even indirect liabilities negatively affect the financial sustainability of the NPO, and the NPO will have financial problems unless strict controls are instated. Some commenters have argued that the receipt of significant funding from large for-profit corporations can ultimately alter the NPO's functions. A frequent measure of an NPO's efficiency is its expense ratio (i.e. expenditures on things other than its programs, divided by its total expenditures). Tax exempt status of NPOs can result in some cases, such as mismanagement, in negative value for society.\nLower wages.\nThere have been times of major labor shortages in the nonprofit sector, particularly for management positions. While many established NPOs are well-funded and comparative to their public sector competitors, many more are independent and must be creative with which incentives they use to attract and maintain people. The initial interest for many is the remuneration package, though many who have been questioned after leaving an NPO have reported that it was stressful work environments and the workload.\nPublic- and private-sector employment have, for the most part, been able to offer more to their employees than most nonprofit agencies throughout history. Either in the form of higher wages, more comprehensive benefit packages, or less tedious work, the public and private sectors have enjoyed an advantage over NPOs in attracting employees. Traditionally, the NPO has attracted mission-driven individuals who want to assist their chosen cause. Compounding the issue is that some NPOs do not operate in a manner similar to most businesses, or they operate only on a seasonal basis. This leads many young and driven employees to forego NPOs in favor of more stable employment. Today, however, nonprofit organizations are adopting methods used by their competitors and finding new means to retain their employees and attract the best of the newly minted workforce.\nSome believe that most nonprofits will never be able to match the pay of the private sector and therefore should focus their attention on benefits packages, incentives, and implementing pleasurable work environments. For some, a good environment is more important than salary and pressure of work. Other incentives that could be implemented are generous vacation allowances or flexible work hours.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72489", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72489", "title": "Electron energy loss spectroscopy", "text": "Form of microscopy using an electron beam\nElectron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) is a form of electron microscopy in which a material is exposed to a beam of electrons with a known, narrow range of kinetic energies. Some of the electrons will undergo inelastic scattering, which means that they lose energy and have their paths slightly and randomly deflected. The amount of energy loss can be measured via an electron spectrometer and interpreted in terms of what caused the energy loss. Inelastic interactions include phonon excitations, inter- and intra-band transitions, plasmon excitations, inner shell ionizations, and Cherenkov radiation. The inner-shell ionizations are particularly useful for detecting the elemental components of a material. For example, one might find that a larger-than-expected number of electrons comes through the material with 285\u00a0eV less energy than they had when they entered the material. This is approximately the amount of energy needed to remove an inner-shell electron from a carbon atom, which can be taken as evidence that there is a significant amount of carbon present in the sample. With some care, and looking at a wide range of energy losses, one can determine the types of atoms, and the numbers of atoms of each type, being struck by the beam. The scattering angle (that is, the amount that the electron's path is deflected) can also be measured, giving information about the dispersion relation of whatever material excitation caused the inelastic scattering.\nHistory.\nThe technique was developed by James Hillier and RF Baker in the mid-1940s but was not widely used over the next 50 years, only becoming more widespread in research in the 1990s due to advances in microscope instrumentation and vacuum technology. With modern instrumentation becoming widely available in laboratories worldwide, the technical and scientific developments from the mid-1990s have been rapid. The technique is able to take advantage of modern aberration-corrected probe forming systems to attain chemical resolved images with atomic resolution, while with a monochromated electron source and/or careful deconvolution the energy resolution can reach units of meV. This has enabled detailed measurements of the atomic and electronic properties of single columns of atoms, and in a few cases, of single atoms.\nComparison with EDX.\nEELS is spoken of as being complementary to energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (variously called EDX, EDS, XEDS, etc.), which is another common spectroscopy technique available on many electron microscopes. EDX excels at identifying the atomic composition of a material, is quite easy to use, and is particularly sensitive to heavier elements. EELS has historically been a more difficult technique but is in principle capable of measuring atomic composition, chemical bonding, valence and conduction band electronic properties, surface properties, and element-specific pair distance distribution functions. EELS tends to work best at relatively low atomic numbers, where the excitation edges tend to be sharp, well-defined, and at experimentally accessible energy losses (the signal being very weak beyond about 3 keV energy loss). EELS is perhaps best developed for the elements ranging from carbon through the 3d transition metals (from scandium to zinc). For carbon, an experienced spectroscopist can tell at a glance the differences between diamond, graphite, amorphous carbon, and \"mineral\" carbon (such as the carbon appearing in carbonates). The spectra of 3d transition metals can be analyzed to identify the oxidation states of the atoms. Cu(I), for instance, has a different so-called \"white-line\" intensity ratio than Cu(II) does. This ability to \"fingerprint\" different forms of the same element is a strong advantage of EELS over EDX. The difference is mainly due to the difference in energy resolution between the two techniques (~1 eV or better for EELS, perhaps a few tens of eV for EDX).\nVariants.\nThere are several basic flavors of EELS, primarily classified by the geometry and by the kinetic energy of the incident electrons (typically measured in kiloelectron-volts, or keV). Probably the most common today is transmission EELS, in which the kinetic energies are typically 100 to 300 keV and the incident electrons pass entirely through the material sample. Usually this occurs in a transmission electron microscope (TEM), although some dedicated systems exist which enable extreme resolution in terms of energy and momentum transfer at the expense of spatial resolution.\nOther flavors include reflection EELS (including reflection high-energy electron energy-loss spectroscopy (RHEELS)), typically at 10 to 30 keV, and aloof EELS (sometimes called near-field EELS), in which the electron beam does not in fact strike the sample but instead interacts with it via the long-ranged Coulomb interaction. Aloof EELS is particularly sensitive to surface properties but is limited to very small energy losses such as those associated with surface plasmons or direct interband transitions.\nWithin transmission EELS, the technique is further subdivided into valence EELS (which measures plasmons and interband transitions) and inner-shell ionization EELS (which provides much the same information as x-ray absorption spectroscopy, but from much smaller volumes of material). The dividing line between the two, while somewhat ill-defined, is in the vicinity of 50 eV energy loss.\nInstrumental developments have opened up the ultra-low energy loss part of the EELS spectrum, enabling vibrational spectroscopy in the TEM. Both IR-active and non-IR-active vibrational modes are present in EELS. In 2025, ultra-low energy loss STEM-EELS was used to directly observe magnons propagating inside antiferromagnetic nanocrystals with nanometer spatial and millielectronvolt energy resolution, marking a new application of EELS to spin-wave excitations.\nEEL spectrum.\nThe electron energy loss (EEL) spectrum (EELS spectrum is redundant) can be roughly split into two different regions: the low-loss spectrum (up until about 50 eV in energy loss) and the high-loss spectrum. The low-loss spectrum contains the zero-loss peak (signal from all the electrons which did not lose measurable energy) as well as the phonon and plasmon peaks, and contains information about the band structure and dielectric properties of the sample. It is also possible to resolve the energy spectrum in momentum to directly measure the band structure. The high-loss spectrum contains the ionisation edges that arise due to inner shell ionisations in the sample. These are characteristic to the species present in the sample, and as such can be used to obtain accurate information about the chemistry of a sample.\nTypically, EEL spectra are susceptible to noise, especially for measurements of beam sensitive materials, such as polymers or biological specimen, requiring limited acquisition times. The two major noise contributions are Poisson noise arising from the quantized nature of the beam electrons and Gaussian distributed detector noise. As EEL spectra are usually measured on CCD or direct electron detectors, where multiple pixels of a pixel-column are summed to create a spectrum out of a 2D pixel array, the noise statistics of such spectra is altered compared to regular 2D images. Due to the image formation process, especially on scintillation-based CCD detectors, the Poisson noise is also heavily correlated by the detector.\nDue to the energy distribution of the electron gun, typically a Schottky-type or cold field emission gun, and the point spread function of the detector, all measurements conducted in EELS appear convolved with both of the above-mentioned distributions. Without a specimen in the beam path, these blur contributions can be measured in EELS as the vacuum zero-loss peak. Since all features in an EEL spectrum of a specimen are measured with this vacuum zero-loss peak, its distribution is also observable in all features of the spectrum, limiting the energy resolution. Therefore, deconvolution has become a standard post-processing procedure in order to reduce the effect and sharpen the spectrum. Typical techniqes employed in EELS are the Fourier-ratio method and the Richardson-Lucy deconvolution algorithm (RLA), wherein the vacuum zero-loss peak serves as the deconvolution kernel. However, the success of deconvolution is limited by the noise of the spectrum, the signal strength, and the width of the vacuum zero-loss peak. Since convolution attenuates the higher frequency components of the spectrum, it is not trivial to recover these in view of a noise background induced by the different noise contributions. The Nyquist-Shannon theorem states that features can only be fully resolved if the sampling rate is at least twice the highest contributing frequency. Therefore, losing these higher frequency components of the original underlying loss-spectrum, due to noise, corresponds to a loss of finer features in the reconstruction. It is hence essential to include a suitable noise statistic into the deconvolution algorithm to recover as many higher frequencies as possible. Since the RLA is derived from the pure Poisson statistics, which only covers part of the real noise statistics faced in EELS, and is doomed to diverge after an unspecified number of iterations, it is apparent that more recent deconvolution methods accounting for this have an edge over the older procedures in terms of accuracy of the reconstruction.\nThickness measurements.\nEELS allows quick and reliable measurement of local thickness in transmission electron microscopy. The most efficient procedure is the following:\nThe spatial resolution of this procedure is limited by the plasmon localization and is about 1\u00a0nm, meaning that spatial thickness maps can be measured in scanning transmission electron microscopy with ~1\u00a0nm resolution.\nPressure measurements.\nThe intensity and position of low-energy EELS peaks are affected by pressure. This fact allows mapping local pressure with ~1\u00a0nm spatial resolution.\nUse in confocal geometry.\nScanning confocal electron energy loss microscopy (SCEELM) is a new analytical microscopy tool that enables a double corrected transmission electron microscope to achieve sub-10\u00a0nm depth resolution in depth sectioning imaging of nanomaterials. It was previously termed as energy filtered scanning confocal electron microscopy due to the lack to full spectrum acquisition capability (only a small energy window on the order of 5 eV can be used at a time). SCEELM takes advantages of the newly developed chromatic aberration corrector which allows electrons of more than 100 eV of energy spread to be focused to roughly the same focal plane. It has been demonstrated that a simultaneous acquisition of the zero loss, low-loss, and core loss signals up to 400 eV in the confocal geometry with depth discrimination capability.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72490", "revid": "39471746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72490", "title": "312 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 312 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Corvus and Mus (or, less frequently, year 442 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 312 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nItaly.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72491", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72491", "title": "310 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 310 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Rullianus and Censorinus (or, less frequently, year 444 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 310 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nIllyria.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72492", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72492", "title": "307 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 307 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caecus and Violens (or, less frequently, year 447 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 307 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nPhilosophy.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72494", "revid": "30861941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72494", "title": "303 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 303 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Aventinensis (or, less frequently, year 451 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 303 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72495", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72495", "title": "Alexander Alekhine", "text": "Russian-French chess player (1892\u20131946)\nAlexander Aleksandrovich Alekhine (October\u00a031\u00a0[O.S. October 19]\u00a01892\u00a0\u2013 March 24, 1946) was a Russian and French chess player and the fourth World Chess Champion, a title he held for two reigns.\nBy the age of 22, Alekhine was already among the strongest chess players in the world. During the 1920s, he won most of the tournaments in which he played. In 1921, Alekhine left Soviet Russia and emigrated to France, which he represented after 1925. In 1927, he became the fourth World Chess Champion by defeating Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca.\nIn the early 1930s, Alekhine dominated tournament play and won two top-class tournaments by large margins. He also played first board for France in five Chess Olympiads, winning individual prizes in each (four medals and a brilliancy prize). Alekhine offered Capablanca a rematch on the same demanding terms that Capablanca had set for him, and negotiations dragged on for years without making much progress. Meanwhile, Alekhine defended his title with ease against Efim Bogoljubov in 1929 and 1934. He was defeated by Max Euwe in 1935, but regained his crown in the 1937 rematch. His tournament record, however, was uneven, and rising young stars like Paul Keres, Reuben Fine, and Mikhail Botvinnik threatened his title. Negotiations for a title match with Keres or Botvinnik were halted by the outbreak of World War II in Europe in 1939. Negotiations with Botvinnik for a world title match were proceeding in 1946 when Alekhine died in Portugal, in unclear circumstances. Alekhine is the only World Chess Champion to have died while holding the title.\nAlekhine is known for his fierce and imaginative attacking style, combined with great positional and endgame skill. He is highly regarded as a chess writer and theoretician, having produced innovations in a wide range of chess openings and having given his name to Alekhine's Defence and several other opening variations. He also composed some endgame studies.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nAlekhine was born into a wealthy Russian family in Moscow, Russia, on October 31, 1892. His father, Alexander Ivanovich Alekhin, was a landowner and Privy Councilor to the conservative legislative Fourth Duma. His mother, Anisya Ivanovna Alekhina (born Prokhorova), was the daughter of a rich industrialist. Alekhine was introduced to chess by his mother, his older brother Alexei, and his older sister Varvara.\nEarly chess career (1902\u20131914).\nAlekhine's first known game was from a correspondence chess tournament that began on December 3, 1902, when he was ten years old. He participated in several correspondence tournaments, sponsored by the chess magazine \"Shakhmatnoe Obozrenie\" (\"Chess Review\"), between 1902 and 1911. In 1907, he played his first over-the-board tournament, the Moscow chess club's Spring Tournament. Later that year, he tied for 11th\u201313th in the club's Autumn Tournament; his elder brother, Alexei, tied for 4th\u20136th place. In 1908, Alexander won the club's Spring Tournament, at the age of 15. In 1909, he won the All-Russian Amateur Tournament in Saint Petersburg. For the next few years, he played in increasingly stronger tournaments, some of them outside Russia. At first he had mixed results, but by the age of 16 he had established himself as one of Russia's top players. He played first board in two friendly team matches: St. Petersburg Chess Club vs. Moscow Chess Club in 1911 and Moscow vs. St. Petersburg in 1912 (both drew with Yevgeny Znosko-Borovsky). By the end of 1911, Alekhine moved to St. Petersburg, where he entered the Imperial Law School for Nobles. By 1912, he was the strongest chess player in the St. Petersburg Chess Society. In March 1912, he won the St. Petersburg Chess Club Winter Tournament. In April 1912, he won the 1st Category Tournament of the St. Petersburg Chess Club. In January 1914, Alekhine won his first major Russian tournament, when he tied for first place with Aron Nimzowitsch in the All-Russian Masters Tournament at St. Petersburg. Afterwards, they drew in a mini-match for first prize (each won a game). Alekhine also played several matches in this period, and his results showed the same pattern: mixed at first but later consistently good.\nTop-level grandmaster (1914\u20131927).\nIn April\u2013May 1914, another major St. Petersburg 1914 chess tournament was held in the capital of the Russian Empire, in which Alekhine took third place behind Emanuel Lasker and Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca. By some accounts, Tsar Nicholas II conferred the title of \"Grandmaster of Chess\" on each of the five finalists (Lasker, Capablanca, Alekhine, Siegbert Tarrasch, and Frank Marshall). (Chess historian Edward Winter has questioned this, stating that the earliest known sources supporting this story are an article by Robert Lewis Taylor in the June 15, 1940, issue of \"The New Yorker\" and Marshall's autobiography \"My 50 Years of Chess\" (1942).) Alekhine's surprising success made him a serious contender for the World Chess Championship. Whether or not the title was formally awarded to him, \"Thanks to this performance, Alekhine became a grandmaster in his own right and in the eyes of the audience.\" In July 1914, Alekhine tied for first with Marshall in Paris.\nWorld War I and post-revolutionary Russia.\nIn July\u2013August 1914, Alekhine was leading an international Mannheim tournament, the 19th DSB Congress (German Chess Federation Congress) in Mannheim, Germany, with nine wins, one draw and one loss, when World War I broke out. Alekhine's prize was 1,100 marks (worth about 11,000 euros in terms of purchasing power today). After the declaration of war against Russia, eleven \"Russian\" players (Alekhine, Efim Bogoljubov, Fedor Bogatyrchuk, Alexander Flamberg, N. Koppelman, Boris Maliutin, Ilya Rabinovich, Peter Romanovsky, Pyotr Saburov, Alexey Selezniev, and Samuil Weinstein) were interned in Rastatt, Germany. On September 14, 17, and 29 of 1914, four of them (Alekhine, Bogatyrchuk, Saburov, and Koppelman) were freed and allowed to return home. Alekhine made his way back to Russia (via Switzerland, Italy, London, Sweden, and Finland) by the end of October 1914. A fifth player, Romanovsky, was released in 1915, and a sixth, Flamberg, was allowed to return to Warsaw in 1916.\nWhen Alekhine returned to Russia, he helped raise money by giving simultaneous exhibitions to aid the Russian chess players who remained interned in Germany. In December 1915, he won the Moscow Chess Club Championship. In April 1916, he won a mini-match against Alexander Evensohn with two wins and one loss at Kiev, and in summer he served in the Union of Cities (Red Cross) on the Austrian front. In September, he played five people in a blindfold display at a Russian military hospital at Tarnopol. In 1918, he won a \"triangular tournament\" in Moscow. In June of the following year, after the Russians forced the German army to retreat from Ukraine, Alekhine was charged with links with White movement counter-intelligence and was briefly imprisoned in Odessa's death cell by the Odessa Cheka. Rumors appeared in the West that he had been killed by the Bolsheviks.\n1920\u20131927.\nWhen conditions in Russia became more settled, Alekhine proved he was among Russia's strongest players. In January 1920, he swept the championship of Moscow (11/11), but was not declared champion because he was not a resident of the city. In October 1920 he won the All-Russian Chess Olympiad in Moscow (+9\u22120=6); the tournament was retroactively called the first USSR Championship. His brother Alexei took third place in the tournament for amateurs.\nIn March 1920, Alekhine married Alexandra Batayeva. They divorced the next year. For a short time in 1920\u201321, he worked as an interpreter for the Communist International (Comintern) and was appointed secretary to the Education Department. In this capacity, he met a Swiss journalist and Comintern delegate, Annelise R\u00fcegg, who was thirteen years his senior, and they married on March 15, 1921. Shortly after getting married, Alekhine was given permission to leave Russia for a visit to the West with his wife, from whom he separated in June 1921. He would never return to Russia, and made France his base for much of the following twenty years.\nIn 1921\u20131923, Alekhine played seven mini-matches. In 1921, he won against Nikolay Grigoriev (+2\u22120=5) in Moscow, drew with Richard Teichmann (+2\u22122=2) and won against Friedrich S\u00e4misch (+2\u22120=0), both in Berlin. In 1922, he won against Ossip Bernstein (+1\u22120=1) and Arnold Aurbach (+1\u22120=1), both in Paris, and Manuel Golmayo (+1\u22120=1) in Madrid. In 1923, he won against Andr\u00e9 Muffang (+2\u22120=0) in Paris.\nFrom 1921 to 1927, Alekhine won or shared first prize in about two-thirds of the many tournaments in which he played. His \"least\" successful efforts were a tie for third place at Vienna 1922 behind Akiba Rubinstein and Richard R\u00e9ti, and third place at the New York 1924 chess tournament, behind ex-champion Emanuel Lasker and world champion Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca (but ahead of Frank Marshall, Richard R\u00e9ti, G\u00e9za Mar\u00f3czy, Efim Bogoljubov, Savielly Tartakower, Frederick Yates, Edward Lasker, and Dawid Janowski). Technically, Alekhine's play was mostly better than his competitors'\u2014even Capablanca's\u2014but he lacked confidence when playing his major rivals.\nAlekhine's main goal throughout this period was to arrange a match with Capablanca. He thought the greatest obstacle was not Capablanca's play but the requirement under the 1922 \"London rules\" (at Capablanca's insistence) that the challenger raise a purse of US$10,000 (~$162,000 in 2022 terms), of which the defending champion would receive over half even if defeated. Alekhine in November 1921, and Rubinstein and Nimzowitsch in 1923, challenged Capablanca but were unable to raise the $10,000. Raising the money was Alekhine's preliminary objective; he even went on tour, playing simultaneous exhibitions for modest fees day after day. In New York on April 27, 1924, he broke the world record for simultaneous blindfold play when he played twenty-six opponents (the previous record was twenty-five, set by Gyula Breyer), winning sixteen games, losing five, and drawing five after twelve hours of play. He broke his own world record on February 1, 1925, by playing twenty-eight games blindfold simultaneously in Paris, winning twenty-two, drawing three, and losing three.\nIn 1924, he applied for the first time for a residence privilege in France and for French citizenship while pursuing his studies in the Sorbonne Faculty of Law to obtain a PhD. There is no record that he completed his studies there, but he was known as \"Dr. Alekhine\" in the 1930s.\nHis French citizenship application was postponed because of his frequent travels abroad to play chess and because he was reported once in April 1922, shortly after his arrival in France, as a \"bolshevist charged by the Soviets of a special mission in France\". Later in 1927, the French Chess Federation asked the Ministry of Justice to intervene in Alekhine's favor to have him lead the French team in the first Nation tournament to be held in London in July 1927. Nevertheless, Alekhine had to wait for a new law on naturalization which was published on 10 August 1927. The decree granting him French nationality (among hundreds of other applicants) was signed on 5 November 1927 and published in the Official Gazette of the French Republic on 14\u201315 November 1927, while Alekhine was playing Capablanca for the World title in Buenos Aires.\nIn October 1926, Alekhine won in Buenos Aires. In December 1926 / January 1927, he defeated Max Euwe 5\u00bd\u20134\u00bd in a training match in the Netherlands. In 1927, he married his third wife, Nadiezda Vasiliev (n\u00e9e Fabritzky), another older woman, the widow of the Russian general V. Vasiliev.\nWorld Chess Champion, first reign (1927\u20131935).\n1927 title match.\nIn 1927, Alekhine's challenge to Capablanca was backed by a group of Argentine businessmen and the president of Argentina, who guaranteed the funds, and organized by the Club Argentino de Ajedrez (Argentine Chess Club) in Buenos Aires. In the World Chess Championship match played from September 16 to November 29, 1927 at Buenos Aires, Alekhine won the title, scoring +6\u22123=25. This was the longest formal World Championship match until the contest in 1984 between Anatoly Karpov and Garry Kasparov. Alekhine's victory surprised almost the entire chess world, since he had never previously won a single game from Capablanca. After Capablanca's death Alekhine expressed surprise at his own victory, since in 1927 he did not think he was superior to Capablanca, and he suggested that Capablanca had been overconfident. Capablanca entered the match with no technical or physical preparation, while Alekhine got himself into good physical condition and had thoroughly studied Capablanca's play. According to Kasparov, Alekhine's research uncovered many small inaccuracies, which occurred because Capablanca was unwilling to concentrate intensely. Vladimir Kramnik has commented that this was the first contest in which Capablanca had no easy wins.\nRematch offered, never finalized.\nImmediately after winning the match, Alekhine announced that he was willing to give Capablanca a return match, on the same terms that Capablanca had required as champion: the challenger must provide a stake of US$10,000, of which more than half would go to the defending champion even if he was defeated. Negotiations dragged on for several years, often breaking down when agreement seemed in sight. Their relationship became bitter, and Alekhine demanded much higher appearance fees for tournaments in which Capablanca also played. The rematch never took place. After Capablanca's death in 1942, Alekhine wrote that Capablanca's demand for a $10,000 stake had been an attempt to avoid challenges.\nDefeats Bogoljubov twice in title matches.\nAlthough he never agreed terms for a rematch against Capablanca, Alekhine played two world title matches with Efim Bogoljubov, in 1929 and 1934, winning handily both times. The first was held at Wiesbaden, Heidelberg, Berlin, The Hague, and Amsterdam from September through November 1929. Alekhine retained his title, scoring +11\u22125=9. From April to June 1934, Alekhine faced Bogoljubov again in a title match held in twelve German cities, defeating him by five games (+8\u22123=15). In 1929, Bogoljubov was forty years old and perhaps already past his peak.\nAnti-Bolshevik statements, controversy.\nAfter the world championship match, Alekhine returned to Paris and spoke against Bolshevism. Afterwards, Nikolai Krylenko, president of the Soviet Chess Federation, published an official memorandum stating that Alekhine should be regarded as an enemy of the Soviets. The Soviet Chess Federation broke all contact with Alekhine until the end of the 1930s. His elder brother Alexei, with whom Alexander Alekhine had a very close relationship, publicly repudiated him and his anti-Soviet utterances shortly afterward, but Alexei may have had little choice about this decision.\nEarly 1930s.\nAccording to Reuben Fine, Alekhine dominated chess into the mid-1930s. His most famous tournament victories were at the San Remo 1930 chess tournament (+13=2, 3\u00bd points ahead of Nimzowitsch) and the Bled 1931 chess tournament (+15=11, 5\u00bd points ahead of Bogoljubov). He won most of his other tournaments outright, shared first place in two, and the first tournament in which he placed lower than first was Hastings 1933\u201334 (shared second place, \u00bd point behind Salo Flohr). In 1933, Alekhine also swept an exhibition match against Rafael Cintron in San Juan (+4\u22120=0), but only managed to draw another match with Ossip Bernstein in Paris (+1\u22121=2).\nFrom 1930 to 1935, Alekhine played first board for France at four Chess Olympiads, winning the first brilliancy prize at Hamburg in 1930, gold medals for board one at Prague in 1931 and Folkestone in 1933, and the silver medal for board one at Warsaw in 1935. His loss to Latvian master Hermanis Matisons at Prague in 1931 was his first loss in a serious chess event since winning the world championship.\nIn the early 1930s, Alekhine travelled the world giving simultaneous exhibitions, including Hawaii, Tokyo, Manila, Singapore, Shanghai, Hong Kong, and the Dutch East Indies. In July 1933, he played thirty-two people blindfold simultaneously (a new world record) in Chicago, winning nineteen, drawing nine and losing four games.\nIn 1934 Alekhine married his fourth wife, Grace Freeman (n\u00e9e Wishaar), sixteen years his senior. She was the American-born widow of a British tea-planter in Ceylon, who retained her British citizenship to the end of her life and remained Alekhine's wife until his death.\nIn the early 1930s, around 1933 according to Reuben Fine, it was noticed that Alekhine was drinking increasing amounts of alcohol. Hans Kmoch wrote that Alekhine first drank heavily during the tournament at Bled in 1931, and drank heavily through the 1934 match with Bogoljubov.\nLoss of the World title (1935\u20131937).\nIn 1933, Alekhine challenged Max Euwe to a championship match. Euwe, in the early 1930s, was regarded as one of three credible challengers (the others were Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca and Salo Flohr). Euwe accepted the challenge for October 1935. Earlier that year, Dutch radio sports journalist Han Hollander asked Capablanca for his views on the forthcoming match. In the rare archival film footage, in which Capablanca and Euwe both speak, Capablanca replies: \"Dr. Alekhine's game is 20% bluff. Dr. Euwe's game is clear and straightforward. Dr. Euwe's game\u2014not so strong as Alekhine's in some respects\u2014is more evenly balanced.\" Then Euwe gives his assessment in Dutch, explaining that his feelings alternated from optimism to pessimism, but in the previous ten years, their score had been evenly matched at 7\u20137.\nOn October 3, 1935, the world championship match began in Zandvoort, the Netherlands. Although Alekhine took an early lead, from game thirteen onwards Euwe won twice as many games as Alekhine. The challenger became the new champion on December 16, 1935, with nine wins, thirteen draws, and eight losses. This was the first world championship match in which seconds were officially employed: Alekhine had the services of Salo Landau, and Euwe had G\u00e9za Mar\u00f3czy. Euwe's win was a major upset. Kmoch wrote that Alekhine drank no alcohol for the first half of the match, but later took a glass before most games.\nHowever, Salo Flohr, who also assisted Euwe, thought overconfidence caused more problems than alcohol did for Alekhine in this match, and Alekhine himself had previously said he would win easily. Later World Champions Vasily Smyslov, Boris Spassky, Anatoly Karpov and Garry Kasparov analyzed the match for their own benefit and concluded that Euwe deserved to win and that the standard of play was worthy of a world championship.\nAccording to Kmoch, Alekhine abstained from alcohol altogether for five\u00a0years after the 1935 match. In the eighteen\u00a0months after losing the title, Alekhine played in ten\u00a0tournaments, with uneven results: tied for first with Paul Keres at Bad Nauheim in May 1936; first place at Dresden in June 1936; second to Flohr at Pod\u011bbrady in July 1936; sixth, behind Capablanca, Mikhail Botvinnik, Reuben Fine, Samuel Reshevsky, and Euwe at Nottingham in August 1936; third, behind Euwe and Fine, at Amsterdam in October 1936; tied for first with Salo Landau at Amsterdam (\"Quadrangular\"), also in October 1936; in 1936/37 he won at the Hastings New Year tournament, ahead of Fine and Erich Eliskases; first place at Nice (\"Quadrangular\") in March 1937; third, behind Keres and Fine, at Margate in April 1937; tied for fourth with Keres, behind Flohr, Reshevsky and Vladimirs Petrovs, at Kemeri in June\u2013July 1937; tied for second with Bogoljubow, behind Euwe, at Bad Nauheim (\"Quadrangular\") in July 1937.\nWorld Chess Champion, second reign (1937\u20131946).\n1937\u20131939.\nMax Euwe was quick to arrange a return match with Alekhine, something Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca had been unable to obtain after Alekhine won the world title in 1927. Alekhine regained the title from Euwe in December 1937 by a large margin (+10\u22124=11). In this match, held in the Netherlands, Euwe was seconded by Fine, and Alekhine by Erich Eliskases. The match was a real contest initially, but Euwe collapsed near the end, losing four of the last five games. Fine attributed the collapse to nervous tension, possibly aggravated by Euwe's attempts to maintain a calm appearance. Alekhine played no more title matches, and thus held the title until his death.\n1938 began well for Alekhine, who won the Montevideo 1938 chess tournament at Carrasco (in March) and at Margate (in April), and tied for first with Sir George Alan Thomas at Plymouth (in September). In November, however, he only tied for 4th\u20136th with Euwe and Samuel Reshevsky, behind Paul Keres, Reuben Fine, and Mikhail Botvinnik, ahead of Capablanca and Flohr, at the AVRO tournament in the Netherlands. This tournament was played in each of several Dutch cities for a few days at a time; it was therefore perhaps not surprising that rising stars took the first three places, as the older players found the travel very tiring, though Fine was dismissive of this explanation because the distances were short.\nImmediately after the AVRO tournament, Botvinnik, who had finished in third place, challenged Alekhine to a match for the world championship. They agreed on a prize fund of US$10,000 with two-thirds going to the winner, and that if the match were to take place in Moscow, Alekhine would be invited at least three months in advance so that he could play in a tournament to get ready for the match. Other details had not been agreed when World War II interrupted negotiations, which the two players resumed after the war.\nKeres, who had won the AVRO tournament on tiebreak over Fine, also challenged Alekhine to a world championship match. Negotiations were proceeding in 1939 when they were disrupted by World War II. During the war Keres' home country, Estonia, was invaded first by the USSR, then by Germany, then again by the USSR. At the end of the war, the Soviet government prevented Keres from continuing the negotiations, on the grounds that he had collaborated with the Germans during their occupation of Estonia (by Soviet standards).\nAlekhine was representing France at first board in the 8th Chess Olympiad at Buenos Aires 1939 when World War II broke out in Europe. The assembly of all team captains, with leading roles played by Alekhine (France), Savielly Tartakower (Poland), and Albert Becker (Germany), plus the president of the Argentine Chess Federation, Augusto de Muro, decided to go on with the Olympiad.\nAlekhine won the individual silver medal (nine wins, no losses, seven draws), behind Capablanca (only results from finals A and B\u2014separately for both sections\u2014counted for best individual scores). Shortly after the Olympiad, Alekhine swept tournaments in Montevideo (7/7) and Caracas (10/10).\nAt the end of August 1939, both Alekhine and Capablanca wrote to Augusto de Muro regarding a possible world championship rematch. Whereas the former spoke of a rematch as a virtual certainty, even stating that the Cuban was remaining in Buenos Aires until it came about, the latter referred at length to the financial burden in the aftermath of the Olympiad. Supported by Latin-American financial pledges, Jos\u00e9 R. Capablanca challenged Alexander Alekhine to a world title match in November. Tentative plans\u2014not, however, backed by a deposit of the required purse ($10,000 in gold)\u2014led to a virtual agreement to play at Buenos Aires, Argentina, beginning on April 14, 1940.\nWorld War II (1939\u20131945).\nUnlike many participants in the 1939 Chess Olympiad, Alekhine returned to Europe in January 1940. After a short stay in Portugal, he enlisted in the French army as a sanitation officer.\nAfter the fall of France (June 1940), he fled to Marseille. Alekhine tried to go to America by traveling to Lisbon and applying for an American visa. In October 1940, he sought permission to enter Cuba, promising to play a match with Capablanca. This request was denied.\nRelationship with Nazi Germany.\nChess historians have had a significant interest in Alekhine's affiliation with Nazi Germany. Of ongoing speculation among historians specialising in mid-20th century European chess is whether or not Alekhine was the author of numerous antisemitic pieces of propaganda published in relevant partisan materials at the time. While an analysis of writing styles is perceived to provide evidence supporting the theory Alekhine willingly worked as a propagandist in a non-coercive fashion, Alekhine himself denied this in written letters.\nBy some accounts, to protect his wife, Grace, and her French assets (a castle at Saint Aubin-le-Cauf, near Dieppe, which the Nazis looted), he agreed to cooperate with the Nazis. Alekhine took part in chess tournaments in Munich, Salzburg, Krak\u00f3w/Warsaw, and Prague, organised by Ehrhardt Post, the chief executive of the Nazi-controlled \"Grossdeutscher Schachbund\" (\"Greater Germany Chess Federation\")\u2014Keres, Bogoljubov, and several other strong masters in Nazi-occupied Europe also played in such events. In 1941, he tied for second-third with Erik Lundin in the Munich 1941 chess tournament (\"Europaturnier\" in September, won by G\u00f6sta Stoltz), shared first with Paul Felix Schmidt at Krak\u00f3w/Warsaw (the 2nd General Government chess tournament, in October) and won in Madrid (in December). The following year he won in the Salzburg 1942 chess tournament (June 1942) and in Munich (September 1942; the Nazis named this the \"Europameisterschaft\", which means \"European Championship\"). Later in 1942 he won at Warsaw/Lublin/Krak\u00f3w (the 3rd GG-ch; October 1942) and tied for first with Klaus Junge in Prague (\"Duras Jubile\u00e9\"; December 1942). In 1943, he drew a mini-match (+2\u22122) with Bogoljubov in Warsaw (March 1943), he won in Prague (April 1943) and tied for first with Keres in Salzburg (June 1943).\nBy late 1943, Alekhine was spending all his time in Spain and Portugal, as the German representative to chess events. This also allowed him to get away from the onrushing Soviet invasion into eastern Europe. In 1944, he narrowly won a match against Ram\u00f3n Rey Ardid in Zaragoza (+1\u22120=3; April 1944) and won in Gij\u00f3n (July 1944). The following year, he won at Madrid (March 1945), tied for second place with Antonio Medina at Gij\u00f3n (July 1945; the event was won by Antonio Rico), won at Sabadell (August 1945), he tied for first with F. L\u00f3pez N\u00fa\u00f1ez in Almeria (August 1945), won in Melilla (September 1945) and took second in Caceres, behind Francisco Lupi (Autumn 1945). Alekhine's last match was with Lupi at Estoril near Lisbon, Portugal, in January 1946. Alekhine won two games, lost one, and drew one.\nAlekhine took an interest in the development of the chess prodigy Arturo Pomar and devoted a section of his last book (\"\u00a1Legado!\" 1946) to him. They played at Gijon 1944, when Pomar, aged 12, achieved a creditable draw with the champion.\nFinal year and death.\nAfter World War II, Alekhine was not invited to chess tournaments outside the Iberian Peninsula, because of his alleged Nazi affiliation. His original invitation to the London 1946 tournament was withdrawn when the other competitors protested.\nWhile planning for a World Championship match against Botvinnik, Alekhine died aged 53 in his hotel room in Estoril, Portugal, on March 24, 1946. The circumstances of his death are still a matter of debate. It is usually attributed to a heart attack, but a letter in \"Chess Life\" magazine from a witness to the autopsy stated that choking on meat was the actual cause of death. At autopsy, a three-inch-long piece of unchewed meat was discovered blocking his windpipe. Some have speculated that he was murdered by a French \"death squad\". A few years later, Alekhine's son, Alexander Alekhine Jr., said that \"the hand of Moscow reached his father.\" Kevin Spraggett, a Canadian Grandmaster who has lived in Portugal since the late 1980s and has thoroughly investigated Alekhine's death, favors this possibility. Spraggett makes a case for the manipulation of the crime scene and the autopsy by the Portuguese secret police PIDE. He believes that Alekhine was murdered outside his hotel room, probably by Soviet agents.\nAlekhine's burial was sponsored by FIDE, and the remains were transferred to the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse, Paris, France, in 1956.\nHis gravestone suffered heavy damage by a cyclone on 26 December 1999. The headstone monument was blown over, shattered and fell on the main gravestone. It was later restored.\nAssessment.\nPlaying strength and style.\nAlekhine's peak period was in the early 1930s, when he won almost every tournament he played, sometimes by huge margins. Afterward, his play declined, and he never won a top-class tournament after 1934. After Alekhine regained his world title in 1937, there were several new contenders, all of whom would have been serious challengers.\nAlekhine was one of the greatest attacking players and could apparently produce combinations at will. What set him apart from most other attacking players was his ability to see the potential for an attack and prepare for it in positions where others saw nothing. Rudolf Spielmann, a master tactician who produced many brilliancies, said, \"I can see the combinations as well as Alekhine, but I cannot get to the same positions.\" Dr. Max Euwe said, \"Alekhine is a poet who creates a work of art out of something that would hardly inspire another man to send home a picture post-card.\" An explanation offered by R\u00e9ti was, \"he beats his opponents by analysing simple and apparently harmless sequences of moves in order to see whether at some time or another at the end of it an original possibility, and therefore one difficult to see, might be hidden.\" John Nunn commented that \"Alekhine had a special ability to provoke complications\nwithout taking excessive risks\", and Edward Winter called him \"the supreme genius of the complicated position\".\nNevertheless, Garry Kasparov said that Alekhine's attacking play was based on solid positional foundations, and Harry Golombek went further, saying that \"Alekhine was the most versatile of all chess geniuses, being equally at home in every style of play and in all phases of the game.\" Reuben Fine, a serious contender for the world championship in the late 1930s, wrote in the 1950s that Alekhine's collection of best games was one of the three most beautiful that he knew, and Golombek was equally impressed.\nAlekhine's games have a higher percentage of wins than those of any other World Champion, and his drawn games are on average among the longest of all champions'. His desire to win extended beyond formal chess competition. When Fine beat him in some casual games in 1933, Alekhine demanded a match for a small stake. And in table tennis, which Alekhine played enthusiastically but badly, he would often crush the ball when he lost.\nBobby Fischer, in a 1964 article, ranked Alekhine as one of the ten greatest players in history. Fischer, who was famous for the clarity of his play, wrote of Alekhine: Alekhine has never been a hero of mine, and I've never cared for his style of play. There's nothing light or breezy about it; it worked for him, but it could scarcely work for anyone else. He played gigantic conceptions, full of outrageous and unprecedented ideas.\u00a0... [H]e had great imagination; he could see more deeply into a situation than any other player in chess history.\u00a0... It was in the most complicated positions that Alekhine found his grandest concepts.\nAlekhine's style had a profound influence on Kasparov, who said: \"Alexander Alekhine is the first luminary among the others who are still having the greatest influence on me. I like his universality, his approach to the game, his chess ideas. I am sure that the future belongs to Alekhine chess.\" In 2012, Levon Aronian said that he considers Alekhine the greatest chess player of all time.\nInfluence on the game.\nSeveral openings and opening variations are named after Alekhine. In addition to the well-known Alekhine's Defence (1.e4 Nf6) and the Albin-Chatard-Alekhine Attack in the \"orthodox\" Paulsen variation of the French Defense, there are Alekhine Variations in: the Budapest Gambit, the Vienna Game, the Exchange Variation of the Ruy Lopez, the Winawer Variation of the French Defense; the Dragon Variation of the Sicilian Defense, the Queen's Gambit Accepted, the Slav Defense, the Queen's Pawn Game, the Catalan Opening and the Dutch Defense (where three different lines bear his name). Irving Chernev commented, \"The openings consist of Alekhine's games, with a few variations.\"\nAlekhine also composed a few endgame studies, one of which is shown in the diagram, a miniature (a study with a maximum of seven pieces).\nAlekhine wrote over twenty books on chess, mostly annotated editions of the games in a major match or tournament, plus collections of his best games between 1908 and 1937. Unlike Wilhelm Steinitz, Emanuel Lasker, Capablanca and Euwe, he wrote no books that explained his ideas about the game or showed beginners how to improve their play. His books appeal to expert players rather than beginners: they contain many long analyses of variations in critical positions, and \"singularities and exceptions were his forte, not rules and simplifications\".\nAlthough Alekhine was declared an enemy of the Soviet Union after his anti-Bolshevik statement in 1928, he was gradually rehabilitated by the Soviet chess elite following his death in 1946. Alexander Kotov's research on Alekhine's games and career, culminating in a biography, \"Alexander Alekhine\", led to a Soviet series of Alekhine Memorial tournaments. The first of these, at Moscow 1956, was won jointly by Botvinnik and Vasily Smyslov. In their book \"The Soviet School of Chess\" Kotov and Yudovich devoted a chapter to Alekhine, called him \"Russia's greatest player\" and praised his capacity for seizing the initiative by concrete tactical play in the opening. Botvinnik wrote that the Soviet School of chess learned from Alekhine's fighting qualities, capacity for self-criticism and combinative vision. Alekhine had written that success in chess required \"Firstly, self-knowledge; secondly, a firm comprehension of my opponent's strength and weakness; thirdly, a higher aim\u00a0\u2013\u00a0... artistic and scientific accomplishments which accord our chess equal rank with other arts.\"\nAccusations of \"improving\" games.\nSamuel Reshevsky wrote that Alekhine \"allegedly made up games against fictitious opponents in which he came out the victor and had these games published in various chess magazines.\" In a recent book Andy Soltis lists \"Alekhine's 15 Improvements\". The most famous example is his game with five queens in Moscow in 1915. In the actual game, Alekhine, playing as Black, beat Grigoriev in the Moscow 1915 tournament; but in one of his books he presented the \"Five Queens\" variation (starting with a move he rejected as Black in the original game) as an actual game won by the White player in Moscow in 1915. (He did not say in the book who was who in this version, nor that it was in the tournament.)\nIn the position shown in the diagram, which never arose in real play, Alekhine claimed that White wins by 24.Rh6, as after some complicated play Black is mated or goes into an endgame a queen down. A later computer-assisted analysis concludes that White can force a win, but only by diverging from Alekhine's move sequence at move 20, while there are only three queens.\nChess historian Edward Winter investigated a game Alekhine allegedly won in fifteen moves via a queen sacrifice at Sabadell in 1945. Some photos of the game in progress were discovered that showed the players during the game and their chessboard. Based on the position that the chess pieces had taken on the chessboard in this photo, the game could never have taken the course that was stated in the published version. This raised suspicions that the published version was made up. Even if the published version is a fake, however, there is no doubt that Alekhine did defeat his opponent in the actual game, and there is no evidence that Alekhine was the source of the famous fifteen-move win whose authenticity is doubted.\nAccusations of antisemitism.\nDuring World War II, Alekhine played in several tournaments held in Germany or German-occupied territory, as did many strong players in occupied and neutral countries. In March 1941, a series of articles appeared under Alekhine's name in the \"Pariser Zeitung\", a German-language newspaper published in Paris by the occupying German forces. Among other things, these articles said that Jews had a great talent for exploiting chess but showed no signs of chess artistry; described the hypermodern theories of Nimzowitsch and R\u00e9ti as \"this cheap bluff, this shameless self-publicity\", hyped by \"the majority of Anglo-Jewish pseudo-intellectuals\"; and described his 1937 match with Euwe as \"a triumph against the Jewish conspiracy\".\nDuring interviews with two Spanish newspapers in September 1941, Alekhine criticised Jewish chess strategy. In one of these, he said that Aryan chess was aggressive but \"the Semitic concept admitted the idea of pure defence\", thus the \"Jewish\" style was supposed to focus merely on exploiting the opponents' mistakes. He also praised rival chessplayer Capablanca for taking the world title from \"the Jew Lasker\". He is reported to have expressed similar views in an interview to the Czech media Sv\u011bt in 1942.\nAlmost immediately after the liberation of Paris (and before World War II ended), Alekhine publicly stated that \"he had to write two chess articles for the \"Pariser Zeitung\" before the Germans granted him his exit visa\u00a0... Articles which Alekhine claims were purely scientific were rewritten by the Germans, published and made to treat chess from a racial viewpoint.\" He wrote at least two further disavowals, in an open letter to the organizer of the 1946 London tournament (W. Hatton-Ward) and in his posthumous book \"\u00a1Legado!\".\nExtensive investigations by Ken Whyld have not yielded conclusive evidence of the authenticity of the articles. Chess writer Jacques Le Monnier claimed in a 1986 issue of \"Europe \u00c9checs\" that in 1958 he saw some of Alekhine's notebooks and found, in Alekhine's own handwriting, the exact text of the first antisemitic article, which appeared in \"Pariser Zeitung\" on March 18, 1941. In his 1973 book \"75 parties d'Alekhine\" (\"75 of Alekhine's games\"), however, Le Monnier had written \"It will never be known whether Alekhine was behind these articles or whether they were manipulated by the editor of the \"Pariser Zeitung\".\"\nBritish chess historian Edward G. Winter notes that the articles in the \"Pariser Zeitung\" misspelled the names of several famous chess masters, which could be interpreted as evidence of forgery or as attempts by Alekhine to signal that he was being forced to write things that he did not believe; but these could simply have been typesetting errors, as Alekhine's handwriting was not easy to read. The articles contained (probably) incorrect claims that Lionel Kieseritzky (\"Kieseritsky\" in English, \"Kizierycki\" in Polish) was a Polish Jew, although Kieseritzky was neither Polish nor Jewish. Winter concludes: \"Although, as things stand, it is difficult to construct much of a defence for Alekhine, only the discovery of the articles in his own handwriting will settle the matter beyond all doubt.\" Under French copyright law, Alekhine's notebooks did not enter the public domain until January 1, 2017.\nThere is evidence that Alekhine was not antisemitic in his personal or chess relationships with Jews. In June 1919, he was arrested by the Cheka, imprisoned in Odessa and sentenced to death. Yakov Vilner, a Jewish master, saved him by sending a telegram to the chairman of the Ukrainian Council of People's Commissars, who knew of Alekhine and ordered his release. Alekhine accepted and apparently used chess analysis from Charles Jaffe in his World Championship match against Capablanca. Jaffe was a Jewish master who lived in New York City, which Alekhine often visited, and upon his return to New York after defeating Capablanca, Alekhine played a short match as a favour to Jaffe, without financial remuneration. Alekhine's second for the 1935 match with Max Euwe was the master Salo Landau, a Dutch Jew. The American Jewish grandmaster Arnold Denker wrote that he found Alekhine very friendly in chess settings, taking part in consultation games and productive analysis sessions. Denker also wrote that Alekhine treated the younger and (at that time) virtually unproven Denker to dinner on many occasions in New York during the 1930s, when the economy was very weak because of the Great Depression. Denker added that Alekhine, during the early 1930s, opined that the American Jewish grandmaster Isaac Kashdan might be his next challenger (this did not in fact take place). He gave chess lessons to 14-year-old prodigy Gerardo Budowski, a German Jew, in Paris in spring 1940. Alekhine also married an American woman who may or may not have had Jewish ancestry, Grace Wishaar, as his fourth wife. Grace Alekhine was the women's champion of Paris in 1944.\nWritings.\nAlekhine wrote over twenty books on chess. Some of the best-known are:\nGames analysis published after 1938 were edited by Edward Winter and published in 1980 in the book:\nSummary of results in competitions.\nTournament results.\nHere are Alekhine's placings and scores in tournaments:\nMatch results.\nHere are Alekhine's results in matches:\nChess Olympiad results.\nHere are Alekhine's results in Chess Olympiads. He played top board for France in all these events.\nOther information.\nIn the town of Cascais, Portugal, there is a street named after Alekhine: Rua Alexander Alekhine. Cascais is near Estoril, where Alekhine died.\nHis book \"My Best Games of Chess 1924\u20131937\" featured in Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger's \"A Matter of Life and Death\", filmed in the year of his death.\nThe asteroid 1909 Alekhin was named in honor of Alekhine.\nCollected games.\nA series of books containing Alekhine's chess games, written and collected by chess player and teacher Mat\u011bj Gargul\u00e1k of Brno:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72497", "revid": "12023796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72497", "title": "298 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 298 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Barbatus and Centumalus (or, less frequently, year 456 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 298 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n* The consuls Lucius Cornelius Scipio Barbatus and Gnaeus Fulvius Maximus Centumalus campaign against the Etruscans. Scipio fights a costly indecisive battle near Volaterrae.\n* The Lucanians seek Roman aid against the invasion of the Samnites. In agreeing to take the Lucanians under their protection, the Romans commit to war against the Samnites.\n* Fulvius invades central Samnium and defeats a Samnite army near Bovianum. He then captures Aufidena and possibly also Bovianum.\n* Scipio captures Taurasia and Cisauna in eastern and south-eastern Samnium and subdues anti-Roman elements in Lucania. Fulvius possibly defeats a Lucanian force as well.\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72498", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72498", "title": "Diophantus of Alexandria", "text": ""}
{"id": "72499", "revid": "985645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72499", "title": "AMI", "text": ""}
{"id": "72500", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72500", "title": "Jean Fran\u00e7ois La P\u00e9rouse", "text": ""}
{"id": "72501", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72501", "title": "Annual Customs of Dahomey", "text": "Yearly celebration in the Kingdom of Dahomey\nThe Annual Customs of Dahomey (\"xwetanu\" or \"huetanu\" in Fon) were the main yearly celebration in the Kingdom of Dahomey, held at the capital, Abomey. These ceremonies were largely started under King Agaja around 1730 and involved significant collection and distribution of gifts and tribute, religious ceremonies involving human sacrifice, military parades, and discussions by dignitaries about the future for the kingdom.\nOrigins.\nTradition amongst the Fon in Western Africa, and among other ethnic groups, often had ceremonies in family lineages where all members of the family would gather for a feast, provide gifts to the eldest member of the family, and discuss issues pertaining to the family. As part of the religious Vodun practiced in the area, gifts and sacrifices to the spirits and ancestors would also be given. King Houegbadja (\"c.\" 1645\u20131685) changed this widespread practice during his reign by making it so that sacrifices or gifts to spirits would have to be done by the king.\nKing Agaja (1718\u20131740) further centralized the ceremonies under the king and the royal dynasty. Under Agaja, the Annual customs became the central religious ceremony in the kingdom, wide participation by most of the population was required, all family lineages were expected to provide gifts and tribute (sometimes considered taxes) to the ruler, and aspects of animal and human sacrifice were added to the practice. The traditional family lineage ceremonies were not allowed in the kingdom until after the royal ceremony was completed. After Agaja the ceremony grew larger, longer and more lavish by future kings.\nPractice.\nThe Annual Customs involved multiple elaborate components and some aspects may have been added in the 19th century. In general, the celebration involved distribution of gifts, human sacrifice, military parades, and political councils. Its main religious aspect was to offer thanks and gain the approval for ancestors of the royal lineage.\nAnother function of the Annual Customs was to raise money for the royal family and the kingdom as a whole. Based on the traditional customs of gift-giving to eldest members of lineage lines, the population of the kingdom provided gifts or paid tribute to the king. The king would then display the riches as a sign of the accomplishments of his administration. The wealth was provided and displayed not simply to enrich the kingdom but also to gain the approval of the ancestors. After the display, significant amounts of the gifts were redistributed to the population.\nSince Dahomey was a significant military power involved in the slave trade, slaves and human sacrifice became crucial aspects of the ceremony. Captives from war and criminals were killed for the deceased kings of Dahomey. During the ceremony, around 500 prisoners would be sacrificed. As many as 4,000 were reported killed in one of these ceremonies in 1727. Most of the victims were sacrificed through decapitation, a tradition widely used by Dahomean kings, and the literal translation for the Fon name for the ceremony \"Xwetanu\" is \"yearly head business\". In later years this ceremony also included the spilling of human blood from the sacrificed. There was also a significant military parade in the ceremonies that further displayed the military might of the kingdom of Dahomey.\nThe Annual Customs also included a prominent structure for discussion and debate about public policy in the kingdom. In this respect, scholar John C. Yoder has argued that the customs \"served a political function similar to that of parliaments in Western countries\", although still far from the open contests in democracies. The Great Council would convene at the annual customs and bring together important leaders from throughout Dahomey to discuss national policy. The Great Council included a large segment of the population and included women. Debate and discussion would be extensive; low ranking-officials could publicly rebuke high-ranking ones. In the end the king would end the debate by declaring consensus.\nIn addition, when a king died, his successor would have to include a significant ceremony in his honor to finish the funeral rites. Until such sacrifices and ceremonies were performed, it was considered that the new king was not approved by the spirits of the ancestors.\nItems associated with the Customs are preserved at the Abomey Historical Museum, in the Royal Palaces of Abomey.\nSchedule.\nBy day, according to Yoder.\nOfficials largely spent their evenings building coalitions of political support.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72502", "revid": "44933079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72502", "title": "Babi Yar", "text": "Ravine and massacre site in Kyiv, Ukraine\nBabi Yar () or Babyn Yar () is a ravine in the Ukrainian capital Kyiv and a site of massacres carried out by Nazi Germany's forces during its campaign against the Soviet Union in World War II. The first and best documented of the massacres took place on 29\u201330 September 1941, in which some 33,771 Jews were murdered. Other victims of massacres at the site included Soviet prisoners of war, communists and Romani people. It is estimated that a total of between 100,000 and 150,000 people were murdered at Babi Yar during the German occupation.\nThe decision to murder all the Jews in Kiev was made by the German military governor \"Generalmajor\" Kurt Eberhard, the Police Commander for Army Group South, SS-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" Friedrich Jeckeln, and the \"Einsatzgruppe\" C Commander Otto Rasch. Sonderkommando 4a as the sub-unit of \"Einsatzgruppe\" C, along with the aid of the \"SD\" and Order Police battalions with the Ukrainian Auxiliary Police backed by the \"Wehrmacht\", carried out the orders. Sonderkommando 4a and the 45th Battalion of the German Order Police conducted the shootings. Servicemen of the 303rd Battalion of the German Order Police at this time guarded the outer perimeter of the execution site.\nThe massacre was the largest mass-murder by the Nazi regime during the campaign against the Soviet Union, and it has been called \"the largest single massacre in the history of the Holocaust\" to that particular date. It is only surpassed overall by the later October 1941 Odessa massacre of more than 50,000 Jews (committed by German and Romanian troops), and by \"Aktion Erntefest\" of November 1943 in occupied Poland with 42,000\u201343,000 victims.\nHistorical background.\nThe \"Babi Yar\" (\"Babyn Yar\") ravine was first mentioned in historical accounts in 1401, in connection to the sale of it by \"baba\" (an old woman) who was also the \"cantiniere\" in the Dominican Monastery. The word \"yar\" is Turkic in origin and means \"gully\" or \"ravine\". Over several centuries, the site was used for various purposes, including military camps and at least two cemeteries, including an Orthodox Christian cemetery and a Jewish cemetery. The latter was officially closed in 1937.\nMassacres of September 1941.\nAxis forces, mainly German, occupied Kyiv on 19 September 1941. Between 20 and 28 September, explosives planted by the Soviet secret police (the NKVD) caused extensive damage in the city, and on 24 September an explosion rocked Rear Headquarters Army Group South. Two days later, on 26 September, Maj. Gen. Kurt Eberhard, the military governor, and SS- Friedrich Jeckeln, the SS and Police Leader, met at Rear Headquarters Army Group South. There, they decided to exterminate the Jews of Kyiv, claiming that it was retaliation for the explosions. Also present were SS- Paul Blobel, commander of 4a of C, and his superior, SS- Dr. Otto Rasch, commander of C. The mass murder was to be carried out by units under the command of Rasch and Blobel, who were ultimately responsible for many atrocities in Soviet Ukraine during the summer and autumn of 1941.\nThe implementation of the order was entrusted to 4a of C commanded by Blobel, under the general command of Friedrich Jeckeln. This unit consisted of (SD) and (SiPo), the third company of the Special Duties -SS battalion, and a platoon of the 9th Police Battalion. 4a of C and Police Battalion 45, commanded by Major Besser, conducted the massacre, supported by members of a -SS battalion. Contrary to the \"myth of the clean\", the Sixth Army under the command of Field Marshal Walter von Reichenau worked together with the SS and SD to plan and execute the mass-murder of the Jews of Kyiv.\nOn 26 September 1941, the following order was posted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All Yids of the city of Kiev and its vicinity must appear on Monday, 29 September, by 8 o'clock in the morning at the corner of Mel'nikova and Dokterivskaya streets (near the Viis'kove cemetery). Bring documents, money and valuables, and also warm clothing, linen, etc.\nAny Yids who do not follow this order and are found elsewhere will be shot. Any civilians who enter the dwellings left by Yids and appropriate the things in them will be shot.\nOn 29 and 30 September 1941, the Nazis and their collaborators murdered approximately 33,771 Jewish civilians at Babi Yar. The order to murder the Jews of Kyiv was given to 4a of C, consisting of SD and SiPo men, the third company of the Special Duties -SS battalion, and a platoon of the No. 9 police battalion. These units were reinforced by police battalions Nos. 45 and 303, by units of the Ukrainian auxiliary police, and supported by local collaborators. 4a and the 45th Battalion of the German Order Police conducted the shootings. Servicemen of the 303rd Battalion of the German Order Police at this time guarded the outer perimeter of the execution site.\nThe commander of the reported two days later:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The difficulties resulting from such a large scale action\u2014in particular concerning the seizure\u2014were overcome in Kiev by requesting the Jewish population through wall posters to move. Although only a participation of approximately 5,000 to 6,000 Jews had been expected at first, more than 30,000 Jews arrived who, until the very moment of their execution, still believed in their resettlement, thanks to an extremely clever organization.\nAccording to the testimony of a truck driver named Hofer, victims were ordered to undress and were beaten if they resisted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I watched what happened when the Jews\u2014men, women and children\u2014arrived. The Ukrainians led them past a number of different places where one after the other they had to give up their luggage, then their coats, shoes and over-garments and also underwear. They also had to leave their valuables in a designated place. There was a special pile for each article of clothing. It all happened very quickly and anyone who hesitated was kicked or pushed by the Ukrainians to keep them moving.\u2014\u200a\nThe crowd was large enough that most of the victims could not have known what was happening until it was too late; by the time they heard the machine gun fire, there was no chance to escape. All were driven down a corridor of soldiers, in groups of ten, and then shot. A truck driver described the scene.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the evening, the Germans undermined the wall of the ravine and buried the people under the thick layers of earth. According to the 's Operational Situation Report, 33,771 Jews from Kyiv and its suburbs were systematically shot dead by machine-gun fire at Babi Yar on 29 and 30 September 1941. The money, valuables, underwear, and clothing of the murdered were turned over to the local ethnic Germans and to the Nazi administration of the city. Wounded victims were buried alive in the ravine along with the rest of the bodies.\nFurther massacres.\nIn the months that followed, thousands more were seized and taken to Babi Yar where they were shot. It is estimated that more than 100,000 residents of Kyiv of all ethnic groups, mostly civilians, were murdered by the Nazis there during World War II. The Syrets concentration camp was also built in the area, which was notorious for its cruelty and execution of three Dynamo Kyiv football players who played in the Match of Death.\nMass executions at Babi Yar continued until the Nazis evacuated the city of Kyiv. On 10 January 1942 about 100 captured Soviet sailors were executed there after being forced to disinter and cremate the bodies of previous victims. In addition, Babi Yar became a place of execution of residents of five Gypsy camps. Patients of the Ivan Pavlov Psychiatric Hospital were gassed and then dumped into the ravine. Thousands of other Ukrainians were murdered at Babi Yar. Ukrainian poet and activist Olena Teliha and her husband, and renowned bandurist Mykhailo Teliha, were murdered there on 21 February 1942. Also murdered in 1941 were Ukrainian activist writer Ivan Rohach, his sister, and his staff.\nUpon the Soviet liberation of Kyiv in 1943, Soviet officials led Western journalists to the site of the massacres and allowed them to interview survivors. Among the journalists were Bill Lawrence of \"The New York Times\" and Bill Downs of CBS. Downs described in a report to \"Newsweek\" what he had been told by one of the survivors, Efim Vilkis:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;However, even more incredible was the action taken by the Nazis between August 19 and September 28 last. Vilkis said that in the middle of August the SS mobilized a party of 100 Russian war prisoners, who were taken to the ravines. On August 19 these men were ordered to disinter all the bodies in the ravine. The Germans meanwhile took a party to a nearby Jewish cemetery whence marble headstones were brought to Babii Yar [\"sic\"] to form the foundation of a huge funeral pyre. Atop the stones were piled a layer of wood and then a layer of bodies, and so on until the pyre was as high as a two-story house. Vilkis said that approximately 1,500 bodies were burned in each operation of the furnace and each funeral pyre took two nights and one day to burn completely. The cremation went on for 40 days, and then the prisoners, who by this time included 341 men, were ordered to build another furnace. Since this was the last furnace and there were no more bodies, the prisoners [realized] it was for them. They made a break but only a dozen out of more than 200 survived the bullets of the Nazi machine guns. \nNumber of people who were murdered.\nEstimates of the total number of people who were murdered at Babi Yar during the Nazi occupation vary. At the Nuremberg trials in 1946, Soviet prosecutor Lev Smirnov claimed that approximately 100,000 corpses were lying in Babi Yar; he made this estimate using documents which were published by the Extraordinary State Commission which the Soviets set up in order to investigate Nazi crimes after the liberation of Kyiv in 1943.\nIn a recently published letter to the Israeli journalist, writer, and translator Shlomo Even-Shoshan which was dated 17 May 1965, Anatoly Kuznetsov commented on the Babi Yar atrocity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Researchers studying Ukrainian archives opened in the wake of the 2022 Russian invasion added 1,031 names of slain Jews to a database maintained by the Babyn Yar Holocaust Memorial Center, bringing the total to 33,771. The new names were read along with a recitation of the Kaddish in a ceremony in September 2025.\nSurvivors.\nOne of the most often-cited parts of Anatoly Kuznetsov's documentary novel is the testimony of Dina Pronicheva, an actress of the Kyiv Puppet Theatre, and a survivor. She was one of those ordered to march to the ravine, to be forced to undress and then be shot. Jumping before being shot and falling on other bodies, she played dead in a pile of corpses. She held perfectly still while the Nazis continued to shoot the wounded or gasping victims. Although the SS had covered the mass grave with earth, she eventually climbed through the soil and escaped. Since it was dark, she had to avoid the torches of the Nazis finishing off the remaining victims still alive, wounded, and gasping in the grave. She was one of the very few survivors of the massacre and later related her story to Kuznetsov. At least 29 survivors are known.\nIn 2006, Yad Vashem and other Jewish organisations started a project to identify and name the Babi Yar victims. However, so far, only 10% have been identified. Yad Vashem has recorded the names of around 3,000 Jews murdered at Babi Yar, as well as those of some 7,000 Jews from Kyiv who were murdered during the Holocaust.\nConcealment of the crimes.\nBefore the Nazis retreated from Kyiv ahead of the Soviet offensive of 1944, they were ordered by Wilhelm Koppe to conceal their atrocities in the East. Paul Blobel, who had been in control of the mass murders in Babi Yar two years earlier, supervised the \"special action\" \"Sonderaktion 1005\" to eliminate its traces. The \"Aktion\" was carried out earlier in all extermination camps. The bodies were exhumed, burned and the ashes were scattered over farmland in the vicinity. Several hundred prisoners of war from the Syrets concentration camp were forced to exhume the bodies for cremation in funeral pyres built atop layers of stolen Jewish gravestones.\nTrials.\nIn the aftermath of the war, several SS commanders who had planned and supervised the massacre were arrested and put on trial. Paul Blobel, the overall commander of the SS unit responsible for the massacre, was sentenced to death by the Subsequent Nuremberg Trials in the Einsatzgruppen Trial. He was hanged on 7 June 1951 at Landsberg Prison. Otto Rasch was also indicted in the Einsatzgruppen Trial but his case was discontinued for health reasons, and he died in prison in 1948. Friedrich Jeckeln was convicted of war crimes by a Soviet military tribunal in the Riga Trial, sentenced to death, and hanged on 3 February 1946. Kurt Eberhard was arrested by US authorities; he killed himself in 1947, while in custody awaiting trial.\nIn January 1946, 15 former members of the German police (including ) were tried in Kyiv over their roles in the massacre and other atrocities. Twelve of them were sentenced to death (Fritz Beckenhof, Karl Burckhardt, Georg Heinisch, Wilhelm Hellerforth, Hans Isenmann, Emil Jogschat, Emil Knoll, Willi Meier, Paul von Scheer, Eckart Hans von Tschammer und Osten, Georg Truckenbrod, and Oskar Walliser). The other three received prison sentences. Those condemned to death were publicly hanged in the town square of Kyiv on 29 January 1946. Erich Koch, who had been \"Reichskommissar\" of Ukraine at the time, was tried and sentenced to death by a Polish court for his atrocities in occupied Poland. However, he was never tried for his crimes in occupied Ukraine. His death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment, and he died in prison in 1986.\nTwo additional perpetrators were given prison sentences at the Nuremberg Trials. In 1967, 11 men were charged for participating in the massacre in a German court in Darmstadt. After a 14 month trial, seven were convicted and sentenced to prison terms ranging between four and fifteen years. In 1971, three more former German police officials were put on trial in Regensburg. The vast majority of the perpetrators were never tried for their roles in the massacre.\nRemembrance.\nAfter the war, specifically Jewish and Roma commemoration efforts encountered difficulty because of the Soviet Union's emphasis on secular remembrances honoring all nationalities of the Soviet Union, so memorials (including at Babi Yar) would generally refer to \"peaceful victims of fascism.\" Memorials were not explicitly forbidden, but successive Soviet leaders preferred instead to emphasise the wide-ranging origins of those murdered at the site. This meant that both Jewish and Roma peoples were not specifically memorialised at the Babi Yar site until the Soviet Union collapsed. Indeed, Yevgeny Yevtushenko's 1961 poem on Babi Yar begins \"\u041d\u0430\u0434 \u0411\u0430\u0431\u044c\u0438\u043c \u042f\u0440\u043e\u043c \u043f\u0430\u043c\u044f\u0442\u043d\u0438\u043a\u043e\u0432 \u043d\u0435\u0442/Nad Babim Yarom pamyatnikov nyet\" (\"Over Babi Yar there are no monuments\"); it is also the first line of Shostakovich's Symphony No. 13.\nAfter the collapse of the Soviet Union, several memorials were erected on the site and elsewhere. The events also formed a part of literature. Babi Yar is located in Kyiv at the juncture of today's Kurenivka, Lukianivka and Syrets districts, between Kyrylivska, Melnykov, and Olena Teliha streets and St. Cyril's Monastery. After the Orange Revolution, President Viktor Yushchenko of Ukraine hosted a major commemoration of the 65th anniversary in 2006, attended by Presidents Moshe Katsav of Israel, Filip Vujanovi\u0107 of Montenegro, Stjepan Mesi\u0107 of Croatia and Chief Rabbi of Tel Aviv Rabbi Yisrael Meir Lau. Rabbi Lau pointed out that if the world had reacted to the massacre of Babi Yar, perhaps the Holocaust might never have happened. Implying that this impunity emboldened Hitler, Lau speculated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Maybe, say, this Babi Yar was also a test for Hitler. If on 29 September and 30 September 1941 Babi Yar may happen and the world did not react seriously, dramatically, abnormally, maybe this was a good test for him. So a few weeks later in January 1942, near Berlin in Wannsee, a convention can be held with a decision, a final solution to the Jewish problem\u00a0... Maybe if the very action had been a serious one, a dramatic one, in September 1941 here in Ukraine, the Wannsee Conference would have come to a different end, maybe.\nIn 2006, a message was also delivered on behalf of Kofi Annan, Secretary-General of the United Nations, by his representative, Resident Coordinator Francis Martin O'Donnell, who added a Hebrew prayer O'seh Shalom, from the Mourners' Kaddish.\nMudslide.\nIn the spring of 1961, Babi Yar was the site of a massive mudslide. An earthen dam in the ravine was used to hold loam pulp which had been pumped from the local brick factories without sufficient drainage over the course of ten years. The dam collapsed after it was hit by a heavy rainstorm, resulting in a mudslide that swept away the low-lying Kurenivka neighborhood and several other areas. The death toll was estimated to be between 1,500 and 2,000 people.\n2022 Russian bombing.\nOn 1 March 2022, during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the site was struck by Russian forces while they were trying to destroy the nearby Kyiv TV Tower. The attack resulted in the death of at least five people.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72504", "revid": "1317717468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72504", "title": "287 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 287 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marcellus and Rutilus (or, less frequently, year 467 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 287 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nGreece.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72505", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72505", "title": "Lyudmila Kondratyeva", "text": "Russian former track and field athlete (born 1958)\nLyudmila Andreyevna Kondratyeva (; born 11 April 1958) is a Russian former track and field athlete, who competed for the Soviet Union and is the 1980 Olympic 100 m champion.\nKondratyeva began athletics at age 11 at the Children and Youth Sport School in Shakhty, her first trainer being Lyudmila Mikhailovna Pavlenko. Two years later she passed exams into Rostov on Don Children and Youth Sport School, created in 1971, where she was coached by Nina Vasilyevna Lazarchenko. In 1973 she became a member of the Soviet Union National Youth Team, and in 1974 - of the Soviet Union National Team. At the 1975 European Youth Championships Kondratyeva finished 4th in the 200 m and in the 4 \u00d7 100 m relay. Four years later she became the winner of the 200 m at the 1978 European Championships, where she also won a gold in the 4 \u00d7 100 m relay event.\nNow one of the medal favourites for the 1980 Summer Olympics, which were held in Moscow, she also ran a non-recognised World Record just before the Olympics. The final in Moscow was a close race, with the first 5 athletes finishing within 1 tenth of a second. A photo finish showed that Kondratyeva had beaten Marlies G\u00f6hr of East Germany by just 0.01 seconds. Kondratyeva pulled her hamstring at the finish, thereby not allowing her to run the 200 m or the 4 \u00d7 100 m relay.\nUnable to compete at the 1984 Summer Olympics due to the boycott led by the Soviet Union, Kondratyeva could not defend her Olympic title. She retired after that season and married Yuriy Sedykh, two-time Olympic champion in the hammer throw, although they would later divorce. The pair had a daughter, Oksana Kondratyeva, who followed in her father's footsteps and became an international hammer thrower.\nShe came out of retirement to compete at the 1988 Seoul Olympic Games. She made the semi-finals of the 100 m and won a bronze medal as part of the Soviet women's 4 \u00d7 100 m relay.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72506", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72506", "title": "Fiji/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "72508", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72508", "title": "Nauru/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "72509", "revid": "48546149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72509", "title": "276 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 276 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gurges and Clepsina (or, less frequently, year 478 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 276 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72510", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72510", "title": "Cambodia/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "72511", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72511", "title": "Mayotte/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "72512", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72512", "title": "Moldova/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "72513", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72513", "title": "Ethymology", "text": ""}
{"id": "72514", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72514", "title": "Ecuador/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "72516", "revid": "31547016", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72516", "title": "275 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 275 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Dentatus and Caudinus (or, less frequently, year 479 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 275 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72517", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72517", "title": "Ghana/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "72518", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72518", "title": "Gaza Strip/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "72519", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72519", "title": "Burundi/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "72521", "revid": "42056547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72521", "title": "272 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 272 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cursor and Maximus (or, less frequently, year 482 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 272 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72522", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72522", "title": "Kyrgyzstan/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "72523", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72523", "title": "416 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 416 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Atratinus, Ambustus, Mugillanus and Rutilus (or, less frequently, year 338 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 416 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nDrama.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72524", "revid": "16416757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72524", "title": "417 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 417 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Tricipitinus, Lanatus, Crassus (or Cicurinus) and Axilla (or, less frequently, year 337 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 417 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nGreece.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72525", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72525", "title": "Consumer Price Index", "text": ""}
{"id": "72526", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72526", "title": "Lupang Hinirang", "text": "National anthem of the Philippines\n\"'\" ('Chosen Land'), originally titled in Spanish as \"'\" ('Philippine National March'), and also commonly and informally known by its incipit \"\" ('Beloved Country'), is the national anthem of the Philippines. Its music was composed in 1898 by Juli\u00e1n Felipe, and the lyrics were adopted from the Spanish poem \"Filipinas\", written by Jos\u00e9 Palma in 1899.\nThe composition known as \"Lupang Hinirang\" was commissioned on June 5, 1898, by Emilio Aguinaldo, head of the Dictatorial Government of the Philippines, as a ceremonial and instrumental national march without lyrics, similar to the status of the \"Marcha Real\" in Spain. It was first performed in public during the proclamation of Philippine independence at Aguinaldo's residence in Kawit, Cavite, on June 12, 1898. It was re-adopted as the national march of the Philippine Republic () in 1899.\nFollowing the defeat of the First Republic in the Philippine\u2013American War and the subsequent Colonial rule of the United States, the Flag Act of 1907 prohibited the public display of flags, banners, emblems, or devices used by the Philippine Republican Army during the war. Under the Flag Act, public performance of the national march was prohibited. Upon repeal of the Flag Act in 1919, the national march regained its popular status as the national anthem of the Philippines. Following the establishment of self-rule under the Commonwealth of the Philippines, , approved on September 5, 1938, officially adopted the musical arrangement and composition by Juli\u00e1n Felipe as the national anthem.\nIn the years after the revolution, the poem \"Filipinas\", written in 1899 by nationalist Jos\u00e9 Palma, gained widespread popularity as unofficial Spanish lyrics of the anthem. The Spanish lyrics were translated into English and, beginning in the 1940s, in the national language. The current Filipino lyrics, written in 1956 and with a slight revision in the 1960s, were adopted and made official. On February 12, 1998, Republic Act No. 8491 was passed, codifying these lyrics into law.\nHistory.\n\"Lupang Hinirang\" began as incidental music which President Emilio Aguinaldo commissioned for use in the proclamation of Philippine independence from Spain. This task was given to Juli\u00e1n Felipe and was to replace a march which Aguinaldo had deemed unsatisfactory. The original title of this new march was \"Marcha Filipina-Magdalo\" (Philippine-Magdalo March), and was later changed to \"Marcha Nacional Filipina\" (Philippine National March) upon its adoption as the national anthem of the First Philippine Republic on June 11, 1898, a day before independence was to be proclaimed.\nFelipe said that he had based his composition on three other musical pieces: the \"Marcha Real\", which is the current Spanish national anthem; the \"Grand March\" from Giuseppe Verdi's \"Aida\"; and the French national anthem, \"La Marseillaise\". It was played by the \"Banda San Francisco de Malab\u00f3n\" (now called the \"Banda Matanda\", from present-day General Trias) during the proclamation rites on June 12.\nIn August 1899, soldier and writer Jos\u00e9 Palma penned the Spanish poem \"Filipinas\", which in turn was derived from a Kapampangan poem called \"Labuad Mapalad\" (Blessed Land) by Mariano Proceso Pabalan of Bacolor, Pampanga written in September 1898 during his stay in Casa Hacienda in Bautista, Pangasinan. The poem was published for the first time for the first anniversary of the newspaper \"La Independencia\" on September 3, 1899, and was subsequently set to the tune of the \"Marcha Nacional Filipina\".\nThe Flag Act of 1907 prohibited the use of the anthem and other Philippine revolutionary and Katipunan symbols for a short period of time. When it was repealed back in 1919, the Insular Government decided to translate the hymn from its original Spanish version to the English version. The first translation was written around that time by the renowned poet Paz M\u00e1rquez Ben\u00edtez of the University of the Philippines. The most popular translation, called the \"Philippine Hymn\", was written by Senator Camilo Os\u00edas and an American, Mary A. Lane. The anthem was played alongside the United States anthem, \"The Star-Spangled Banner\", which was adopted in 1931, until the country's eventual independence in 1946.\nTagalog translations began appearing in the 1940s, with the first known one titled \"Diwa ng Bayan\" (Spirit of the Country), which was sung during the Japanese occupation of the Philippines. The second most popular one was \"O Sintang Lupa\" (O Beloved Land) by Juli\u00e1n Cruz Balmaceda, Ildefonso Santos, and Francisco Caballo; this was adopted as the official version in 1948. Upon the adoption of \"Diwa ng Bayan\", the song \"Awit sa Paglikha ng Bagong Pilipinas\" and the Japanese national anthem \"Kimigayo\" were replaced.\nDuring the term of President Ramon Magsaysay, Education Secretary Gregorio Hern\u00e1ndez formed a commission to revise the lyrics. On May 26, 1956, the Tagalog translation \"Lupang Hinirang\" was sung for the first time. Minor revisions were made in the 1960s, and it is this version by Felipe Padilla de Le\u00f3n which is presently used.\nThe Marcos Sr. dictatorship until the 1986 EDSA Revolution saw the use of the National Anthem as the opening protest song of some political parties, activist organizations, and union groups, accompanied by the use of the \"raised clenched fist\" salute instead of the traditional hand-to-heart salute. This was notably done by opposition political parties and activists.\nSome of the original meanings in \"Filipinas\" have been lost in translation; for example, \"hija del sol de oriente\" () in the original Spanish version became \"child of the sun returning\" in the Philippine Hymn and \"perlas ng silanganan\" () in the present (official) version. The time signature in performance had been changed from 2/4 to 4/4 to facilitate singing and the key changed from the original C major to G in the 1920s. However, this change was not codified into law.\nThe 1956 Filipino lyrics were confirmed in 1958 by Republic Act No. 8491 (the \"Flag and Heraldic Code of the Philippines\") in 1998, abandoning use of both the Spanish and English versions. Philippine law requires that the anthem always be rendered in accordance with Felipe's original musical arrangement and composition, but the original holograph cannot be located. In 2011, Senator Bong Revilla introduced a bill which, among other things, would have removed the requirement that the anthem be sung \"in its original Filipino lyrics and march tempo\", but this was not promulgated into law.\nOther anthems.\n\"Lupang Hinirang\" was not the first Philippine national anthem to ever be conceived. The composer and revolutionist Julio Nakpil composed \"Marangal na Dalit ng Katagalugan\" (Honorable Hymn of the Tagalog Nation/People) upon the request of Andr\u00e9s Bonifacio, the leader of the Katipunan, the secret society that had spearheaded the Revolution. Bonifacio had converted the organization into a revolutionary government\u2014with himself as President\u2014known as the Tagalog Republic just before hostilities erupted. The term \"Katagalugan\" in Bonifacio's usage referred to the Philippine Islands and its population as a whole; not just ethnic Tagalogs, but all Filipinos. Nakpil composed his national anthem for Bonifacio in Balara (part of modern Quezon City) in November 1896, and Bonifacio later promoted its use in Cavite, where it was still known as late as 1898. But after Bonifacio's \"Katipunan\" and \"Republika ng Katagalugan\" were superseded by a succession of various governments led by Aguinaldo starting in 1897, Nakpil's anthem was never officially adopted by them.\nSome sources assert that an English version written by Mary A. Lane and Camilo Os\u00edas was legalized by Commonwealth Act No. 382. The act, however, only concerns itself with the instrumental composition by Juli\u00e1n Felipe.\nDuring World War II, Felipe Padilla de Le\u00f3n composed \"Awit sa Paglikha ng Bagong Pilipinas\", commissioned as a replacement anthem by the Japanese-sponsored Second Philippine Republic. It was later adapted during the martial law era under President Ferdinand Marcos into the patriotic song titled \"Hymn of the New Society\", not to be confused with the \"March of the New Society\".\nLyrics.\nOfficial lyrics.\nThe following Spanish, English and Tagalog versions of the national anthem have been given official status throughout Philippine history. However, only the current Filipino version is officially recognized by the Flag and Heraldic Code, approved on February 12, 1998, which specifies, \"The National Anthem shall always be sung in the 'national language' within or outside the country; violation of the law is punishable by a fine and imprisonment.\" Several bills have been introduced to amend the Flag and Heraldic Code to highlight the importance of complying, abiding and conforming to the standard expression as prescribed by law, but none have been enacted into law.\nProposed lyrical revisions.\nIn 2018, Senate president Vicente Sotto III criticized the final line, \"ang mamatay nang dahil sa 'yo\" (literally \"to die because of you [the country]\" and translated above as \"For us, thy sons to suffer and die.\"), in reference to Horace's \"Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori\" as \"defeatist\", but a proposed recvision with a message of commitment to defending the country's independence drew popular backlash. In 2013, musician Joey Ayala, tampered with the national anthem in a forum by changing the last line to \"ang magmahal nang dahil sa 'yo\" (\"to love for the country\") and arranged the time signature from 4/4 to 6/8, drawing mixed reactions from the public. In 2018, Senate President Tito Sotto suggested that last line should be revised to \"ang ipaglaban ang kalayaan mo\" (\"to defend your freedom\") as it reflects the commitment of the Filipinos to defend the country's independence, but his suggestion was not well-received online.\nMusic and tempo.\nR.A. 8491 specifies that in official or civic gatherings the anthem \"shall be in accordance with the musical arrangement and composition of Juli\u00e1n Felipe.\" However, when literally followed, this would require performance by a pianist or by a brass band, as these were the only versions that were produced by Juli\u00e1n Felipe. The original version was composed in duple time (i.e., in a time signature of ) and was changed to the present quadruple time () in the 1920s to make singing easier by reducing emphasis on syncopation.\nDuring televised boxing matches featuring Filipino boxer Manny Pacquiao, singers have been both praised and criticized by the National Historical Institute (NHI) for singing too slow or too fast. The NHI says that the proper time signature is and the proper tempo is 100 bpm. The NHI also states that the anthem should last 53 seconds.\nUsage.\nThe anthem is usually played during public gatherings in the Philippines or in foreign countries where the Filipino audience is sizable. The Code also provides that it be played at other occasions as may be allowed by the National Historical Institute (now known as the National Historical Commission of the Philippines). It prohibits its playing or singing for mere recreation, amusement, or entertainment except during International competitions where the Philippines is the host or has a representative; local competitions; during the \"sign-on\" and \"sign-off\" of radio broadcasting and television stations in the country; and before the initial and last screening of films and before the opening of theatre performances.\nUntil 1999, the national anthem was played with four ruffles and flourishes as the presidential salute honors music during the beginning of civil or military parades following Spanish and Taiwanese tradition, especially on national holidays. Since that year it has been played solely during the presentation of award recipients on anniversary parades or following the presidential honors.\nRegulation.\nArticle XVI, Section 2 of the 1987 Constitution specifies that \"The Congress may, by law, adopt a new name for the country, a national anthem, or a national seal, which shall be truly reflective and symbolic of the ideals, history, and traditions of the people. Such law shall take effect only upon its ratification by the people in a national referendum.\"\nFlag and Heraldic Code of the Philippines.\nRepublic Act No. 8491 (\"The Flag and Heraldic Code of the Philippines\") regulates usage of the National Anthem, and contains the complete lyrics of \"Lupang Hinirang\". Enacted in 1998, it requires that the anthem \"shall always be sung in the national language\" regardless if performed inside or outside the Philippines, and specifies that the singing must be done \"with fervor\".\nThe code specifies penalties for violation of its provisions. Section 48 provides for public censure and cancellation of licenses and permits, Section 49 requires the Department of Education and the Commission on Higher Education to ensure that all students commit the national anthem to memory, section 50 specifies penalties of fine or imprisonment for violations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72528", "revid": "12608568", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72528", "title": "Bureau of Labor Statistics", "text": "US government agency\nThe Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is a unit of the United States Department of Labor. It is the principal fact-finding agency for the U.S. government in the broad field of labor economics and statistics and serves as a principal agency of the U.S. Federal Statistical System. The BLS collects, processes, analyzes, and disseminates essential statistical data to the American public, the U.S. Congress, other Federal agencies, state and local governments, businesses, and labor representatives. The BLS also serves as a statistical resource to the United States Department of Labor, and conducts research measuring the income levels families need to maintain a satisfactory quality of life.\nBLS data must satisfy a number of criteria, including relevance to current social and economic issues, timeliness in reflecting today's rapidly changing economic conditions, accuracy and consistently high statistical quality, impartiality in both subject matter and presentation, and accessibility to all. To avoid the appearance of partiality, the dates of major data releases are scheduled more than a year in advance, in coordination with the Office of Management and Budget.\nHistory.\nThe Bureau of Labor was established within the Department of the Interior on June 27, 1884, to collect information about employment and labor. Its creation under the Bureau of Labor Act (23 Stat. 60) stemmed from the findings of U.S. Senator Henry W. Blair's \"Labor and Capital Hearings\", which examined labor issues and working conditions in the U.S. Statistician Carroll D. Wright became the first U.S. Commissioner of Labor in 1885, a position he held until 1905. The Bureau's placement within the federal government structure changed three times in the first 29 years following its formation. It was made an independent (sub-Cabinet) department by the Department of Labor Act (25 Stat. 182) on June 13, 1888. The Bureau was then incorporated into the Department of Commerce and Labor by the Department of Commerce Act (32 Stat. 827) on February 14, 1903. Finally, it was transferred under the Department of Labor in 1913, where it resides today. Starting in 1992, BLS was headquartered in the Postal Square Building near Washington Union Station. During 2024, BLS headquarters were moved to the Suitland Federal Center in Suitland, Maryland, into the same facility that houses the Bureau of the Census headquarters.\nSince 1915, the BLS has published the \"Monthly Labor Review\", a journal focused on the data and methodologies of labor statistics.\nThe BLS is headed by a commissioner who serves a four-year term from the date he or she takes office.\nErica Groshen was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on January 2, 2013, and sworn in as the 14th commissioner of labor statistics on January 29, 2013, for a term that ended on January 27, 2017. William Wiatrowski, Deputy Commissioner of the BLS, served as Acting Commissioner until the next commissioner, William Beach was sworn in. Beach served until January 2024, at which time he was succeeded by Erika McEntarfer. \nFiring of Commissioner McEntarfer.\nOn August 1, 2025, President Donald Trump announced that he would fire Commissioner McEntarfer, hours after a downward revision in job creation was published in the Bureau's July jobs report. According to the BBC, \"[t]he decision shocked Wall Street and raised alarm about White House interference in economic data.\" Commentators pointed out that due to BLS security precautions, the commissioner did not have access to the systems that collect the data for this report, and could not change the results without a large number of people knowing and at least some of them complaining publicly.\nUS Jobs Report.\nEvery month, usually on the first Friday, the BLS releases its Employment Situation Summary, commonly known as the \"US jobs report,\" among other monthly, quarterly, annual, etc., reports.\nThe methods the BLS uses for the surveys that originate the data for the jobs reports, and how the calculations for the reports are done, are publicly available government data, published on the BLS website.\nThe BLS collects job data in two separate surveys: the Current Population Survey (CPS) and Current Employment Statistics (CES). \nCurrent Population Survey (CPS).\nThis survey provides data on the employed, unemployed, and those not in the labor force. It measures the unemployment rate, labor force participation rate, and employment-to-population ratio. It is a monthly survey of U.S. households, conducted by the United States Census Bureau for the BLS. Participation in the survey is voluntary.\nAfter the interviews are conducted, the Census Bureau processes the raw data files (as submitted by interviewers) to create a microdata file that can be used to produce estimates. This processing includes removing all personally identifiable information, assigning standardized occupation and industry classifications, editing the data for completeness and consistency, and creating new data elements based on responses to multiple survey questions. Data from field interviewers and centralized call centers are transmitted to Census Bureau headquarters daily during the survey interview period through secure electronic communications. When the Census Bureau's processing activities are completed, the microdata file is securely transferred to the BLS for estimation of labor force statistics.\nCurrent Employment Statistics (CES).\nThis program produces detailed industry estimates of nonfarm employment, hours, and earnings of workers on payrolls. CES National Estimates (CES-N) produces data for the nation, and CES State and Metro Area (CES-SA) produces estimates for all 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and about 450 metropolitan areas and divisions. Each month, CES surveys approximately 121,000 businesses and government agencies, representing approximately 631,000 individual worksites, drawn from a sampling frame of unemployment insurance tax accounts. Both programs use the same sample and collection methods. Participation in the survey is voluntary under federal law, but it is mandatory in California, New Mexico, Ohio, Oregon, South Carolina, and Puerto Rico. The South Carolina requirement applies to firms with more than 20 employees. The businesses report data on employment, hours, and earnings for all paid workers from their payroll records. The data is collected for the pay period that includes the 12th of the month (regardless of its length), via a form sent to workplaces, by telephone, and online (but not by email, for security reasons).\nFor its monthly estimation, the CES-N program uses a matched sample concept and weighted sample data to produce employment, hours, and earnings estimates. Regarding its reliability, the CES survey, like other sample surveys, is subject to two types of error: sampling and nonsampling error. The magnitude of sampling error, or variance, is directly related to the size of the sample and the percentage of universe coverage achieved by the sample. The CES sample covers over one-third of total universe employment, yielding a very small variance for the total nonfarm estimates. Nonsampling error includes response errors, nonresponse bias, and frame imperfections, such as the inability to account for business births.\nRevisions.\nThe BLS cautions on its releases page that \"data in archived news releases may have been revised in subsequent releases. The latest data, including any revisions, may be obtained from the databases accessible on the program homepages.\"\nIn addition to the last month's information, the jobs report revises up or down the previous two months' jobs totals. The primary reasons for the monthly revisions are the collection of additional samples and seasonal adjustments. Also, each year, CES March employment data are reanchored or benchmarked to employment population totals primarily derived from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. This is done by replacing the March data-based employment estimates with universe counts of employment. The data are also re-seasonally adjusted to account for the benchmark revision and the re-evaluation of outliers and models. \"Although revisions can seem disruptive to some users, they are an integral part of the quality control of CES sample-based estimates.\" The BLS does not wait until it has all the reports to make the estimate and avoid revisions because users of the data are \"intensely interested in the earliest possible read on labor market developments.\" As the revised estimates are based on more complete data, they create a higher resolution picture; sometimes, the revised data produce a totally different picture.\nFollowing Trump's firing of Commissioner McEntarfer, the media explained how The Employment Situation reports are made, stating that revisions are not unusual, nor are large changes in them abnormal. The BLS considers its initial job numbers as preliminary when they are first published, because some businesses do not report their payroll data by the deadline (only about 60% do), making the report harder to estimate. The BLS continues collecting the payroll data (three months after the deadline, when more than 90% of workplaces have responded), and revising it according to seasonal adjustments; if more complete data is much above or below the preliminary data, \"revisions can be exacerbated by the BLS' seasonal adjustments, which sometimes need to be recalculated.\" The data is revised in each of the two months following the initial report, also in a preliminary annual revision (August), and in a final annual revision (February), adding unemployment insurance data; there is a 10-year revision with census data. The BLS does not provide lengthy analyses of the revisions; according to William Beach, \"it's normal for BLS not to explain those differences, because then they're doing a job outside of the job they're supposed to do, which is to take the data, and statistically make modifications to the estimates based on the data.\"\nAccording to the WSJ, the BLS has faced issues with data collection in recent years. Budget cuts\u2014including a governmental hiring freeze earlier this year\u2014and response rates have made providing real-time, accurate data more difficult. For example, the BLS surveys about 120,000 employers by phone or online to track the number of jobs in the economy and about 30% to 40% do not reply on time\u2014up from under 20% a decade ago.\nAccording to Barry Knapp of Ironsides Macroeconomics, the model used by BLS systematically overestimates the employment effects of small businesses. At the same time, reduced numbers of job-seeking foreigners are not caused by higher employment but by increased deportations and sinking immigration, which is not reflected in the BLS reports.\nCommissioners.\nCommissioners of Labor Statistics (1885 to present):\nTable notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStatistical reporting.\nStatistics published by the BLS fall into four main categories:\nStatistical regions.\nData produced by the BLS is often categorized into groups of states known as Census Regions. There are four Census Regions, which are further categorized by Census Division as follows:\nNortheast Region\nSouth Region\nMidwest Region\nWest Region\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72529", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72529", "title": "Economic indicator", "text": "Measure, which allows statements about the economic situation in general of national economies\nAn economic indicator is a statistic about an economic activity. Economic indicators allow analysis of economic performance and predictions of future performance. One application of economic indicators is the study of business cycles. Economic indicators include various indices, earnings reports, and economic summaries: for example, the unemployment rate, quits rate (quit rate in American English), housing starts, consumer price index (a measure for inflation), inverted yield curve, consumer leverage ratio, industrial production, bankruptcies, gross domestic product, broadband internet penetration, retail sales, price index, and changes in credit conditions.\nThe leading business cycle dating committee in the United States of America is the private National Bureau of Economic Research. The Bureau of Labor Statistics is the principal fact-finding agency for the U.S. government in the field of labor economics and statistics. Other producers of economic indicators includes the United States Census Bureau and United States Bureau of Economic Analysis.\nClassification by timing.\nEconomic indicators can be classified into three categories according to their usual timing in relation to the business cycle: leading indicators, lagging indicators, and coincident indicators.\nLeading indicators.\nLeading indicators are indicators that usually, but not always, change before the economy as a whole changes. They are therefore useful as short-term predictors of the economy. Leading indicators include the index of consumer expectations, building permits, and credit conditions. The Conference Board publishes a composite Leading Economic Index consisting of ten indicators designed to predict activity in the U. S. economy six to nine months in future.\nComponents of the Conference Board's Leading Economic Indicators Index:\nEconomist D.W. Mackenzie suggests that the https:// may also be useful as a leading economic indicator.\nLagging indicators.\nLagging indicators are indicators that usually change after the economy as a whole does. Typically the lag is a few quarters of a year. The unemployment rate is a lagging indicator: employment tends to increase two or three quarters after an upturn in the general economy.. In a performance measuring system, profit earned by a business is a lagging indicator as it reflects a historical performance; similarly, improved customer satisfaction is the result of initiatives taken in the past.\nThe Index of Lagging Indicators is published monthly by The Conference Board, a non-governmental organization, which determines the value of the index from seven components.\nThe Index tends to \"follow\" changes in the overall economy.\nThe components on the Conference Board's index are:\nCoincident indicators.\nCoincident indicators change at approximately the same time as the whole economy, thereby providing information about the current state of the economy. There are many coincident economic indicators, such as Gross Domestic Product, industrial production, personal income and retail sales. A coincident index may be used to identify, after the fact, the dates of peaks and troughs in the business cycle.\nThere are four economic statistics comprising the Index of Coincident Economic Indicators:\nThe Philadelphia Federal Reserve produces state-level coincident indexes based on 4 state-level variables:\nBy direction.\nThere are also three terms that describe an economic indicator's \"direction\" relative to the direction of the general economy:\nLocal indicators.\nLocal governments often need to project future tax revenues. The city of San Francisco, for example, uses the price of a one-bedroom apartment on Craigslist, weekend subway ridership numbers, parking garage usage, and monthly reports on passenger landings at the city's airport.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72530", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72530", "title": "Bankruptcies", "text": ""}
{"id": "72532", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72532", "title": "Marxists", "text": ""}
{"id": "72535", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72535", "title": "Evelyn Ashford", "text": "American sprinter\nEvelyn Ashford (born April 15, 1957) is an American retired track and field athlete, the 1984 Olympic champion in the 100-meter dash, and the world record-holder in the 60-yard dash. She ran under the 11-second barrier over 30 times and was the first woman to run under 11 seconds in an Olympic Games. Ashford has the distinction of owning the longest unbroken athletics record (60y dash).\nBiography.\nAs a 19-year-old, Ashford finished fifth in the 100 m event at the 1976 Summer Olympics. After beating the world record holders in the 100 m and 200 m in 1979 at the World Cup of Track and Field in Montreal, Ashford was one of the potential medalists for the 1980 Summer Olympics, but these Games were boycotted by the United States. Ashford also tore a quad muscle in 1980 and was out for the rest of the season.\nIn 1977, she won the first Broderick Award (now the Honda Sports Award) as the nation's best female collegiate track and field athlete.\nAshford was ranked No. 1 in the world by \"Track &amp; Field News\" over 100 meters in 1979 and 1981, and over 200 meters in 1981. She also was named Track and Field News \"Athlete of the Year\" twice, in 1981 and 1984\nShe again won the sprint double, at the world cup in Rome, in 1981.\nOn July 3, 1983, she set her first world record for the 100 meters, running 10.79 seconds at the National Sports Festival in Colorado Springs, Colorado, and was one of the favorites to win the 100-meter title at the inaugural World Championships in Helsinki. In the final, however, she pulled a hamstring muscle and fell. The other main favorite, Marlies G\u00f6hr of East Germany (who had already beaten Ashford earlier that year), went on to win.\nAt the 1984 Summer Olympics, Ashford had a chance to win a gold medal. However, she had to withdraw from the 200 m heats with a minor injury. She competed in the 100 m, winning the event in a new Olympic record of 10.97 secs. As the anchor runner for 4 \u00d7 100 m relay team, she won a second gold medal. In the absence of World Champions and world record holders East Germany, the US team clocked one of the fastest times in history and won by the biggest margin ever at an Olympics, 1.12 seconds.\nLater in the season, she finally defeated her main rival G\u00f6hr at the Weltklasse meeting in Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland. The race saw Ashford make up half a meter or so over G\u00f6hr and lower her own world record to 10.76 seconds. That race proved to be Ashford's personal record. It still ranks as the No. 13 individual all-time. Ashford regained her No. 1 \"Track &amp; Field News\" ranking.\nAt the 1988 Summer Olympics, she was the flag bearer for the United States team at the Opening Ceremony. She was beaten in the 100 m by Florence Griffith Joyner, who had broken her world record earlier in the season at the Olympic Trials. In the 4 \u00d7 100 m relay she again ran the final leg, winning her third Olympic gold medal despite a less than perfect last exchange between Griffith-Joyner and Ashford that required Ashford to run a sensational final leg to overtake G\u00f6hr.\nAt her last Olympics in Barcelona, Ashford, aged 35, was eliminated in the 100 m semi-finals by 1/100 of a second; she went on to win her third straight Olympic 4 \u00d7 100 m relay gold, this time running the first leg. She is one of six women to have won four gold medals in track and field Olympic history.\nAshford came back from season-ending injuries three times, to reach the top of the sport in the following year. In 1980 she injured her quad, and returned in 1981 with the sprint double at the World Cup and the number one world ranking in both sprints. After an injury in 1983, she became double Olympic Champion in 1984. In 1987 a hamstring pull prevented her from competing at the World Championships, then a season later added an Olympic Silver and third Gold medal to her collection.\nOn May 30, 1985, she gave birth to her daughter Raina Ashley Washington, and again came back for an excellent 1986, losing only once over both the 100 m and 200 m, and winning the 100 meter title at the Goodwill Games; earning another No. 1 ranking by \"Track &amp; Field News\" over the shorter distance.\nAfter parting ways with her coach Pat Connolly in 1985, Ashford was largely self-coached.\nIn 1997, Ashford was inducted into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame, where she is said to be \"one of the greatest track and field runners ever\". Ashford went to the University of California, Los Angeles and Roseville High School. She was inducted into the UCLA Athletics Hall of Fame in 1990.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72536", "revid": "50737244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72536", "title": "Thermal conduction", "text": "Process by which heat is transferred within an object\nThermal conduction is the diffusion of thermal energy (heat) within one material or between materials in contact. The higher temperature object has molecules with more kinetic energy; collisions between molecules distributes this kinetic energy until an object has the same kinetic energy throughout. Thermal conductivity, frequently represented by k, is a property that relates the rate of heat loss per unit area of a material to its rate of change of temperature. Essentially, it is a value that accounts for any property of the material that could change the way it conducts heat. Heat spontaneously flows along a temperature gradient (i.e. from a hotter body to a colder body). For example, heat is conducted from the hotplate of an electric stove to the bottom of a saucepan in contact with it. In the absence of an opposing external driving energy source, within a body or between bodies, temperature differences decay over time, and thermal equilibrium is approached, temperature becoming more uniform.\nEvery process involving heat transfer takes place by only three methods:\nOverview.\nA region with greater thermal energy (heat) corresponds with greater molecular agitation. Thus when a hot object touches a cooler surface, the highly agitated molecules from the hot object bump the calm molecules of the cooler surface, transferring the microscopic kinetic energy and causing the colder part or object to heat up. Mathematically, thermal conduction works just like diffusion. As temperature difference goes up, the distance traveled gets shorter or the area goes up thermal conduction increases:\nformula_1\nWhere:\nConduction is the main mode of heat transfer for solid materials because the strong inter-molecular forces allow the vibrations of particles to be easily transmitted, in comparison to liquids and gases. Liquids have weaker inter-molecular forces and more space between the particles, which makes the vibrations of particles harder to transmit. Gases have even more space, and therefore infrequent particle collisions. This makes liquids and gases poor conductors of heat.\nThermal contact conductance is the study of heat conduction between solid bodies in contact. A temperature drop is often observed at the interface between the two surfaces in contact. This phenomenon is said to be a result of a thermal contact resistance existing between the contacting surfaces. Interfacial thermal resistance is a measure of an interface's resistance to thermal flow. This thermal resistance differs from contact resistance, as it exists even at atomically perfect interfaces. Understanding the thermal resistance at the interface between two materials is of primary significance in the study of its thermal properties. Interfaces often contribute significantly to the observed properties of the materials.\nThe inter-molecular transfer of energy could be primarily by elastic impact, as in fluids, or by free-electron diffusion, as in metals, or phonon vibration, as in insulators. In insulators, the heat flux is carried almost entirely by phonon vibrations.\nMetals (e.g., copper, platinum, gold, etc.) are usually good conductors of thermal energy. This is due to the way that metals bond chemically: metallic bonds (as opposed to covalent or ionic bonds) have free-moving electrons that transfer thermal energy rapidly through the metal. The \"electron fluid\" of a conductive metallic solid conducts most of the heat flux through the solid. Phonon flux is still present but carries less of the energy. Electrons also conduct electric current through conductive solids, and the thermal and electrical conductivities of most metals have about the same ratio. A good electrical conductor, such as copper, also conducts heat well. Thermoelectricity is caused by the interaction of heat flux and electric current. Heat conduction within a solid is directly analogous to diffusion of particles within a fluid, in the situation where there are no fluid currents.\nIn gases, heat transfer occurs through collisions of gas molecules with one another. In the absence of convection, which relates to a moving fluid or gas phase, thermal conduction through a gas phase is highly dependent on the composition and pressure of this phase, and in particular, the mean free path of gas molecules relative to the size of the gas gap, as given by the Knudsen number formula_7.\nTo quantify the ease with which a particular medium conducts, engineers employ the thermal conductivity, also known as the conductivity constant or conduction coefficient, \"k\". In thermal conductivity, \"k\" is defined as \"the quantity of heat, \"Q\", transmitted in time (\"t\") through a thickness (\"L\"), in a direction normal to a surface of area (\"A\"), due to a temperature difference (\u0394\"T\") [...]\". Thermal conductivity is a material \"property\" that is primarily dependent on the medium's phase, temperature, density, and molecular bonding. Thermal effusivity is a quantity derived from conductivity, which is a measure of its ability to exchange thermal energy with its surroundings.\nSteady-state conduction.\nSteady-state conduction is the form of conduction that happens when the temperature difference(s) driving the conduction are constant, so that (after an equilibration time), the spatial distribution of temperatures (temperature field) in the conducting object does not change any further. Thus, all partial derivatives of temperature \"concerning space\" may either be zero or have nonzero values, but all derivatives of temperature at any point \"concerning time\" are uniformly zero. In steady-state conduction, the amount of heat entering any region of an object is equal to the amount of heat coming out (if this were not so, the temperature would be rising or falling, as thermal energy was tapped or trapped in a region).\nFor example, a bar may be cold at one end and hot at the other, but after a state of steady-state conduction is reached, the spatial gradient of temperatures along the bar does not change any further, as time proceeds. Instead, the temperature remains constant at any given cross-section of the rod normal to the direction of heat transfer, and this temperature varies linearly in space in the case where there is no heat generation in the rod.\nIn steady-state conduction, all the laws of direct current electrical conduction can be applied to \"heat currents\". In such cases, it is possible to take \"thermal resistances\" as the analog to electrical resistances. In such cases, temperature plays the role of voltage, and heat transferred per unit time (heat power) is the analog of electric current. Steady-state systems can be modeled by networks of such thermal resistances in series and parallel, in exact analogy to electrical networks of resistors. See purely resistive thermal circuits for an example of such a network.\nTransient conduction.\nDuring any period in which temperatures changes \"in time\" at any place within an object, the mode of thermal energy flow is termed \"transient conduction.\" Another term is \"non-steady-state\" conduction, referring to the time-dependence of temperature fields in an object. Non-steady-state situations appear after an imposed change in temperature at a boundary of an object. They may also occur with temperature changes inside an object, as a result of a new source or sink of heat suddenly introduced within an object, causing temperatures near the source or sink to change in time.\nWhen a new perturbation of temperature of this type happens, temperatures within the system change in time toward a new equilibrium with the new conditions, provided that these do not change. After equilibrium, heat flow into the system once again equals the heat flow out, and temperatures at each point inside the system no longer change. Once this happens, transient conduction is ended, although steady-state conduction may continue if heat flow continues.\nIf changes in external temperatures or internal heat generation changes are too rapid for the equilibrium of temperatures in space to take place, then the system never reaches a state of unchanging temperature distribution in time, and the system remains in a transient state.\nAn example of a new source of heat \"turning on\" within an object, causing transient conduction, is an engine starting in an automobile. In this case, the transient thermal conduction phase for the entire machine is over, and the steady-state phase appears, as soon as the engine reaches steady-state operating temperature. In this state of steady-state equilibrium, temperatures vary greatly from the engine cylinders to other parts of the automobile, but at no point in space within the automobile does temperature increase or decrease. After establishing this state, the transient conduction phase of heat transfer is over.\nNew external conditions also cause this process: for example, the copper bar in the example steady-state conduction experiences transient conduction as soon as one end is subjected to a different temperature from the other. Over time, the field of temperatures inside the bar reaches a new steady-state, in which a constant temperature gradient along the bar is finally set up, and this gradient then stays constant in time. Typically, such a new steady-state gradient is approached exponentially with time after a new temperature-or-heat source or sink, has been introduced. When a \"transient conduction\" phase is over, heat flow may continue at high power, so long as temperatures do not change.\nAn example of transient conduction that does not end with steady-state conduction, but rather no conduction, occurs when a hot copper ball is dropped into oil at a low temperature. Here, the temperature field within the object begins to change as a function of time, as the heat is removed from the metal, and the interest lies in analyzing this spatial change of temperature within the object over time until all gradients disappear entirely (the ball has reached the same temperature as the oil). Mathematically, this condition is also approached exponentially; in theory, it takes infinite time, but in practice, it is over, for all intents and purposes, in a much shorter period. At the end of this process with no heat sink but the internal parts of the ball (which are finite), there is no steady-state heat conduction to reach. Such a state never occurs in this situation, but rather the end of the process is when there is no heat conduction at all.\nThe analysis of non-steady-state conduction systems is more complex than that of steady-state systems. If the conducting body has a simple shape, then exact analytical mathematical expressions and solutions may be possible (see heat equation for the analytical approach). However, most often, because of complicated shapes with varying thermal conductivities within the shape (i.e., most complex objects, mechanisms or machines in engineering) often the application of approximate theories is required, and/or numerical analysis by computer. One popular graphical method involves the use of Heisler Charts.\nOccasionally, transient conduction problems may be considerably simplified if regions of the object being heated or cooled can be identified, for which thermal conductivity is very much greater than that for heat paths leading into the region. In this case, the region with high conductivity can often be treated in the lumped capacitance model, as a \"lump\" of material with a simple thermal capacitance consisting of its aggregate heat capacity. Such regions warm or cool, but show no significant temperature \"variation\" across their extent, during the process (as compared to the rest of the system). This is due to their far higher conductance. During transient conduction, therefore, the temperature across their conductive regions changes uniformly in space, and as a simple exponential in time. An example of such systems is those that follow Newton's law of cooling during transient cooling (or the reverse during heating). The equivalent thermal circuit consists of a simple capacitor in series with a resistor. In such cases, the remainder of the system with a high thermal resistance (comparatively low conductivity) plays the role of the resistor in the circuit.\nRelativistic conduction.\nThe theory of relativistic heat conduction is a model that is compatible with the theory of special relativity. For most of the last century, it was recognized that the Fourier equation is in contradiction with the theory of relativity because it admits an infinite speed of propagation of heat signals. For example, according to the Fourier equation, a pulse of heat at the origin would be felt at infinity instantaneously. The speed of information propagation is faster than the speed of light in vacuum, which is physically inadmissible within the framework of relativity.\nQuantum conduction.\nSecond sound is a quantum mechanical phenomenon in which heat transfer occurs by wave-like motion, rather than by the more usual mechanism of diffusion. Heat takes the place of pressure in normal sound waves. This leads to a very high thermal conductivity. It is known as \"second sound\" because the wave motion of heat is similar to the propagation of sound in air. This is called Quantum conduction.\nFourier's law.\nThe law of heat conduction, also known as Fourier's law (compare Fourier's heat equation), states that the rate of heat transfer through a material is proportional to the negative gradient in the temperature and to the area, at right angles to that gradient, through which the heat flows. We can state this law in two equivalent forms: the integral form, in which we look at the amount of energy flowing into or out of a body as a whole, and the differential form, in which we look at the flow rates or fluxes of energy locally.\nNewton's law of cooling is a discrete analogue of Fourier's law, while Ohm's law is the electrical analogue of Fourier's law and Fick's laws of diffusion is its chemical analogue.\nDifferential form.\nThe differential form of Fourier's law of thermal conduction shows that the local heat flux density formula_8 is equal to the product of thermal conductivity formula_9 and the negative local temperature gradient formula_10. The heat flux density is the amount of energy that flows through a unit area per unit time.\nformula_11\nwhere (including the SI units)\nThe thermal conductivity formula_9 is often treated as a constant, though this is not always true. While the thermal conductivity of a material generally varies with temperature, the variation can be small over a significant range of temperatures for some common materials. In anisotropic materials, the thermal conductivity typically varies with orientation; in this case formula_9 is represented by a second-order tensor. In non-uniform materials, formula_9 varies with spatial location.\nFor many simple applications, Fourier's law is used in its one-dimensional form, for example, in the \"x\" direction:\nformula_18\nIn an isotropic medium, Fourier's law leads to the heat equation\nformula_19\nwith a fundamental solution famously known as the heat kernel.\nIntegral form.\nBy integrating the differential form over the material's total surface formula_20, we arrive at the integral form of Fourier's law:\n formula_21 formula_22formula_23formula_24 formula_21 formula_26\nwhere (including the SI units):\nThe above differential equation, when integrated for a homogeneous material of 1-D geometry between two endpoints at constant temperature, gives the heat flow rate as\nformula_32\nwhere\nOne can define the (macroscopic) thermal resistance of the 1-D homogeneous material:\nformula_38\nWith a simple 1-D steady heat conduction equation which is analogous to Ohm's law for a simple electric resistance:\nformula_39\nThis law forms the basis for the derivation of the heat equation.\nConductance.\nWriting\nformula_40\nwhere U is the conductance, in W/(m2 K).\nFourier's law can also be stated as:\nformula_41\nThe reciprocal of conductance is resistance, formula_42 is given by:\nformula_43\nResistance is additive when several conducting layers lie between the hot and cool regions, because \"A\" and \"Q\" are the same for all layers. In a multilayer partition, the total conductance is related to the conductance of its layers by:\nformula_44 or equivalently formula_45\nSo, when dealing with a multilayer partition, the following formula is usually used:\nformula_46\nFor heat conduction from one fluid to another through a barrier, it is sometimes important to consider the conductance of the thin film of fluid that remains stationary next to the barrier. This thin film of fluid is difficult to quantify because its characteristics depend upon complex conditions of turbulence and viscosity\u2014but when dealing with thin high-conductance barriers it can sometimes be quite significant.\nIntensive-property representation.\nThe previous conductance equations, written in terms of extensive properties, can be reformulated in terms of intensive properties. Ideally, the formulae for conductance should produce a quantity with dimensions independent of distance, like Ohm's law for electrical resistance, formula_47, and conductance, formula_48.\nFrom the electrical formula: formula_49, where \"\u03c1\" is resistivity, \"x\" is length, and \"A\" is cross-sectional area, we have formula_50, where \"G\" is conductance, \"k\" is conductivity, \"x\" is length, and \"A\" is cross-sectional area.\nFor heat,\nformula_51\nwhere U is the conductance.\nFourier's law can also be stated as:\nformula_52\nanalogous to Ohm's law, formula_53 or formula_54\nThe reciprocal of conductance is resistance, \"R\", given by:\nformula_55\nanalogous to Ohm's law, formula_56\nThe rules for combining resistances and conductances (in series and parallel) are the same for both heat flow and electric current.\nCylindrical shells.\nConduction through cylindrical shells (e.g. pipes) can be calculated from the internal radius, formula_57, the external radius, formula_58, the length, formula_6, and the temperature difference between the inner and outer wall, formula_60.\nThe surface area of the cylinder is formula_61\nWhen Fourier's equation is applied:\nformula_62\nand rearranged:\nformula_63\nthen the rate of heat transfer is:\nformula_64\nthe thermal resistance is:\nformula_65\nand formula_66, where formula_67. It is important to note that this is the log-mean radius.\nSpherical.\nThe conduction through a spherical shell with internal radius, formula_57, and external radius, formula_58, can be calculated in a similar manner as for a cylindrical shell.\nThe surface area of the sphere is: formula_70\nSolving in a similar manner as for a cylindrical shell (see above) produces:\nformula_71\nTransient thermal conduction.\nInterface heat transfer.\nThe heat transfer at an interface is considered a transient heat flow. To analyze this problem, the Biot number is important to understand how the system behaves. The Biot number is determined by:\nformula_72\nThe heat transfer coefficient formula_73, is introduced in this formula, and is measured in formula_74. If the system has a Biot number of less than 0.1, the material behaves according to Newtonian cooling, i.e. with negligible temperature gradient within the body. If the Biot number is greater than 0.1, the system behaves as a series solution. however, there is a noticeable temperature gradient within the material, and a series solution is required to describe the temperature profile. The cooling equation given is:\nformula_75\nThis leads to the dimensionless form of the temperature profile as a function of time:\nformula_76\nThis equation shows that the temperature decreases exponentially over time, with the rate governed by the properties of the material and the heat transfer coefficient.\nThe heat transfer coefficient, \"h\", is measured in formula_77, and represents the transfer of heat at an interface between two materials. This value is different at every interface and is an important concept in understanding heat flow at an interface.\nThe series solution can be analyzed with a nomogram. A nomogram has a relative temperature as the \"y\" coordinate and the Fourier number, which is calculated by\nformula_78\nThe Biot number increases as the Fourier number decreases. There are five steps to determine a temperature profile in terms of time.\nApplications.\nSplat cooling.\nSplat cooling is a method for quenching small droplets of molten materials by rapid contact with a cold surface. The particles undergo a characteristic cooling process, with the heat profile at formula_80 for initial temperature as the maximum at formula_81 and formula_82 at formula_83 and formula_84, and the heat profile at formula_85 for formula_86 as the boundary conditions. Splat cooling rapidly ends in a steady state temperature, and is similar in form to the Gaussian diffusion equation. The temperature profile, with respect to the position and time of this type of cooling, varies with:\nformula_87\nSplat cooling is a fundamental concept that has been adapted for practical use in the form of thermal spraying. The thermal diffusivity coefficient, represented as formula_88, can be written as formula_89. This varies according to the material.\nMetal quenching.\nMetal quenching is a transient heat transfer process in terms of the time temperature transformation (TTT). It is possible to manipulate the cooling process to adjust the phase of a suitable material. For example, appropriate quenching of steel can convert a desirable proportion of its content of austenite to martensite, creating a very hard and strong product. To achieve this, it is necessary to quench at the \"nose\" (or eutectic) of the TTT diagram. Since materials differ in their Biot numbers, the time it takes for the material to quench, or the Fourier number, varies in practice. In steel, the quenching temperature range is generally from 600\u00a0\u00b0C to 200\u00a0\u00b0C. To control the quenching time and to select suitable quenching media, it is necessary to determine the Fourier number from the desired quenching time, the relative temperature drop, and the relevant Biot number. Usually, the correct figures are read from a standard nomogram. By calculating the heat transfer coefficient from this Biot number, one can find a liquid medium suitable for the application.\nZeroth law of thermodynamics.\nOne statement of the so-called zeroth law of thermodynamics is directly focused on the idea of conduction of heat. Bailyn (1994) writes that \"the zeroth law may be stated: All diathermal walls are equivalent\".\nA diathermal wall is a physical connection between two bodies that allows the passage of heat between them. Bailyn is referring to diathermal walls that exclusively connect two bodies, especially conductive walls.\nThis statement of the \"zeroth law\" belongs to an idealized theoretical discourse, and actual physical walls may have peculiarities that do not conform to its generality.\nFor example, the material of the wall must not undergo a phase transition, such as evaporation or fusion, at the temperature at which it must conduct heat. But when only thermal equilibrium is considered and time is not urgent, so that the conductivity of the material does not matter too much, one suitable heat conductor is as good as another. Conversely, another aspect of the zeroth law is that, subject again to suitable restrictions, a given diathermal wall is indifferent to the nature of the heat bath to which it is connected. For example, the glass bulb of a thermometer acts as a diathermal wall whether exposed to a gas or a liquid, provided that they do not corrode or melt it.\nThese differences are among the defining characteristics of heat transfer. In a sense, they are symmetries of heat transfer.\nInstruments.\nThermal conductivity analyzer.\nThermal conduction property of any gas under standard conditions of pressure and temperature is a fixed quantity. This property of a known reference gas or known reference gas mixtures can, therefore, be used for certain sensory applications, such as the thermal conductivity analyzer.\nThe working of this instrument is by principle based on the Wheatstone bridge containing four filaments whose resistances are matched. Whenever a certain gas is passed over such network of filaments, their resistance changes due to the altered thermal conductivity of the filaments and thereby changing the net voltage output from the Wheatstone Bridge. This voltage output will be correlated with the database to identify the gas sample.\nGas sensor.\nThe principle of thermal conductivity of gases can also be used to measure the concentration of a gas in a binary mixture of gases.\nWorking: if the same gas is present around all the Wheatstone bridge filaments, then the same temperature is maintained in all the filaments and hence same resistances are also maintained; resulting in a balanced Wheatstone bridge. However, If the dissimilar gas sample (or gas mixture) is passed over one set of two filaments and the reference gas on the other set of two filaments, then the Wheatstone bridge becomes unbalanced. And the resulting net voltage output of the circuit will be correlated with the database to identify the constituents of the sample gas.\nUsing this technique many unknown gas samples can be identified by comparing their thermal conductivity with other reference gas of known thermal conductivity. The most commonly used reference gas is nitrogen; as the thermal conductivity of most common gases (except hydrogen and helium) are similar to that of nitrogen.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72539", "revid": "32124853", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72539", "title": "List of premiers of the Northwest Territories", "text": "The premier of the Northwest Territories is a title given to the head of government in the Northwest Territories of Canada when the territory is using an elected system of responsible government. Throughout its history, the territory has been governed by various combinations of locally elected governments and administrators appointed by the government of Canada.\nUpon creation, the Northwest Territories were governed by the lieutenant governor of Manitoba, a representative of the federal government and Queen Victoria, for the newly created province of Manitoba. Six years later in 1876, the territory was given its own lieutenant governor, separate from that of Manitoba. These lieutenant governors presided over an assembly with members both elected and appointed by the federal government. Before 1888, the territory required electoral districts with an area of to contain at least 1,000 people. When this quota was met, a by-election was held to elect a member to replace an appointed one.\nThe Northwest Territories held its first general elections to the North-West Legislative Assembly in 1888 when it considered the population to be sufficient. After this election, the chairman of the assembly's executive committee (analogous to a cabinet) assumed the role of head of government. From 1897 to 1905, the chairman used the title \"premier\", the same title used by the heads of government in the Canadian provinces.\nIn 1905, the provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta were created from the most populous regions of the Northwest Territories. With a much lower population, powers of the territory's head of government reverted to a federal and Crown representative appointed by the prime minister of Canada, this time with the title Commissioner of the Northwest Territories. Beginning in 1951, and increasingly in 1967, powers were transferred back to an elected assembly. In 1980, the head of this assembly regained the title of premier, and in 1985 the became chair of the Executive Council and full head of government.\nBecause the Northwest Territories has a consensus government, the premier is elected by, and from, the members of the Legislative Assembly, and are not divided into parties. This list contains only those government leaders who governed under an elected system of responsible government. For the heads of government before and in between these times, see commissioner of the Northwest Territories.\nPremiers of the Northwest Territories.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt; \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72540", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72540", "title": "Newton (unit)", "text": "Unit of force in physics\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe newton (symbol: N) is the unit of force in the International System of Units (SI). Expressed in terms of SI base units, it is 1\u00a0kg\u22c5m/s2, the force that accelerates a mass of one kilogram at one metre per second squared.\nThe unit is named after Isaac Newton in recognition of his work on classical mechanics, specifically his second law of motion.\nDefinition.\nA newton is defined as 1\u00a0kg\u22c5m/s2 (it is a named derived unit defined in terms of the SI base units). One newton is, therefore, the force needed to accelerate one kilogram of mass at the rate of one metre per second squared in the direction of the applied force.\nThe units \"metre per second squared\" can be understood as measuring a rate of change in velocity per unit of time, i.e. an increase in velocity by one metre per second every second.\nIn 1946, the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) Resolution\u00a02 standardized the unit of force in the MKS system of units to be the amount needed to accelerate one kilogram of mass at the rate of one metre per second squared. In 1948, the 9th CGPM Resolution\u00a07 adopted the name \"newton\" for this force. The MKS system then became the blueprint for today's SI system of units. The newton thus became the standard unit of force in the (SI), or International System of Units.\nThe newton is named after Isaac Newton. As with every SI unit named after a person, its symbol starts with an upper case letter (N), but when written in full, it follows the rules for capitalisation of a common noun; i.e., \"newton\" becomes capitalised at the beginning of a sentence and in titles but is otherwise in lower case.\nThe connection to Newton comes from Newton's second law of motion, which states that the force exerted on an object is directly proportional to the acceleration hence acquired by that object, thus:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 represents the mass of the object undergoing an acceleration formula_3. When using the SI unit of mass, the kilogram (kg), and SI units for distance metre (m), and time, second (s) we arrive at the SI definition of the newton: 1\u00a0kg\u22c5m/s2.\nExamples.\nAt average gravity on Earth (conventionally, formula_4 = ), a kilogram mass exerts a force of about 9.81\u00a0N. \n formula_5\n formula_6 (where 62\u00a0kg is the world average adult mass).\nKilonewtons.\nLarge forces may be expressed in kilonewtons (kN), where 1\u00a0kN \n 1000\u00a0N. For example, the tractive effort of a Class Y steam train locomotive and the thrust of an F100 jet engine are both around 130\u00a0kN.\nClimbing ropes are tested by assuming a human can withstand a fall that creates 12\u00a0kN of force. The ropes must not break when tested against 5 such falls.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72542", "revid": "40443892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72542", "title": "Hygelac", "text": "Legendary king of Geats\nHygelac (; ; ; or \"Hugilaicus\"; died c. 516 or 521) was a king of the Geats according to the poem \"Beowulf\". It is Hygelac's presence in the poem which has allowed scholars to tentatively date the setting of the poem as well as to infer that it contains at least some points of historical fact. \"Beowulf\" gives Hygelac's genealogy: according to the poem, he was the son of Hrethel and had two brothers Herebeald and H\u00e6\u00fecyn, as well as an unnamed sister who was married to Ecgtheow and was the mother of the hero Beowulf. Hygelac was married to Hygd, and they had a son Heardred and an unnamed daughter who married Eofor. When Hygelac's brother H\u00e6\u00fecyn was fighting with the Swedes, Hygelac arrived at Hrefnesholt one day too late to save his brother H\u00e6\u00fecyn, but he managed to rescue the surviving Geatish warriors, who were besieged by the Swedish king Ongentheow and his three sons. The Swedes found refuge at a hill fort but were assaulted by the Geats. In the battle, the Swedish king was slain by Eofor. After the death of his brother Herebeald, Hygelac ascended the Geatish throne. After he was killed during a raid on Frisia, Hygelac was succeeded by Heardred, according to \"Beowulf\".\nHistorical identification.\nThe raid to Frisia enabled N. F. S. Grundtvig to approximate the date of Hygelac's death to c. 516, because a raid to France under a Danish King Chlochilaicus is mentioned by Gregory of Tours. In that source he is recorded as invading the Frankish Kingdoms during the reign of Theodericus I (died 534), the son of Clovis (\"Chlodovechus\"), the king of the Franks in the early sixth century, and was killed in the ensuing chaos after the Scandinavian raiders were caught by the sudden appearance of a military response force led by Theodericus I\u2019s son, Theodebertus. After the defeat the rest of the survivors took to sea in such disordered haste that they left their dead on the field, including their king. The Franks must have taken back whatever had been taken in pillage as well as spoils of the battlefield; and it is reported by Gregory that they found the corpse of Chlochilaicus so awe-inspiring due his extraordinary height, that, as a pagan barbarian not entitled to burial, his remains were exposed for a long time in the nearest Merovingian Court as a curiosity, following the usual triumphal trophy exhibition customary after battle or pirate captures.\nWhile Gregory calls him a king of the Danes, the much younger \"Liber historiae Francorum\" instead calls him a king of the Goths (\"rege Gotorum\"), agreeing with \"Beowulf\".\nTransmission to England.\nThere are two theories on how the account of the Frankish raid came to be preserved in the English epic \"Beowulf\", and they have a bearing upon the date assigned to the poem.\nOral transmission.\nOne view considers the account to have been kept alive by the oral tradition of heroic poetry until it was included in the \"epos\". That Hygelac was known in England already in the early eighth century is seen by the \"Liber Monstrorum\" (\"Book of Monsters\"), where he is referred to as \"Higlacus\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Et fiunt monstra mirae magnitudinis, ut rex Higlacus, qui imperavit Getis et a Francis occisus est, quem equus a duodecimo aetatis anno portare non potuit. Cuius ossa in Rheni fluminis insula, ubi in Oceanum prorumpit, reservata sunt, et de longinquo venientibus pro miraculo ostenduntur.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And there are monsters of an amazing size, like King Hygelac, who ruled the Geats and was killed by the Franks, whom no horse could carry from the age of twelve. His bones are preserved on an island in the river Rhine, where it breaks into the Ocean, and they are shown as a wonder to travellers from afar.\nLeonard Neidorf argues that the authors of \"Beowulf\" and the \"Liber Monstrorum\" must have been relying on a shared oral legendary tradition ultimately stemming from Scandinavia, since they could not have reconstructed the etymologically accurate forms \"Higlac\" and \"Hygelac\" based on the garbled Frankish \"Chlochilaicus.\"\nLiterary transmission.\nOther scholars have instead suggested that the episode shows that Beowulf was composed as late as the 10th century, the date of the sole surviving manuscript. It has been suggested that the poem is in fact dependent on the \"Liber historiae Francorum\", because it mentions the \"Attoarii\", which in \"Beowulf\" become \"Hetware\". One scholar considers it to be inconceivable that independent oral tradition would have faithfully transmitted such a detail. German historian Walter Goffart estimated that \"Beowulf\" could not have been written with these historical details before 923.\nSources and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72544", "revid": "50525190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72544", "title": "North Carolina State University", "text": "Public university in Raleigh, North Carolina, US\nNorth Carolina State University (NC State, North Carolina State, NC State University, or NCSU) is a public land-grant research university in Raleigh, North Carolina, United States. Founded in 1887 and part of the University of North Carolina system, it is the largest university in the Carolinas. The university forms one of the corners of the Research Triangle together with Duke University in Durham and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. It is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\".\nThe North Carolina General Assembly established North Carolina College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts on March 7, 1887, as a land-grant college. The college underwent several name changes and officially became North Carolina State University at Raleigh in 1965. However, by longstanding convention, the \"at Raleigh\" portion is usually omitted. Today, NC State has an enrollment of more than 39,000 students, making it among the largest in the country. NC State has historical strengths in engineering, statistics, agriculture, life sciences, textiles, and design and offers bachelor's degrees in 106 fields of study. The graduate school offers master's degrees in 104 fields, doctoral degrees in 61 fields, and a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine.\nNC State athletic teams are known as the Wolfpack. The name was unofficially adopted in 1921 following an unsigned letter to the NC State \"Alumni News\" suggesting the moniker \"Wolf Pack\". They compete in NCAA Division I in athletics. They have won five NCAA championships, including two mens basketball championships. (1974, 1983) They have also won 3 womens cross-country championships. (2021, 2022, 2023) NC State has also won numerous other championships, conference and others\nHistory.\nThe North Carolina General Assembly founded NC State on March 7, 1887, as a land-grant college under the name \"North Carolina College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts,\" or \"North Carolina A&amp;M\" for short. In the segregated system, it was open only to white students. As a land-grant college, North Carolina A&amp;M would provide a liberal and practical education while focusing on military tactics, agriculture, and the mechanical arts without excluding classical studies. Since its founding, the university has maintained these objectives while building on them. After opening in 1889, North Carolina A&amp;M saw its enrollment fluctuate and its mandate expand. In 1917, it changed its name to \"North Carolina State College of Agriculture and Engineering\"\u2014or \"North Carolina State\" for short. During the Great Depression, the North Carolina state government, under Governor O. Max Gardner, administratively combined the University of North Carolina, the Woman's College (now the University of North Carolina at Greensboro), and NC State. This conglomeration became the University of North Carolina in 1931. In 1937, Blake R. Van Leer joined as Dean and started the graduate program for engineering, among numerous other programs. In 1942, Van Leer successfully encouraged NC State's first women to pursue an engineering degree, 4-5 women would enroll and the first women graduated in 1941. One of his students Katharine Stinson became the Federal Aviation Administration's first female engineer. Following World War II, the university grew and developed. The G.I. Bill enabled thousands of veterans to attend college, and enrollment shot past the 5,000 mark in 1947.\nState College created new academic programs, including the School of Architecture and Landscape Design in 1947 (renamed as the School of Design in 1948), the School of Education in 1948, and the School of Forestry in 1950. In the summer of 1956, following the US Supreme Court ruling in \"Brown v. Board of Education\" (1954) that segregated public education was unconstitutional, North Carolina State College enrolled its first African-American undergraduates, Ed Carson, Manuel Crockett, Irwin Holmes, and Walter Holmes. In 1962, State College officials desired to change the institution's name to North Carolina State University. Consolidated university administrators approved a change to the University of North Carolina at Raleigh, frustrating many students and alumni who protested the change with letter writing campaigns. In 1963, State College officially became North Carolina State of the University of North Carolina. Students, faculty, and alumni continued to express dissatisfaction with this name; however, after two additional years of protest, the name was changed to the current official name, North Carolina State University at Raleigh. However, by longstanding convention, the \"at Raleigh\" portion is omitted even in official documents such as diplomas, and in practice the institution's name is simply \"North Carolina State University\"; \"NC State University\" is also accepted on first reference in news stories. Indeed, school officials have long discouraged using \"at Raleigh\" except when absolutely necessary, as the full name implies that there is another branch of the university elsewhere in the state.\nIn 1966, single-year enrollment reached 10,000. In the 1970s enrollment surpassed 19,000 and the School of Humanities and Social Sciences was added.\nCelebrating its centennial in 1987, NC State reorganized its internal structure, renaming all its schools to colleges (e.g. School of Engineering to the College of Engineering). Also in this year, it gained of land that was developed as Centennial Campus. Since then, NC State has focused on developing its new Centennial Campus. It has invested more than $620 million in facilities and infrastructure at the new campus, with of space being constructed. Sixty-one private and government agency partners are on Centennial Campus.\nNC State has almost 8,000 employees, nearly 38,000 students, a $1.495\u00a0billion annual budget, and a $2.2\u00a0billion endowment. It is the largest university in the state and one of the anchors of North Carolina's Research Triangle, together with Duke University and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.\nIn 2009, NCSU canceled a planned appearance by the Dalai Lama to speak on its Raleigh campus, citing concerns about a Chinese backlash and a shortage of time and resources.\nNCSU Libraries Special Collections Research Center, in D.H. Hill Library, maintains a website devoted to NC State history entitled \"Historical State\".\nIn October 2023, Polychlorinated biphenyl was detected in Poe Hall. NCSU closed Poe Hall the next month. The Campus Community Alliance for Environmental Justice, a student-led coalition, was formed to petition the college to test for environmental contaminants in all campus buildings and increase transparency surrounding Poe Hall.\nCampuses.\nMain campus.\nNC State's Main Campus has three sub-campuses: North Campus, Central Campus, and South Campus. North Campus is the oldest part of NC State and is home to most academic departments and a few residence halls. Central Campus is mainly residence halls, cafeterias, gymnasiums and student support facilities. Finally, Greek Court, the McKimmon Conference and Training Center, and student park-and-ride areas are found on South Campus. North and Central Campus are separated by the North Carolina Railroad. Pedestrian tunnels allow students to commute between campuses. Central and South Campuses are separated by Western Boulevard, a major downtown artery. University Housing divides Main Campus into West, Central, and East Campus for residence hall purposes. West and Central campuses are divided by Dan Allen Drive, while Central and East are divided by Morill Drive and Reynolds Coliseum.\nArchitecturally, Main Campus is known for its distinctive red brick buildings. Brick statues dot the landscape, and the University Plaza, colloquially named \"The Brickyard\", in North Campus is nicknamed for its paving material; most sidewalks are also made from brick. The Brickyard and sidewalks also contain white brick mosaics of the athletics logo and other patterns.\nThe Memorial Belltower, located in the Northeast corner of North Campus, serves as the signature of NC State and appears in the NC State Chancellor's Seal. It was constructed as a monument to alumni killed in World War I. The granite tower, completed in 1937, is 115\u00a0feet (35 m) tall. As a tradition, the Belltower is lit in red at night immediately following athletic victories and certain academic achievements.\nThe Court of North Carolina, just west of the Memorial Belltower, is surrounded by the 1911 Building; the College of Humanities and Social Sciences in Tompkins, Caldwell, Winston Halls and The College of Education in Poe Hall; Page Hall, home to College of Engineering offices; and Leazar Hall, former location of the Computer Science Teaching Labs. It was once home to 100 trees (one for every county in North Carolina), but damage caused by Hurricane Fran in 1996 reduced the number significantly, including the destruction of a particularly old and large tree which was some in diameter. Some replanting has occurred, but the Court's former appearance is far from being restored.\nSouthwest of the Court of North Carolina is another landmark, the Free Expression Tunnel. The Tunnel functions as one of three pedestrian tunnels underneath the railroad tracks separating North Campus and Central Campus. This particular tunnel is the site of sanctioned graffiti; anyone may paint there, and it is often the place for political statements, personal messages, and art. This tunnel also serves as a way to advertise events going on around campus. In 2008, racist and threatening graffiti in the tunnel directed at then President-elect Barack Obama prompted an investigation from the United States Secret Service. Students held a \"Unity Rally\" in response to denounce the acts of racism.\nThe Wolfline bus service connects points on the campuses with each other. It also provides transportation to collegiate athletic events.\nCentennial.\nNC State's main campus is augmented by the mixed-use Centennial Campus. Located south of the Memorial Tower, this campus houses university, corporate, and government research, in addition to classrooms and non-student residences. The Wilson College of Textiles has been based on this campus since 1991. Beginning in 2002, the College of Engineering began to relocate to Centennial Campus. Six of the nine College of Engineering departments are housed in three Engineering Buildings in an area known as the Engineering Oval. The Golden LEAF Biomanufacturing Training and Education Center (BTEC), part of the College of Engineering, is located adjacent to the Engineering Oval. The offices of ABB, LexisNexis and the National Weather Service are also on the Centennial Campus, as well as Centennial Campus Magnet Middle School.\nCentennial Biomedical Campus.\nThe North Carolina State University Centennial Biomedical Campus is located west of the NCSU Memorial Tower. North Carolina State University College of Veterinary Medicine, NC State's professional college and North Carolina's only veterinary medicine program, serves as the anchor of the Biomedical Campus. The campus consists of 20 buildings including the CVM Research Building where biomedical investigations in genomic sciences; vaccine development; cancer immuno-therapy; emerging and infectious zoonotic diseases; and diseases of the lung, respiratory tract, skin, and digestive system are undertaken. The Center for Comparative Medicine and Translational Research, the Veterinary Teaching Hospital with its clinical research and clinical trials, and the Teaching Animal Unit (TAU), which is a working farm, are also campus elements. The 110,000-square-foot Randall B. Terry Jr. Companion Animal Veterinary Medical Center, completed in 2011, doubled the size of the veterinary hospital.\nJ. C. Raulston Arboretum is an arboretum and botanical garden operated by NC State, and located just south of West Campus. It is open daily without charge.\nNC Research Campus.\nNC State is one of eight universities with a presence at the North Carolina Research Campus, a 340-acre biotechnology hub in Kannapolis, NC The university operates the Plants for Human Health Institute (PHHI), a research and education organization devoted to research involving food crops, like fruits and vegetables, and the potential health-promoting properties they convey when consumed. NC State's College of Agriculture and Life Sciences staffs the institute with faculty from the departments of horticultural science; food, bioprocessing and nutrition sciences; plant and microbial biology; genetics; and agricultural and resource economics.\nPHHI has both research and Cooperative Extension components. Mary Ann Lila is director of the Plants for Human Health Institute. As of February 2024, PHHI is home to around 11 faculty and 70 staff at the NC Research Campus.\nNC State began operations in Kannapolis in 2007 as the Fruit and Vegetable Science Institute. The university was one of the first organizations to join the fledgling biotech hub that would become the NC Research Campus. The university's program was renamed the Plants for Human Health Institute when the NC Research Campus was officially dedicated on October 20, 2008, in order \"to more accurately reflect the groundbreaking research approach the institute will take. Institute research will focus on identifying and making available to consumers bioactive compounds in plants that prevent and treat disease.\"\nSustainability.\nIn March 2008, NC State launched the University Sustainability Office in order to address environmental concerns on campus. The university has established a commitment to reduce its annual energy consumption per square foot by at least 4% over a 10-year period. In addition, the university has surpassed the Executive Order 156 goal of diverting 40 percent of their solid waste stream from the landfill through a variety of campus reuse and recycling programs. NC State incorporates locally grown, organic, and free range foods into dining service meals at several events such as Earth Week's EarthFest and the annual All Carolinas Meal with foods local to the Carolinas.\nExaminations of the campus' sustainability practices by the Sustainable Endowments Institute resulted in a \"B+\" grade for NC State on the College Sustainability Report Card 2011. In 2013 the University Housing department agreed to incorporate a new living and learning community known as \"EcoVillage.\" Members of EcoVillage were originally housed in Bragaw Residence Hall on West Campus. Today, EcoVillage is housed in the adjacent Lee Residence Hall. Members of EcoVillage complete numerous volunteer based sustainability trips every semester and attend various discussions about how to improve and further the university's reach into sustainability.\nAcademics.\nStructure.\nNC State is one of 17 institutions that constitute the University of North Carolina system. Each campus has a high degree of independence, but each submits to the policies of the UNC system board of governors. The 32 voting members of the board of governors are elected by the North Carolina General Assembly for four-year terms. President Peter Hans heads the system.\nThe board of trustees of NC State has thirteen members and sets all policies for the university. The UNC system board of governors elects eight of the trustees and the governor of North Carolina appoints four. The student body president serves on the board of trustees as a voting member. The UNC system also elects the chancellor of NC State, currently Kevin Howell.\nThe board of trustees administers NC State's eleven academic colleges. Each college grants its own degrees with the exception of the First Year College which provides incoming freshmen the opportunity to experience several disciplines before selecting a major. The College of Agriculture and Life Sciences is the only college to offer associate degrees and the College of Veterinary Medicine does not grant undergraduate degrees. Each college is composed of numerous departments that focus on a particular discipline or degree program, for example Food Science, Civil Engineering, Genetics or Accounting. There are a total of 66 departments administered by all eleven NC State colleges.\nIn total, NC State offers nine associate degree programs in agriculture, bachelor's degrees in 102 areas of study, master's degrees in 108 areas, and doctorate degrees in 60 areas. NC State is known for its programs in agriculture, engineering, textiles, and design. The textile and paper engineering programs are notable, given the uniqueness of the subject area.\nAcademic divisions.\nAs of the 2018\u20132019 school year[ [update]], NC State had the following colleges and academic departments:\nAdmission.\nConsidered a \"more selective\" university, NC State accepts about half of those who apply for undergraduate admission. For the class of 2019, 21,104 applied and 10,584, or 50%, were accepted, of whom 4,210 enrolled.\nMembers of the class of 2019 had average SAT verbal, math and writing scores of 610, 640 and 587, respectively, for a two-part total (verbal and math) of 1250 (1600-point scale) or a three-part total of 1836 (2400-point scale). The 4,210 students who enrolled had an average high school GPA of 3.44; 40%, or 1,677, ranked in the top 10% of their graduating classes. There were 130 valedictorians and 102 salutatorians in the class.\nTransfer admission is also very competitive. In the fall of 2015, 4,165 students applied to the transfer class; 1,470, or 35%, were admitted.\nNC State requires undergraduate admission candidates to choose a preferred college of study. After determining that an applicant meets the overall university requirements, the individual college must also agree to accept the student. Because of this process, some colleges have significantly higher admission requirements than others.\nThe Graduate School reviews all postgraduate education applications. For fall 2015, 14,394 prospective students applied to the Graduate School; 3,460 (24%) were admitted. Of these, 2,982 (80.3%) enrolled.\nThe Master of Science in Analytics (MSA) degree awarded by the Institute for Advanced Analytics is the university's most selective graduate program accepting around one-in-eight applicants.\nLibraries.\nNC State University Libraries, ranked 30th out of 120 North American research libraries, includes 4.4 million volumes, over 50,000 print and electronic serial subscriptions, more than 20,000 videos and film holdings, and more than 40,000 digital images (as of 2011). The library system has an annual budget of over $40 million.\nThe library system consists of five libraries: two main libraries and three branch libraries. The D. H. Hill Jr. Library, on Main Campus, is over nine stories tall and covers over 119,000 square feet. This library is on North Main Campus in the center of University Plaza, or often called \"The Brickyard\" and is 11,000 square meters. The James B. Hunt Jr. Library, on the university's Centennial Campus, opened in January 2013 and covers over 221,000 square feet. NC State, as a member of the Triangle Research Libraries Network (TRLN), has interlibrary loan services with Duke University, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and North Carolina Central University.\nRankings and reputation.\nIn 2014\u20132015 NC State became part of only fifty-four institutions in the U.S. to have earned the \"Innovation and Economic Prosperity University\" designation by the Association of Public and Land-grant Universities.\nFor 2025, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranks NC State tied for 58th out of all national universities and tied for 26th out of public universities in the U.S., tied at 34th for \"best college for veterans\" and 60th for \"best value\" schools.\nNC State's College of Engineering was tied for 24th by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\", with many of its programs ranking in the top 30 nationally. NC State's Nuclear Engineering program is considered to be one of the best in the world and in 2020, was ranked 3rd in the country (behind MIT and the University of Michigan Ann Arbor). The biological and agricultural engineering programs are also widely recognized and were ranked 4th nationally. In 2019 NC State's manufacturing and industrial engineering program was ranking 13th in the nation, and material science at 15th. Other notable programs included civil engineering at 20th, environmental engineering tied at 21st, chemical engineering tied for 22nd, computer engineering at 28th, and biomedical engineering ranking 28th nationally in 2019. In 2019, the Academic Ranking of World Universities ranked NC State's electrical engineering program 9th internationally and chemical engineering 20th. In 2020, \"The Princeton Review\" ranked NC State 36th for game design.\nNC State is also home to the only college dedicated to textiles in the country, the Wilson College of Textiles, which is a partner of the National Council of Textile Organizations and is widely regarded as one of the best textiles programs in the world. In 2020 the textile engineering program was ranked 1st nationally by College Factual. In 2017, \"Business of Fashion Magazine\" ranked the college's fashion and apparel design program 8th in the country and 30th in the world. In 2018, \"Fashion Schools\" ranked the college's fashion and textile management program 11th in the nation.\nNC State's Masters program in data analytics was the first in the United States. Launched in 2007, it is part of the Institute for Advanced Analytics and was created as a university-wide multidisciplinary initiative to meet the rapidly growing demand in the labor market for analytics professionals. In 2012, Thomas H. Davenport and D.J. Patil highlighted the MSA program in \"Harvard Business Review\" as one of only a few sources of talent with proven strengths in data science.\nNC State is known for its College of Veterinary Medicine and in 2020 it was ranked 4th nationally, by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\", 25th internationally by NTU Ranking and 36th internationally by the Academic Ranking of World Universities.\nIn 2020, NC State's College of Design was ranked 25th by College Factual. In 2018, the \"Animation Career Review\" ranked NC State's Graphic Design program 4th in the country and best among public universities.\nIn 2020, the College of Education tied for 45th in the U.S. and the Poole College of Management is tied for 52nd among business schools. NC State's Entrepreneurship program is ranked 10th internationally among undergraduate programs by \"The Princeton Review\" in 2020. For 2010 the Wall Street Journal surveyed recruiters and ranked NC State number 19 among the top 25 recruiter picks. In 2022, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked the Department of Statistics 11th (tied) in the nation.\nIn fiscal year 2019, NC State University received 95 awards and $29,381,782 in National Institutes of Health (NIH) Funds for Research. For fiscal year 2017, NC State was ranked 45th in total research expenditure by the National Science Foundation.\n\"Kiplinger's Personal Finance\" placed NC State 9th in its 2018 ranking of best value public colleges in the United States.\nScholarships.\nThere are several notable scholarships of North Carolina State University which include:\nSpecial programs.\nThe Entrepreneurship Initiative\nThe Entrepreneurship Initiative (EI) at NC State was formed In July 2008 in response to the Chancellor's call to \"develop an educated an entrepreneurial work force.\" By organizing and energizing its entrepreneurial efforts through the initiative, NC State hopes to provide a comprehensive springboard for ideas, projects, and partnerships.\nYoung and Teen Writers' Workshops\nThe Young and Teen Writers' Workshop is a summer creative writing program for area high school and middle school students. Sponsored by the English Department within the College of Humanities and Social Sciences and held on NC State University's campus, the Young and Teen Writers' Workshop teaches creative writing skills and techniques, while also improving communication skills and confidence. YTWW was founded in 1986 and is one of the oldest and most affordable young writing summer programs in the nation. Courses offered include fiction, poetry, creative nonfiction, genre fiction, graphic novels, and dramatic writing. The director since 2015 is William K. Lawrence.\nAthletics.\nNorth Carolina State (NC State) teams are known as the Wolfpack. They compete as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I level (Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) sub-level for football), primarily competing in the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) for all sports since the 1953\u201354 season. Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cheerleading, cross country, football, golf, soccer, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, track &amp; field and wrestling; while women's sports include basketball, cheerleading, cross country, golf, gymnastics, soccer, softball, swimming and diving, tennis, track &amp; field and volleyball.\nNC State has won ten national championships: four NCAA championships, two AIAW championships, and four titles under other sanctioning bodies. Most NC State fans and athletes recognize the rivalry with the North Carolina Tar Heels as their biggest. NC State was a founding member of the Southern Conference and of the Atlantic Coast Conference, and it is one of the four teams on \"Tobacco Road\".\nThe primary logo for NC State athletics is a red block 'S' with an inscribed 'N' and 'C'. The block S has been in use since 1890 but has seen many alterations through the years. It became the sole logo for all NC State athletic teams in 2000 and was modernized to its current design in 2006.\nNC State athletic teams are nicknamed the 'Wolfpack' (most women's teams are also called the \"Wolfpack,\" except for the women's basketball team who go by the \"Wolfpack Women\"). The name was unofficially adopted in 1921 following an unsigned letter to the NC State \"Alumni News\" suggesting the moniker \"Wolf Pack\". Prior to the adoption of the current nickname, NC State athletic teams went by such names as the Aggies, the Techs, and the Red Terrors. Since the 1960s the Wolfpack has been represented at athletic events by its mascots, Mr. and Mrs. Wuf. In print, the 'Strutting Wolf' is used and is known by the name 'Tuffy.'\nAthletic facilities.\nThe stadium property is northwest of the Memorial Bell Tower. Both Carter\u2013Finley Stadium and the Lenovo Center are located there. Aside from the two stadiums, the property is mainly open space used for event parking. The property borders the North Carolina State Fair to the North and hosts tailgating parties before NC State football games. Located on campus, Reynolds Coliseum is now home to all services of ROTC and several Wolfpack teams, including women's basketball, women's volleyball, women's gymnastics, and men's wrestling.\nStudent life.\nMany residence halls host events, though alcohol policies are strictly enforced.\nWitherspoon Student Center (A.K.A. Student Center Annex) houses an African American Cultural Center which has an art gallery and a library. The cultural center moved to its current location in Witherspoon in 1991, having formerly been in the Print Shop. Witherspoon also houses Student Media and a multicultural student affairs office.\nStudent life at North Carolina State University includes opportunities in a diverse range of activities and organizations. These include multicultural groups, arts groups, political and social action groups, service and professional groups, religious groups, Greek organizations, sports and recreation groups, academic and professional groups, and special interest groups such as the Clogging Team, the Film Society, the Judo Club, the Equestrian Club, the Herpetology Club, and the Black Finesse Modeling Troupe.\nResidence life.\nThirty-five percent of full-time undergraduate students live on campus in one of nineteen residence halls. First year students are required to live in University Housing. Most residence halls provide events that acclimate incoming students to the college experience. Many residence halls house villages, such as Honors Village in the Quad, Global Village in Alexander Hall, Engineering Village in Sullivan, Impact Leadership Village in Bowen Hall, WISE in Lee Hall, Arts Village in Turlington Hall, First Year Commons in Owen and Tucker Hall, and Black Male Initiative in Avent Ferry. The residence hall or residence hall area has an elected council to provide for local event programming and an outlet for student concerns. Collectively, representatives from each hall make up the Inter-Residence Council which represents the on-campus residence-life community as a whole.\nUniversity housing facilities are divided into four areas: East Campus, Central Campus, West Campus, and University Apartments.\nStudent government.\nFounded in 1921, NC State Student Government is a student-run organization that serves as the official voice of the student body and attempts to better the student experience at the university. Both a governing body and an advocacy group, Student Government is involved in policy-making, adjudication, programming, advocating, community service, and countless other activities. The organization is a clearinghouse for concerns from students and answers from administrators. The organization also is responsible for distributing a portion of the fees it receives to student organizations in a process known as appropriations. Student organizations must be registered through Student Involvement to become eligible for appropriations.\nStudent traditions.\nService NC State.\nService NC State (SNCS) is sponsored by the Center for Student Leadership, Ethics &amp; Public Service as the definitive service event to welcome new students to NC State's campus, and as a way to impact the community. This event is open to all students, faculty, staff and the Raleigh community. The event role models the university's mission to impact and support its local and global community.\nHomecoming Week.\nHomecoming week, an event run by the AASAP (Alumni Association Student Ambassador Program), is one of the only homecoming weeks entirely run by students. Usually at the end of October, starts with a Kickoff event and ends with the Pack Howl pep rally and concert. Featured performers have included Lonestar, Ludacris, Chris Daughtry, and most recently Cartel, Guster and The Avett Brothers.\nDuring the week, events such as Wear Red-Get Fed, a parade down Hillsborough Street, and a campus-wide Spirit Competition take place. The week also includes a Leader of the Pack competition honoring NC State's brightest and most passionate female and male student leaders.\nShack-A-Thon.\nShack-A-Thon, a tradition since 1991, is NC State's Habitat for Humanity's annual fall fundraiser. Habitat for Humanity at NC State's Campus Chapter partners with many other student organizations to take over the Brickyard by building shacks that the students live, sleep, and study in for an entire week. Each group raises money by collecting from people walking through the brickyard and online donations. This money goes toward funding a house through Habitat for Humanity of Wake County. In 2014 students raised over $46,000.\nKrispy Kreme Challenge.\nStarted by Park Scholars, a more recent tradition of NC State is the Krispy Kreme Challenge. In this race, students meet at the university's Memorial Bell Tower, then run to a Krispy Kreme shop away (changed from in 2012). Each student must eat twelve glazed doughnuts, then run back to the Bell Tower within one hour. The Challenge was listed as one of the \"102 Things You Gotta Do Before You Graduate\" by \"Sports Illustrated\". Proceeds from the race go to the NC Children's Hospital. In 2014, 8,000 runners participated and the committee raised $200,000 bringing the cumulative total donated to the NC Children's Hospital to $758,000 since the race's inception. The cumulative total reached $2.1 million in 2023.\nStudent media.\n\"Technician\" has been NC State's student-run newspaper since 1920. It employs students throughout the year and reports on campus news, sports, entertainment, and state and national news. \"Technician\" is published Monday through Friday when school is in session with a circulation of about 20,000. The paper is funded by advertisement and a student media fee; it is distributed for free at numerous locations on campus and at area merchants.\nThe \"Nubian Message\" is NC State's African American student newspaper. The \"Nubian Message\" was first published in 1992 following protests from many African American students denouncing the \"Technician's\" alleged racial bias. The \"Nubian Message\" is published biweekly.\nNC State's oldest student publication, the \"Agromeck\" yearbook, celebrated its 100th birthday with the 2002 edition. It acts as a compendium of student life on campus including sporting events, social activities, and day-to-day living. The yearbook serves as a historian of campus. Each year, nearly 1,000 copies are printed and sold.\nThe university has its own student-run radio station, WKNC. The radio station broadcasts at 25,000 watts and reaches all corners of \"the Triangle\" (Raleigh, Durham and Chapel Hill). In 2010, WKNC was voted \"Best College Radio Station of the Triangle\" by readers of the \"Independent Weekly\". The station hosts several formats run by student disc jockeys. Prior to its designation as WKNC in 1958, the station's call letters were WVWP.\nNC State's literary and arts magazine, \"Windhover\", is published once a year in the spring. The publication solicits entries from all university affiliated individuals, including students, staff, alumni, and faculty. The content published includes visual art, writing (prose, poetry, personal narratives, etc.), audio, and video. It was first published in 1964, although the publication was discontinued between the years of 1970 to 1973.\nNotable alumni.\nNC State has 156,297 living alumni, with 61% of alumni living in North Carolina. There are 100 alumni clubs in North Carolina and another 42 states also have active clubs. In addition to alumni, the university employs 2,040 faculty and 5,843 staff. A number of NC State alumni and faculty have made significant contributions in the fields of government, military, science, academia, business, arts, and athletics, among others.\nAmong the most notable alumni with involvement in politics are John Edwards, former U.S. Senator and two-time presidential candidate; James B. Hunt Jr., 4-term Governor of North Carolina; Nida Allam, the first Muslim woman to be elected to a North Carolina government office; and Robert Gibbs, former White House Press Secretary.\nCombining science and politics, Rajendra Kumar Pachauri was the elected chief of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), an organization that shared the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize with Al Gore; Pachauri represented the IPCC in receiving the award. Abdurrahim El-Keib was the interim prime minister of Libya from November 24, 2011, to November 14, 2012. Alumnus Munir Ahmad Khan gained international recognition for his work in reactor quantum physics and later guided the scientific research in nuclear weapons for Pakistan's atomic bomb programs. NASA astronaut Christina Koch also attended NC State, earning two bachelor's degrees in Electrical Engineering and Physics and a Masters of Science in Electrical Engineering. Khalia Braswell, computer scientist, technologist, and founder of INTech earned her bachelor's degree from NC State in computer science.\nSeveral alumni hold or have held top positions at large companies. These include: Apple Inc. (Jeff Williams, chief operating officer), Caterpillar Inc. (James W. Owens), SAS Institute (James Goodnight), president and CEO), Tractor Supply (Hal Lawton, president and CEO), and HowStuffWorks (Marshall Brain).\nOver 60 NC State alumni have achieved the rank of brigadier general, rear admiral, or higher in the United States military. General William C. Lee is often referred to as the \"Father of the U.S. Airborne.\"\nGeneral Maxwell R. Thurman, a former Vice Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army, was the first four-star officer from NCSU. Hugh Shelton, now retired, was a former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and a four-star general. General Dan McNeill commanded the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. NC state alum Major General Michelle Mills Rose was promoted to general from the Virginia Army National Guard. Nominated to be the 34th Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Daryl Caudle, is 1985 NCSU graduate.\nSome alumni have become national academic leaders. Albert Carnesale was the chancellor of UCLA from 1997 to 2006 after a 23-year tenure at Harvard University. Bill Friday was president of the University of North Carolina system for 30 years. William Brantley Aycock was chancellor of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill from 1957 until 1964.\nNotable contributors to the entertainment industry are associated with NC State. Actor and comedian Zach Galifianakis attended NC State. Country singer and American Idol winner Scotty McCreery attends NC State University. Donald Bitzer, the father of plasma television and Emmy Award winner, sat on the faculty of NC State. Musician and entertainment personality John Tesh also studied at NC State, but was expelled his junior year. Comedians and self-proclaimed \"Internetainers\" Rhett and Link also attended NC State.\nAthletes.\nSeveral NC State students later became professional athletes. Bill Cowher coached 15 seasons with the Pittsburgh Steelers football team, including the Super Bowl XL championship team; he is a studio analyst for \"The NFL Today\". Over 130 NC State alumni play or have played in the NFL. Notable former players include Philip Rivers, Don Buckey, Torry Holt, Roman Gabriel, Ted Brown, Dick Christy, Perry Williams, Haywood Jeffires, Vaughan Johnson, Jerry Punch, Jim Ritcher, Koren Robinson, Dewayne Washington, Jerricho Cotchery, Tank Tyler, and 2006 number one pick Mario Williams. Notable current players include Bradley Chubb of the Miami Dolphins; Nyheim Hines of the Cleveland Browns; Garrett Bradbury of the Minnesota Vikings; Jacoby Brissett of the New England Patriots, Russell Wilson of the Pittsburgh Steelers. Willie Burden was a star player in the Canadian Football League, and is a member of the Canadian Football Hall of Fame.\nAnother 41 alumni have played for the NBA including Naismith Hall of Fame member David Thompson and players Tom Gugliotta, Kenny Carr, Spud Webb, Cedric Simmons, Julius Hodge, J.J. Hickson, Josh Powell, T. J. Warren, Dennis Smith Jr., and Thurl Bailey. Former Wolfpack player Nate McMillan played in the NBA and was formerly the Head Coach of the Atlanta Hawks and Indiana Pacers, whilst another former Wolfpack player, Vinny Del Negro, both played and coached in the NBA. Justine Lindsay, the first transgender National Football League cheerleader, is also an alumna of NC State. Patrick Bailey is a catcher with the San Francisco Giants. Trea Turner is an all star infielder for the Philadelphia Phillies.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72545", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72545", "title": "Sir Walter Raleigh", "text": ""}
{"id": "72546", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72546", "title": "Rotokas Record", "text": "2001 weapons surrender agreement in Papua New Guinea\nThe Rotokas Record was a weapons surrender agreement involving the Bougainville Resistance Force and the Bougainville Revolutionary Army and the Papua New Guinean government. It was signed on May 3, 2001.\nThe weapons surrender agreement was part of a larger peace process between Papua New Guinea and Bougainville after Bougainville attempted to secede from Papua New Guinea.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72547", "revid": "16477971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72547", "title": "Carthago Nova", "text": "Roman name for Cartagena in Spain\nCartago Nova is an historical name for the city of Cartagena in Spain, from the Roman conquest until the Byzantine domination in the 6th century. Its name then changed to Carthago Spartaria. The city may not have been founded entirely \"ex novo\" but rather built on earlier Iberian or possibly Tartessian settlement. \nHistory.\nOrigin.\n Cartago Nova was founded around 227\u00a0BC by the Carthaginian general Hasdrubal the Fair, son-in-law and successor of Hamilcar Barca, father of Hannibal. Cartago Nova became the most important of the Carthaginian cities on the peninsula, owing to its strong position and a well-built wall, and it was provided with harbors, lagoons, and silver mines. In Cartago Nova and the surrounding towns, salted fish abounded, and it was the principal emporium both for goods arriving by sea destined for inland residents, and for inland products intended for overseas trade.\nThere is evidence of commercial exchanges with the Phoenicians dating back to the 8th century\u00a0BC along the entire coastline. In addition, Cartagena has traditionally been associated with the city of Mastia mentioned by the Greco-Latin poet Avienus in the work known as the \"Ora maritima\", which contains the oldest preserved accounts of the Iberian Peninsula, and also cited in the Second Treaty of Rome-Carthage in 348\u00a0BC as \"Mastia Tarseion\" (Mastia of the Tartessians).\nAll of the present coastline of Cartagena and Mazarr\u00f3n was highly coveted in Antiquity for its important mineral deposits of lead, silver, zinc, and other minerals. Exploitation and trade in minerals from the Cartagena mines and Mazarr\u00f3n are documented from Phoenician times.\nAfter the First Punic War, the Carthaginians lost their main stronghold in the Mediterranean: the island of Sicily. The only undefeated Carthaginian general in this conflict with the Romans, Hamilcar Barca, went to the Iberian Peninsula with the intention of forming a personal dominion for the Barcid family\u2014of which he was the head\u2014somewhat apart from the direct control of the Senate of Carthage, making Cartago Nova the center of his military operations and enabling him to control the mineral wealth of the southeast of the peninsula. Following Hamilcar\u2019s death in a clash with local tribes, his son Hannibal assumed his position, intending to raise an army powerful enough to face the Romans. Thus, Qart Hadasht became the main city of the Carthaginians in Hispania. From there, Hannibal departed with his elephants on his famous expedition to Italy; he crossed the Alps at the start of the Second Punic War in 218\u00a0BC.\nConquest by Rome and Republican period.\n Undoubtedly, the first Roman interest in Hispania was extracting profit from its legendary mineral wealth, especially the mining deposits of the Cartagena and Mazarr\u00f3n region, then under Carthaginian control.\nThe Roman general Scipio Africanus took Qart Hadasht in 209\u00a0BC, renaming it Cartago Nova as a \"civitas stipendaria\" (tributary community). Later, it received Latin rights under Julius Caesar and became a Roman colony in 44\u00a0BC. The settlement developed into one of the most important Roman cities of Hispania. Administratively, it belonged to the Roman province of Hispania Citerior.\nHigh Empire.\nThe Roman prosperity of Cartago Nova was primarily based on the exploitation of the silver and lead mines of the Cartagena mining area. Around 40,000 enslaved people are said to have worked in these mines, which had been exploited since Phoenician times, with Rome continuing extensive extraction.\nIn 44\u00a0BC, the city was granted the title of a Roman colony under the name \"Colonia Vrbs Iulia Nova Carthago\" (C.V.I.N.C), made up of citizens with full Roman rights.\nIn 27\u00a0BC, Augustus reorganized Hispania, and the city was included in the new imperial province of \"Hispania Tarraconensis\".\nFrom the Republican era, there was a Roman amphitheatre in the city. However, it was under Augustus that Cartago Nova underwent an ambitious urban and monumental development program, which included the construction of an impressive Roman theatre and a large forum.\nBetween the reigns of Tiberius and Claudius, Hispania Tarraconensis was divided into seven juridical convents, one of which was the \"Conventus Iuridicus Carthaginensis\", with its capital in Cartago Nova.\nBeginning in the 2nd century, like other cities of Hispania, the city experienced a slow economic and demographic decline. The entire eastern sector of the city was abandoned, including the forum built in the time of Augustus. The city contracted into the area spanning from the Concepci\u00f3n hill to El Molinete. One reason for the decline appears to have been depletion of the local mines.\nLate Empire: Creation of the Carthaginensis province.\n This downturn was slowed in 298, when Emperor Diocletian divided Hispania Tarraconensis into three provinces, creating the Roman province of \"Carthaginensis\", with its capital in Cartagena.\nA large part of the eastern sector of the city was rebuilt using materials from the Augustan buildings, as was the case with the monumental market built over the remains of the Roman theatre, or the baths on Calle Honda.\nCommercial activity in the city shifted to the production of \"garum\", a fermented fish sauce; numerous remains of such facilities have been found along the coast. An example of the shift from mining to garum production can be seen in the Roman villa of Paturro.\nAround 425, the city was devastated and plundered by the Vandals before they moved on to North Africa.\nNevertheless, the city must have recovered to some extent. In 461, Emperor Majorian assembled a fleet of 45 ships in Cartagena, aiming to invade and recover the Vandal Kingdom of North Africa for the Empire. The Battle of Cartagena ended in a serious defeat for the Roman navy, which was completely destroyed.\nLate Antiquity.\nAfter being sacked by the Vandals around 439, and following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in 476, the city fell under Visigothic control, although it retained a strongly Romanized population. In the midst of Visigothic internal conflicts in the mid-6th century, one faction appealed for help to the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I. After a brief campaign, he seized a significant strip of southern Spain and established the city as the capital of the province of Spania, renaming it Carthago Spartaria. The Bishop of Cartagena then became the metropolitan bishop of this Byzantine province.\nArchaeology.\nMuseums.\nMost archaeological remains connected with Cartago Nova can be found in the following museums:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "72549", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72549", "title": "Neeltje Jans", "text": "Artificial island in Zeeland, the Netherlands\nNeeltje Jans () is an artificial island in the Netherlands in the province of Zeeland, halfway between Noord-Beveland and Schouwen-Duiveland in the Oosterschelde. It was constructed to facilitate the construction of the Oosterscheldedam.\nAfter the construction, a fun park with attractions and other various expositions were built on the island, which are now connected to the shore through the dam. Another addition of the island is a nature reserve.\nThe island was named after a nearby sand bank. The name of this sandbank has two possible origins:\nThe second stage of the 2015 Tour de France finished on Neeltje Jans on 5 July 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72550", "revid": "11360876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72550", "title": "Qin", "text": "Qin may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "72554", "revid": "31609040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72554", "title": "Sound bite", "text": "Short audio clip extracted from a recording\nA sound bite or soundbite is a short clip of speech or music extracted from a longer piece of audio, often used to promote or exemplify the full-length piece. In the context of journalism, a sound bite is characterized by a short phrase or sentence that captures the essence of what the speaker was trying to say, and is used to summarize information and entice the reader or viewer. The term was coined by the U.S. media in the 1970s. Since then, various politicians have increasingly employed sound bites to summarize their positions.\nDue to its brevity, the sound bite often overshadows the broader context in which it was spoken, and can be misleading or inaccurate. The insertion of sound bites into news broadcasts or documentaries is open to manipulation, leading to conflict over journalistic ethics.\nHistory.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, pressure from advertisers on the American television industry to create entertaining news material made sound bites central to political coverage. Politicians began to use PR techniques to craft self-images and slogans that would resonate with the television-viewing audience and ensure their victory in campaigns. The term \"sound bite\" was coined in the late 1970s, several years before the presidency of Ronald Reagan, who was famous for short, memorable phrases like, \"Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!\" in reference to the Berlin Wall.\nDuring the 1988 United States presidential election, candidate Michael Dukakis highlighted the prominent role of sound bites and spin doctors in political campaigns by running a commercial that mocked contender George H. W. Bush's handlers' frustration over the gaffes of his vice presidential running-mate Dan Quayle.\nJournalism.\nIn journalism, sound bites are used to summarize the position of the speaker, as well as to increase the interest of the reader or viewer in the piece. In both print and broadcast journalism, sound bites are conventionally juxtaposed and interspersed with commentary from the journalist to create a news story. A balanced news report is expected to contain sound bites representing both sides of the debate. This technique, however, can lead to biased reporting when a sound bite is selected for sensationalism, or is used to promote the point of view of one individual or group over another.\nImpact.\nIn his book \"The Sound Bite Society\", Jeffrey Scheuer argues that the sound bite was the product of television's increased power over all forms of communication, and that the resulting trend toward short, catchy snippets of information had a significant negative impact on American political discourse. In contrast, Peggy Noonan feels that sound bites have acquired a negative connotation but are not inherently negative, and that what we now think of as great historical sound bites\u2014such as \"The only thing we have to fear is fear itself\", the most famous phrase in Franklin D. Roosevelt's first Inaugural Address\u2014were examples of eloquent speakers unselfconsciously and \"simply trying in words to capture the essence of the thought they wished to communicate.\"\nThe increased use of sound bites in news media has been criticized, and has led to discussions on journalistic and media ethics. According to the Code of Ethics of the Society of Professional Journalists, journalists should \"make certain that headlines, news teases and promotional material, photos, video, audio, graphics, sound bites and quotations do not misrepresent. They should not oversimplify or highlight incidents out of context.\"\nDespite this criticism, sound bites are widely employed by businesses, trade groups, labor unions and politicians. Senator Jim DeMint readily admitted this when he said, \"There\u2019s a reason why most politicians talk in sanitized sound bites: Once you get out of that, you\u2019re opening yourself up to get attacked.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72556", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72556", "title": "Maoist", "text": ""}
{"id": "72561", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72561", "title": "Peta-", "text": ""}
{"id": "72562", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72562", "title": "Orion project", "text": ""}
{"id": "72563", "revid": "1316537665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72563", "title": "Lew Allen", "text": "US Air Force general (1925\u20132010)\nLew Allen Jr. (30 September 1925 \u2013 4 January 2010) was a United States Air Force four-star general who served as the tenth Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force. As chief of staff, Allen served as the senior uniformed Air Force officer responsible for the organization, training, and equipping of 750,000 active duty Air Force, Air National Guard, Air Force Reserve, and civilian personnel serving in the United States and overseas. As a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he and the other service chiefs function(ed) as the military advisers to the Secretary of Defense, the National Security Council, and the president.\nEarly life and education.\nBorn in Miami, Florida, Allen attended and graduated from high school in Gainesville, Texas, in 1942. He entered the United States Military Academy, in 1943, and he graduated in 1946 with a Bachelor of Science degree and a commission as a second lieutenant. He was awarded his pilot's wings upon his graduation from flight training.\nMilitary career.\nAfter completing multi-engine flight training in November 1946, Allen was assigned to Strategic Air Command's 7th Bombardment Group at Carswell Air Force Base, Texas, where he flew B-29 Superfortress bombers, and then the new and very long-range Convair B-36 bomber. Allen also served in various technical positions in the area of nuclear weapons. Allen also attended the Air Tactical Course at Tyndall Air Force Base, Florida, and next he returned to Carswell Air Force Base as a flight instructor and as an assistant Special Weapons Officer for the 7th Bombardment Wing.\nIn September 1950, Allen entered the University of Illinois for graduate study in nuclear physics. He completed his Master of Science degree in 1952. Allen continued his graduate study, and he earned his PhD in physics in 1954 under the direction of Alfred O. Hanson. He had completed an experimental thesis on high-energy photonuclear reactions. Allen then was assigned to the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission's Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in Los Alamos, New Mexico, as a physicist in the Test Division, where he became acquainted with the bomb designer Ted Taylor. Allen conducted experiments in several different nuclear test series. These experiments concerned the physics of thermonuclear weapons design and to the effects of high altitude nuclear explosions conceivably to be used for ballistic missile defense.\nFrom June 1957 to December 1961, Allen was assigned to Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, as the science adviser to the Physics Division of the Air Force Special Weapons Center. (\"Special weapons\" is a euphemism for nuclear and thermonuclear bombs.) Allen specialized in the military effects of high altitude nuclear explosions and participated in several nuclear weapons test series. He was scientific director of a major experiment that utilized a large series of high-altitude rockets to measure the characteristics of electrons trapped in the geomagnetic field after an exoatmospheric nuclear burst.\nAllen was assigned in December 1961 to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Space Technology Office, in the Directorate of Research and Engineering, Washington, D.C. From June 1965 to February 1973, he was assigned to the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force, initially in Los Angeles, California, as the deputy director for advanced plans in the Directorate of Special Projects. Allen next moved to The Pentagon in June 1968 as the deputy director of space systems, and in June 1969, he became the director. He returned to Los Angeles in September 1970 as the assistant to the director of special projects and in April 1971 became the director of special projects, with additional duty as the deputy commander for satellite programs of the Space and Missile Systems Organization.\nAfter serving briefly as the chief of staff for the Air Force Systems Command at Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland, Allen was appointed in March 1973 as a deputy to the Director of Central Intelligence for the Intelligence Community in Washington, D.C. In August 1973, Allen became the director of the National Security Agency (NSA) and the chief of the Central Security Service at Fort George G. Meade, Maryland. Allen's tenure as the NSA director was noteworthy in that he became the first director to ever testify publicly before Congress. In August 1977, he was named commander of Air Force Systems Command.\nAllen served as the Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force from April 1978 until he became the Chief of Staff of the Air Force in July 1978. His nomination was unusual in that he had never served in an overseas or combat assignment, and most of his positions were in specialized technical activities, rather than in the usual command structure of the Air Force. Also, he was the last chief of staff with a bomber background; all subsequent chiefs of staff except General Norton Schwartz have been fighter pilots, and this trend is reflected by the Service's weapon budgets, which devote most funding to fighters rather than bombers.\nRetirement.\nAllen did not believe that crewed spaceflight was useful. He reportedly told a manned spaceflight engineer that he had helped cancel Manned Orbiting Laboratory in the 1960s, and would have canceled the Space Shuttle program. Following his retirement from the Air Force in 1982, Allen became the director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), during part of the Voyager Program (space probes launched in 1977), and he served as the director of the JPL until 1990.\nAllen was a member of the National Academy of Engineering and the Council on Foreign Relations.\nFrom 1993 to 1995, Allen served as a member of the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board (PFIAB) and the Intelligence Oversight Board.\nAllen was awarded the 1999 Distinguished Graduate Award of the Association of Graduates, the alumni association of West Point graduates.\nAllen died in Potomac Falls, Virginia, on 4 January 2010, of complications from rheumatoid arthritis. He was buried at Arlington National Cemetery on March 22, 2010.\nLegacy.\nThe United States Air Force created the General Lew Allen, Jr. Trophy in Allen's honor, which is awarded annually to an Officer and a Senior NCO in the aircraft maintenance or munitions career fields directly involved with setting up aircraft sorties.\nIn 1983, Allen received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nSince 1986, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory awards in his honor the \"Lew Allen Award for Excellence\", until 1990 called the \"Director's Research Achievement Award\".\nMinor planet 4125 Lew Allen is named in his honor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates https:// from "}
{"id": "72564", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72564", "title": "South American economic crisis", "text": ""}
{"id": "72566", "revid": "49096883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72566", "title": "Carmina Burana", "text": "Medieval manuscript of poems and dramatic texts\nCarmina Burana (, Latin for \"Songs from Benediktbeuern\" [\"Buria\" in Latin]) is a manuscript of 254 poems and dramatic texts mostly from the 11th or 12th century, although some are from the 13th century. The pieces are mostly bawdy, irreverent, and satirical. They were written principally in Medieval Latin, a few in Middle High German and old Arpitan. Some are macaronic, a mixture of Latin and German or French vernacular.\nThey were written by students and clergy when Latin was the lingua franca throughout Italy and western Europe for travelling scholars, universities, and theologians. Most of the poems and songs appear to be the work of Goliards, clergy (mostly students) who satirized the Catholic Church. The collection preserves the works of a number of poets, including Peter of Blois, Walter of Ch\u00e2tillon and an anonymous poet referred to as the Archpoet.\nThe collection was found in 1803 in the Benedictine monastery of Benediktbeuern, Bavaria, and is now housed in the Bavarian State Library in Munich. It is considered to be the most important collection of Goliard and vagabond songs, along with the \"Carmina Cantabrigiensia\".\nThe manuscripts reflect an international European movement, with songs originating from Occitania, France, England, Scotland, Aragon, Castile and the Holy Roman Empire.\nTwenty-four poems in \"Carmina Burana\" were set to music in 1936 by Carl Orff as \"Carmina Burana: Cantiones profanae cantoribus et choris cantandae comitantibus instrumentis atque imaginibus magicis\". His composition quickly became popular and a staple piece of the classical music repertoire. The opening and closing movement \"O Fortuna\" has been used in numerous films, becoming one of the most recognizable compositions in popular culture.\nManuscript.\n\"Carmina Burana\" (CB) is a manuscript written in 1230 by two different scribes in an early gothic minuscule on 119 sheets of parchment. A number of free pages, cut of a slightly different size, were attached at the end of the text in the 14th century. At some point in the Late Middle Ages, the handwritten pages were bound into a small folder called the \"Codex Buranus\". However, in the process of binding, the text was placed partially out of order, and some pages were most likely lost as well. The manuscript contains eight miniatures: the \"rota fortunae\" (which actually is an illustration from songs CB 14\u201318, but was placed by the book binder as the cover), an imaginative forest, a pair of lovers, scenes from the story of Dido and Aeneas, a scene of drinking beer, and three scenes of playing dice, tables, and chess.\nHistory.\nOlder research assumed that the manuscript was written in Benediktbeuern where it was found. Today, however, \"Carmina Burana\" scholars have several different ideas about the manuscript's place of origin. It is agreed that the manuscript must be from the region of central Europe where the Bavarian dialect of German is spoken due to the Middle High German phrases in the text\u2014a region that includes parts of southern Germany, western Austria, and northern Italy. It must also be from the southern part of that region because of the Italian peculiarities of the text. The two possible locations of its origin are the bishop's seat of Seckau in Styria and Neustift Abbey near Brixen in South Tyrol.\nA bishop named Heinrich was provost in Seckau from 1232 to 1243, and he is mentioned as provost of Maria Saal in Carinthia in CB 6* of the added folio. This would support Seckau as the possible point of origin, and it is possible that Heinrich funded the creation of the \"Carmina Burana\". The \"marchiones\" (people from Steiermark) were mentioned in CB 219,3 before the Bavarians, Saxons, or Austrians, presumably indicating that Steiermark was the location closest to the writers. Many of the hymns were dedicated to Saint Catherine of Alexandria, who was venerated in Seckau, such as CB 12* and 19*\u201322*.\nIn support of Kloster Neustift, the text's open-mindedness is characteristic of the reform-minded Augustine Canons Regular of the time, as is the spoken quality of the writing. Also, Brixen is mentioned in CB 95, and the beginning to a story appears in CB 203a which is unique to Tirol called the \"Eckenlied\" about the mythic hero Dietrich von Bern.\nIt is less clear how the \"Carmina Burana\" traveled to Benediktbeuern. Fritz Peter Knapp suggested that the manuscript could have traveled in 1350 by way of the Wittelsbacher family who were V\u00f6gte of both Tirol and Bavaria, if it was written in Neustift.\nThemes.\nGenerally, the works contained in the \"Carmina Burana\" can be arranged into four groups according to theme:\nThis outline, however, has many exceptions. CB 122\u2013134, which are categorized as love songs, actually are not: they contain a song for mourning the dead, a satire, and two educational stories about the names of animals. Another group of spiritual poems may have been included in the \"Carmina Burana\" and since lost. The attached folio contains a mix of 21 generally spiritual songs: a prose-prayer to Saint Erasmus and four more spiritual plays, some of which have only survived as fragments. These larger thematic groups can also be further subdivided, for example, the end of the world (CB 24\u201331), songs about the crusades (CB 46\u201352) or reworkings of writings from antiquity (CB 97\u2013102).\nOther frequently recurring themes include: critiques of simony and greed in the church, that, with the advent of the monetary economy in the 12th century, rapidly became an important issue (CB 1\u201311, 39, 41\u201345); lamentations in the form of the planctus, for example about the ebb and flow of human fate (CB 14\u201318) or about death (CB 122\u2013131); the hymnic celebration of the return of spring (CB 132, 135, 137, 138, 161 and others); pastourelles about the rape/seduction of shepherdesses by knights, students/clergymen (CB 79, 90, 157\u2013158); and the description of love as military service (CB 60, 62, and 166), a topos known from Ovid's elegiac love poems. Ovid and especially his erotic elegies were reproduced, imitated and exaggerated in the \"Carmina Burana.\" Following Ovid, depictions of sexual intercourse in the manuscript are frank and sometimes aggressive. CB 76, for example, makes use of the first-person narrative to describe a ten-hour love act with the goddess of love herself, Venus.\nThe \"Carmina Burana\" contains numerous poetic descriptions of a raucous medieval paradise (CB 195\u2013207, 211, 217, 219), for which the ancient Greek philosopher Epicurus, known for his advocation of the blissful life, is even taken as an authority on the subject (CB 211). CB 219 describes, for example, an \"ordo vagorum\" (vagrant order) to which people from every land and clerics of all rankings were invited\u2014even \"presbyter cum sua matrona,\" or \"a priest with his lady wife\" (humorous because Catholic priests must swear an oath of celibacy). CB 215 even provides an example of the religious rites of this order, the \"Officium lusorum\", the \"Service\", or \"Mass\", \"of the Gamblers\". In this parody world, the rules of priesthood include sleeping in, eating heavy food and drinking rich wine, and regularly playing dice games. These rules were described in such detail that older research on the \"Carmina Burana\" took these descriptions literally and assumed there actually existed such a lazy order of priests. In fact, though, this outspoken reverie of living delights and freedom from moral obligations shows \"an attitude towards life and the world that stands in stark contrast to the firmly established expectations of life in the Middle Ages\". The literary researcher Christine Kasper considers this description of a bawdy paradise as part of the early history of the European story of the land of Cockaigne: in CB 222 the \"abbas Cucaniensis\", or Abbot of Cockaigne, is said to have presided over a group of dice players.\nAuthors.\nAlmost nothing is known about the authors of the \"Carmina Burana\". Only a few songs can be ascribed to specific authors, such as those by Hugh Primas of Orl\u00e9ans (died c.\u20091160), by the Archpoet (died c.\u20091165), by Frenchman Walter of Ch\u00e2tillon (died c.\u20091201), and by Breton Petrus Blesensis (died c.\u20091203). Additionally, the attached folio contains German stanzas that mention specific authors, so they can be ascribed to German Minnesinger Dietmar von Aist (died c.\u20091170), to Heinrich von Morungen (died c.\u20091222), to Walther von der Vogelweide (died c.\u20091228), and to Neidhart (died c.\u20091240). The only signed poems are contained in the attached folio, and they are by the so-called Marner, a wandering poet and singer from Swabia. Many poems stem from works written in Classical antiquity by Ovid, Horace, Juvenal, and Ausonius; however, about two-thirds of the poems appear not to be derivative works.\nThe text is mostly an anonymous work, and it appears to have been written by Goliards and vagrants who were either theology students travelling between universities or clerics who had not yet received a prebendary. Presumably these individuals scrounged and begged for a living, which might explain why a good portion of the moral songs are dedicated to condemning those who are not generous alms givers (e.g., CB 3, 9, 11, and 19\u201321). The authors demonstrate a broad knowledge of ancient mythology, which they employ to rich effect through metonymy and allegorical references, and which they effortlessly weave into scenes from the Bible. \"Lyaeus\", for example, the mythical god of wine (Dionysus), casually makes an appearance at the Marriage at Cana in CB 194 where Jesus performed the miracle of transforming water into wine ().\nRediscovery and history of publication.\nThe manuscript was discovered in the monastery at Benediktbeuern in 1803 by librarian Johann Christoph von Aretin. He transferred it to the Bavarian State Library in Munich where it currently resides (Signatur: clm 4660/4660a). Aretin regarded the Codex as his personal reading material, and wrote to a friend that he was glad to have discovered \"a collection of poetic and prosaic satire, directed mostly against the papal seat\".\nThe first pieces to be published were Middle-High German texts, which Aretin's colleague Bernhard Joseph Docen published in 1806. Additional pieces were eventually published by Jacob Grimm in 1844. The first collected edition of the \"Carmina Burana\" was not published until 1847, almost 40 years after Aretin's discovery. Publisher Johann Andreas Schmeller chose a misleading title for the collection, which created the misconception that the works contained in the \"Codex Buranas\" were not from Benediktbeuern. Schmeller attempted to organize the collection into \"joking\" (\"Scherz\") and \"serious\" (\"Ernst\") works, but he never fully completed the task. The ordering scheme used today was proposed in 1930 by Alfons Hilka and Otto Schumann in the first critical text edition of the \"Carmina Burana\". The two based their edition on previous work by Munich philologist Wilhelm Meyer, who discovered that some pages of the \"Codex Buranus\" had mistakenly been bound into other old books. He also was able to revise illegible portions of the text by comparing them to similar works.\nMusical settings.\nAbout one-quarter of the poems in the \"Carmina Burana\" are accompanied in the manuscript by music using unheighted, staffless neumes, an archaic system of musical notation that by the time of the manuscript had largely been superseded by staffed neumes. Unheighted neumes only indicate whether a given note is pitched higher or lower than the preceding note, without giving any indication of how much change in pitch there is between two notes, so they are useful only as mnemonic devices for singers who are already familiar with the melody. However, it is possible to identify many of those melodies by comparing them with melodies notated in staffed neumes in other contemporary manuscripts from the schools of Notre Dame and Saint Martial.\nBetween 1935 and 1936, German composer Carl Orff composed music, also called \"Carmina Burana\", for 24 of the poems. The single song \"O Fortuna\" (the Roman goddess of luck and fate), from the movement \"Fortuna Imperatrix Mundi\", is often heard in many popular settings such as films. Orff's composition has been performed by many ensembles.\nOther musical settings include: \nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "72567", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72567", "title": "Passy Cemetery", "text": "Cemetery in Paris, France\nPassy Cemetery () is a small cemetery in Passy, in the 16th arrondissement of Paris, France. \nHistory.\nThe current cemetery replaced the old cemetery (\"l'ancien cimeti\u00e8re communal de Passy\", located on Rue Lekain), which was closed in 1802.\nIn the early 19th century, on the orders of Napoleon I, Emperor of the French, all the cemeteries in Paris were replaced by several large new ones outside the precincts of the capital. Montmartre Cemetery was built in the north, P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery in the east, and Montparnasse Cemetery in the south. \nOpened in 1820 in the expensive residential and commercial districts of the Right Bank near the \"Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es\", by 1874 the small Passy Cemetery had become the aristocratic necropolis of Paris. It is the only cemetery in Paris to have a heated waiting-room.\nThe cemetery was once the home of a statue by Dunikowski titled \"The Soul Escaping the Body\". It was on top of the ceremonial grave of Antoni Cierplikowski. The statue was known by many but was removed when the grave was cleared in 2004.\nThe current entrance (designed by Ren\u00e9 Berger) was built in 1934. The retaining wall of the cemetery is adorned with a bas relief (by Louis Janthial) commemorating the soldiers who fell in World War I.\nLocation.\nThe entrance of the cemetery is located at 2, Rue du Commandant Schl\u0153sing. The street in which it is situated is named for a pilot, Squadron Leader (1919\u20131944), who flew with the wartime RAF until killed in action, the day that Paris was liberated.\nThe cemetery is behind the Trocad\u00e9ro.\nSheltered by a bower of chestnut trees, the cemetery is in the shadow of the Eiffel Tower.\nNotable interments.\nAmong its more famous burials are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72569", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72569", "title": "Patriot", "text": "A patriot is a person with the quality of patriotism.\nPatriot(s) or The Patriot(s) may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "72572", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72572", "title": "Social-democracy", "text": ""}
{"id": "72573", "revid": "1319964646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72573", "title": "Ted Taylor (physicist)", "text": "American theoretical nuclear physicist\nTheodore Brewster \"Ted\" Taylor (July 11, 1925 \u2013 October 28, 2004) was an American theoretical physicist, specifically concerning nuclear energy. His higher education included a PhD from Cornell University in theoretical physics. His most noteworthy contributions to the field of nuclear weaponry were his small bomb developments at the Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico. Although not widely known to the general public, Taylor is credited with numerous landmarks in fission nuclear weaponry development, including having designed and developed the smallest, most powerful, and most efficient fission weapons ever tested by the U.S. program. His vision and creativity allowed him to thrive in the field. The later part of Taylor's career was focused on nuclear energy instead of weaponry, and included his work on Project Orion, nuclear reactor developments, and anti-nuclear proliferation.\nEarly life.\nTed Taylor was born in Mexico City, Mexico, on July 11, 1925. His mother and father were both Americans. His mother, Barbara Southworth Howland Taylor, held a PhD in Mexican literature from the Universidad Nacional Aut\u00f3noma de M\u00e9xico, and his father, Walter Clyde Taylor, was the director of a YMCA in Mexico City. Before marrying in 1922, his father had been a widower with three sons and his mother a widow with a son of her own. Taylor's four half-brothers were old enough that Ted was essentially raised as an only child. Both of his maternal grandparents were Congregationalist missionaries in Guadalajara. Taylor grew up in a house without electricity in the Atlixo 13 neighborhood of Cuernavaca. His upbringing was quiet and religious, and his home filled with books, mainly atlases and geographies, which he would read by candlelight. This interest followed him into adulthood.\nTaylor showed an early interest in chemistry, specifically pyrotechnics, when he received a chemistry set at the age of ten. This fascination was enhanced when a small and exclusive university in the area built a chemistry laboratory in his neighborhood, after which Taylor had access to items from local druggists that otherwise would not have been readily available, including corrosive and explosive chemicals, as well as nitric and sulfuric acids. These allowed him to conduct his own experiments. He also often read through the 1913 New International Encyclopedia, which contained extensive chemistry, for new concoctions to make. These included sleeping drugs, small explosives, guncotton, precipitates, and many more. His mother was extremely tolerant of his experimentation but prohibited any experiments that involved nitroglycerin.\nGrowing up, Taylor also showed an interest in billiards. In the afternoons after school he played billiards for almost ten hours a week. He would recall this early interest as his introduction to the mechanics of collisions, relating it to his later work in particle physics. The behavior of the interacting balls on the table and their elastic collisions within the confining framework of the reflector cushions helped him to conceptualize the difficult abstractions of cross sections, neutron scattering, and fission chain reactions.\nAs a child, he developed a passion for music, and would quietly sit for an hour and listen to his favorite songs in the mornings before school. Later, while completing his PhD at Cornell, he noted that while his theoretical physicist peers embraced the classical music piped into their rooms, their experimentalist counterparts would uniformly shut the system off.\nTaylor attended the American School in Mexico City from elementary school through high school. A gifted student, he finished the fourth through sixth grades in one year. Being an accelerated student, Taylor found himself three years younger than his friends as he entered his teens. Taylor graduated early from high school in 1941 at the age of 15. Not yet meeting the age requirements for American universities, he then attended the Exeter Academy in New Hampshire for one year, where he took Modern Physics from Elbert P. Little. This developed his interest in physics, though he displayed poor academic performance in the course: Little gave Taylor a grade D on his final winter term examination. He quickly brushed this failure off, and soon confirmed that he wanted to be a physicist. Apart from education, he also developed an interest in throwing discus at Exeter. This interest continued into his college career, as he continued to throw discus at Caltech.\nHe enrolled at the California Institute of Technology in 1942 and then spent his second and third years in the Navy V-12 program. This accelerated his schooling and he graduated with a bachelor's degree in physics from Caltech in 1945 at age nineteen.\nAfter graduation, he attended the midshipman school at Throgs Neck, in the Bronx, New York, for one year to fulfill his naval active duty requirement. He was discharged in mid-1946, by which time he had been promoted to the rank of lieutenant.\nHe then enrolled in a graduate program in theoretical physics at the University of California at Berkeley, while also working part-time at the Berkeley Radiation laboratory, mainly on the cyclotron and a beta-ray spectrograph. After failing an oral preliminary examination on mechanics and heat, and a second prelim in modern physics in 1949, Taylor was disqualified from the graduate program.\nEarly career.\nPrior to Taylor's work at Los Alamos, he had firmly declared himself an opponent of nuclear weapons. While at the midshipmen school, he received news of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima by the United States. He immediately wrote a letter home discussing the perils of nuclear proliferation and his fears that it would lead to the end of mankind in the event of another war. He showed some optimism, however, as he felt with proper leadership the nuclear bomb could result in the end of wars altogether. Either way, he was still very curious about the field of nuclear physics after his time as an undergraduate.\nTaylor began his work in nuclear physics in 1949 when he was hired to a junior position at Los Alamos National Laboratory in the Theoretical Physics Division. He received this job after failing out of the PhD program at Berkeley; J. Carson Mark connected Taylor with a leader at Los Alamos and recommended him for a position. Taylor was unsure of the details of his new job at Los Alamos prior to his arrival. He had only been briefed that his first assignment related to investigations of Neutron Diffusion Theory, a theoretical analysis of neutron movement within a nuclear core. While at Los Alamos, Taylor's strictly anti-nuclear development beliefs changed. His theory on preventing nuclear war turned to developing bombs of unprecedented power in an attempt to make people, including governments, so afraid of the consequences of nuclear warfare that they would not dare engage in this sort of altercation. He continued in his junior position at Los Alamos until 1953, when he took a temporary leave of absence to obtain his PhD from Cornell.\nFinishing his PhD in 1954, he returned to Los Alamos, and by 1956 he was famous for his work in small-bomb development. Freeman Dyson is quoted as saying, \"A great part of the small-bomb development of the last five years [at Los Alamos] was directly due to Ted.\" Although the majority of the brilliant minds at Los Alamos were focused on developing the fusion bomb, Taylor remained hard at work on improving fission bombs. His innovations in this area of study were so important that he was eventually given the freedom to choose whatever he wanted to study. Eventually, Taylor's stance on nuclear warfare and weapon development changed, altering his career path. In 1956, Taylor left his position at Los Alamos and went to work for General Atomics. Here, he developed TRIGA, a reactor that produced isotopes used in the medical field. In 1958, Taylor began working on Project Orion, which sought to develop space travel that relied on nuclear energy as the fuel source. The proposed spacecraft would use a series of nuclear fission reactions as its propellant, thus accelerating space travel while eliminating the Earth's source of fuel for nuclear weaponry. In collaboration with Dyson, Taylor led the project development team for six years until the 1963 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was instituted. After this, they could not test their developments and the project became unviable.\nLate career.\nTaylor's career shifted again after Project Orion. He developed an even greater fear of the potential ramifications of his entire life's work, and began taking precautionary measures to mitigate those concerns. In 1964 he served as the deputy director of the Defense Atomic Support Agency (a branch within the Department of Defense), where he managed the U.S. nuclear weapons inventory. Then, in 1966 he created a consulting firm called the International Research and Technology Corporation, located in Vienna, Austria, which sought to prevent the development of more nuclear weapons programs. Taylor also worked as a visiting professor at the University of California, Santa Cruz and Princeton University. His focus eventually turned to renewable energy, and In 1980 Taylor started a company called Nova Incorporated, which focused on nuclear energy alternatives as a means of supplementing the energy requirements of the earth. He studied energy capture from sources like cooling ice ponds and heating solar ponds, and eventually turned to energy conservation within buildings. Concerning this work in energy conservation, he founded a not-for-profit organization in Montgomery County, Maryland called Damascus Energy, which focuses on energy efficiency within the home. Taylor also served on the President of the United States' commission concerning the Three Mile Island Accident, working to mitigate issues associated with the reactor meltdown.\nPrivate life.\nTaylor married Caro Arnim in 1948 and had five children in the following years: Clare Hastings, Katherine Robertson, Christopher Taylor, Robert Taylor, and Jeffrey Taylor. Arnim was majoring in Greek at Scripps College, a liberal arts university in Claremont, California, and Taylor would visit her whenever he could. Both Arnim and Taylor were very shy people, and unsure of what the future held. When they first met they both believed that Taylor would end up as a college professor in a sleepy town, and that Caro would be a librarian. After 44 years of marriage the couple divorced in 1992.\nTaylor died on October 28, 2004, of coronary artery disease, at the age of 79.\nLegacy.\nTaylor was involved in many important projects and made numerous contributions to nuclear development for the United States. During his time at Los Alamos, he was responsible for designing the smallest fission bomb of the era, the 'Davy Crockett', which weighed only , measured approximately across, and could produce between 10 and 20 tons of TNT equivalent. This device was formerly known as the M28 Weapons System. The Davy Crockett itself was the M388 Atomic Round fired from the weapons system, featuring a recoilless rifle either erected and fixed on as freestanding tripod or mounted on the frame of a light utility vehicle, such as the Jeep, the former functioned similarly to other modern rocket propelled rounds (see RPG-7). It was a mounted weapons system, which means that it would be set up, aimed, and fired as a crew-served weapon. Taylor also designed fission bombs smaller than the Davy Crockett, which were developed after he left Los Alamos. He designed a nuclear bomb so small that it weighed only , but it was never developed and tested. Taylor designed the Super Oralloy Bomb, also known as the \"SOB\". It still holds the record for the largest fission explosion ever tested (as the Ivy King device tested during Operation Ivy), producing over 500 kilotons of TNT equivalent. Taylor was credited with developing multiple techniques that improved the fission bomb. For example, he was largely responsible for the development of fusion boosting, which is a technique that improves the reaction yield and efficiency of a nuclear reaction. This technique was a re-invention of the implosion mechanism used in the bomb detonated at Nagasaki. He theorized a series of nuclear reactions within the implosion mechanism that, in combination, trigger the large chain reaction to detonate. This eliminated much of the energy waste and necessity for precision of the original reaction mechanism. This technique is still found in all U.S. fission nuclear weapons today. He also developed a technique that greatly reduced the size of atomic bombs. First tested in a bomb called \"Scorpion\", it used a reflector made of beryllium, which was drastically lighter than the materials previously used, such as tungsten carbide (WC). Taylor recognized that although a low-atomic-number element like beryllium did not \"bounce\" neutrons back into the fissile core as efficiently as heavy tungsten, its propensity for neutron spallation (in nuclear physics the so-called \"(n,2n)\" reaction) more than compensated in overall reflector performance.\nAfter these breakthroughs, Taylor became more of an important figure at Los Alamos. He was included in high priority situations reserved for important personnel, and was even taken to The Pentagon as a consultant on strategies and the potential outcomes of a nuclear war with Russia. In total, Taylor was responsible for the development of eight bombs: the Super Oralloy Bomb, Davy Crockett, Scorpion, Hamlet, Bee, Hornet, Viper, and the Puny Plutonium bomb. The latter was the first-ever nuclear fizzle (dud) in the history of U.S. nuclear tests. He produced the bomb called Hamlet after receiving direct orders from military officials to pursue a project in bomb efficiency; it ended up being the most efficient fission bomb ever exploded in the kiloton range.\nApart from bombs, Taylor also explored concepts of producing large amounts of nuclear fuel in an expedited manner. His plans, known as MICE (Megaton Ice Contained Explosions), essentially sought to plant a thermonuclear weapon deep in the ice and detonate it, resulting in a giant underground pool of radioactive materials that could then be retrieved. While his idea had merit, Taylor ultimately received little support for this concept and the project never came to fruition.\nPublications and other works.\nTed Taylor was an accomplished author in the latter part of his career. He worked in cooperation with many specialists in other fields to publish his work on anti-nuclear proliferation and sustainable nuclear energy. Perhaps the greatest fear that propelled Taylor to work so fervently in these areas was the realization that the consequences of nuclear material ending up in the wrong hands could be severe.\n\"Nuclear Theft: Risks and Safeguards\" is a book Taylor wrote in collaboration with Mason Willrich in the 1970s. According to reviews, the book predicted a future where nuclear energy was the primary energy source in the United States, and therefore needed enhanced protective measures to protect the public. In the book, Taylor and Willrich provide multiple recommendations on ways to prevent nuclear material from ending up in the wrong hands, as they anticipated that there would be multiple more sources of nuclear byproducts and therefore more opportunity for nuclear theft. This book likely was a culmination of much of Ted's work in the field, as he often toured nuclear reactor sites and provided insight on potential weak points in their security measures.\nTaylor also co-authored the book \"The Restoration of the Earth\" with Charles C. Humpstone. According to reviews, the book focused on techniques to enhance sustainability and expanded on different sources of energy that could be used alternatively to meet the power needs of the earth. This book was also a culmination of his focus on nuclear security and the ramifications of the use of nuclear weaponry. In it he addressed the potential effects of nuclear fallout on the environment. This 1973 hardcover discussed potential sources of energy in 2000, along with the conceptualization of safer alternatives to the methods of acquiring nuclear energy that were available at the time. In fact, Taylor indirectly referenced a concept for a nuclear reactor which is inherently similar to a reactor that he patented in 1964. Taylor spent much of his time studying the risk potential of the nuclear power fuel cycle after learning about the detrimental effects that his nuclear weapons had on the environment, so he sought to explore new opportunities for safer use of nuclear power. In his writing, Taylor argued that the most dangerous and devastating events that could possibly occur during nuclear research would most likely happen at reactors that are incapable of running efficiently and maintaining a safe temperature. Taylor went on to state that the prioritization of safety in nuclear reactors is relatively low compared to how it should be, and that if one were to create a nuclear reactor with the capability of cooling down\u2014without the initiation of a fission reaction\u2014then efforts at harvesting nuclear energy would be more incentivized and exponentially safer.\nTaylor also wrote the book \"Nuclear Proliferation: Motivations, Capabilities and Strategies for Control\" with Harold Feiveson and Ted Greenwood. The book explains the two most dangerous mechanisms by which nuclear proliferation could be devastating for the world, as well as how to disincentivize nuclear proliferation within destabilizing political systems.\nTaylor further collaborated with George Gamow on a study called, \"What the World Needs Is a Good Two-Kiloton Bomb\", which investigated the concept of small nuclear artillery weapons. This paper reflected another shift in Taylor's beliefs about nuclear weapons. He had changed from his deterrent position to a position that sought to develop small yield nuclear weapons that could target specific areas and minimize collateral damage.\nTaylor was not only involved in the publication of the aforementioned books, but he, along with a few of his colleagues, was also responsible for a number of patents involving nuclear physics. Taylor is credited with patenting a nuclear reactor with a prompt negative temperature coefficient and fuel element, along with a patent protecting their discovery of an efficient method of producing isotopes from thermonuclear explosions. The patent concerning the production of isotopes from thermonuclear explosions was groundbreaking because of its efficiency and cost effectiveness. It also provides a means for attaining necessary elements that otherwise are difficult to find in nature. Prior to this discovery, the cost per neutron in a nuclear reaction was relatively high. The patent concerning the prompt negative temperature coefficient was groundbreaking because it provided a markedly safer reactor even in the event of misuse. With the negative temperature coefficient, the reactor can mitigate sudden surges of reactivity propelled into the system. These patented realizations would later become vital components in the future of nuclear technology.\n\"The Curve of Binding Energy\", by John McPhee, is written primarily about the life of Theodore Taylor, as he and McPhee traveled together quite often\u2014spending a great deal of time with one another. It is evident that during their time together, McPhee was very inclined to learn from Taylor. Many of Taylor's personal opinions regarding nuclear energy and safety are mentioned throughout McPhee's writing. McPhee voices one of Taylor's bigger concerns in particular\u2014that plutonium can be devastating if left in the wrong hands. According to McPhee, Taylor suspected that if plutonium were to be acquired by someone with ill-intentions and handled improperly, the aftermath could be catastrophic\u2014as plutonium is a rather volatile element and can be lethal for anyone within hundreds of miles. This clearly can be avoided, Taylor suggests, if nuclear reactors are protected and all sources of nuclear fuel elements are heavily guarded. The book would inspire Princeton student John Aristotle Phillips, and several other imitators, to prove Taylor's contention that \"anyone\" could design a plausible nuclear weapon using declassified and public information.\nThe Santa Claus machine and Pugwash.\nAccording to Freitas and Merkle, the only known extant source on Taylor's concept of the \"Santa Claus machine\" is found in Nigel Calder's \"Spaceships of the Mind\". The concept would use a large mass spectrometer to separate an ion beam into atomic elements for later use in making products.\nTaylor was a member of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs and attended several of its meetings during the 1980s. After his retirement he lived in Wellsville, New York.\nFreeman Dyson on Taylor.\nFreeman Dyson said of Taylor, \"Very few people have Ted's imagination. ... I think he is perhaps the greatest man that I ever knew well. And he is completely unknown.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72576", "revid": "3125232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72576", "title": "Axial precession", "text": "Change of rotational axis in an astronomical body\nIn astronomy, axial precession is a gravity-induced, slow, and continuous change in the orientation of an astronomical body's rotational axis. In the absence of precession, the astronomical body's orbit would show axial parallelism. In particular, axial precession can refer to the gradual shift in the orientation of Earth's axis of rotation in a cycle of approximately 26,000 years. This is similar to the precession of a spinning top, with the axis tracing out a pair of cones joined at their apices. The term \"precession\" typically refers only to this largest part of the motion; other changes in the alignment of Earth's axis\u2014nutation and polar motion\u2014are much smaller in magnitude.\nEarth's precession was historically called the precession of the equinoxes, because the equinoxes moved westward along the ecliptic relative to the fixed stars, opposite to the yearly motion of the Sun along the ecliptic. Historically, \nthe discovery of the precession of the equinoxes is usually attributed in the West to the 2nd-century-BC astronomer Hipparchus. With improvements in the ability to calculate the gravitational force between planets during the first half of the nineteenth century, it was recognized that the ecliptic itself moved slightly, which was named planetary precession, as early as 1863, while the dominant component was named lunisolar precession. Their combination was named general precession, instead of precession of the equinoxes.\nLunisolar precession is caused by the gravitational forces of the Moon and Sun on Earth's equatorial bulge, causing Earth's axis to move with respect to inertial space. Planetary precession (an advance) is due to the small angle between the gravitational force of the other planets on Earth and its orbital plane (the ecliptic), causing the plane of the ecliptic to shift slightly relative to inertial space. Lunisolar precession is about 500 times greater than planetary precession. In addition to the Moon and Sun, the other planets also cause a small movement of Earth's axis in inertial space, making the contrast in the terms lunisolar versus planetary misleading, so in 2006 the International Astronomical Union recommended that the dominant component be renamed the precession of the equator, and the minor component be renamed precession of the ecliptic, but their combination is still named general precession. Many references to the old terms exist in publications predating the change.\nNomenclature.\nThe term \"Precession\" is derived from the Latin \"praecedere\" (\"to precede, to come before or earlier\"). The stars viewed from Earth are seen to proceed from east to west daily (at about 15 degrees per hour), because of the Earth's diurnal motion, and yearly (at about 1 degree per day), because of the Earth's revolution around the Sun. At the same time the stars can be observed to anticipate slightly such motion, at the rate of approximately 50 arcseconds per year (1 degree per 72 years), a phenomenon known as the \"precession of the equinoxes\".\nIn describing this motion astronomers generally have shortened the term to simply \"precession\". In describing the \"cause\" of the motion physicists have also used the term \"precession\", which has led to some confusion between the observable phenomenon and its cause, which matters because in astronomy, some precessions are real and others are apparent. This issue is further obfuscated by the fact that many astronomers are physicists or astrophysicists.\nThe term \"precession\" used in astronomy generally describes the observable precession of the equinox (the stars moving retrograde across the sky), whereas the term \"precession\" as used in physics, generally describes a mechanical process.\nEffects.\nThe precession of the Earth's axis has a number of observable effects. First, the positions of the south and north celestial poles appear to move in circles against the space-fixed backdrop of stars, completing one circuit in approximately 26,000 years. Thus, while today the star Polaris lies approximately at the north celestial pole, this will change over time, and other stars will become the \"north star\". In approximately 3,200 years, the star Gamma Cephei in the Cepheus constellation will succeed Polaris for this position. The south celestial pole currently lacks a bright star to mark its position, but over time precession also will cause bright stars to become South Stars. As the celestial poles shift, there is a corresponding gradual shift in the apparent orientation of the whole star field, as viewed from a particular position on Earth.\nSecondly, the position of the Earth in its orbit around the Sun at the solstices, equinoxes, or other time defined relative to the seasons, slowly changes. For example, suppose that the Earth's orbital position is marked at the summer solstice, when the Earth's axial tilt is pointing most nearly toward the Sun. One full orbit later, when the Sun has returned to the same apparent position relative to the background stars, the Earth's axial tilt is not now directly toward the Sun: because of the effects of precession, it is a little way \"beyond\" this. In other words, the solstice occurred a little \"earlier\" in the orbit. Thus, the tropical year, measuring the cycle of seasons (for example, the time from solstice to solstice, or equinox to equinox), is about 20 minutes shorter than the sidereal year, which is measured by the Sun's apparent position relative to the stars. After about 26\u00a0000 years the difference amounts to a full year, so the positions of the seasons relative to the orbit are \"back where they started\". (Other effects also slowly change the shape and orientation of the Earth's orbit, and these, in combination with precession, create various cycles of differing periods; see also Milankovitch cycles. The magnitude of the Earth's tilt, as opposed to merely its orientation, also changes slowly over time, but this effect is not attributed directly to precession.)\nFor identical reasons, the apparent position of the Sun relative to the backdrop of the stars at some seasonally fixed time slowly regresses a full 360\u00b0 through all twelve traditional constellations of the zodiac, at the rate of about 50.3 seconds of arc per year, or 1 degree every 71.6 years.\nAt present, the rate of precession corresponds to a period of 25,772 years, so a tropical year is shorter than a sidereal year by 1,224.5 seconds (20 min 24.5 sec \u2248 (365.24219 \u00d7 86400) / 25772).\nThe rate itself varies somewhat with time (see Values below), so one cannot say that in exactly 25,772 years the Earth's axis will be back to where it is now.\nFor further details, see Changing pole stars and Polar shift and equinoxes shift, below.\nHistory.\nHellenistic world.\nHipparchus.\nThe discovery of precession usually is attributed to Hipparchus (190\u2013120 BC) of Rhodes or Nicaea, a Greek astronomer. According to Ptolemy's \"Almagest\", Hipparchus measured the longitude of Spica and other bright stars. Comparing his measurements with data from his predecessors, Timocharis (320\u2013260 BC) and Aristillus (~280 BC), he concluded that Spica had moved 2\u00b0 relative to the autumnal equinox. He also compared the lengths of the tropical year (the time it takes the Sun to return to an equinox) and the sidereal year (the time it takes the Sun to return to a fixed star), and found a slight discrepancy. Hipparchus concluded that the equinoxes were moving (\"precessing\") through the zodiac, and that the rate of precession was not less than 1\u00b0 in a century, in other words, completing a full cycle in no more than 36,000 years.\nVirtually all of the writings of Hipparchus are lost, including his work on precession. They are mentioned by Ptolemy, who explains precession as the rotation of the celestial sphere around a motionless Earth. It is reasonable to presume that Hipparchus, similarly to Ptolemy, thought of precession in geocentric terms as a motion of the heavens, rather than of the Earth.\nPtolemy.\nThe first astronomer known to have continued Hipparchus's work on precession is Ptolemy in the second century AD. Ptolemy measured the longitudes of Regulus, Spica, and other bright stars with a variation of Hipparchus's lunar method that did not require eclipses. Before sunset, he measured the longitudinal arc separating the Moon from the Sun. Then, after sunset, he measured the arc from the Moon to the star. He used Hipparchus's model to calculate the Sun's longitude, and made corrections for the Moon's motion and its parallax. Ptolemy compared his own observations with those made by Hipparchus, Menelaus of Alexandria, Timocharis, and Agrippa. He found that between Hipparchus's time and his own (about 265 years), the stars had moved 2\u00b040', or 1\u00b0 in 100 years (36\" per year; the rate accepted today is about 50\" per year or 1\u00b0 in 72 years). It is possible, however, that Ptolemy simply trusted Hipparchus' figure instead of making his own measurements. He also confirmed that precession affected all fixed stars, not just those near the ecliptic, and his cycle had the same period of 36,000 years as that of Hipparchus.\nOther authors.\nMost ancient authors did not mention precession and, perhaps, did not know of it. For instance, Proclus rejected precession, while Theon of Alexandria, a commentator on Ptolemy in the fourth century, accepted Ptolemy's explanation. Theon also reports an alternate theory:\n\"According to certain opinions ancient astrologers believe that from a certain epoch the solstitial signs have a motion of 8\u00b0 in the order of the signs, after which they go back the same amount. ...\" (Dreyer 1958, p. 204)\nInstead of proceeding through the entire sequence of the zodiac, the equinoxes \"trepidated\" back and forth over an arc of 8\u00b0. The theory of trepidation is presented by Theon as an alternative to precession.\nAlternative discovery theories.\nBabylonians.\nVarious assertions have been made that other cultures discovered precession independently of Hipparchus. According to Al-Battani, the Chaldean astronomers had distinguished the tropical and sidereal year so that by approximately 330 BC, they would have been in a position to describe precession, if inaccurately, but such claims generally are regarded as unsupported.\nMaya.\nArchaeologist Susan Milbrath has speculated that the Mesoamerican Long Count calendar of \"30,000 years involving the Pleiades...may have been an effort to calculate the precession of the equinox.\" This view is held by few other professional scholars of Maya civilization.\nAncient Egyptians.\nSimilarly, it is claimed the precession of the equinoxes was known in Ancient Egypt, prior to the time of Hipparchus (the Ptolemaic period). These claims remain controversial. Ancient Egyptians kept accurate calendars and recorded dates on temple walls, so it would be a simple matter for them to plot the \"rough\" precession rate. \nThe Dendera Zodiac, a star-map inside the Hathor temple at Dendera, allegedly records the precession of the equinoxes. In any case, if the ancient Egyptians knew of precession, their knowledge is not recorded as such in any of their surviving astronomical texts.\nMichael Rice, a popular writer on Ancient Egypt, has written that Ancient Egyptians must have observed the precession, and suggested that this awareness had profound effects on their culture. Rice noted that Egyptians re-oriented temples in response to precession of associated stars.\nIndia.\nBefore 1200, India had two theories of trepidation, one with a rate and another without a rate, and several related models of precession. Each had minor changes or corrections by various commentators. The dominant of the three was the trepidation described by the most respected Indian astronomical treatise, the \"Surya Siddhanta\" (3:9\u201312), composed c.\u2009400 but revised during the next few centuries. It used a sidereal epoch, or ayanamsa, that is still used by all Indian calendars, varying over the ecliptic longitude of 19\u00b011\u2032 to 23\u00b051\u2032, depending on the group consulted. This epoch causes the roughly 30 Indian calendar years to begin 23\u201328 days after the modern March equinox. The March equinox of the \"Surya Siddhanta\" librated 27\u00b0 in both directions from the sidereal epoch. Thus the equinox moved 54\u00b0 in one direction and then back 54\u00b0 in the other direction. This cycle took 7200 years to complete at a rate of 54\u2033/year. The equinox coincided with the epoch at the beginning of the \"Kali Yuga\" in \u22123101 and again 3,600 years later in 499. The direction changed from prograde to retrograde midway between these years at \u22121301 when it reached its maximum deviation of 27\u00b0, and would have remained retrograde, the same direction as modern precession, for 3600 years until 2299.\nAnother trepidation was described by Var\u0101hamihira (c.\u2009550). His trepidation consisted of an arc of 46\u00b040\u2032 in one direction and a return to the starting point. Half of this arc, 23\u00b020\u2032, was identified with the Sun's maximum declination on either side of the equator at the solstices. But no period was specified, thus no annual rate can be ascertained.\nSeveral authors have described precession to be near 200,000revolutions in a Kalpa of 4,320,000,000years, which would be a rate of = 60\u2033/year. They probably deviated from an even 200,000revolutions to make the accumulated precession zero near 500. Visnucandra (c.\u2009550\u2013600) mentions 189,411revolutions in a Kalpa or 56.8\u2033/year. Bhaskara I (c.\u2009600\u2013680) mentions [1]94,110revolutions in a Kalpa or 58.2\u2033/year. Bh\u0101skara II (c.\u20091150) mentions 199,699revolutions in a Kalpa or 59.9\u2033/year.\nChinese astronomy.\nYu Xi (fourth century AD) was the first Chinese astronomer to mention precession. He estimated the rate of precession as 1\u00b0 in 50 years.\nMiddle Ages and Renaissance.\nIn medieval Islamic astronomy, precession was known based on Ptolemy's \"Almagest\", and by observations that refined the value.\nAl-Battani, in his work \"Zij Al-Sabi\", mentions Hipparchus's calculation of precession, and Ptolemy's value of 1 degree per 100 solar years, says that he measured precession and found it to be one degree per 66 solar years.\nSubsequently, Al-Sufi, in his \"Book of Fixed Stars\", mentions the same values that Ptolemy's value for precession is 1 degree per 100 solar years. He then quotes a different value from \"Zij Al Mumtahan\", which was done during Al-Ma'mun's reign, of 1 degree for every 66 solar years. He also quotes the aforementioned \"Zij Al-Sabi\" of Al-Battani as adjusting coordinates for stars by 11 degrees and 10 minutes of arc to account for the difference between Al-Battani's time and Ptolemy's.\nLater, the \"Zij-i Ilkhani\", compiled at the Maragheh observatory, sets the precession of the equinoxes at 51 arc seconds per annum, which is very close to the modern value of 50.2 arc seconds.\nIn the Middle Ages, Islamic and Latin Christian astronomers treated \"trepidation\" as a motion of the fixed stars to be \"added to\" precession. This theory is commonly attributed to the Arab astronomer Thabit ibn Qurra, but the attribution has been contested in modern times. Nicolaus Copernicus published a different account of trepidation in \"De revolutionibus orbium coelestium\" (1543). This work makes the first definite reference to precession as the result of a motion of the Earth's axis. Copernicus characterized precession as the third motion of the Earth.\nModern period.\nOver a century later, Isaac Newton in \"Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" (1687) explained precession as a consequence of gravitation. However, Newton's original precession equations did not work, and were revised considerably by Jean le Rond d'Alembert and subsequent scientists.\nHipparchus's discovery.\nHipparchus gave an account of his discovery in \"On the Displacement of the Solsticial and Equinoctial Points\" (described in \"Almagest\" III.1 and VII.2). He measured the ecliptic longitude of the star Spica during lunar eclipses and found that it was about 6\u00b0 west of the autumnal equinox. By comparing his own measurements with those of Timocharis of Alexandria (a contemporary of Euclid, who worked with Aristillus early in the 3rd century BC), he found that Spica's longitude had decreased by about 2\u00b0 in the meantime (exact years are not mentioned in \"Almagest\"). Also in VII.2, Ptolemy gives more precise observations of two stars, including Spica, and concludes that in each case a 2\u00b0 40' change occurred between 128 BC and AD 139. Hence, 1\u00b0 per century or one full cycle in 36,000 years, that is, the precessional period of Hipparchus as reported by Ptolemy; cf. page 328 in Toomer's translation of Almagest, 1998 edition. He also noticed this motion in other stars. He speculated that only the stars near the zodiac shifted over time. Ptolemy called this his \"first hypothesis\" (\"Almagest\" VII.1), but did not report any later hypothesis Hipparchus might have devised. Hipparchus apparently limited his speculations, because he had only a few older observations, which were not very reliable.\nBecause the equinoctial points are not marked in the sky, Hipparchus needed the Moon as a reference point; he used a lunar eclipse to measure the position of a star. Hipparchus already had developed a way to calculate the longitude of the Sun at any moment. A lunar eclipse happens during Full moon, when the Moon is at opposition, precisely 180\u00b0 from the Sun. Hipparchus is thought to have measured the longitudinal arc separating Spica from the Moon. To this value, he added the calculated longitude of the Sun, plus 180\u00b0 for the longitude of the Moon. He did the same procedure with Timocharis' data. Observations such as these eclipses, incidentally, are the main source of data about when Hipparchus worked, since other biographical information about him is minimal. The lunar eclipses he observed, for instance, took place on 21 April 146 BC, and 21 March 135 BC.\nHipparchus also studied precession in \"On the Length of the Year\". Two kinds of year are relevant to understanding his work. The tropical year is the length of time that the Sun, as viewed from the Earth, takes to return to the same position along the ecliptic (its path among the stars on the celestial sphere). The sidereal year is the length of time that the Sun takes to return to the same position with respect to the stars of the celestial sphere. Precession causes the stars to change their longitude slightly each year, so the sidereal year is longer than the tropical year. Using observations of the equinoxes and solstices, Hipparchus found that the length of the tropical year was 365+1/4\u22121/300 days, or 365.24667 days (Evans 1998, p.\u00a0209). Comparing this with the length of the sidereal year, he calculated that the rate of precession was not less than 1\u00b0 in a century. From this information, it is possible to calculate that his value for the sidereal year was 365+1/4+1/144 days. By giving a minimum rate, he may have been allowing for errors in observation.\nTo approximate his tropical year, Hipparchus created his own lunisolar calendar by modifying those of Meton and Callippus in \"On Intercalary Months and Days\" (now lost), as described by Ptolemy in the \"Almagest\" III.1. The Babylonian calendar used a cycle of 235 lunar months in 19 years since 499 BC (with only three exceptions before 380 BC), but it did not use a specified number of days. The Metonic cycle (432 BC) assigned 6,940 days to these 19 years producing an average year of 365+1/4+1/76 or 365.26316 days. The Callippic cycle (330 BC) dropped one day from four Metonic cycles (76 years) for an average year of 365+1/4 or 365.25 days. Hipparchus dropped one more day from four Callippic cycles (304 years), creating the Hipparchic cycle with an average year of 365+1/4\u22121/304 or 365.24671 days, which was close to his tropical year of 365+1/4\u22121/300 or 365.24667 days.\nHipparchus's mathematical signatures are found in the Antikythera Mechanism, an ancient astronomical computer of the second century BC. The mechanism is based on a solar year, the Metonic Cycle, which is the period the Moon reappears in the same place in the sky with the same phase (full Moon appears at the same position in the sky approximately in 19 years), the Callipic cycle (which is four Metonic cycles and more accurate), the Saros cycle, and the Exeligmos cycles (three Saros cycles for the accurate eclipse prediction). Study of the Antikythera Mechanism showed that the ancients used very accurate calendars based on all the aspects of solar and lunar motion in the sky. In fact, the Lunar Mechanism which is part of the Antikythera Mechanism depicts the motion of the Moon and its phase, for a given time, using a train of four gears with a pin and slot device which gives a variable lunar velocity that is very close to Kepler's second law. That is, it takes into account the fast motion of the Moon at perigee and slower motion at apogee.\nChanging pole stars.\nA consequence of the precession is a changing pole star. Currently Polaris is extremely well suited to mark the position of the north celestial pole, as Polaris is a moderately bright star with a visual magnitude of 2.1 (variable), and is located about one degree from the pole, with no stars of similar brightness too close.\nThe previous pole star was Kochab (Beta Ursae Minoris, \u03b2 UMi, \u03b2 Ursae Minoris), the brightest star in the bowl of the \"Little Dipper\", located 16 degrees from Polaris. It held that role from 1500 BC to AD 500. It was not quite as accurate in its day as Polaris is today. Today, Kochab and its neighbor Pherkad are referred to as the \"Guardians of the Pole\" (meaning Polaris).\nOn the other hand, Thuban in the constellation Draco, which was the pole star in 3000 BC, is much less conspicuous at magnitude 3.67 (one-fifth as bright as Polaris); today it is invisible in light-polluted urban skies.\nWhen Polaris becomes the north star again around 27,800, it will then be farther away from the pole than it is now due to its proper motion, while in 23,600 BC it came closer to the pole.\nIt is more difficult to find the south celestial pole in the sky at this moment, as that area is a particularly bland portion of the sky. The nominal south pole star is Sigma Octantis, which with magnitude 5.5 is barely visible to the naked eye even under ideal conditions. That will change from the 80th to the 90th centuries, however, when the south celestial pole travels through the False Cross.\nThis situation also is seen on a star map. The orientation of the south pole is moving toward the Southern Cross constellation. For the last 2,000 years or so, the Southern Cross has pointed to the south celestial pole. As a consequence, the constellation is difficult to view from subtropical northern latitudes, unlike in the time of the ancient Greeks. The Southern Cross can be viewed from as far north as Miami (about 25\u00b0\u00a0N), but only during the winter/early spring.\nPolar shift and equinoxes shift.\nThe images at right attempt to explain the relation between the precession of the Earth's axis and the shift in the equinoxes. These images show the position of the Earth's axis on the \"celestial sphere\", a fictitious sphere which places the stars according to their position as seen from Earth, regardless of their actual distance. The first image shows the celestial sphere from the outside, with the constellations in mirror image. The second image shows the perspective of a near-Earth position as seen through a very wide angle lens (from which the apparent distortion arises).\nThe rotation axis of the Earth describes, over a period of 25,700\u00a0years, a small blue circle among the stars near the top of the diagram, centered on the ecliptic north pole (the blue letter E) and with an angular radius of about 23.4\u00b0, an angle known as the \"obliquity of the ecliptic\". The direction of precession is opposite to the daily rotation of the Earth on its axis. The brown axis was the Earth's rotation axis 5,000\u00a0years ago, when it pointed to the star Thuban. The yellow axis, pointing to Polaris, marks the axis now.\nThe equinoxes occur where the celestial equator intersects the ecliptic (red line), that is, where the Earth's axis is perpendicular to the line connecting the centers of the Sun and Earth.The term \"equinox\" here refers to a point on the celestial sphere so defined, rather than the moment in time when the Sun is overhead at the Equator (though the two meanings are related). When the axis \"precesses\" from one orientation to another, the equatorial plane of the Earth (indicated by the circular grid around the equator) moves. The celestial equator is just the Earth's equator projected onto the celestial sphere, so it moves as the Earth's equatorial plane moves, and the intersection with the ecliptic moves with it. The positions of the poles and equator \"on Earth\" do not change, only the orientation of the Earth against the fixed stars.\nAs seen from the brown grid, 5,000\u00a0years ago, the March equinox was close to the star Aldebaran in Taurus. Now, as seen from the yellow grid, it has shifted (indicated by the red arrow) to somewhere in the constellation of Pisces.\nStill pictures like these are only first approximations, as they do not take into account the variable speed of the precession, the variable obliquity of the ecliptic, the planetary precession (which is a slow rotation of the ecliptic plane itself, presently around an axis located on the plane, with longitude 174.8764\u00b0) and the proper motions of the stars.\nThe precessional eras of each constellation, often known as \"Great Months\", are given, approximately, in the table below:\nCause.\nThe precession of the equinoxes is caused by the gravitational forces of the Sun and the Moon, and to a lesser extent other bodies, on the Earth. It was first explained by Isaac Newton.\nAxial precession is similar to the precession of a spinning top. In both cases, the applied force is due to gravity. For a spinning top, this force tends to be almost parallel to the rotation axis initially and increases as the top slows down. For a gyroscope on a stand it can approach 90 degrees. For the Earth, however, the applied forces of the Sun and the Moon are closer to perpendicular to the axis of rotation.\nThe Earth is not a perfect sphere but an oblate spheroid, with an equatorial diameter about 43 kilometers larger than its polar diameter. Because of the Earth's axial tilt, during most of the year the half of this bulge that is closest to the Sun is off-center, either to the north or to the south, and the far half is off-center on the opposite side. The gravitational pull on the closer half is stronger, since gravity decreases with the square of distance, so this creates a small torque on the Earth as the Sun pulls harder on one side of the Earth than the other. The axis of this torque is roughly perpendicular to the axis of the Earth's rotation so the axis of rotation precesses. If the Earth were a perfect sphere, there would be no precession.\nThis average torque is perpendicular to the direction in which the rotation axis is tilted away from the ecliptic pole, so that it does not change the axial tilt itself. The magnitude of the torque from the Sun (or the Moon) varies with the angle between the Earth's spin axis direction and that of the gravitational attraction. It approaches zero when they are perpendicular. For example, this happens at the equinoxes in the case of the interaction with the Sun. This can be seen to be since the near and far points are aligned with the gravitational attraction, so there is no torque due to the difference in gravitational attraction.\nAlthough the above explanation involved the Sun, the same explanation holds true for any object moving around the Earth, along or close to the ecliptic, notably, the Moon. The combined action of the Sun and the Moon is called the lunisolar precession. In addition to the steady progressive motion (resulting in a full circle in about 25,700 years) the Sun and Moon also cause small periodic variations, due to their changing positions. These oscillations, in both precessional speed and axial tilt, are known as the nutation. The most important term has a period of 18.6 years and an amplitude of 9.2 arcseconds.\nIn addition to lunisolar precession, the actions of the other planets of the Solar System cause the whole ecliptic to rotate slowly around an axis which has an ecliptic longitude of about 174\u00b0 measured on the instantaneous ecliptic. This so-called planetary precession shift amounts to a rotation of the ecliptic plane of 0.47 seconds of arc per year (more than a hundred times smaller than lunisolar precession). The sum of the two precessions is known as the general precession.\nEquations.\nThe tidal force on Earth due to a perturbing body (Sun, Moon or planet) is expressed by Newton's law of universal gravitation, whereby the gravitational force of the perturbing body on the side of Earth nearest is said to be greater than the gravitational force on the far side by an amount proportional to the difference in the cubes of the distances between the near and far sides. If the gravitational force of the perturbing body acting on the mass of the Earth as a point mass at the center of Earth (which provides the centripetal force causing the orbital motion) is subtracted from the gravitational force of the perturbing body everywhere on the surface of Earth, what remains may be regarded as the tidal force. This gives the paradoxical notion of a force acting away from the satellite but in reality it is simply a lesser force toward that body due to the gradient in the gravitational field. For precession, this tidal force can be grouped into two forces which only act on the equatorial bulge outside of a mean spherical radius. This couple can be decomposed into two pairs of components, one pair parallel to Earth's equatorial plane toward and away from the perturbing body which cancel each other out, and another pair parallel to Earth's rotational axis, both toward the ecliptic plane. The latter pair of forces creates the following torque vector on Earth's equatorial bulge:\nformula_1\nwhere\n\"GM\", standard gravitational parameter of the perturbing body\n\"r\", geocentric distance to the perturbing body\n\"C\", moment of inertia around Earth's axis of rotation\n\"A\", moment of inertia around any equatorial diameter of Earth\n\"C\" \u2212 \"A\", moment of inertia of Earth's equatorial bulge (\"C\" &gt; \"A\")\n\"\u03b4\", declination of the perturbing body (north or south of equator)\n\"\u03b1\", right ascension of the perturbing body (east from March equinox).\nThe three unit vectors of the torque at the center of the Earth (top to bottom) are x on a line within the ecliptic plane (the intersection of Earth's equatorial plane with the ecliptic plane) directed toward the March equinox, y on a line in the ecliptic plane directed toward the summer solstice (90\u00b0 east of x), and z on a line directed toward the north pole of the ecliptic.\nThe value of the three sinusoidal terms in the direction of x (sin\"\u03b4\" cos\"\u03b4\" sin\"\u03b1\") for the Sun is a sine squared waveform varying from zero at the equinoxes (0\u00b0, 180\u00b0) to 0.36495 at the solstices (90\u00b0, 270\u00b0). The value in the direction of y (sin\"\u03b4\" cos\"\u03b4\" (\u2212cos\"\u03b1\")) for the Sun is a sine wave varying from zero at the four equinoxes and solstices to \u00b10.19364 (slightly more than half of the sine squared peak) halfway between each equinox and solstice with peaks slightly skewed toward the equinoxes (43.37\u00b0(\u2212), 136.63\u00b0(+), 223.37\u00b0(\u2212), 316.63\u00b0(+)). Both solar waveforms have about the same peak-to-peak amplitude and the same period, half of a revolution or half of a year. The value in the direction of z is zero.\nThe average torque of the sine wave in the direction of y is zero for the Sun or Moon, so this component of the torque does not affect precession. The average torque of the sine squared waveform in the direction of x for the Sun or Moon is:\nformula_2\nwhere\nformula_3, semimajor axis of Earth's (Sun's) orbit or Moon's orbit\n\"e\", eccentricity of Earth's (Sun's) orbit or Moon's orbit\nand 1/2 accounts for the average of the sine squared waveform, formula_4 accounts for the average distance cubed of the Sun or Moon from Earth over the entire elliptical orbit, and \u03b5 (the angle between the equatorial plane and the ecliptic plane) is the maximum value of \"\u03b4\" for the Sun and the average maximum value for the Moon over an entire 18.6 year cycle.\nPrecession is:\nformula_5\nwhere \"\u03c9\" is Earth's angular velocity and \"C\u03c9\" is Earth's angular momentum. Thus the first order component of precession due to the Sun is:\nformula_6\nwhereas that due to the Moon is:\nformula_7\nwhere \"i\" is the angle between the plane of the Moon's orbit and the ecliptic plane. In these two equations, the Sun's parameters are within square brackets labeled S, the Moon's parameters are within square brackets labeled L, and the Earth's parameters are within square brackets labeled E. The term formula_8 accounts for the inclination of the Moon's orbit relative to the ecliptic. The term (\"C\" \u2212 \"A\")/\"C\" is Earth's dynamical ellipticity or flattening, which is adjusted to the observed precession because Earth's internal structure is not known with sufficient detail. If Earth were homogeneous the term would equal its third eccentricity squared,\nformula_9\nwhere a is the equatorial radius () and c is the polar radius (), so \"e\"2 = 0.003358481.\nApplicable parameters for J2000.0 rounded to seven significant digits (excluding leading 1) are:\nwhich yield\n\"d\u03c8S/dt\" = 2.450183\u00d710\u221212 /s\n\"d\u03c8L/dt\" = 5.334529\u00d710\u221212 /s\nboth of which must be converted to \u2033/a (arcseconds/annum) by the number of arcseconds in 2\u03c0 radians (1.296\u00d7106\u2033/2\u03c0) and the number of seconds in one annus (a Julian year) (3.15576\u00d7107s/a):\n\"d\u03c8S/dt\" = 15.948788\u2033/a \u00a0 vs \u00a0 15.948870\u2033/a from Williams\n\"d\u03c8L/dt\" = 34.723638\u2033/a \u00a0 vs \u00a0 34.457698\u2033/a from Williams.\nThe solar equation is a good representation of precession due to the Sun because Earth's orbit is close to an ellipse, being only slightly perturbed by the other planets. The lunar equation is not as good a representation of precession due to the Moon because the Moon's orbit is greatly distorted by the Sun and neither the radius nor the eccentricity is constant over the year.\nValues.\nSimon Newcomb's calculation at the end of the 19th century for general precession (\"p\") in longitude gave a value of 5,025.64 arcseconds per tropical century, and was the generally accepted value until artificial satellites delivered more accurate observations and electronic computers allowed more elaborate models to be calculated. Jay Henry Lieske developed an updated theory in 1976, where \"p\" equals 5,029.0966 arcseconds (or 1.3969713 degrees) per Julian century. Modern techniques such as VLBI and LLR allowed further refinements, and the International Astronomical Union adopted a new constant value in 2000, and new computation methods and polynomial expressions in 2003 and 2006; the accumulated precession is:\n\"pA\" = 5,028.796195\u202f\"T\" + 1.1054348\u202f\"T\"2 + higher order terms, in arcseconds, with \"T\", the time in Julian centuries (that is, 36,525 days) since the epoch of 2000.\nThe rate of precession is the derivative of that:\n\"p\" = 5,028.796195 + 2.2108696\u202f\"T\" + higher order terms.\nThe constant term of this speed (5,028.796195 arcseconds per century in above equation) corresponds to one full precession circle in 25,771.57534 years (one full circle of 360 degrees divided by 50.28796195 arcseconds per year) although some other sources put the value at 25771.4 years, leaving a small uncertainty.\nThe precession rate is not a constant, but is (at the moment) slowly increasing over time, as indicated by the linear (and higher order) terms in \"T\". In any case it must be stressed that this formula is only valid over a \"limited time period\". It is a polynomial expression centred on the J2000 datum, empirically fitted to observational data, not on a deterministic model of the Solar System. It is clear that if \"T\" gets large enough (far in the future or far in the past), the \"T\"\u00b2 term will dominate and \"p\" will go to very large values. In reality, more elaborate calculations on the numerical model of the Solar System show that the precessional rate has a period of about 41,000 years, the same as the obliquity of the ecliptic. That is,\n\"p\" = \"A\" + \"BT\" + \"CT\"2 + \u2026\nis an approximation of\n\"p\" = \"a\" + \"b\" sin (2\u03c0\"T\"/\"P\"), where \"P\" is the 41,000-year period.\nTheoretical models may calculate the constants (coefficients) corresponding to the higher powers of \"T\", but since it is impossible for a polynomial to match a periodic function over all numbers, the difference in all such approximations will grow without bound as \"T\" increases. Sufficient accuracy can be obtained over a limited time span by fitting a high enough order polynomial to observation data, rather than a necessarily imperfect dynamic numerical model. For present flight trajectory calculations of artificial satellites and spacecraft, the polynomial method gives better accuracy. In that respect, the International Astronomical Union has chosen the best-developed available theory. For up to a few centuries into the past and future, none of the formulas used diverge very much. For up to a few thousand years in the past and the future, most agree to some accuracy. For eras farther out, discrepancies become too large \u2013 the exact rate and period of precession may not be computed using these polynomials even for a single whole precession period.\nThe precession of Earth's axis is a very slow effect, but at the level of accuracy at which astronomers work, it does need to be taken into account on a daily basis. Although the precession and the tilt of Earth's axis (the obliquity of the ecliptic) are calculated from the same theory and are thus related one to the other, the two movements act independently of each other, moving in opposite directions.\nPrecession rate exhibits a secular decrease due to tidal dissipation from 59\"/a to 45\"/a (a = annus = Julian year) during the 500 million year period centered on the present. After short-term fluctuations (tens of thousands of years) are averaged out, the long-term trend can be approximated by the following polynomials for negative and positive time from the present in \"/a, where \"T\" is in billions of Julian years (Ga):\n\"p\"\u2212 = 50.475838 \u2212 26.368583\u202f\"T\" + 21.890862\u202f\"T\"2\n\"p\"+ = 50.475838 \u2212 27.000654\u202f\"T\" + 15.603265\u202f\"T\"2\nThis gives an average cycle length now of 25,676 years.\nPrecession will be greater than \"p\"+ by the small amount of +0.135052\"/a between +30 Ma and +130 Ma. The jump to this excess over \"p\"+ will occur in only 20 Ma beginning now because the secular decrease in precession is beginning to cross a resonance in Earth's orbit caused by the other planets.\nAccording to W. R. Ward, in about 1,500 million years, when the distance of the Moon, which is continuously increasing from tidal effects, has increased from the current 60.3 to approximately 66.5 Earth radii, resonances from planetary effects will push precession to 49,000 years at first, and then, when the Moon reaches 68 Earth radii in about 2,000\u00a0million years, to 69,000 years. This will be associated with wild swings in the obliquity of the ecliptic as well. Ward, however, used the abnormally large modern value for tidal dissipation. Using the 620-million year average provided by tidal rhythmites of about half the modern value, these resonances will not be reached until about 3,000 and 4,000 million years, respectively. However, due to the gradually increasing luminosity of the Sun, the oceans of the Earth will have vaporized before that time (about 2,100\u00a0million years from now).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72577", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72577", "title": "Crassus", "text": ""}
{"id": "72578", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72578", "title": "Joab", "text": "Nephew of King David of Israel and commander of his army\nJoab (; ), the son of Zeruiah, was the nephew of King David and the commander of his army according to the Hebrew Bible.\nName.\nThe name Joab is, like many other Hebrew names, theophoric\u2014derived from Yahweh (), the name of the God of Israel, and the Hebrew word \"father\" (). It therefore means \"Yahweh [is] the Father\".\nLife.\nJoab was the son of Zeruiah, a sister of king David (1 Chronicles 2:15\u201316). According to Josephus (\"Antiquities\" VII, 1, 3) his father was called Suri.\nJoab had two brothers, Abishai and Asahel. Asahel was killed by Abner in combat, for which Joab took revenge by murdering Abner against David's wishes and shortly after David and Abner had secured peace between the House of David and the House of Saul (2 Samuel 2:13\u20133:21; 3:27).\nWhile 2 Samuel 3:27 explicitly states that Joab killed Abner \"to avenge the blood of his brother Asahel\", Josephus (Antiquities VII, 1, 3) paints a different picture: Joab had forgiven Abner for the death of Joab's brother Asahel, since Abner had slain Asahel honorably in combat, but killed Abner as a potential threat to his rank after Abner had switched to the side of David and granted David control over the tribe of Benjamin.\nAfter Joab led the assault on the fortress of Mount Zion, David made him captain of his army (2 Samuel 8:16; 20:23; 1 Chronicles 11:4\u20136; 18:15; 27:34). He led the army against Aram, Ammon, Moab and Edom. He also colluded with David in the murder of Uriah (2 Samuel 11:14\u201325).\nJoab played a pivotal role as the commander of David's forces during Absalom's rebellion. Absalom, one of David's sons, rallied much of Israel in rebellion against David, who was forced to flee with only his most trusted men. However, David could not bring himself to harm his son, and ordered that none of his men should kill Absalom during the ensuing battle. However, when a man reported that Absalom had been found alive and caught in a tree, Joab and his men killed him (2 Samuel 18:1\u201333).\nHearing of David's grief over the reported death of Absalom, Joab confronted and admonished David. The king followed Joab's advice to make a public appearance to encourage his troops (2 Samuel 19:1\u20138).\nDavid later replaced him as commander of the army with David's nephew, Amasa (2 Samuel 19:13). Joab later killed Amasa (2 Samuel 20:8\u201313; 1 Kings 2:5).\nJoab and other commanders began questioning David's judgment (2 Samuel 24:2\u20134). As David neared the end of his reign, Joab offered his allegiance to David's eldest living son, Adonijah, rather than to the eventual king, Solomon (1 Kings 1:1\u201327).\nOn the brink of death, David told Solomon to have Joab killed, citing Joab's past betrayals and the blood that he was guilty of. Solomon ordered Joab's death by the hand of Benaiah (1 Kings 2:29\u201334). Hearing this, Joab fled to the Tent of the Tabernacle (where Adonijah had previously sought successful refuge according to 1 Kings 1:50\u201353) and told Benaiah that he would die there. Benaiah killed Joab there and thereby replaced him as commander of the army. Joab was buried in 'the wilderness' (1 Kings 2:34).\nCommentary.\nThe \"ATS Bible Dictionary\" describes Joab as \"a valiant warrior, and an able general; and his great influence on public affairs was often exerted for good, as in the rebellion of Absalom, and the numbering of Israel ... [b]ut as a man he was imperious, revengeful, and unscrupulous\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n "}
{"id": "72579", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72579", "title": "Bristol University", "text": ""}
{"id": "72581", "revid": "12521734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72581", "title": "Arminius", "text": "Germanic Cherusci chieftain (18/17 BC \u2013 AD 21)\nArminius (; 18/17 BC\u2013AD 21; Hermann in German) was a chieftain of the Germanic Cherusci tribe who is best known for commanding an alliance of Germanic tribes at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in AD 9, in which three Roman legions under the command of general and governor Publius Quinctilius Varus were destroyed. His victory at Teutoburg Forest precipitated the Roman Empire's permanent strategic withdrawal and the deprovincialization of Germania Magna, and modern historians regard it as one of Imperial Rome's greatest defeats. As it prevented the Romanization of Germanic peoples east of the Rhine, it has also been considered one of the most decisive battles in history and a turning point in human history.\nBorn a prince of the Cherusci tribe, Arminius was part of the Roman-friendly faction of the tribe. He learned Latin and served in the Roman military, which gained him Roman citizenship, and the rank of \"eques\". After serving with distinction in the Great Illyrian Revolt, he was sent to Germania to aid the local governor Publius Quinctilius Varus in completing the Roman conquest of the Germanic tribes. While in this capacity, Arminius secretly plotted a Germanic revolt against Roman rule, which culminated in the ambush and destruction of three Roman legions in the Teutoburg Forest.\nIn the aftermath of the battle, Arminius fought retaliatory invasions by the Roman general Germanicus in the battles of Pontes Longi, Idistaviso, and the Angrivarian Wall, and defeated a rival, the Marcomanni king Maroboduus. Arminius sought to become a king and was assassinated in 21. He was remembered in Germanic legends for generations afterwards. The Roman historian Tacitus designated Arminius as the liberator of the Germanic tribes and commended him for having fought the Roman Empire to a standstill at the peak of its power.\nDuring the unification of Germany in the 19th century, Arminius was hailed by German nationalists as a symbol of German unity and freedom. Following World War II, however, Arminius' significance diminished in Germany due to the rise of anti-militarism, pacifism, and anti-nationalism; the 2,000th anniversary of his victory at the Teutoburg Forest was only lightly commemorated in Germany.\nName.\nThe etymology of the Latin name is unknown, and confusion is further created by recent scholars who alternately referred to him as . In his \"History\", Marcus Velleius Paterculus calls him \"Arminius, the son of Sigimer, a prince of the nation\" and states he \"attained the dignity of equestrian rank\". Due to Roman naming conventions of the time, it is likely is an adopted name granted to him upon citizenship or, in any case, not his Germanic name. The name instead appears to ultimately be of Etruscan origin, appearing as and on inscriptions found at Volaterrae.\nAccording to another theory, that name was given to Arminius for his service in Armenia. Scholars note that the name \"Arme(i)nius\" (meaning literally \"from Armenia\") was not uncommon in Latin onomastics and could serve as both a cognomen and a nomen. It appears in several contexts of the Roman West without proven links to Armenia, and may overlap with or represent a variant of \"Arminius\", the cognomen of the Cheruscan chieftain. A senatorial family bore the nomen, the most notable member being the consul of 244, Ti. Pollenius Armenius Peregrinus. Modern scholarship, however, regards this as Italic, possibly Etruscan, rather than Armenian in origin. Thus, bearers of the name cannot automatically be connected with Armenian provenance.\nThe German translation of as the name \"Hermann\" dates from the 16th century, possibly first by Martin Luther. In German, Arminius was traditionally distinguished as (\"Hermann the Cheruscan\") or (\"Hermann the Cheruscan Prince\"). Hermann etymologically means \"Man of War\", coming from the Old High German meaning \"war\" and meaning \"man\". This has also led to his English nickname \"Herman the German\".\nEarly life and Roman military service.\nBorn in 18 or 17 BC in Germania, Arminius was the son of the Cheruscan chief Segimerus (German: \"Segimer\"; Proto-Germanic: \"Sigimariz\"; Old English: \"Sigem\u00e6r\"), who was allied with Rome.\nArminius learned to speak Latin and joined the Roman military with his younger brother Flavus. He served in the Roman army between AD 1 and 6, and received a military education as well as Roman citizenship and the status of equite before returning to Germania. These experiences gave him knowledge of Roman politics and military tactics, which allowed him to successfully anticipate enemy battle maneuvers during his later campaigns against the Roman army.\nReturn to Germania.\nAround the year AD 4, Arminius assumed command of a Cheruscan detachment of Roman auxiliary forces, probably while fighting in the Pannonian wars on the Balkan peninsula. He returned to northern Germania in AD 7 or 8, where the Roman Empire had established secure control of the territories just east of the Rhine, along the Lippe and Main rivers, and was now seeking to extend its hegemony eastward to the Weser and Elbe rivers, under Publius Quinctilius Varus, a high-ranking administrative official appointed by Augustus as governor. Arminius began plotting to unite various Germanic tribes in order to thwart Roman efforts to incorporate their lands into the empire. This proved a difficult task, as the tribes were strongly independent and many were traditionally enemies of each other.\nBetween AD 6 and 9, the Romans were forced to move eight legions, of the eleven present in Germania east of the Rhine, to crush a rebellion in the Balkans, leaving Varus with only three legions to face the Germans. This was still 18,000 troops, or 6,000 men per legion. An additional two legions, under the command of Lucius Nonius Asprenas, were stationed in Moguntiacum. Arminius saw this as the perfect opportunity to defeat Varus.\nAnti-Roman uprising.\nIn the autumn of AD 9, the 25-year-old Arminius brought to Varus a false report of rebellion in northern Germany. He persuaded Varus to divert the three legions under his command (composed of the 17th, 18th, and 19th legions, plus three cavalry detachments and six cohorts of auxiliaries), which were at the time marching to winter quarters, to suppress the rebellion. Varus and his legions marched right into the trap that Arminius had set for them near Kalkriese. Arminius' tribe, the Cherusci, and their allies the Marsi, Chatti, Bructeri, Chauci, and Sicambri (five out of at least fifty Germanic tribes at the time) ambushed and annihilated Varus' entire army, totaling over 20,000 men, as it marched along a narrow road through a dense forest. Recent archaeological finds show the long-debated location of the three-day battle was almost certainly near Kalkriese Hill, about north of present-day Osnabr\u00fcck. When defeat was certain, Varus committed suicide by falling upon his sword. The battle was one of the most devastating defeats Rome suffered in its history. Arminius' success in destroying three entire legions and driving the Romans out of Germany marked a high point of Germanic power for centuries. Roman attempts to reconquer Germania failed, although they did eventually manage to break Arminius' carefully coordinated alliance.\nAfter the battle, the Germans quickly annihilated every trace of Roman presence east of the Rhine. Roman settlements such as the Waldgirmes Forum were abandoned. The vastly outnumbered Roman garrison of Aliso (present-day Haltern am See), under the command of the prefect Lucius Cedicius, inflicted heavy losses on the Germans before retreating into Gaul, resisting long enough for Lucius Nonius Asprenas to organize the Roman defense on the Rhine and Tiberius to arrive with a new army. This prevented Arminius from crossing the Rhine and invading Gaul.\nMarriage.\nAt some point after the battle, Arminius married a Germanic princess named Thusnelda. Her father was the Cheruscan prince Segestes, who was pro-Roman. But Arminius abducted and then impregnated Thusnelda circa AD 14. This elopement was likely a result of a dispute between Arminius and Segestes who was against their relationship. In May of 15 the Roman general Germanicus captured Thusnelda. At the point of her capture she was pregnant and living with her father, who had taken her back. Arminius deeply grieved the capture of Thusnelda and did not marry again. Tacitus recorded that Arminius was \"driven to frenzy\" by the loss of his beloved wife. Tacitus states in the \"Annals\":Arminius, with his naturally furious temper, was driven to frenzy by the seizure of his wife and the foredooming to slavery of his wife's unborn child. He flew hither and thither among the Cherusci, demanding \"war against Segestes, war against C\u00e6sar.\" And he refrained not from taunts.Thusnelda gave birth to a son named Thumelicus who grew up in Roman captivity. Tacitus describes him as having an unusual story, which he promises to tell in his later writings, but these writings have never been found.\nRoman retribution and death.\nBetween 14 and 16, Germanicus led punitive operations into Germany, fighting Arminius to a draw in the Battle at Pontes Longi and twice defeating him (according to Tacitus): first in the Battle of Idistaviso and later at the Battle of the Angrivarian Wall. In 15, Roman troops managed to recapture one of the three legionary eagles lost in the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest. In 16, a second eagle was retrieved. Tiberius denied the request of Germanicus to launch an additional campaign for 17, however, having decided the frontier with Germania would stand at the Rhine river. Instead, he offered Germanicus the honor of a triumph for his two victories. The third Roman eagle was recovered in 41 by Publius Gabinius, under the emperor Claudius. Arminius also faced opposition from his father-in-law and other pro-Roman Germanic leaders. His brother Flavus, who had been raised alongside him in Rome, remained loyal to the Roman Empire and fought under Germanicus against Arminius at the Battle of Idistaviso. With the end of the Roman threat, a war broke out between Arminius and Marbod, king of the Marcomanni. It ended with Marbod fleeing to Ravenna and Roman protection, but Arminius failed to break into the \"natural fortification\" of Bohemia, and the war ended in stalemate. In 19, Germanicus died in Antioch under circumstances which led many to believe he had been poisoned by his opponents. Arminius died two years later in 21, murdered by opponents within his own tribe who felt that he was becoming too powerful. Tiberius allegedly had refused an earlier offer from a Chatti nobleman to poison Arminius: \"It was not by secret treachery but openly and by arms that the people of Rome avenged themselves on their enemies.\"\nLegacy and influence.\nArminius' victory against the Roman legions in the Teutoburg Forest had a far-reaching effect on the subsequent history of both the ancient Germanic peoples and on the Roman Empire. The Romans made no further concerted efforts to conquer and permanently hold Germania beyond the Rhine and the \"Agri Decumates\". Numerous modern historians have regarded Arminius' victory as one of the most decisive battles in history, with some calling it \"Rome's greatest defeat\".\nRoman imperial expansion.\nIn the accounts of his Roman enemies, Arminius is highly regarded for his military leadership and as a defender of the liberty of his people. Based on these records, the story of Arminius was revived in the 16th century with the recovery of the histories of Tacitus, who wrote in his \"Annales II, 88\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Arminius, without doubt Germania's liberator, who challenged the Roman people not in its beginnings like other kings and leaders, but in the peak of its empire; in battles with changing success, undefeated in the war.\nArminius was not the only reason for Rome's change of policy towards Germania. Politics also played a factor; emperors found they could rarely trust a large army to a potential rival, though Augustus had enough loyal family members to wage his wars. Also, Augustus, in his 40-year reign, had annexed many territories still at the beginning of the process of Romanization. Tiberius, who succeeded Augustus in AD 14, decided that Germania was a far less developed land, possessing few villages and only a small food surplus, and therefore was not currently important to Rome. Conquering Germania would require a commitment too burdensome for the imperial finances and an excessive expenditure of military force.\nModern scholars have pointed out that the Rhine was a more practical boundary for the Roman Empire than any other river in Germania. Armies on the Rhine could be supplied from the Mediterranean Sea via the Rh\u00f4ne, Sa\u00f4ne, and Mosel, with only a brief area of portage. Armies on the Elbe, however, would have to have been supplied by extensive overland routes or by ships travelling the hazardous Atlantic. Economically, the Rhine already had towns and sizable villages at the time of the Gallic conquest. The Rhine was significantly more accessible from Rome and better equipped to supply sizable garrisons than the regions beyond.\nRome chose no longer to rule directly in Germania east of the Rhine and north of the Danube, instead preferring to exert indirect influence through the tactics of using divide and rule and the appointing of client kings, which were cheaper than military campaigns. Italicus, nephew of Arminius, was appointed king of the Cherusci; Vangio and Sido became vassal princes of the powerful Suebi, etc. Only when indirect methods proved insufficient to control the Germanic tribes beyond the Rhine, did Roman emperors occasionally lead devastating punitive campaigns deep into Germania. One of them, led by the Roman emperor Maximinus Thrax, resulted in a Roman victory in 235 at the Battle at the Harzhorn Hill, located in the modern German state of Lower Saxony, east of the Weser river, between the towns of Kalefeld and Bad Gandersheim.\nGermanic sagas.\nIn the early 19th century, attempts were made to show that the story of Arminius and his victory may have lived on in the Old Norse sagas, in the form of the dragon slayer Sigurd of the V\u00f6lsunga saga and the Nibelungenlied. An Icelandic account states that Sigurd \"slew the dragon\" in the Gnitaheidr\u2014today the suburb Knetterheide of the city of Bad Salzuflen, located at a strategic site on the Werre river which could very well have been the point of departure of Varus' legions on their way to their doom in the Teutoburg Forest. One of the foremost Scandinavian scholars of the 19th century, Gu\u00f0brandur Vigf\u00fasson, identified Sigurd as Arminius. This educated guess was also picked up by Otto H\u00f6fler, who was a prominent Nazi academic during World War II. Other scholars have described attempts to connect Arminius with Sigurd as improbable and unfounded.\nGerman nationalism.\nAfter Tacitus' \"Annals\" were rediscovered by Renaissance humanists and first published during the Gutenberg Revolution of the 15th century, Arminius became an important symbol of German national identity, as a figure who successfully opposed colonialism and prevented the Romanization of his people by outgeneraling and defeating one of the world's first superpowers. Indeed, learning of his victory over the Roman army was especially important to German Renaissance humanists, as the Renaissance only reached the Holy Roman Empire much later than southern Europe and German humanists were widely looked down upon by their Italian colleagues. The first literary adaptation of the Arminius story came in 1520 with Ulrich von Hutten's Latin dialogue \"Arminius\", which inserts the Germanic leader into a reimagining of the twelfth chapter of Lucian's satirical \"Dialogues of the Dead\"; a debate between Alexander the Great, Hannibal, and Scipio Africanus before the underworld judgment seat of Minos over who most deserves the position of history's greatest general and military strategist. Arminius argues his own claim and calls upon Tacitus to bear witness, and ultimately wins the case and the eloquent praise of Minos.\nThis version influenced later adaptations of the story, and reflected a wide interest in Arminius during the years of the German Reformation; the name \"Arminius\" was interpreted as reflecting the name \"Hermann\" by Martin Luther, who saw Arminius as a symbol of his religious followers among the German people and their resistance to the Papacy and the Roman Catholic Church. \nDuring the military occupation of the German States, first by the French Revolutionary Army and then by the French Imperial Army of Napoleon Bonaparte, \"Hermann der Cheruskerf\u00fcrst\" once again became a national icon and a martyr within both German Romanticism and the anti-Colonialist romantic nationalism fueled by the Napoleonic Wars, which are still termed in Germany the Wars of Liberation. This may particularly be seen as in Caspar David Friedrich's 1812 painting \"The Tombs of the Old Heroes\".&lt;ref name=\"Klein/K\u00e4ppel\"&gt;Dorothea Klein (ed.), Lutz K\u00e4ppel (ed.): \"Das diskursive Erbe Europas: Antike und Antikerezeption\". Peter Lang, 2008, , https://&lt;/ref&gt; During the unification of Germany in the 19th century, Arminius was hailed as a symbol of German unity and liberation. \nIn 1808, Heinrich von Kleist wrote the play \"Die Hermannsschlacht\", but with Napoleon's victory at Wagram it remained in manuscript, being published in 1821 and not staged until 1860. The play has been revived repeatedly at moments of national crisis and was especially used as propaganda in Nazi Germany.\nIn 1838, construction was started on a massive statue of Arminius, known as the \"Hermannsdenkmal\", on a hill near Detmold in the Teutoburg Forest; it was finally completed and dedicated during the early years of the Second German Empire in the wake of the German victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u20131871. The monument has been a major tourist attraction ever since, as has the Hermann Heights Monument, a similar statue erected in New Ulm, Minnesota, in the United States in 1897. The Hermann Heights monument was erected by the Sons of Hermann, a fraternal organization formed in New York City by German Americans as a means of self protection against anti-German sentiment and discrimination in 1840; and that flourished during the 19th century in American cities and rural areas with large populations speaking the German language in the United States. Hermann, Missouri, a town on the Missouri River founded in the 1830s and incorporated in 1845, was also named for Arminius.\nFollowing the defeat of Nazi Germany in 1945, Arminius became lesser-known among West Germans and the educational system shied away from teaching about his life due to a sense of guilt and shame, rooted in both the Holocaust and Nazi war crimes, related to any form of German nationalism. There was, however, a radically different practice in East Germany. Particularly during the Cold War, Arminius and his warriors were anachronistically reinterpreted quite similarly to the slave revolt led by Spartacus in the Marxist-Leninist official history promoted by the State; as an early socialist revolution and as revolutionary terror against the \"Roman slaveholder society\" (\"Sklavenhaltergesellschaft\"). The legacy of Arminius and his followers was further reinterpreted as symbolic of the allegedly \"peace-loving\" Warsaw Pact countries, while Imperial Rome was made into a symbol of the capitalist and allegedly Fascistic United States and the NATO military alliance, which were cast as the new evil empire needing to be resisted.\nAccording to journalist David Crossland: \"The old nationalism has been replaced by an easy-going patriotism that mainly manifests itself at sporting events like the soccer World Cup.\" The German Bundesliga football club DSC Arminia Bielefeld is named after Arminius. In the German diaspora, on the other hand, the 2,000-year anniversary of the battle was celebrated in New Ulm, Minnesota, proudly and without restraint. There were mock battles between Romans and club-wielding barbarians and also a lecture series in an auditorium.\nCultural references.\nLiterature.\nFictionalized versions of Arminius or commentary upon his legacy appear in:\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nThe Football (Soccer) Team \u201eDSC Arminia Bielefeld\u201c is named After Arminius"}
{"id": "72584", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72584", "title": "Environmental geology", "text": "Application of geology to environmental problems\nEnvironmental geology, like hydrogeology, is an applied science concerned with the practical application of the principles of geology in the solving of environmental problems created by man. It is a multidisciplinary field that is closely related to engineering geology and, to a lesser extent, to environmental geography. Each of these fields involves the study of the interaction of humans with the geologic environment, including the biosphere, the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, and to some extent the atmosphere. In other words, environmental geology is the application of geological information to solve conflicts, minimizing possible adverse environmental degradation, or maximizing possible advantageous conditions resulting from the use of natural and modified environment. With an increasing world population and industrialization, the natural environment and resources are under high strain which puts them at the forefront of world issues. Environmental geology is on the rise with these issues as solutions are found by utilizing it.\nEnvironmental geology in relation to other fields.\nHydrogeology.\nHydrogeology is the area of geology that deals with the distribution and movement of groundwater in the soil and rocks of the Earth's crust. Environmental geology is applied in this field as environmental problems are created in groundwater pollution due to mining, agriculture, and other human activities. Pollution is the impairment of groundwater by heat, bacteria, or chemicals. The greatest contributors to groundwater pollution are surface sources such as fertilizers, leaking sewers, polluted streams, and mining/mineral wastes. Environmental geology approaches the groundwater pollution problem by creating objectives when monitoring.\nThese objectives include:\nSoil Science.\nSoil science is the study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of the Earth. Environmental geology is applied in this field as soil scientists raise concerns on soil preservation and arable land with the world increasing population, increasing per capita food consumption, and land degradation. These environmental problems are attacked and reduced with environmental geology by using soil surveys. These surveys assess the properties of soils and are of use in geologic mapping, rural and urban land planning, especially in terms of agriculture and forestry. Soil surveys are essential parts of land use planning and mapping as they provide insight on agricultural land usage. Soil surveys provide information on optimum cropping systems and soil management so less land degradation is done and agriculture provides its optimum yield for the increasing per capita food consumption.\nSoil survey investigations include:\nFocuses.\nEnvironmental geology includes\nEnvironmental geology is often applied to some well known environmental issues including population growth, mining, diminishing resources, and global land use.\nMining.\nSince the Stone Age, when humans began mining for flint, they have been dependent on this practice, and the dependency on minerals continues to increase as society evolves. One of the downsides of mining is that it is restricted to areas where minerals are present and economically viable. Mining duration is also restrained as mineral resources are finite, so when a deposit is exhausted, mining in that location comes to an end. Although modern mining and mineral activities utilize many ways to reduce negative environmental impacts, accidental releases can occur and the appropriate mitigation and prevention practices were not common in historical practices. Potentially harmful metals, other deposit constituents, and mineral processing chemicals or byproducts can contaminate the surrounding environment due to these situations. Some common environmental impacts of mining are rock displacements that allow fine dust particles to seep into surface waters, the defacement of the local landscape, and the large amounts of waste with some being chemically reactive. Ultimately, the impact that mining has on the environment is determined by many factors such as the size of the operation and the type of mining. Environmental geology has reduced the negative environmental impacts of mining as it has been used in litigation toward mining. In some countries like Brazil and Australia for example, it is decreed by law that sites must undergo rehabilitation after a mining operation has ceased. Prior to any mining, an assessment is also necessary to analyze the potential environmental impacts. Another measure taken is that an environmental management program must be produced to show how the mine will operate. Land planning is an important aspect in deciding whether a site is suitable for mining but some environmental degradation is inevitable. Environmental Geology continues to lower the amount of negative effects that mining has on the natural environment.\nRecycling.\nNonrenewable resources are only one type of resource with the other two being potentially renewable and perpetual. Nonrenewable resources, such as fossil fuels and metals, are finite, and therefore cannot be replenished during human lifetime, but are being depleted at a high rate. Due to their importance in many economies, this creates an issue as the world keeps developing the technologies used to exploit these resources. Some important roles of these nonrenewable resources are to heat homes, fuel cars, and build infrastructure. Environmental geology has been used to approach this issue with the sustainable development of recycling and reusing. Recycling is the process of collecting recyclable consumer and industrial materials and products and then sorting them so they can be processed into raw materials with the intention of then using the raw materials to create new products. Recycling and reusing can be done on an individual scale as well as an industrial scale. These practices maximize the usage of resources as much as possible all while minimizing waste. They also manage the industrial and domestic waste disposal as they reduce the amount of waste discharged into the global environment.\nReusing and recycling include:\nEnvironmental geology's approach to the decline of nonrenewable resources along with high amounts of waste polluting the Earth has been to reduce wasteful usage and recycle when possible.\nLand use.\nPlanning out the usage of land is important to reduce the risk of natural hazards on humans and their infrastructure, but mostly to reduce negative human impact on the natural environment. The land, water, air, materials, and energy use are all critically impacted by human settlement and resource production. New sites must be found for mining, waste disposal, and industrial sites as these are all parts of an industrial society. Suitable sites are often difficult to find and get approval for as they must be shown to have barriers so contaminants are prevented from entering the environment.\nSite investigation in land use planning often includes at least two phases, an orientating investigation and a detailed investigation. The information in an orientating investigation is obtained through maps and other archived data. The information in a detailed investigation is obtained through a reconnaissance survey in the field and by reviewing the historic land use.\nThe orientating investigation includes:\nThe detailed investigation includes:\nEnvironmental geology includes both the monitorization and planning of land use. Land use maps are made to represent current land use along with possible future uses. Land maps like the one shown can be used to reduce human settlement in areas with potential natural hazards such as floods, geological instability, wildfires, etc. In the land map shown it can be seen that there is a margin of trees and vegetation between the settlements and Mississippi River to reduce the risk of flood damage as the Mississippi Rivers water levels change.\nFurther reading.\nSome books and peer-reviewed journals in the field are:"}
{"id": "72585", "revid": "46512407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72585", "title": "Weathering", "text": "Deterioration of rocks and minerals through exposure to the elements\nWeathering is the deterioration of rocks, soils and minerals (as well as wood and artificial materials) through contact with water, atmospheric gases, sunlight, and biological organisms. It occurs \"in situ\" (on-site, with little or no movement), and so is distinct from erosion, which involves the transport of rocks and minerals by agents such as water, ice, snow, wind, waves and gravity.\nWeathering processes are either physical or chemical. The former involves the breakdown of rocks and soils through such mechanical effects as heat, water, ice, and wind. The latter covers reactions to water, atmospheric gases and biologically produced chemicals with rocks and soils. Water is the principal agent behind both kinds, though atmospheric oxygen and carbon dioxide and the activities of biological organisms are also important. Biological chemical weathering is also called biological weathering.\nThe materials left after the rock breaks down combine with organic material to create soil. Many of Earth's landforms and landscapes are the result of weathering, erosion and redeposition. Weathering is a crucial part of the rock cycle; sedimentary rock, the product of weathered rock, covers 66% of the Earth's continents and much of the ocean floor.\nPhysical.\nPhysical weathering, also called mechanical weathering or \"disaggregation\", is the class of processes that causes the disintegration of rocks without chemical change. Physical weathering involves the breakdown of rocks into smaller fragments through processes such as expansion and contraction, mainly due to temperature changes. Two types of physical breakdown are freeze-thaw weathering and thermal fracturing. Pressure release can also cause weathering without temperature change. It is usually much less important than chemical weathering, but can be significant in subarctic or alpine environments. Furthermore, chemical and physical weathering often go hand in hand. For example, cracks extended by physical weathering will increase the surface area exposed to chemical action, thus amplifying the rate of disintegration.\nFrost weathering is the most important form of physical weathering. Next in importance is wedging by plant roots, which sometimes enter cracks in rocks and pry them apart. The burrowing of worms or other animals may also help disintegrate rock, as can \"plucking\" by lichens.\nFrost.\n\"Frost weathering\" is the collective name for those forms of physical weathering that are caused by the formation of ice within rock outcrops. It was long believed that the most important of these is \"frost wedging\", which is the widening of cracks or joints in rocks resulting from the expansion of porewater when it freezes. A growing body of theoretical and experimental work suggests that ice segregation, whereby supercooled water migrates to lenses of ice forming within the rock, is the more important mechanism.\nWhen water freezes, its volume increases by 9.2%. This expansion can theoretically generate pressures greater than , though a more realistic upper limit is . This is still much greater than the tensile strength of granite, which is about . This makes frost wedging, in which pore water freezes and its volumetric expansion fractures the enclosing rock, appear to be a plausible mechanism for frost weathering. Ice will simply expand out of a straight open fracture before it can generate significant pressure. Thus, frost wedging can only take place in small tortuous fractures. The rock must also be almost completely saturated with water, or the ice will simply expand into the air spaces in the unsaturated rock without generating much pressure. These conditions are unusual enough that frost wedging is unlikely to be the dominant process of frost weathering. Frost wedging is most effective where there are daily cycles of melting and freezing of water-saturated rock, so it is unlikely to be significant in the tropics, in polar regions or in arid climates.\nIce segregation is a less well characterized mechanism of physical weathering. It takes place because ice grains always have a surface layer, often just a few molecules thick, that resembles liquid water more than solid ice, even at temperatures well below the freezing point. This \"premelted liquid layer\" has unusual properties, including a strong tendency to draw in water by capillary action from warmer parts of the rock. This results in growth of the ice grain that puts considerable pressure on the surrounding rock, up to ten times greater than is likely with frost wedging. This mechanism is most effective in rock whose temperature averages just below the freezing point, . Ice segregation results in growth of ice needles and ice lenses within fractures in the rock and parallel to the rock surface, which gradually pry the rock apart.\nThermal stress.\n\"Thermal stress weathering\" results from the expansion and contraction of rock due to temperature changes. Thermal stress weathering is most effective when the heated portion of the rock is buttressed by surrounding rock, so that it is free to expand in only one direction.\nThermal stress weathering comprises two main types, thermal shock and thermal fatigue. Thermal shock takes place when the stresses are so great that the rock cracks immediately, but this is uncommon. More typical is thermal fatigue, in which the stresses are not great enough to cause immediate rock failure, but repeated cycles of stress and release gradually weaken the rocks. Block disintegration, when rock joints weaken from temperature fluctuations and the rock splits into rectangular blocks, can be attributed to thermal fatigue.\nThermal stress weathering is an important mechanism in deserts, where there is a large diurnal temperature range, hot in the day and cold at night. As a result, thermal stress weathering is sometimes called insolation weathering, but this is misleading. Thermal stress weathering can be caused by any large change of temperature, and not just intense solar heating. It is likely as important in cold climates as in hot, arid climates. Wildfires can also be a significant cause of rapid thermal stress weathering.\nThe importance of thermal stress weathering has long been discounted by geologists, based on experiments in the early 20th century that seemed to show that its effects were unimportant. These experiments have since been criticized as unrealistic, since the rock samples were small, were polished (which reduces nucleation of fractures), and were not buttressed. These small samples were thus able to expand freely in all directions when heated in experimental ovens, which failed to produce the kinds of stress likely in natural settings. The experiments were also more sensitive to thermal shock than thermal fatigue, but thermal fatigue is likely the more important mechanism in nature. Geomorphologists have begun to reemphasize the importance of thermal stress weathering, particularly in cold climates.\nPressure release.\n\"Pressure release\" or \"unloading\" is a form of physical weathering seen when deeply buried rock is exhumed. Intrusive igneous rocks, such as granite, are formed deep beneath the Earth's surface. They are under tremendous pressure because of the overlying rock material. When erosion removes the overlying rock material, these intrusive rocks are exposed and the pressure on them is released. The outer parts of the rocks then tend to expand. The expansion sets up stresses which cause fractures parallel to the rock surface to form. Over time, sheets of rock break away from the exposed rocks along the fractures, a process known as exfoliation. Exfoliation due to pressure release is also known as \"sheeting\".\nAs with thermal weathering, pressure release is most effective in buttressed rock. Here the differential stress directed toward the unbuttressed surface can be as high as , easily enough to shatter rock. This mechanism is also responsible for spalling in mines and quarries, and for the formation of joints in rock outcrops.\nRetreat of an overlying glacier can also lead to exfoliation due to pressure release. This can be enhanced by other physical wearing mechanisms.\nSalt-crystal growth.\n\"Salt crystallization\" (also known as salt weathering, salt wedging or haloclasty) causes disintegration of rocks when saline solutions seep into cracks and joints in the rocks and evaporate, leaving salt crystals behind. As with ice segregation, the surfaces of the salt grains draw in additional dissolved salts through capillary action, causing the growth of salt lenses that exert high pressure on the surrounding rock. Sodium and magnesium salts are the most effective at producing salt weathering. Salt weathering can also take place when pyrite in sedimentary rock is chemically weathered to iron(II) sulfate and gypsum, which then crystallize as salt lenses.\nSalt crystallization can take place wherever salts are concentrated by evaporation. It is thus most common in arid climates where strong heating causes strong evaporation and along coasts. Salt weathering is likely important in the formation of tafoni, a class of cavernous rock weathering structures.\nBiomechanical relationship.\nLiving organisms may contribute to mechanical weathering, as well as chemical weathering (see \u00a7 Biological weathering below). Lichens and mosses grow on essentially bare rock surfaces and create a more humid chemical microenvironment. The attachment of these organisms to the rock surface enhances physical as well as chemical breakdown of the surface microlayer of the rock. Lichens have been observed to pry mineral grains loose from bare shale with their hyphae (rootlike attachment structures), a process described as \"plucking\", and to pull the fragments into their body, where the fragments then undergo a process of chemical weathering not unlike digestion. On a larger scale, seedlings sprouting in a crevice and plant roots exert physical pressure as well as providing a pathway for water and chemical infiltration.\nChemical.\nMost rock forms at elevated temperature and pressure, and the minerals making up the rock are often chemically unstable in the relatively cool, wet, and oxidizing conditions typical of the Earth's surface. Chemical weathering takes place when water, oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other chemical substances react with rock to change its composition. These reactions convert some of the original \"primary\" minerals in the rock to \"secondary\" minerals, remove other substances as solutes, and leave the most stable minerals as a chemically unchanged \"resistate\". In effect, chemical weathering changes the original set of minerals in the rock into a new set of minerals that is in closer equilibrium with surface conditions. True equilibrium is rarely reached, because weathering is a slow process, and leaching carries away solutes produced by weathering reactions before they can accumulate to equilibrium levels. This is particularly true in tropical environments.\nWater is the principal agent of chemical weathering, converting many primary minerals to clay minerals or hydrated oxides via reactions collectively described as hydrolysis. Oxygen is also important, acting to oxidize many minerals, as is carbon dioxide, whose weathering reactions are described as carbonation.\nThe process of mountain block uplift is important in exposing new rock strata to the atmosphere and moisture, enabling important chemical weathering to occur; significant release occurs of Ca2+ and other ions into surface waters.\nDissolution.\nDissolution (also called \"simple solution\" or \"congruent dissolution\") is the process in which a mineral dissolves completely without producing any new solid substance. Rainwater easily dissolves soluble minerals, such as halite or gypsum, but can also dissolve highly resistant minerals such as quartz, given sufficient time. Water breaks the bonds between atoms in the crystal:\nThe overall reaction for dissolution of quartz is\nThe dissolved quartz takes the form of silicic acid.\nA particularly important form of dissolution is carbonate dissolution, in which atmospheric carbon dioxide enhances solution weathering. Carbonate dissolution affects rocks containing calcium carbonate, such as limestone and chalk. It takes place when rainwater combines with carbon dioxide to form carbonic acid, a weak acid, which dissolves calcium carbonate (limestone) and forms soluble calcium bicarbonate. Despite a slower reaction kinetics, this process is thermodynamically favored at low temperature, because colder water holds more dissolved carbon dioxide gas (due to the retrograde solubility of gases). Carbonate dissolution is therefore an important feature of glacial weathering.\nCarbonate dissolution involves the following steps:\nCO2 + H2O \u2192 H2CO3\ncarbon dioxide + water \u2192 carbonic acid\nH2CO3 + CaCO3 \u2192 Ca(HCO3)2\ncarbonic acid + calcium carbonate \u2192 calcium bicarbonate\nCarbonate dissolution on the surface of well-jointed limestone produces a dissected limestone pavement. This process is most effective along the joints, widening and deepening them.\nIn unpolluted environments, the pH of rainwater due to dissolved carbon dioxide is around 5.6. Acid rain occurs when gases such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides are present in the atmosphere. These oxides react in the rain water to produce stronger acids and can lower the pH to 4.5 or even 3.0. Sulfur dioxide, SO2, comes from volcanic eruptions or from fossil fuels, and can become sulfuric acid within rainwater, which can cause solution weathering to the rocks on which it falls.\nHydrolysis and carbonation.\nHydrolysis (also called \"incongruent dissolution\") is a form of chemical weathering in which only part of a mineral is taken into solution. The rest of the mineral is transformed into a new solid material, such as a clay mineral. For example, forsterite (magnesium olivine) is hydrolyzed into solid brucite and dissolved silicic acid:\nMg2SiO4 + 4 H2O \u21cc 2 Mg(OH)2 + H4SiO4\nforsterite + water \u21cc brucite + silicic acid\nMost hydrolysis during weathering of minerals is \"acid hydrolysis\", in which protons (hydrogen ions), which are present in acidic water, attack chemical bonds in mineral crystals. The bonds between different cations and oxygen ions in minerals differ in strength, and the weakest will be attacked first. The result is that minerals in igneous rock weather in roughly the same order in which they were originally formed (Bowen's Reaction Series). Relative bond strength is shown in the following table: \nThis table is only a rough guide to order of weathering. Some minerals, such as illite, are unusually stable, while silica is unusually unstable given the strength of the silicon\u2013oxygen bond.\nCarbon dioxide that dissolves in water to form carbonic acid is the most important source of protons, but organic acids are also important natural sources of acidity. Acid hydrolysis from dissolved carbon dioxide is sometimes described as \"carbonation\", and can result in weathering of the primary minerals to secondary carbonate minerals. For example, weathering of forsterite can produce magnesite instead of brucite via the reaction:\nMg2SiO4 + 2 CO2 + 2 H2O \u21cc 2 MgCO3 + H4SiO4 \nforsterite + carbon dioxide + water \u21cc magnesite + silicic acid in solution\nCarbonic acid is consumed by silicate weathering, resulting in more alkaline solutions because of the bicarbonate. This is an important reaction in controlling the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere and can affect climate.\nAluminosilicates containing highly soluble cations, such as sodium or potassium ions, will release the cations as dissolved bicarbonates during acid hydrolysis:\n2 KAlSi3O8 + 2 H2CO3 + 9 H2O \u21cc Al2Si2O5(OH)4 + 4 H4SiO4 + 2 K+ + 2 HCO3\u2212\northoclase (aluminosilicate feldspar) + carbonic acid + water \u21cc kaolinite (a clay mineral) + silicic acid in solution + potassium and bicarbonate ions in solution\nOxidation.\nWithin the weathering environment, chemical oxidation of a variety of metals occurs. The most commonly observed is the oxidation of Fe2+ (iron) by oxygen and water to form Fe3+ oxides and hydroxides such as goethite, limonite, and hematite. This gives the affected rocks a reddish-brown coloration on the surface which crumbles easily and weakens the rock. Many other metallic ores and minerals oxidize and hydrate to produce colored deposits, as does sulfur during the weathering of sulfide minerals such as chalcopyrites or CuFeS2 oxidizing to copper hydroxide and iron oxides.\nHydration.\nMineral hydration is a form of chemical weathering that involves the rigid attachment of water molecules or H+ and OH- ions to the atoms and molecules of a mineral. No significant dissolution takes place. For example, iron oxides are converted to iron hydroxides and the hydration of anhydrite forms gypsum.\nBulk hydration of minerals is secondary in importance to dissolution, hydrolysis, and oxidation, but hydration of the crystal surface is the crucial first step in hydrolysis. A fresh surface of a mineral crystal exposes ions whose electrical charge attracts water molecules. Some of these molecules break into H+ that bonds to exposed anions (usually oxygen) and OH- that bonds to exposed cations. This further disrupts the surface, making it susceptible to various hydrolysis reactions. Additional protons replace cations exposed on the surface, freeing the cations as solutes. As cations are removed, silicon-oxygen and silicon-aluminium bonds become more susceptible to hydrolysis, freeing silicic acid and aluminium hydroxides to be leached away or to form clay minerals. Laboratory experiments show that weathering of feldspar crystals begins at dislocations or other defects on the surface of the crystal, and that the weathering layer is only a few atoms thick. Diffusion within the mineral grain does not appear to be significant.\nBiological.\nMineral weathering can also be initiated or accelerated by soil microorganisms. Soil organisms make up about 10\u00a0mg/cm3 of typical soils, and laboratory experiments have demonstrated that albite and muscovite weather twice as fast in live versus sterile soil. Lichens on rocks are among the most effective biological agents of chemical weathering. For example, an experimental study on hornblende granite in New Jersey, US, demonstrated a 3x \u2013 4x increase in weathering rate under lichen covered surfaces compared to recently exposed bare rock surfaces.\nThe most common forms of biological weathering result from the release of chelating compounds (such as certain organic acids and siderophores) and of carbon dioxide and organic acids by plants. Roots can build up the carbon dioxide level to 30% of all soil gases, aided by adsorption of CO2 on clay minerals and the very slow diffusion rate of CO2 out of the soil. The CO2 and organic acids help break down aluminium- and iron-containing compounds in the soils beneath them. Roots have a negative electrical charge balanced by protons in the soil next to the roots, and these can be exchanged for essential nutrient cations such as potassium. Decaying remains of dead plants in soil may form organic acids which, when dissolved in water, cause chemical weathering. Chelating compounds, mostly low molecular weight organic acids, are capable of removing metal ions from bare rock surfaces, with aluminium and silicon being particularly susceptible. The ability to break down bare rock allows lichens to be among the first colonizers of dry land. The accumulation of chelating compounds can easily affect surrounding rocks and soils, and may lead to podsolisation of soils.\nThe symbiotic mycorrhizal fungi associated with tree root systems can release inorganic nutrients from minerals such as apatite or biotite and transfer these nutrients to the trees, thus contributing to tree nutrition. It was also recently evidenced that bacterial communities can impact mineral stability leading to the release of inorganic nutrients. A large range of bacterial strains or communities from diverse genera have been reported to be able to colonize mineral surfaces or to weather minerals, and for some of them a plant growth promoting effect has been demonstrated. The demonstrated or hypothesised mechanisms used by bacteria to weather minerals include several oxidoreduction and dissolution reactions as well as the production of weathering agents, such as protons, organic acids and chelating molecules.\nOcean floor.\nWeathering of basaltic oceanic crust differs in important respects from weathering in the atmosphere. Weathering is relatively slow, with basalt becoming less dense, at a rate of about 15% per 100 million years. The basalt becomes hydrated, and is enriched in total and ferric iron, magnesium, and sodium at the expense of silica, titanium, aluminum, ferrous iron, and calcium.\nBuildings.\nBuildings made of any stone, brick or concrete are susceptible to the same weathering agents as any exposed rock surface. Also statues, monuments and ornamental stonework can be badly damaged by natural weathering processes. This is accelerated in areas severely affected by acid rain.\nAccelerated building weathering may be a threat to the environment and occupant safety. Design strategies can moderate the impact of environmental effects, such as using of pressure-moderated rain screening, ensuring that the HVAC system is able to effectively control humidity accumulation and selecting concrete mixes with reduced water content to minimize the impact of freeze-thaw cycles.\nSoil.\nGranitic rock, the most abundant crystalline rock exposed at the Earth's surface, begins weathering with the destruction of hornblende. Biotite then weathers to vermiculite, and finally oligoclase and microcline are destroyed. All are converted into a mixture of clay minerals and iron oxides. The resulting soil is depleted in calcium, sodium, and ferrous iron compared with the bedrock, and magnesium is reduced by 40% and silicon by 15%. At the same time, the soil is enriched in aluminium and potassium by at least 50%; by titanium, whose abundance triples, and ferric iron, whose abundance increases by an order of magnitude compared with the bedrock.\nBasaltic rock is more easily weathered than granitic rock due to its formation at higher temperatures and drier conditions. The fine grain size and presence of volcanic glass also hasten weathering. In tropical settings, it rapidly weathers to clay minerals, aluminium hydroxides, and titanium-enriched iron oxides. Because most basalt is relatively poor in potassium, the basalt weathers directly to potassium-poor montmorillonite, then to kaolinite. Where leaching is continuous and intense, as in rain forests, the final weathering product is bauxite, the principal ore of aluminium. Where rainfall is intense but seasonal, as in monsoon climates, the final weathering product is iron- and titanium-rich laterite. Conversion of kaolinite to bauxite occurs only with intense leaching, as ordinary river water is in equilibrium with kaolinite.\nSoil formation requires between 100 and 1,000 years, a brief interval in geologic time. As a result, some formations show numerous paleosol (fossil soil) beds. For example, the Willwood Formation of Wyoming contains over 1,000 paleosol layers in a section representing 3.5 million years of geologic time. Paleosols have been identified in formations as old as Archean (over 2.5 billion years in age). They are difficult to recognize in the geologic record. Indications that a sedimentary bed is a paleosol include a gradational lower boundary and sharp upper boundary, the presence of much clay, poor sorting with few sedimentary structures, rip-up clasts in overlying beds, and desiccation cracks containing material from higher beds.\nThe degree of weathering of soil can be expressed as the \"chemical index of alteration\", defined as . This varies from 47 for unweathered upper crust rock to 100 for fully weathered material.\nWood, paint and plastic.\nWood can be physically and chemically weathered by hydrolysis and other processes relevant to minerals and is highly susceptible to ultraviolet radiation from sunlight. This induces photochemical reactions that degrade its surface. These also significantly weather paint and plastics.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72586", "revid": "47474982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72586", "title": "Simon Stevin", "text": "Flemish mathematician scientist and music theorist (1548\u20131620)\nSimon Stevin (; 1548\u20131620), sometimes called Stevinus, was a Flemish mathematician, scientist and music theorist. He made various contributions in many areas of science and engineering, both theoretical and practical. He also translated various mathematical terms into Dutch, making it one of the few European languages in which the word for mathematics, \"wiskunde\" (\"wis\" and \"kunde\", i.e., \"the knowledge of what is certain\"), was not a loanword from Greek but a calque via Latin. He also replaced the word \"chemie\", the Dutch for chemistry, by \"scheikunde\" (\"the art of separating\"), made in analogy with \"wiskunde\".\nBiography.\nVery little is known with certainty about Simon Stevin's life, and what we know is mostly inferred from other recorded facts. The exact birth date and the date and place of his death are uncertain. It is assumed he was born in Bruges, since he enrolled at Leiden University under the name \"Simon Stevinus Da Brugensis\" (meaning \"Simon Stevin from Bruges\"). His name is usually written as Stevin, but some documents regarding his father use the spelling \"Stevijn\" (pronunciation [\u02c8ste:v\u03b5\u026an]); this was a common spelling shift in 16th-century Dutch. \nSimon Stevin's mother, Cathelijne (or Catelyne), was the daughter of a wealthy family from Ypres; her father Hubert was a poorter of Bruges. Cathelijne would later marry Joost Sayon, who was involved in the carpet and silk trade and was a member of the schuttersgilde Sint-Sebastiaan. Through her marriage, Cathelijne became a member of a family of Calvinists; it is thought that Simon Stevin was likely brought up in the Calvinist faith.\nIt is believed that Stevin grew up in a relatively affluent environment and enjoyed a good education. He was likely educated at a Latin school in his hometown.\nSimon Stevin's travels.\nStevin left Bruges in 1571 apparently without a particular destination. Stevin was most likely a Calvinist since a Catholic would likely not have risen to the position of trust he later occupied with Maurice, Prince of Orange. It is assumed that he left Bruges to escape the religious persecution of Protestants by the Spanish rulers. Based on references in his work \"Wisconstighe Ghedaechtenissen\" (Mathematical Memoirs), it has been inferred that he must have moved first to Antwerp where he began his career as a merchant's clerk. Some biographers mention that he travelled to Prussia, Poland, Denmark, Norway and Sweden and other parts of Northern Europe, between 1571 and 1577. It is possible that he completed these travels over a longer period of time. In 1577 Simon Stevin returned to Bruges and was appointed city clerk by the aldermen of Bruges, a function he occupied from 1577 to 1581. He worked in the office of Jan de Brune of the Brugse Vrije, the castellany of Bruges.\nWhy he had returned to Bruges in 1577 is not clear. It may have been related to the political events of that period. Bruges was the scene of intense religious conflict. Catholics and Calvinists alternately controlled the government of the city. They usually opposed each other but would occasionally collaborate in order to counteract the dictates of King Philip II of Spain. In 1576 a certain level of official religious tolerance was decreed. This could explain why Stevin returned to Bruges in 1577. Later the Calvinists seized power in many Flemish cities and incarcerated Catholic clerics and secular governors supportive of the Spanish rulers. Between 1578 and 1584 Bruges was ruled by Calvinists.\nSimon Stevin in the Netherlands.\nIn 1581 Stevin again left his native Bruges and moved to Leiden where he attended the Latin school. On 16 February 1583 he enrolled, under the name \"Simon Stevinus Brugensis\" (meaning \"Simon Stevin from Bruges\"), at Leiden University, which had been founded by William the Silent in 1575. Here he befriended William the Silent's second son and heir Prince Maurice, the Count of Nassau. Stevin is listed in the university's registers until 1590 and apparently never graduated.\nFollowing William the Silent's assassination and Prince Maurice's assumption of his father's office, Stevin became the principal advisor and tutor of Prince Maurice. Prince Maurice asked his advice on many occasions, and made him a public officer \u2013 at first director of the so-called \"waterstaet\" (the government authority for public works, especially water management) from 1592, and later quartermaster-general of the army of the States-General. Prince Maurice also asked Stevin to found an engineering school within the University of Leiden.\nStevin moved to The Hague where he bought a house in 1612. He married in 1610 or 1614 and had four children. It is known that he left a widow with two children at his death in Leiden or The Hague in 1620.\nDiscoveries and inventions.\nStevin is responsible for many discoveries and inventions. Stevin wrote numerous bestselling books, and he was a pioneer of the development and the practical application of (engineering related) science such as mathematics, physics and applied science like hydraulic engineering and surveying. He was thought to have invented the decimal fractions until the middle of the 20th century, when researchers discovered that decimal fractions had been previously introduced by the medieval Islamic scholar al-Uqlidisi in a book written in 952. Moreover, a systematic development of decimal fractions was given well before Stevin in the book \"Miftah al-Hisab\" written in 1427 by Al-Kashi.\nHis contemporaries were most struck by his invention of a so-called land yacht, a carriage with sails, of which a model was preserved in Scheveningen until 1802. The carriage itself had been lost long before. Around the year 1600 Stevin, with Prince Maurice of Orange and twenty-six others, used the carriage on the beach between Scheveningen and Petten. The carriage was propelled solely by the force of wind and acquired a speed which exceeded that of horses. \nManagement of waterways.\nStevin's work in the \"waterstaet\" involved improvements to the sluices and spillways to control flooding, exercises in hydraulic engineering. Windmills were already in use to pump the water out but in \"Van de Molens\" (\"On mills\"), he suggested improvements including ideas that the wheels should move slowly with a better system for meshing of the gear teeth. These improved threefold the efficiency of the windmills used in pumping water out of the polders. He received a patent on his innovation in 1586.\nPhilosophy of science.\nStevin's aim was to bring about a second age of wisdom, in which mankind would have recovered all of its earlier knowledge. He deduced that the language spoken in this age would have to be Dutch, because, as he showed empirically, in that language, more concepts could be indicated with monosyllabic words than in any of the (European) languages he had compared it with. This was one of the reasons why he wrote all of his works in Dutch and left the translation of them for others to do. The other reason was that he wanted his works to be practically useful to people who had not mastered the common scientific language of the time, Latin. Thanks to Simon Stevin the Dutch language got its proper scientific vocabulary such as \"\" (\"kunst van het gewisse of zekere\" the art of what is known or what is certain) for mathematics, \"\" (the \"art of nature\") for physics, \"\" (the \"art of separation\") for chemistry, \"\" (the \"art of stars\") for astronomy, \"\" (the \"art of measuring\") for geometry.\nGeometry, physics and trigonometry.\nStevin was the first to show how to model regular and semiregular polyhedra by delineating their frames in a plane. He also distinguished stable from unstable equilibria.\nStevin contributed to trigonometry with his book, \"De Driehouckhandel\".\nIn \"The First Book of the Elements of the Art of Weighing, The second part: Of the propositions [The Properties of Oblique Weights], Page 41, Theorem XI, Proposition XIX\", he derived the condition for the balance of forces on inclined planes using a diagram with a \"wreath\" containing evenly spaced round masses resting on the planes of a triangular prism (see the illustration on the side). He concluded that the weights required were proportional to the lengths of the sides on which they rested assuming the third side was horizontal and that the effect of a weight was reduced in a similar manner. It is implicit that the reduction factor is the height of the triangle divided by the side (the sine of the angle of the side with respect to the horizontal). The proof diagram of this concept is known as the \"Epitaph of Stevinus\". As noted by E. J. Dijksterhuis, Stevin's proof of the equilibrium on an inclined plane can be faulted for using perpetual motion to imply a reductio ad absurdum. Dijksterhuis says Stevin \"intuitively made use of the principle of conservation of energy ... long before it was formulated explicitly\".\nHe demonstrated the resolution of forces before Pierre Varignon, which had not been remarked previously, even though it is a simple consequence of the law of their composition.\nStevin discovered the hydrostatic paradox, which states that the pressure in a liquid is independent of the shape of the vessel and the area of the base, but depends solely on its height.\nHe also gave the measure for the pressure on any given portion of the side of a vessel.\nHe was the first to explain the tides using the attraction of the moon.\nIn 1586, he demonstrated that two objects of different weight fall with the same acceleration.\nMusic theory.\nThe first mention of equal temperament related to the twelfth root of two in the West appeared in Simon Stevin's unfinished manuscript \"Van de Spiegheling der singconst \"(ca 1605) published posthumously three hundred years later in 1884; however, due to insufficient accuracy of his calculation, many of the numbers (for string length) he obtained were off by one or two units from the correct values. He appears to have been inspired by the writings of the Italian lutenist and musical theorist Vincenzo Galilei (father of Galileo Galilei), a onetime pupil of Gioseffo Zarlino.\nBookkeeping.\nDouble-entry bookkeeping may have been known to Stevin, as he was a clerk in Antwerp in his younger years, either practically or via the medium of the works of Italian authors such as Luca Pacioli and Gerolamo Cardano. However, Stevin was the first to recommend the use of impersonal accounts in the national household. He brought it into practice for Prince Maurice, and recommended it to the French statesman Sully.\nDecimal fractions.\nStevin wrote a 35-page booklet called \"De Thiende\" (\"the art of tenths\"), first published in Dutch in 1585 and translated into French as \"La Disme\". The full title of the English translation was \"Decimal arithmetic: Teaching how to perform all computations whatsoever by whole numbers without fractions, by the four principles of common arithmetic: namely, addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.\" The concepts referred to in the booklet included unit fractions and Egyptian fractions. Muslim mathematicians were the first to utilize decimals instead of fractions on a large scale. Al-Kashi's book, \"Key to Arithmetic\", was written at the beginning of the 15th century and was the stimulus for the systematic application of decimals to whole numbers and fractions thereof. But nobody established their daily use before Stevin. He felt that this innovation was so significant, that he declared the universal introduction of decimal coinage, measures and weights to be merely a question of time.\nHis notation is rather unwieldy. The point separating the integers from the decimal fractions seems to be the invention of Bartholomaeus Pitiscus, in whose trigonometrical tables (1612) it occurs, and it was accepted by John Napier in his logarithmic papers (1614 and 1619).\nStevin printed little circles around the exponents of the different powers of one-tenth. That Stevin intended these encircled numerals to denote mere exponents is clear from the fact that he employed the same symbol for powers of algebraic quantities. He did not avoid fractional exponents; only negative exponents do not appear in his work.\nStevin wrote on other scientific subjects \u2013 for instance optics, geography, astronomy \u2013 and a number of his writings were translated into Latin by W. Snellius (Willebrord Snell). There are two complete editions in French of his works, both printed in Leiden, one in 1608, the other in 1634.\nMathematics.\nStevin wrote his \"Arithmetic\" in 1594. The work brought to the western world for the first time a general solution of the quadratic equation, originally documented nearly a millennium previously by Brahmagupta in India.\nAccording to Van der Waerden, Stevin eliminated \"the classical restriction of 'numbers' to integers (Euclid) or to rational fractions (Diophantos)...the real numbers formed a continuum. His general notion of a real number was accepted, tacitly or explicitly, by all later scientists\". A recent study attributes a greater role to Stevin in developing the real numbers than has been acknowledged by Weierstrass's followers. Stevin proved the intermediate value theorem for polynomials, anticipating Cauchy's proof thereof. Stevin uses a divide and conquer procedure, subdividing the interval into ten equal parts. Stevin's decimals were the inspiration for Isaac Newton's work on infinite series.\nNeologisms.\nStevin thought the Dutch language to be excellent for scientific writing, and he translated many of the mathematical terms to Dutch. As a result, Dutch is one of the few Western European languages that have many mathematical terms that do not stem from Greek or Latin. This includes the very name \"wiskunde\" (mathematics).\nHis eye for the importance of having the scientific language be the same as the language of the craftsman may show from the dedication of his book \"De Thiende\" ('The Disme' or 'The Tenth'): 'Simon Stevin wishes the stargazers, surveyors, carpet measurers, body measurers in general, coin measurers and tradespeople good luck.' Further on in the same pamphlet, he writes: \"[this text] teaches us all calculations that are needed by the people without using fractions. One can reduce all operations to adding, subtracting, multiplying and dividing with integers.\"\nSome of the words he invented evolved: 'aftrekken' (\"subtract\") and 'delen' (\"divide\") stayed the same, but over time 'menigvuldigen' became 'vermenigvuldigen' (\"multiply\", the added 'ver' emphasizes the fact it is an action). 'Vergaderen' (\"gathering\") became 'optellen' (\"add\" lit. \"count up\").\nAnother example is the Dutch word for diameter: 'middellijn', lit.: line through the middle.\nThe word 'zomenigmaal' (\"quotient\" lit. 'that many times') has been replaced by 'quoti\u00ebnt' in modern-day Dutch.\nOther terms did not make it into modern day mathematical Dutch, like 'teerling' (\"die\", although still being used in the meaning as die), instead of cube.\nLegacy.\nFollowing his life, Belgium and the city of Bruges have continued to name places, statues and other topics in honor of Stevin\nPublications.\nAmongst others, he published:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72587", "revid": "36418353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72587", "title": "Frederick I of Prussia", "text": "Ruler of Brandenburg\u2013Prussia from 1688 to 1713\nFrederick I (; 11 July 1657 \u2013 25 February 1713), of the Hohenzollern dynasty, was (as Frederick III) Elector of Brandenburg (1688\u20131713) and Duke of Prussia in personal union (Brandenburg\u2013Prussia). The latter function he upgraded to royalty, becoming the first King in Prussia (1701\u20131713). From 1707 he was in personal union with the sovereign prince of the Principality of Neuch\u00e2tel.\nBiography.\nFamily.\nBorn in K\u00f6nigsberg, Frederick was the third son of Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg by his father's first marriage to Louise Henriette of Orange-Nassau, eldest daughter of Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange and Amalia of Solms-Braunfels. His maternal cousin was King William III of England. Upon the death of his father on 29 April 1688, Frederick became Elector Frederick III of Brandenburg and Duke of Prussia. Right after ascending the throne Frederick founded a new city southerly adjacent to Dorotheenstadt and named it after himself, the Friedrichstadt.\nMilitary career.\nFrederick was noted for his opposition to France, in contrast to his father who had sought an alliance with Louis XIV. Frederick took Brandenburg into the League of Augsburg against France and in 1689 led military forces into the field as part of the allied coalition. That year an army under his command besieged and captured Bonn. Despite this opposition to France (a characteristic that was even more prominent in his son and heir) he was fond of French culture, and styled his court in imitation of that of Louis XIV.\nReign as King.\nThe Hohenzollern state was then known as Brandenburg-Prussia. The family's main possessions were the Margraviate of Brandenburg within the Holy Roman Empire and the Duchy of Prussia outside of the Empire, ruled as a personal union. Although he was the Margrave and Prince-elector of Brandenburg and the Duke of Prussia, Frederick desired the more prestigious title of king. However, according to Germanic law at that time, no kingdoms could exist within the Holy Roman Empire, with the exception of the Kingdom of Bohemia which belonged to the Holy Roman Emperor.\nFrederick persuaded Emperor Leopold I to allow Prussia to be elevated to a kingdom by the Crown Treaty of 16 November 1700. This agreement was ostensibly given in exchange for an alliance against King Louis XIV in the War of the Spanish Succession and the provision of 8,000 Prussian troops to Leopold's service. Frederick argued that Prussia had never been part of the Holy Roman Empire, and he ruled over it with full sovereignty. Therefore, he said, there was no legal or political barrier to letting him rule it as a kingdom. Frederick was aided in the negotiations by Charles Ancillon.\nFrederick crowned himself on 18 January 1701 in K\u00f6nigsberg. Although he did so with the Emperor's consent, and also with formal acknowledgement from Augustus II the Strong, Elector of Saxony, who held the title of King of Poland, the Sejm of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth raised objections, and viewed the coronation as illegal. In fact, according to the terms of the Treaty of Wehlau and Bromberg, the House of Hohenzollern's sovereignty over the Duchy of Prussia was not absolute but contingent on the continuation of the male line (in the absence of which the duchy would revert to the Polish crown). Therefore, out of deference to the region's historic ties to the Polish crown, Frederick made the symbolic concession of calling himself \"King in Prussia\" instead of \"King of Prussia\".\nFrederick leveraged the recognizance of other nations to attempt to construct the legitimacy of his assumed royal title. In this, the English were his most willing diplomatic allies. They first sent an envoy to Berlin, who conformed to the new royal protocol. Thereafter, they sent an ambassador to Berlin, who ceremonially recognised Frederick as king. In exchange, Frederick provided England with troops during the War of the Spanish Succession, though he often withheld these until he received the ceremonial concessions he desired.\nHis royalty was, in any case, limited to Prussia and did not reduce the rights of the Emperor in the portions of his domains that were still part of the Holy Roman Empire. In other words, while he was a king in Prussia, he was still only an elector under the suzerainty of the Holy Roman Emperor in Brandenburg. Legally, the Hohenzollern state was still a personal union between Brandenburg and Prussia. However, by the time Frederick crowned himself as king, the emperor's authority over Brandenburg (and the rest of the empire) was only nominal, and in practice it soon came to be treated as part of the Prussian kingdom rather than as a separate entity. His grandson, Frederick the Great, was the first Prussian king formally to style himself \"King of Prussia\" (from 1772 onwards).\nFrederick was a patron of the arts and learning. The Prussian Academy of Arts in Berlin was founded by Frederick in 1696, as was the Academy of Sciences in 1700, though the latter was closed down by his son as an economic measure; it was reopened in 1740 by his grandson, Frederick II. Frederick also appointed Jacob Paul von Gundling as Professor of History and Law at the Berlin Knights Academy in 1705, and as historian at the Higher Herald's Office in 1706.\nFrederick died in Berlin in 1713 and is entombed in the Berlin Cathedral.\nHis grandson, Frederick the Great, referred to Frederick I as \"the mercenary king\", due to the fact that he greatly profited from the hiring of his Prussian troops to defend other territories, such as in northern Italy against the French. \"All in all,\" he wrote of his grandfather, \"he was great in small matters, and small in great matters.\"\nMarriages and children.\nFrederick was married three times:\nFirst, in 1679, to Elizabeth Henrietta of Hesse-Kassel (1661\u20131683), with whom he had one child, \nThen to Sophia Charlotte of Hanover (1668\u20131705), with whom he had \nIn 1708, he married Sophia Louise of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, who survived him but had no children by him. \nHe also had an official mistress, Catharina von Wartenberg, between 1696 and 1711. However, he was never known to make use of her services, being deeply in love with his second wife.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72588", "revid": "3940708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72588", "title": "Jean Giraudoux", "text": "French novelist, essayist, diplomat and playwright (1882\u20131944)\nHippolyte Jean Giraudoux (; ; 29 October 1882 \u2013 31 January 1944) was a French novelist, essayist, diplomat and playwright. He is considered among the most important French dramatists of the period between World War I and World War II. \nHis work is noted for its stylistic elegance and poetic fantasy. Giraudoux's dominant theme is the relationship between man and woman\u2014or in some cases, between man and some unattainable ideal.\nBiography.\nGiraudoux was born 29 October 1882 in Bellac, Haute-Vienne, where his father, L\u00e9ger Giraudoux, worked for the Ministry of Transport. Giraudoux studied at the Lyc\u00e9e Lakanal in Sceaux and upon graduation traveled extensively in Europe. After his return to France in 1910, he accepted a position with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. With the outbreak of World War I, he served with distinction and in 1915 became the first writer ever to be awarded the wartime Legion of Honour.\nHe married in 1918 and in the subsequent inter-war period produced the majority of his writing. He first achieved literary success through his novels, notably \"Siegfried et le Limousin\" (1922) and \"Eglantine\" (1927). An ongoing collaboration with actor and theater director Louis Jouvet, beginning in 1928 with Jouvet's radical streamlining of \"Siegfried\" for the stage, stimulated his writing. But it is his plays that gained him international renown. He became well known in the English speaking world largely because of the award-winning adaptations of his plays by Christopher Fry (\"Tiger at the Gates\") and Maurice Valency (the satirical \"The Madwoman of Chaillot\", \"Ondine\", \"The Enchanted\", \"The Apollo of Bellac\").\nGiraudoux served as a juror with Florence Meyer Blumenthal in awarding the Prix Blumenthal, a grant given between 1919 and 1954 to painters, sculptors, decorators, engravers, writers, and musicians. In politics he was affiliated with the Radical Party, served in the cabinet of \u00c9douard Herriot in 1932, and was appointed as Minister of Information by \u00c9douard Daladier in 1939.\nGiraudoux died mysteriously in Paris, 31 January 1944, at the age of 61. There has been speculation that he was poisoned. He is buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re de Passy in Paris.\nSeveral of his poems were set to music by Maurice Jaubert.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72590", "revid": "38795873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72590", "title": "Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco", "text": "Romanian-French playwright (1909\u20131994)\nEug\u00e8ne Ionesco (; ; born Eugen Ionescu, ; 26 November 1909 \u2013 28 March 1994) was a Romanian-French playwright who wrote mostly in French, and was one of the foremost figures of the French avant-garde theatre in the 20th century. Ionesco instigated a revolution in ideas and techniques of drama, beginning with his \"anti play\", \"The Bald Soprano\" which contributed to the beginnings of what is known as the Theatre of the Absurd, which includes a number of plays that, following the ideas of the philosopher Albert Camus, explore concepts of absurdism and surrealism. He was made a member of the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise in 1970, and was awarded the 1970 Austrian State Prize for European Literature, and the 1973 Jerusalem Prize.\nBiography.\nIonesco was born in Slatina, Romania. His father belonged to the Orthodox Christian church. His mother was of French and Romanian heritage. According to some sources, her faith was Protestant (the faith into which her father was born and to which her originally Greek Orthodox Christian mother had converted). According to other sources, his mother had Jewish ancestry; however, this has been contested by his niece. Eug\u00e8ne was baptized into the Orthodox Christian faith. Many sources cite his birthdate as 1912, this error being due to vanity on the part of Ionesco himself, who wanted the year of his birth to coincide with that of when his idol, Romanian playwright Caragiale, died.\nHe spent most of his childhood in France and, while there, had an experience he claimed affected his perception of the world more significantly than any other. As Deborah B. Gaensbauer describes in \"Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco Revisited\", \"Walking in summer sunshine in a white-washed provincial village under an intense blue sky, [Ionesco] was profoundly altered by the light.\" He was struck very suddenly with a feeling of intense luminosity, the feeling of floating off the ground and an overwhelming feeling of well-being. When he \"floated\" back to the ground and the \"light\" left him, he saw that the real world in comparison was full of decay, corruption and meaningless repetitive action. This also coincided with the revelation that death takes everyone in the end. Much of his later work, reflecting this new perception, demonstrates a disgust for the tangible world, a distrust of communication, and the subtle sense that a better world lies just beyond our reach. Echoes of this experience can also be seen in references and themes in many of his important works: characters pining for an unattainable \"city of lights\" (\"The Killer\", \"The Chairs\") or perceiving a world beyond (\"A Stroll in the Air\"); characters granted the ability to fly (\"A Stroll in the Air\", \"Am\u00e9d\u00e9e\", \"Victims of Duty\"); the banality of the world which often leads to depression (the B\u00e9renger character); ecstatic revelations of beauty within a pessimistic framework (\"Am\u00e9d\u00e9e\", \"The Chairs\", the B\u00e9renger character); and the inevitability of death (\"Exit the King\").\nHe returned to Romania with his father and mother in 1925 after his parents divorced. There he attended Saint Sava National College, after which he studied French Literature at the University of Bucharest from 1928 to 1933 and qualified as a teacher of French. While there he met Emil Cioran and Mircea Eliade, and the three became lifelong friends.\nIn 1936, Ionesco married Rodica Burileanu. They had one daughter, Marie-France Ionesco, for whom he wrote a number of unconventional children's stories. With his family, he returned to France in 1938 to complete his doctoral thesis. Caught by the outbreak of World War II in 1939, he returned to Romania, but soon changed his mind and, with the help of friends, obtained travel documents which allowed him to return to France in 1942, where he remained during the rest of the war, living in Marseille and then moving with his family to Paris after its liberation.\nLiterary career.\nWriting in Romania.\nThough best known as a playwright, plays were not his first chosen medium. He started writing poetry and criticism, publishing in several Romanian journals. Two early writings of note are \"Nu\", a book criticizing many other writers, including prominent Romanian poets, and \"Hugoliade, or, The grotesque and tragic life of Victor Hugo\" a satirical biography mocking Victor Hugo's status as a great figure in French literature. The \"Hugoliade\" includes exaggerated retellings of the most scandalous episodes in Hugo's life and contains prototypes for many of Ionesco's later themes: the ridiculous authoritarian character, the false worship of language.\nOrigins of his first play.\nIonesco began his theatre career later in life; he did not write his first play until 1948 (\"La Cantatrice chauve\", first performed in 1950 with the English title \"The Bald Soprano\"). At the age of 40, he decided to learn English using the Assimil method, conscientiously copying whole sentences in order to memorize them. Re-reading them, he began to feel that he was not learning English, rather he was discovering some astonishing truths such as the fact that there are seven days in a week, that the ceiling is up and the floor is down; things which he already knew, but which suddenly struck him as being as stupefying as they were indisputably true.\nThis feeling intensified with the introduction in later lessons of the characters known as \"Mr. and Mrs. Smith\". To her husband's astonishment, Mrs. Smith informed him that they had several children, that they lived in the vicinity of London, that their name was Smith, that Mr. Smith was a clerk, and that they had a servant, Mary, who was English like themselves. What was remarkable about Mrs. Smith, Ionesco thought, was her eminently methodical procedure in her quest for truth. For Ionesco, the clich\u00e9s and truisms of the conversation primer disintegrated into wild caricature and parody with language itself disintegrating into disjointed fragments of words. Ionesco set about translating this experience into a play, \"La Cantatrice Chauve\", which was performed for the first time in 1950 under the direction of Nicolas Bataille. It was far from a success and went unnoticed until a few established writers and critics, among them Jean Anouilh and Raymond Queneau, championed the play.\nEarly plays.\nIonesco's earliest theatrical works, considered to be his most innovative, were one-act plays or extended sketches: \"La Cantatrice chauve\" translated as \"The Bald Soprano\" or \"The Bald Prima Donna\" (written 1948), \"Jacques ou la soumission\" translated as \"Jack, or The Submission\" (1950), \"La Le\u00e7on\" translated as \"The Lesson\" (1950), \"Les Salutations\" translated as \"Salutations\" (1950), \"Les Chaises\" translated as \"The Chairs\" (1951), \"L'Avenir est dans les oeufs\" translated as \"The Future is in Eggs\" (1951), \"Victimes du devoir\" translated as \"Victims of Duty\" (1952) and, finally, \"Le Nouveau locataire\" translated as \"The New Tenant\" (1953). These absurdist sketches, to which he gave such descriptions as \"anti-play\" (\"anti-pi\u00e8ce\" in French) express modern feelings of alienation and the impossibility and futility of communication with surreal comic force, parodying the conformism of the bourgeoisie and conventional theatrical forms. In them Ionesco rejects a conventional story-line as their basis, instead taking their dramatic structure from accelerating rhythms and/or cyclical repetitions. He disregards psychology and coherent dialogue, thereby depicting a dehumanized world with mechanical, puppet-like characters who speak in \"non-sequiturs\". Language becomes rarefied, with words and material objects gaining a life of their own, increasingly overwhelming the characters and creating a sense of menace.\nThe full-length plays.\nWith \"Tueur sans gages\" translated as \"The Killer\" (1959; his second full-length play, the first being \"Am\u00e9d\u00e9e, ou Comment s'en d\u00e9barrasser\" in 1954), Ionesco began to explore more sustained dramatic situations featuring more humanized characters. Notably this includes B\u00e9renger, a central character in a number of Ionesco's plays, the last of which is \"Le Pi\u00e9ton de l'air\" translated as \"A Stroll in the Air\".\nB\u00e9renger is a semi-autobiographical figure expressing Ionesco's wonderment and anguish at the strangeness of reality. He is comically na\u00efve, engaging the audience's sympathy. In \"The Killer\" he encounters death in the figure of a serial killer. In \"Rhinoc\u00e9ros\" he watches his friends turning into rhinoceroses one by one until he alone stands unchanged against this mass movement. It is in this play that Ionesco most forcefully expresses his horror of ideological conformism, inspired by the rise of the fascist Iron Guard in Romania in the 1930s. \"Le Roi se meurt\" translated as \"Exit the King\" (1962) shows him as King B\u00e9renger I, an everyman figure who struggles to come to terms with his own death.\nLater works.\nIonesco's later work has generally received less attention. This includes \"La Soif et la faim\" translated as \"Hunger and Thirst\" (1966), \"Jeux de massacre\" (1971), \"Macbett\" (1972, a free adaptation of Shakespeare's \"Macbeth\") and \"Ce formidable bordel\" (1973).\nIonesco also wrote his only novel, \"The Hermit\", during this later period. It was first published in 1975.\nApart from the libretto for the opera \"Maximilien Kolbe\" (music by Dominique Probst) which has been performed in five countries, produced for television and recorded for release on CD, Ionesco did not write for the stage after \"Voyage chez les morts\" in 1981. However, \"La Cantatrice chauve\" is still playing at the http:// today, having moved there in 1952. It holds the world record for the play that has been staged continuously in the same theatre for the longest time.\nTheoretical writings.\nLike Shaw and Brecht, Ionesco contributed to the theatre with his theoretical writings (Wellwarth, 33). Ionesco wrote mainly in attempts to correct critics whom he felt misunderstood his work and therefore wrongly influenced his audience. In doing so, Ionesco articulated ways in which he thought contemporary theatre should be reformed (Wellwarth, 33). \"Notes and Counter Notes\" is a collection of Ionesco's writings, including musings on why he chose to write for the theatre and direct responses to his contemporary critics.\nIn the first section, titled \"Experience of the Theatre\", Ionesco claimed to have hated going to the theatre as a child because it gave him \"no pleasure or feeling of participation\" (Ionesco, 15). He wrote that the problem with realistic theatre is that it is less interesting than theatre that invokes an \"imaginative truth\", which he found to be much more interesting and freeing than the \"narrow\" truth presented by strict realism (Ionesco, 15). He claimed that \"drama that relies on simple effects is not necessarily drama simplified\" (Ionesco, 28). \"Notes and Counter Notes\" also reprints a heated war of words between Ionesco and Kenneth Tynan based on Ionesco's beliefs and Ionesco's hatred for Brecht and Brechtian theatre.\nLiterary context.\nIonesco is often considered a writer of the Theatre of the Absurd, a label originally given to him by Martin Esslin in his book of the same name. Esslin, placed Ionesco alongside contemporaries Samuel Beckett, Jean Genet, and Arthur Adamov, calling this informal group \"absurd\" on the basis of Albert Camus' concept of the absurd. In Esslin's view, Beckett and Ionesco better captured the meaninglessness of existence in their plays than works by Camus or Sartre. Because of this loose association, Ionesco is often mislabeled an existentialist. Ionesco claimed in \"Notes and Counter Notes\" that he was not an existentialist and often criticized existentialist figurehead Jean-Paul Sartre. Although Ionesco knew Beckett and honored his work, the French group of playwrights was far from an organized movement.\nIonesco on the metaphysics of death in \"Through Parisian Eyes: Reflections on Contemporary French Arts and Culture\" by Melinda Camber Porter: \"Death is our main problem and all others are less important. It is the wall and the limit. It is the only inescapable alienation; it gives us a sense of our limits. But the ignorance of ourselves and of others to which we are condemned is just as worrying. In the final analysis, we don't know what we're doing. Nevertheless, in all my work there is an element of hope and an appeal to others.\"\nIonesco claimed instead an affinity for \u2019Pataphysics and its creator Alfred Jarry. He was also a great admirer of the Dadaists and Surrealists, especially his fellow countryman Tristan Tzara. Ionesco became friends with Andr\u00e9 Breton, whom he revered. In \"Present Past, Past Present\", Ionesco wrote \"Breton taught us to destroy the walls of the real that separate us from reality, to participate in being so as to live as if it were the first day of creation, a day that would every day be the first day of new creations.\" Raymond Queneau, a former associate of Breton and a champion of Ionesco's work, was a member of the Coll\u00e8ge de \u2019Pataphysique and a founder of Oulipo, two groups with which Ionesco was associated. Politically, Ionesco expressed sympathy with the left-libertarian Transnational Radical Party of Marco Pannella.\nHonours and awards.\nIonesco was made a member of the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise in 1970. He also received numerous awards including Tours Festival Prize for film, 1959; Prix Italia, 1963; Society of Authors Theatre Prize, 1966; Grand Prix National for theatre, 1969; Monaco Grand Prix, 1969; Austrian State Prize for European Literature, 1970; Jerusalem Prize, 1973; and honorary Doctoral Degrees from New York University and the Universities of Leuven, Warwick and Tel Aviv. He was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature eight times.\nDeath.\nEug\u00e8ne Ionesco died at age 84 on 28 March 1994 and is buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse in Paris.\nIn 2009, the Romanian Academy granted posthumous membership to Ionesco.\nTheatrical works.\nLong plays\nShort plays\nVignettes\nMonologue\nBallet scenario\nOpera libretto\nOther writings.\nFiction\nNon-fiction\nFilm scenarios\nTelevision scenario\nUntranslated writings.\nNon-fiction\nPlays\nBallet scenario\nPoetry\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72591", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72591", "title": "Pierre de Marivaux", "text": "French playwright and novelist (1688\u20131763)\nPierre Carlet de Chamblain de Marivaux (; ; 4 February 1688 \u2013 12 February 1763), commonly referred to as Marivaux, was a French playwright and novelist.\nMarivaux is considered one of the most important French playwrights of the 18th century, writing numerous comedies for the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise and the Com\u00e9die-Italienne of Paris. His most important works are \"Le Triomphe de l'amour\", \"Le Jeu de l'amour et du hasard\" and \"Les Fausses Confidences\". He also published a number of essays and two important but unfinished novels, \"La Vie de Marianne\" and \"Le Paysan parvenu\".\nLife.\nMarivaux's father was a Norman financier whose name from birth was Carlet, but who assumed the surname of Chamblain, and then that of Marivaux. He brought up his family in Limoges and Riom, in the province of Auvergne, where he directed the mint.\nMarivaux is said to have written his first play, the \"P\u00e8re prudent et \u00e9quitable\", when he was only eighteen, but it was not published until 1712, when he was twenty-four. However, the young Marivaux concentrated more on writing novels than plays. In the three years from 1713 to 1715 he produced three novels \u2013 \"Effets surprenants de la sympathie\"; \"La Voiture embourb\u00e9e\", and a book which had three titles \u2013 \"Pharsamon\", \"Les Folies romanesques\", and \"Le Don Quichotte moderne\". These books are very different from his later, more famous pieces: they are inspired by Spanish romances and the heroic novels of the preceding century, with a certain mixture of the marvelous.\nThen Marivaux's literary ardour entered a new phase. He parodied Homer to serve the cause of Antoine Houdar de La Motte, (1672\u20131731) an ingenious paradoxer; Marivaux had already done something similar for Fran\u00e7ois F\u00e9nelon, whose \"Telemachus\" he parodied and updated as \"Le Telemaque travesti\" (written in 1714 but not published until 1736). His friendship with Antoine Houdar de La Motte introduced him to the \"Mercure\", the chief newspaper of France, and he started writing articles for it in 1717. His work was noted for its keen observation and literary skill. His work showed the first signs of what is now called \"marivaudage,\" the flirtatious bantering tone characteristic of Marivaux's dialogues. In 1742 he became acquainted with the then-unknown Jean-Jacques Rousseau, helping him revise a play, \"Narcissus,\" though it wasn't produced till long afterwards.\nMarivaux is reputed to have been a witty conversationalist, with a somewhat contradictory personality. He was extremely good-natured but fond of saying very severe things, unhesitating in his acceptance of favours (he drew a regular annuity from Claude Adrien Helv\u00e9tius) but exceedingly touchy if he thought himself in any way slighted. At the same time, he was a great cultivator of sensibility and unsparingly criticized the rising \"philosophes\". Perhaps for this reason, Voltaire became his enemy and often disparaged him. Marivaux's friends included Helv\u00e9tius, Claudine Gu\u00e9rin de Tencin, Bernard le Bovier de Fontenelle and even Madame de Pompadour (who allegedly provided him with a pension). Marivaux had one daughter, who became a nun; the duke of Orleans, the regent's successor, furnished her with her dowry.\nLiterary career.\nThe early 1720s were very important for Marivaux; he wrote a comedy (now mostly lost) called \"L'Amour et la v\u00e9rit\u00e9\", another comedy, \"Arlequin poli par l'amour\", and an unsuccessful tragedy, \"Annibal\" (printed 1737). In about 1721, he married a Mlle Martin, but she died shortly thereafter. Meanwhile, he lost all of his inheritance money when he invested it in the Mississippi scheme. His pen now became almost his sole resource.\nMarivaux had a connection with two fashionable theatres: \"Annibal\" had played at the Com\u00e9die Fran\u00e7aise and \"Arlequin poli\" at the Com\u00e9die Italienne. He also endeavoured to start a weekly newspaper, the \"Spectateur Fran\u00e7ais\", to which he was the sole contributor. But his irregular work ethic killed the paper after less than two years. Thus, for nearly twenty years, the theatre, especially the Com\u00e9die Italienne, was Marivaux's chief support. His plays were well received by the actors of the Com\u00e9die Fran\u00e7aise, but were rarely successful there.\nMarivaux wrote between 30 and 40 plays, the best of which are \"La Surprise de l'amour\" (1722), the \"Triomphe de Plutus\" (1728), \"Jeu de l'amour et du hasard\" (1730) (The Game of Love and Chance), \"Les Fausses confidences\" (1737), all produced at the Italian theatre, and \"Le Legs\" (1736), produced at the French. At intervals, he returned to journalism: a periodical publication called \"L'Indigent philosophe\" appeared in 1727, and another called \"Le Cabinet du philosophe\" in 1734. But the same causes which had proved fatal to the \"Spectateur\" prevented these later efforts from succeeding.\nIn 1731 Marivaux published the first two parts of his great novel, \"Marianne\". The eleven parts appeared at intervals over the next eleven years, but the novel was never finished. In 1735 another novel, \"Le Paysan parvenu\", was begun, but this also was left unfinished. Marivaux was elected a member of the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise in 1742. For the next twenty years, he contributed occasionally to the \"Mercure\", wrote plays and reflections (which were seldom of much worth), and so forth. He died on 12 February 1763, aged seventy-five.\n\"Marivaudage\".\nThe so-called \"marivaudage\" is the main point of importance about Marivaux's literary work, though the best of the comedies have great merits, and \"Marianne\" is an extremely important step in the development of the French novel. That, and \"Le Paysan parvenu\", have some connection to the work of Samuel Richardson and Henry Fielding. In general, Marivaux's subject matter is the so-called \"metaphysic of love-making.\" As Claude Prosper Jolyot Cr\u00e9billon said, Marivaux's characters not only tell each other and the reader everything they have thought, but everything that they would like to persuade themselves that they have thought.\nThis style derives mainly from Fontenelle and the \"Pr\u00e9cieuses\", though there are traces of it even in Jean de La Bruy\u00e8re. It abuses metaphor somewhat, and delights to turn a metaphor in an unexpected and bizarre fashion. Sometimes a familiar phrase is used where dignified language would be expected; sometimes the reverse. Cr\u00e9billon also described Marivaux's style as an introduction of words to each other which have never made acquaintance and which think that they will not get on together (this phrase is itself rather Marivaux-esque). This kind of writing, of course, recurs at several periods of literature, especially at the end of the 19th century. This fantastic embroidery of language has a certain charm, and suits the somewhat unreal gallantry and sensibility which it describes and exhibits. Marivaux possessed, moreover, both thought and observation, besides considerable command of pathos.\nWorks.\nPlays.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdaptations.\n\"Triumph of Love\", a 1997 musical stage adaptation of Marivaux's play \"The Triumph of Love\" had a brief Broadway run.\nFilm and television.\nMarivaux's play \"The Triumph of Love\" (1732) was filmed in English in 2001 as \"The Triumph of Love\", starring Mira Sorvino, Ben Kingsley, and Fiona Shaw. It is, so far, the only one of Marivaux's plays ever to be filmed in English. The film received modestly favourable reviews, but was not a box office success.\nIn the French film \"L'Esquive\" (2003), directed by Abdellatif Kechiche, Arab-French adolescents in a Paris suburb prepare and perform Marivaux's play \"Le Jeu de l'amour et du hasard\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72593", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72593", "title": "Ermland Bishop Maximilian Kaller", "text": ""}
{"id": "72595", "revid": "51036202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72595", "title": "Tsinghua University", "text": "Public university in Beijing, China\nTsinghua University (THU) is a public university in Haidian, Beijing, China. It is affiliated with and funded by the Ministry of Education of China. The university is part of Project 211, Project 985, and the Double First-Class Construction. The university is also a member of the C9 League.\nTsinghua University's campus is in northwest Beijing, on the site of the former imperial gardens of the Qing dynasty. The university has 21 schools and 59 departments, with faculties in science, engineering, humanities, law, medicine, history, philosophy, economics, management, education, and art.\nSince the university was established in 1911, it has produced notable leaders in science, engineering, politics, business, and academia.\nHistory.\nEarly 20th century (1911\u20131949).\nTsinghua University was established in Beijing during a tumultuous period of national upheaval and conflicts with foreign powers which culminated in the Boxer Rebellion, an uprising against foreign influence in China. After the suppression of the revolt by a foreign alliance including the United States, the ruling Qing dynasty was required to pay indemnities to alliance members. United States Secretary of State John Hay suggested that the US$30 million Boxer indemnity allotted to the United States was excessive. After much negotiation with Qing ambassador Liang Cheng, president of the United States Theodore Roosevelt obtained approval from the United States Congress in 1909 to reduce the indemnity payment by US$10.8 million, on the condition that the funds would be used as scholarships for Chinese students to study in the United States.\nUsing this fund, the Tsinghua College () was established in Beijing, on 29 April 1911 on the site of a former royal garden to serve as a preparatory school for students the government planned to send to the United States. Faculty members for sciences were recruited by the YMCA from the United States, and its graduates transferred directly to American schools as juniors upon graduation. The motto of Tsinghua, \"Self-Discipline and Social Commitment\", was derived from a 1914 speech by prominent scholar and faculty member Liang Qichao, in which he quoted the I Ching to describe a notion of the ideal gentleman.\nIn 1925, the school established its own four-year undergraduate program and started a research institute on Chinese studies. In 1928, the school changed its name to National Tsinghua University.\nDuring the Second Sino-Japanese War, many Chinese universities were forced to evacuate their campuses to avoid the Japanese invasion. In 1937, Tsinghua University, Peking University and Nankai University merged to form the National Changsha Temporary University, located in Changsha, Hunan. The merged university later became the National Southwestern Associated University, located in Kunming, Yunnan. The Tsinghua University section of the merged university returned to Beijing at the end of World War II.\nLater 20th century (post-1949).\nAfter the end of the Chinese Civil War in 1949, China experienced a communist revolution leading to the creation of the People's Republic of China. Tsinghua University's then president Mei Yiqi, along with many professors, fled to Taiwan with the retreating Nationalist government. They established the National Tsing Hua Institute of Nuclear Technology in 1955, which later became the National Tsing Hua University in Taiwan, an institution independent and distinct from Tsinghua University.\nIn 1952, the Chinese Communist Party regrouped the country's higher education institutions in an attempt to build a Soviet style system where each institution specialized in a certain field of study, such as social sciences or natural sciences. Tsinghua University was streamlined into a polytechnic institute with a focus on engineering and the natural sciences.\nIn 1953, Tsinghua established a political counselor program, becoming the first university to do so following the Ministry of Education's 1952 directive to begin piloting such programs.107 As political counselors, new graduates who were also Communist Party members worked as political counselors in managing the student body and student organizations, often simultaneously serving as Communist Youth League secretaries.107 The program was later expanded to other universities following its endorsement by Deng Xiaoping and became further institutionalized across China in the 1990s and 2000s.108\nDuring the Third Front construction, Tsinghua established a branch in Mianyang, Sichuan province.\nIn 1966, the efforts of Tsinghua researchers were critical in China's transition from vacuum-tube computers to fully transistorized computers.101\nFrom 1966 to 1976, China experienced immense sociopolitical upheaval and instability during the Cultural Revolution. Many university students walked out of classrooms at Tsinghua and other institutions, and some went on to join the Red Guards, resulting in the complete shutdown of the university as faculty were persecuted or otherwise unable to teach. It was not until 1978, after the Cultural Revolution ended, that the university began to take in students and re-emerge as a force in Chinese politics and society.\nDuring the Criticize Lin, Criticize Confucius campaign of 1973 to 1976, critique groups formed at Tsinghua and Peking University disseminated commentaries under the pseudonym of \"Liang Xiao\". The pseudonym sounds like a person's name but is a homophone for \"two schools\".\nIn the 1980s, Tsinghua evolved beyond the polytechnic model and incorporated a multidisciplinary system emphasizing collaboration between distinct schools within the broader university environment. Under this system, several schools have been re-incorporated, including Tsinghua Law School, the School of Economics and Management, the School of Sciences, the School of Life Sciences, the School of Humanities and Social Sciences, the School of Public Policy and Management, and the Academy of Arts and Design.\nIn 1996, the School of Economics and Management established a partnership with the Sloan School of Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. One year later, Tsinghua and MIT began the MBA program known as the Tsinghua-MIT Global MBA.\nIn 1998, Tsinghua became the first Chinese university to offer a Master of Laws (LLM) program in American law, through a cooperative venture with the Temple University Beasley School of Law.\n21st century.\nTsinghua alumni include the current General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and paramount leader of China, Xi Jinping '79, who graduated with a degree in chemical engineering, along with the CCP General Secretary and former Paramount Leader of China Hu Jintao '64, who graduated with a degree in hydraulic engineering. In addition to its powerful alumni, Tsinghua has a reputation for hosting globally prominent guest speakers, with international leaders Bill Clinton, Tony Blair, Henry Kissinger, Carlos Ghosn, and Henry Paulson having lectured to the university community.\nAs of 2018, Tsinghua University consists of 20 schools and 58 university departments, 41 research institutes, 35 research centers, and 167 laboratories, including 15 national key laboratories. In September 2006, the Peking Union Medical College, a renowned medical school, was renamed \"Peking Union Medical College, Tsinghua University\" although it and Tsinghua University are technically separate institutions. The university operates the Tsinghua University Press, which publishes academic journals, textbooks, and other scholarly works.Through its constituent colleges, graduate and professional schools, and other institutes, Tsinghua University offers more than 82 bachelor's degree programs, 80 master's degree programs and 90 PhD programs.\nIn 2014, Tsinghua established Xinya College, a residential liberal arts college, as a pilot project to reform undergraduate education at the university. Modeled after universities in the United States and Europe, Xinya combines general and professional education in a liberal arts tradition, featuring a core curriculum of Chinese and Western literature and civilization studies and required courses in physical education and foreign languages. Furthermore, while most Tsinghua undergraduates must choose a specific major upon entrance, Xinya students declare their majors at the end of freshman year, enabling them to explore several different fields of study.\nIn December 2014, Tsinghua University established the Advisory Committee of Undergraduate Curriculum (ACUC). It became the first student autonomous organization in mainland China for students to participate in the school's management. The Tsinghua University Academic Committee, which was formally established on 8 July 2015, has stipulated in the committee's charter that students should be consulted through the ACUC for resolutions involving undergraduate students. From then on, Tsinghua commenced a new round of academic reform lasting ever since, including establishing GPA grading system, adding the writing classes, critical thinking classes, second foreign languages classes into curriculum, requiring undergrads to be able to swim before graduation, cooperating with the Peking University on class cross-registration to supplement each other's general education curriculum, reducing fees on class withdraw, transcripts and certificates, and adjusting the graduate school co-terminal admission policies.\nIn 2016, Schwarzman Scholars was established with almost US$400 million endowment by Steven Schwarzman, the chairman and CEO of the Blackstone Group and other multinational corporations and global leaders. Schwarzman Scholars annually selects 100\u2013200 scholars across the world to enroll in a one-year fully-funded master's degree leadership program designed to cultivate the next generation of global leaders. 40% students are selected from the United States, 20% students are selected from China, 40% are selected from rest of the world. These scholars reside on the university campus at Schwarzman College, a residential college built specifically for the program.\nIn 2016, Tsinghua's expenditures were RMB 13.7 billion (US$3.57 billion at purchasing power parity), the largest budget of any university in China. According to a 2018 \"Financial Times\" report, Tsinghua University has been linked to cyber-espionage.\nIn 2024, Tsinghua announced that its office of the university president had merged into the university's Chinese Communist Party committee, which would directly administer the university henceforth.\nAcademics.\nTsinghua University engages in extensive research and offers 51 bachelor's degree programs, 139 master's degree programs, and 107 doctoral programs through 20 colleges and 57 departments covering a broad range of subjects, including science, engineering, arts and literature, social sciences, law, medicine. Along with its membership in the C9 League, Tsinghua University affiliations include the Association of Pacific Rim Universities, a group of 50 leading Asian and American universities, Washington University in St. Louis's McDonnell International Scholars Academy, a group of 35 premier global universities, and the Association of East Asian Research Universities, a 17-member research collaboration network of top regional institutions. Tsinghua is an associate member of the Consortium Linking Universities of Science and Technology for Education and Research (CLUSTER). Tsinghua is a member of a Low Carbon Energy University Alliance (LCEUA), together with the University of Cambridge and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).\nAdmissions.\nAdmission to Tsinghua for both undergraduate and graduate schools is extremely competitive. Undergraduate admissions for domestic students is decided through the gaokao, the Chinese national college entrance exam, which allows students to list Tsinghua University among their preferred college choices. While selectivity varies by province, the sheer number of high school students applying for college each year has resulted in overall acceptance rates far lower than 0.1% of all test takers.\nAdmission to Tsinghua's graduate schools is also very competitive. Only about 16% of MBA applicants are admitted each year.\nResearch.\nResearch at Tsinghua University is mainly supported by government funding from national programs and special projects. In the areas of science and technology, funding from these sources totals over 20 billion yuan, which subsidizes more than 1,400 projects every year conducted by the university. With the prospective increase of state investment in science and technology, research at Tsinghua is projected to receive more financial support from the state.\nIn 2007, Tsinghua was granted security clearance to conduct classified research of military interest.\nEach year, the university hosts the Intellectual Property Summer Institute in cooperation with Franklin Pierce Law Center of Concord, New Hampshire.\nThe scientific research institutions in Tsinghua University are divided into three categories, including government-approved institutions, institutions independently established by the university and institutions jointly established by the university and independent legal entities outside the university.\nAs of 31 December 2022, Tsinghua University has 428 university-level scientific research institutions in operation.\nRankings and reputation.\nGeneral ranking.\nTsinghua University ranked No. 1 in China, the whole of Asia-Oceania region and emerging countries according to the \"Times Higher Education, \"with its industry income, research, and teaching performance indicator placed at 1st, 4th and 9th respectively in the world\".\" Internationally, Tsinghua was regarded as the most reputable Chinese university by the \"Times Higher Education World Reputation Rankings\" where, it has ranked 8th globally and 1st in the Asia-Pacific.\nTsinghua University ranked 10 among Global Innovative Universities according to the World's Universities with Real Impact (WURI) 2020 ranking released by United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR).\nSince 2013, Tsinghua also topped the newly created regional \"QS BRICS University Rankings\". Tsinghua graduates are highly desired worldwide; in the QS Graduate Employability Rankings 2017, Tsinghua was ranked 3rd in the world and 1st in the whole of Afro-Eurasia &amp; Oceania region. In 2020, Tsinghua was ranked 15th in the world by QS World University Rankings, and ranked 6th globally and 1st in Asia in the QS Graduate Employability Rankings.\nAs of 2025, the Academic Ranking of World Universities, also known as the \"Shanghai Ranking\", placed Tsinghua University 18th in the world and 1st in Asia &amp; Oceania region. The \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked Tsinghua at 1st in the Asia-Pacific and =11th globally in its 2025-2026 Best Global Universities Rankings.\nTsinghua was the best-ranked university in the Asia-Pacific and the 12th worldwide in 2025/2026 in terms of aggregate performance by the four widely observed university rankings (THE+ARWU+QS+US News), as reported by the BlueSky Ranking of University Rankings.\nResearch performance.\nAs of 2024, it ranked 3rd among the universities around the world by SCImago Institutions Rankings. The \"Nature Index 2025 Annual Tables\" by Nature Research ranked Tsinghua 6th among the leading universities globally for the high quality of research publications in natural science.\nFor sciences in general, the 2025 CWTS Leiden Ranking ranked Tsinghua University 2nd in the world after Harvard based on the number of their scientific publications belonging to the top 1% in their fields. In November 2024, Clarivate Analytics ranked Tsinghua 2nd in Afro-Eurasia &amp; Oceania regions after Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and 4th in the world after (CAS, Harvard, and Stanford) for most cited researchers.\nSubjects rankings.\nAs of 2021, it ranked 6th globally in \"Education\", 7th in \"Clinical, pre-clinical and Health\", 11th in \"Business and Economics\", 12th in \"Computer Science\", 13th in \"Life Science\", 17th in \"Engineering and Technology\", 18th in \"Physical Science\", 33th in \"Social Science\", 37th in \"Law\", and 40th in \"Arts and Humanities\" by the \"Times Higher Education Rankings by Subjects\", which are historical strengths for Tsinghua.\nSince 2015, Tsinghua University has overtaken the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to top the list of Best Global Universities for Engineering published by the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" and as of 2024, it also ranked number one globally in 9 subjects: \"Artificial Intelligence\", \"Chemical Engineering\", \"Chemistry\", \"Computer Science\", \"Energy and Fuels\", \"Engineering\", \"Environment Engineering\", \"Environment/Ecology\" and \"Material Science\".\nAs of 2024, the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" also placed \"Civil Engineering\", \"Condensed Matter Physics\", \"Electrical and Electronic Engineering\", \"Geosciences\", \"Green and Sustainable Science and Technology\", \"Mechanical Engineering\", \"Meteorology and Atmospheric Sciences\", \"Nanoscience and Nanotechnology\", \"Optics\", \"Physical Chemistry\", \"Physics\" and \"Water Resources\" at Tsinghua in the global Top 10 universities.\nIn the ARWU's Global Ranking of Academic Subjects 2020, Tsinghua ranks in the world's top five universities in \"Telecommunication Engineering\", \"Instruments Science &amp; Technology\", \"Civil Engineering\", \"Chemical Engineering\", \"Mechanical Engineering\", \"Nanoscience &amp; Nanotechnology\", \"Energy Science &amp; Engineering\", and \"Transportation Science &amp; Technology\" and falls within the global top 10 for \"Electrical &amp; Electronic Engineering\", \"Computer Science &amp; Engineering\", \"Materials Science &amp; Engineering\", \"Environmental Science &amp; Engineering\", and \"Water Resources\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nList of university departments and institutions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDepartment of Industrial Engineering.\nDepartment of Industrial Engineering (Tsinghua IE) has three institutes: \nThe department also operates two university-level multi-disciplinary application-oriented institutes or centers: \nDepartment of Mathematical Sciences.\nThe Department of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) was established in 1927.\nIn 1952, Tsinghua DMS was merged with the Peking University Department of Mathematical Sciences. Then in 1979 it was renamed \"Department of Applied Mathematics\", and renamed again in 1999 to its current title.\nTsinghua DMS has three institutes at present, the institute of Pure Mathematics which has 27 faculty members, the Institute of Applied Mathematics and Probability and Statistics which has 27 faculty members, and the Institute of Computational Mathematics and Operations Research which has 20 faculty members. There are currently about 400 undergraduate students and 200 graduate students.\nDepartment of Precision Instrument.\nThe Department of Precision Instrument was called the Department of Precision Instrument and Machine Manufacturing in 1960 when it was separated out from the Department of Machine Manufacturing to be an independent department. Later, in 1971, it was renamed the Department of Precision Instrument. The mission of the Department of Precision Instrument at Tsinghua University, as its dean said, is \"supporting the national development and improving the people's well-being.\"\nResearch.\nResearch in the Department of Precision Instrument is divided to four main parts, led by its four research institutes: the Institute of Opto-electronic Engineering, the Institute of Instrument Science and Technology, the Engineering Research Center for Navigation Technology, and the Center for Photonics and Electronics. At the same time, the Department of Precision Instrument has three key laboratories: the State Key Laboratory of Tribology, the State Key Laboratory of Precision Measurement Technology and Instruments, and the Key Laboratory of High-accuracy Inertial Instrument and System. It also has two national engineering research centers, which are the National Engineering Research Center of Optical Disk and the CIMS National Engineering Research Center.\nThe Institute of Opto-electronic Engineering\nThe Institute of Opto-electronic Engineering (IOEE) was established in 1958. It obtained the Chinese government's authorization to offer PhD program in 1981 and the approval to build the post-doctoral research site in 1988. The research of the IOEE covers opto-electronic instruments, precision metrology and measurement, modern optical information processing, the theory and components of binary optics, and the birefringent frequency-splitting lasers. Several famous scientists work in the IOEE, including Professor Guofan Jin, an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, and Professor Kegong Zhao, formerly the president of the Chinese National Institute of Metrology.\nThe Institute of Instrument Science and Technology\nThe Institute of Instrument Science and Technology is the most important institute in the State Key Laboratory of Precision Measuring Technology and Instrument Science at Tsinghua University. The institute is equipped with advanced instruments and facilities, and its research has included every major area in modern instrument science and technology. Up to 2012, the institute have produced over 1500 publications, more than 100 patents, and acquired many significant awards.\nThe Engineering Research Center for Navigation Technology\nThe Engineering Research Center for Navigation Technology is a relatively young institute in the Department of Precision Instrument which was established in 2000, with the intention to \"[pursue] excellence in the research and development in the field of high-accuracy inertial instruments and navigation technology, as well as in MEMS inertial sensor fields, and to provide advanced training for future scientists and engineers in the field of inertial technology.\" Its research interests cover high-accuracy inertial instruments and navigation technology, MEMS inertial sensors and systems, and precise electro-mechanical control systems and their application. As of 2012, the area of the center is 2900 square meters, including approximately 550 square meters of clean rooms. Equipment and instruments in this center are worth over 50 million RMB (US$7.56 million).\nThe Center for Photonics and Electronics\nThe center for Photonics and Electronics works on advanced laser and photonic technology. It houses 200 square meters of clean rooms and very modern laser instruments and equipment. The research of this Center covers solid-state laser technology, fiber laser technology, active optics technology, and laser detection technology. The center has published more than published more than 100 scientific papers including 40 indexed by SCI, has 18 national patents, and also frequently exchange visits and academic conferences with foreign scholars.\nThe SKLT has one central laboratory and four sub-laboratories. It has been awarded numerous awards, including \"two National Natural Science Awards, two National Invention Awards, one National Award for Science and Technology Progress, two National Excellent Science Book Awards, 25 awards from ministries or provinces of China, Edmond E. Bisson Award in 2003 from STLE, the 2008 PE Publishing Prize by the Editor and Editorial Board of the Journal of Engineering Tribology.\" Moreover, China's Ministry of Education recognized the SKLT as one of the creative groups in 2005, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China recognized the SKLT as one of the creative research groups in 2007. The TRibology Science Fund of the Key Laboratory of Tribology cooperates with National Natural Science Foundation of China in founding research projects in various applied sciences and technologies.\nEducation.\nCurrently, there are two disciplines in the Department of Precision Instrument: the discipline of the instrumental science and technology of precision instrument and mechanology and the discipline of optical engineering.\nThere are six teaching laboratories or centers which serve significant roles in undergraduate and graduate education in the Department of Precision Instrument. They are:\nThe department provides more than 40 courses of the undergraduate level and 25 courses of the graduate level.\nSchool of Life Sciences.\nSchool of Life Sciences was first established in 1926 under the name Department of Biology. Botanist Qian Chongshu took up the first dean.\nDuring the nationwide reorganization of universities in the early 1950s, the Department of Biology was merged into other universities, namely Peking University etc., resulting in a vacancy in the field of biological research in Tsinghua for almost 30 years.\nIn June 1984, decisions were made about the reestablishment of the Department of Biology, and the department officially reopened in September. During the reestablishment the Department of Biology of Peking University, the Institute of Biophysics of Chinese Academy of Sciences, and many other institutes as well as biologists provided valuable support and help. The department changed its name to the current name in September 2009. As of 2013, structural biologist and foreign associate of National Academy of Sciences of United States Dr. Wang Hongwei (\u738b\u5b8f\u4f1f) is the current dean of School of Life Sciences. The school currently has 129 professors and employees, around 600 undergraduates (including the candidates of Tsinghua University \u2013 Peking Union Medical College joint MD program).\nPeking Union Medical College.\nThe Peking Union Medical College was established in 1917 by the Rockefeller Foundation and was modeled on the US medical education system. Tsinghua first established its medical school in 2001 and in 2006, Tsinghua's medical school merged with the Peking Union Medical College renaming it \"Peking Union Medical College, Tsinghua University\". The school remains the top ranked medical school and general hospital in China according to CUCAS in 2015. The Peking Union Medical College is also the only medical school to be affiliated with the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. It runs one of the most competitive medical programs in the country, accepting 90 students a year into its 8-year MD program. Students in the 8-year program spend 2.5 years at Tsinghua studying premedical education before moving onto Peking Union Medical College to complete the last 5.5 years in clinical medicine, basic medical education and research.\nSchool of Economics and Management.\nThe School of Economics and Management dates back to 1926, when Tsinghua University established its Faculty of Economics.\nSchool of Journalism and Communication.\nThe Tsinghua School of Journalism and Communication (TSJC) was established in April 2002. Its predecessor was Communication Studies in the Department of Chinese Language and Literature and its establishment of coincides with the development of media increasingly influencing world affairs in a time of fast-growing globalization. The school's research fields include International Communication, Film and Television Studies, New Media Studies, Media Operation and Management, and Business Journalism and are based on comprehensive academic research in journalism and communication theories. The objective of the school is to bring full advantage of Tsinghua University's comprehensive academic structure to Chinese and international media, to construct a first-rate discipline in journalism and communication studies, to cultivate talented professionals in the field and to explore advanced concepts in journalism and communication. The school also offers a two-year graduate program in international business journalism, sponsored by Bloomberg L.P. and the International Center for Journalists (ICFJ), that trains talented students and media professionals from around the globe in financial media and corporate communication.\nThe school has five research-oriented centers to organize and conduct academic research activities. They are: Center for International Communications Studies, Center for New Media Studies, Center for Film and Television Studies, Center for Media Management Studies and Center for Cultural Industry Studies.\nSchool of Law.\nThe legal studies at Tsinghua University can be dated back to the \"Tsinghua College\" era (1911\u20131929), where many students were sent to universities in western countries for legal studies. Graduating from institutions such as Columbia, Yale, and Harvard, those Tsinghua alumni have played an important role in areas of law and diplomacy. Famous legal scholars Tuan-Sheng Ch'ien, Yan Shutang (\u71d5\u6811\u68e0), Wang Huacheng (\u738b\u5316\u6210), Kung Chuan Hsiao (\u8427\u516c\u6743), Pu Xuefeng (\u6d66\u859b\u51e4), Mei Ju'ao (\u6885\u6c5d\u7488), Xiang Zhejun (\u5411\u54f2\u6d5a) and diplomat Tang Yueliang (\u5510\u60a6\u826f) are all graduates from Tsinghua College or went to study abroad after passing exams in Tsinghua College.\nTsinghua University School of Law was established in 1929 after Tsinghua College was renamed Tsinghua University. Legal education in Tsinghua University at the time focused on international affairs and Chinese legal studies. Courses on political science and economics could also be found on students' curriculum. Before the Japanese army invaded Beijing in 1937, the School of Law developed greatly. Many Chinese legal scholars graduated during that era, including Wang Tieya (\u738b\u94c1\u5d16), Gong Xiangrui (\u9f9a\u7965\u745e) and Lou Bangyan (\u697c\u90a6\u5f66).\nIn 1952, in response to the government policy of turning Tsinghua University into an engineering-focused university, the law school was dismissed; the faculty were appointed to other universities, including Peking University and Peking College of Political Science and Law (the predecessor of China University of Political Science and Law). Until 1995, there was no formal \"school of law\" at Tsinghua University, yet courses on law were still taught in Tsinghua University from the early 1980s.\nOn 8 September 1995, the Tsinghua University Department of Law was formally re-established; on 25 April 1999, the 88th anniversary of Tsinghua University, the university formally changed the department into the \"School of Law\". The \"new\" law school inherited the spirit of the \"old\" law school and has endeavored to add international factors to its students' curriculum. Due to its outstanding faculty members and students, the Tsinghua University School of Law has risen to become one of the leading law schools in China and since 2011, has been consistently ranked as the best or the second-best law school in mainland China by QS World University Rankings.\nGraduate School at Shenzhen.\nThe Graduate School at Shenzhen was jointly founded by Tsinghua University and the Shenzhen Municipal Government. The school is directly affiliated with Tsinghua University in Beijing. The campus is located in the University Town of Shenzhen since 18 October 2003.\nThe Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, was jointly founded by Tsinghua University and the Shenzhen Municipal Government for cultivating top level professionals and carrying out scientific and technological innovations.\nThe academic divisions are the following:\nCampus.\nThe campus of Tsinghua University is located in northwest Beijing, in the Haidian district. Tsinghua University's campus was named one of the most beautiful college campuses in the world by a panel of architects and campus designers in \"Forbes\" in 2010; it was the only university in Asia on the list.\nNumerous architects were involved in the designing of buildings on the campus. American architect Henry Killam Murphy (1877\u20131954), a Yale graduate, designed the Grand Auditorium, the Roosevelt Memorial Gymnasium, the Science Building and the east side of the Old Library. Yang Tingbao designed the Observatory, the Life Sciences building, the Mingzhai of the student dormitory buildings and the middle and west side of the Old Library. Shen Liyuan designed the Mechanical Engineering Hall, the Chemistry Hall and the Aviation Hall. Zhuang Jun designed the Civil Engineering Hall, Zhaolan Yuan, and the West Dormitories. T. Chuang, a 1914 graduate of the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign, helped design the campus grounds of the Tsinghua University with influences of Neoclassical and Palladian architectural styles and architectures. Zhang Bo designed the Shengyinyuan. Other notable 20th-century Chinese architects such as Li Daozeng, Zhou Weiquan, Wang Guoyu and Guan Zhaoye have all designed various buildings on the Tsinghua University campus.\nThe university's Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology is on a separate campus in a northern suburb of Beijing.\nThe Tsinghua History Museum covers a construction area of 5,060 m2. A collection of old documents, pictures, artworks, maps, graphics, videos and music tells the visitors the history of Tsinghua University. The exhibition also pays tribute to the people who contributed to the development of the institution. The university also operates its own art museum, the Tsinghua University Art Museum, which derives its collection from the university's Academy of Arts &amp; Design since 1956.\nNotable people.\nNotable alumni.\nTsinghua University has produced many notable graduates, especially in political sphere, academic field and industry. \"Forbes\" has referred to Tsinghua as China's \"power factory\", citing the amount of senior Chinese politicians the university has produced.\nNotable alumni who have held senior positions in Chinese politics include current general secretary and president of China, Xi Jinping, former general secretary and president of China Hu Jintao, former chairman of the National People's Congress Wu Bangguo, former premier Zhu Rongji, and the former first vice premier Huang Ju. This also includes politicians like Wu Guanzheng, former governor of the People's Bank of China Zhou Xiaochuan, former minister of finance Lou Jiwei, general Sun Li-jen, Liang Qichao, and more. Since 2016, Tsinghua graduates who have political prominence are disproportionately greater in number than graduates of other famous universities.\nNotable alumni in the sciences include Nobel laureate Yang Chen Ning, who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his work with Tsung-Dao Lee on parity nonconservation of weak interaction; Wolf Prize winning mathematician Shiing-Shen Chern, biologist Min Chueh Chang, theoretical physicist Zhou Peiyuan, astronomer Zhang Yuzhe, biomedical engineer Leslie Ying, mechanical engineer Qingyan Chen, anthropologist Fei Xiaotong, sociologist and ethnologist Wu Wenzao, political scientist K. C. Hsiao, and sociologist Pan Guangdan.\nTsinghua is known for having educated the most billionaires of any university in China, and since 2017 counts 152 billionaires amongst its alumni. These include billionaires Sun Hongbin (real estate), chairman of Goertek Jiang Bin (components), Xu Hang (medical devices), and Zhang Zetian (e-commerce), among others.\nNotable alumni in the arts and poetry include author Qian Zhongshu, Wen Yiduo, painter Xinyi Cheng, historian and poet Wang Guowei, Chen Yinke, and architect Xu Tiantian.\nTsinghua clique.\nThe term Tsinghua clique refers to a group of Chinese Communist Party politicians that have graduated from Tsinghua University. They are members of the fourth generation of Chinese leadership, and are purported to hold reformist and hesitantly pro-democratic ideas (a number have studied in the United States following graduation from Tsinghua, and some are said to be influenced by the reform ideals of Hu Yaobang). In the PRC, their ascendance to power began in 2008 at the 17th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party.\nCanteens.\nStudent canteens\nStaff Canteens\nSpecialty Dining Halls\nNote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "72598", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72598", "title": "Department of Justice", "text": ""}
{"id": "72599", "revid": "38001712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72599", "title": "Fudan University", "text": "Public university in Shanghai, China\nFudan University (FDU) is a public university in Yangpu, Shanghai, China. It is affiliated with the Ministry of Education and is co-funded with the Shanghai Municipal Government. The university is part of Project 211, Project 985, and the Double First-Class Construction. \nThe university was originally founded by the Chinese Jesuit priest Ma Xiangbo in 1905. It is a member of the C9 League.\nHistory.\n1905\u20131917: college-preparatory school.\nThe university traces its origins to Fudan College, established in 1905 by Chinese Jesuit priest Ma Xiangbo. Prior to founding Fudan, Ma had established Aurora College, where the Society of Jesus frequently opposed and intervened in student movements. This led Ma to create a new institution, Fudan College, as a preparatory school for higher education with government funding, offering three-year education for general or specialised tracks.58-60 After the 1911 Revolution, Fudan continued to offer general rather than specialised education.63\n1917\u20131941: private university.\nFudan became a private university in 1917, establishing specialised departments including Chinese literature, foreign literature, banking, business and administration, economics, politics, civil engineering and psychology.63 In 1921, university preparatory education was ended and the university began to adopt an American-styled credit and elective system, per a national policy.69 In 1928, Fudan was registered with the Ministry of Education of the newly founded Nationalist government. In 1929, the university was organised into four faculties, namely Liberal Arts, Science, Law and Commerce. In 1937, it moved to Chongqing due to the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War.71\n1941\u20131949: national university.\nIn 1941, with the approval from the Nationalist government, the university was transformed from a private university to a national university, which allowed the government to control Fudan's major posts, including the president, provost and dean. In early 1946, the university returned to Shanghai.71 In China under Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang, Fudan University was tasked with providing a Western-style education to Chinese students to support the country's economic reconstruction efforts.75\n1949\u20131976: Mao Zedong era.\nIn 1949, the university was taken over by the Shanghai Military Control Commission of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), as the CCP defeated the Kuomintang in the Chinese civil war.77 By 1952, the CCP remodelled the Chinese higher education based on the Soviet model, leading to the inclusion of Communist ideology in Fudan's educational offerings.79 Fudan was transformed into a Soviet-style comprehensive university, with departments of arts and science of other universities merged into Fudan, leaving Fudan the only university to provide basic science and arts in Shanghai.81 In China under Mao Zedong, Fudan University was tasked with transmitting socialist values to further the agenda of the CCP.78 During the Cultural Revolution, the teaching at Fudan was completely halted due to political turmoils.80\n1976 to present.\nIn 2000, Fudan University merged with Shanghai Medical University, which was founded as the Fourth National Chungshan University School of Medicine in 1927, to form the new Fudan University.\nIn December 2019, Fudan University changed its constitution, removing the phrase \"academic independence and freedom of thought\" and including a \"pledge to follow the Communist party's leadership\", leading to protests among the students. It also said that Fudan University had to \"equip its teachers and employees\" with \"Xi Jinping Thought\", leading to concerns about the diminishing academic freedom of Fudan.\nThe university set up a 1 billion yuan fund of funds for start up innovation in 2023 as well as launching what it claims to be China\u2019s largest cloud-based scientific research computing platform CFFF.\nThe Hungarian government made an agreement to open the first campus of Fudan University outside China in Budapest in 2024. The expansion would cost 540 billion HUF, of which 450 billion would be paid by the Hungarian state from a Chinese loan. The construction would be mainly done by Chinese companies. Hungarian education professionals and politicians denounced the investment, citing economics, higher education and national security concerns.\nCampus.\nFudan has five undergraduate colleges \u2013 Zhide (), Tengfei (), Keqing (), Renzhong (), and Xide (). \nThe university has four campuses in Shanghai \u2013 Handan (), Fenglin (), Zhangjiang (), and Jiangwan () \u2013 that share the same central administration. It also has 17 affiliated hospitals. \nAcademic profile.\nInternational links.\nAs of 2024,[ [update]] Fudan has joint MBA programs in the School of Management with MIT Sloan School of Management in the US (since 1996, leading to a Fudan degree), BI Norwegian Business School in Norway (since 1996, leading to a BI Norwegian Business School degree), the University of Hong Kong in Hong Kong (leading to a University of Hong Kong degree), and Washington University in St. Louis in the US (leading to a WUSTL degree). There are also a double degree in international management with Bocconi University and Luiss University in Italy (since 2005, leading to a master's in international management from one of the Italian universities), an executive MBA with National Taiwan University, and a global master's in management with London Business School (leading to degrees from both institutions).\nFudan University School of Economics has had a partnership with Durham University Business School in England to deliver a Doctor of Business Administration (DBA) degree awarded by Durham University since 2006, with the first students starting in 2007. As of 2024,[ [update]] Fudan remains the main location, but some elements of the course are also delivered at Durham and in San Francisco, USA.\nFudan, Korea University Business School in Korea, and the National University of Singapore in Singapore have collaborated on the S3 Asia MBA since 2008, with students spending six months at each of the institutions. Fudan students receive a dual degree from Fudan and one of the other universities in the collaboration.\nBeyond business education, the Fudan Institute for Global Public Policy (IGPP) strengthens international collaboration through strategic academic hubs, including the LSE-Fudan Research Centre for Global Public Policy (with the London School of Economics) and the Fudan-Arab Research Centre for Global Development and Governance (focused on MENA regions). These centers foster cross-border research, policy dialogue, and academic exchange, positioning IGPP as a bridge between China, Europe, and the Middle East.\nReputation and rankings.\nSubject rankings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nResearch output rankings.\nRegarding research output in natural science and life science, the Nature Index Research Leaders 2024 ranked Fudan the No.9 university in the Asia Pacific region, and 12th in the world among the global universities. The 2024 CWTS Leiden Ranking ranked Fudan 11th in the world based on their publications for the time period 2019\u20132022.\nNotable alumni.\nSince 1952, Fudan University has a total of 95 academicians alumni, second only to Peking University and Tsinghua University in China. Fudan's notable alumni include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72600", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72600", "title": "U.S. Department of State", "text": ""}
{"id": "72602", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72602", "title": "State Department", "text": ""}
{"id": "72604", "revid": "461300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72604", "title": "Department of Agriculture", "text": ""}
{"id": "72605", "revid": "1263273077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72605", "title": "Forest service", "text": "Forest Service may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "72606", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72606", "title": "US Forest Service", "text": ""}
{"id": "72608", "revid": "35331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72608", "title": "Antiarrhythmic", "text": ""}
{"id": "72609", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72609", "title": "Panama/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "72610", "revid": "294180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72610", "title": "United States Commerce Department", "text": ""}
{"id": "72611", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72611", "title": "United States Labor Department", "text": ""}
{"id": "72612", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72612", "title": "Djibouti/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "72615", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72615", "title": "Cuba/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "72616", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72616", "title": "Government of Turkmenistan", "text": ""}
{"id": "72617", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72617", "title": "Midway Islands/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "72618", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72618", "title": "Kuwait/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "72622", "revid": "10232273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72622", "title": "1976 Summer Olympics", "text": "Multi-sport event in Montreal, Canada\nThe 1976 Summer Olympics (), officially known as the Games of the XXI Olympiad () and officially branded as Montreal 1976 (), were an international multi-sport event held from July 17 to August 1, 1976, in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Montreal was awarded the rights to the 1976 Games at the 69th IOC Session in Amsterdam on May 12, 1970, over the bids of Moscow and Los Angeles. It is the only Summer Olympic Games to be held in Canada. Toronto hosted the 1976 Summer Paralympics the same year as the Montreal Olympics, also the only Summer Paralympics to be held in Canada. Calgary and Vancouver later hosted the Winter Olympic Games in 1988 and 2010, respectively. This was the first of two consecutive Olympic games held in North America, followed by the 1980 Winter Olympics in Lake Placid.\nTwenty-nine countries, mostly African, boycotted the Montreal Games when the International Olympic Committee (IOC) refused to ban New Zealand, after the New Zealand national rugby union team had toured South Africa earlier in 1976 in defiance of the United Nations' calls for a sporting embargo due to their racist apartheid policies. The Soviet Union won the most gold and overall medals, with the Eastern Bloc having seven countries in the top 10 of the medal table.\nHost city selection.\nThe vote occurred at the 69th IOC Session in Amsterdam, Netherlands on May 12, 1970. While Los Angeles and Moscow were viewed as the favourites, given that they represented the world's two main powers, many of the smaller and neutral countries supported Montreal as an underdog and as a relatively neutral site for the Games. Los Angeles was eliminated after the first round, and Montreal won over Moscow in the second round. Moscow and Los Angeles would go on to host the next two Summer Games, 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics, respectively, which were also marked by political boycotts (for instance, the U.S.-led boycott of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979). One blank vote was cast in the second and final round. The Soviet state media accused the IOC of political corruption following the vote.\nToronto had made its third attempt for the Olympics, but failed to win the support of the Canadian Olympic Committee, which selected Montreal instead. Another candidate was the Italian city of Florence, which announced that it would withdraw from contention two months before the vote.\nOrganization.\nRobert Bourassa, then the Premier of Quebec, asked Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau to advise Canada's monarch Elizabeth II to attend the opening of the games. However, Bourassa later became unsettled about how unpopular the move might be with sovereigntists in the province, annoying Trudeau, who had already made arrangements. Ren\u00e9 L\u00e9vesque, the leader of the Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois at the time, sent his own letter to Buckingham Palace, asking the Queen to refuse her prime minister's request, but she did not oblige L\u00e9vesque as he was out of his jurisdiction in offering advice to the Sovereign.\nIn 1976, Trudeau, succumbing to pressure from the People's Republic of China, issued an order barring Taiwan from participating as China in the 1976 Montreal Olympics, although it was technically a matter for the IOC. His action strained relations with the United States \u2013 from President Ford to future President Carter and the press. Trudeau's action was widely condemned as having brought shame on Canada by succumbing to political pressure to keep the Taiwanese delegation from competing under its name.\nMascot.\nThe mascot was a beaver named Amik, whose name was chosen after a national competition.\nCost and cost overrun.\nThe \"Oxford Olympics Study\" estimates the outturn cost of the Montreal 1976 Summer Olympics at US$6.1\u00a0billion in 2015 dollars and cost overrun at 720% in real terms. This includes sports-related costs only, that is, \"operational costs\" incurred by the organizing committee for the purpose of staging the Games, e.g., expenditures for technology, transportation, workforce, administration, security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and \"direct capital costs\" incurred by the host city and country or private investors to build, e.g., the competition venues, the Olympic village, international broadcast centre, and media and press centre, which are required to host the Games. Indirect capital costs are \"not\" included, such as those for road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in preparation for the Games but not directly related to staging the Games. The cost overrun for Montreal 1976 is the highest cost overrun on record for any Olympics. The cost and cost overrun for Montreal 1976 compares with costs of US$4.6\u00a0billion and a cost overrun of 51% for Rio de Janeiro in 2016 and $15\u00a0billion and 76% for London in 2012. The average cost for the Summer Games from 1960 to 2016 was $5.2\u00a0billion in 2015 dollars, and the average cost overrun was 176%.\nMuch of the cost overruns were caused by the \"Conseil des m\u00e9tiers de la construction\" union, whose leader was Andr\u00e9 \"Dede\" Desjardins. French architect Roger Taillibert, who designed the Olympic stadium, recounted in his 2000 book \"Notre Cher Stade Olympique\" that he and Montreal mayor Jean Drapeau tried hard to buy off Desjardins, even taking him to a lunch at the exclusive Ritz-Carlton hotel in a vain attempt to end the \"delays\". Ultimately Quebec Premier Robert Bourassa made a secret deal to buy off Desjardins, which finally allowed work to proceed. Taillibert wrote in \"Notre Cher Stade Olympique\" \"If the Olympic Games took place, it was thanks to Dede Desjardins. What irony!\"\nOpening ceremony.\nThe opening ceremony of the 1976 Summer Olympic Games was held at the incomplete Olympic Stadium in Montreal, Quebec on Saturday afternoon, July 17, 1976, in front of an audience of some 73,000 in the stadium and an estimated half billion watching on television.\nFollowing an air show by the Canadian Forces Air Command's Snowbirds aerobatic flight demonstration squadron in the sunny skies above the stadium, the ceremony officially began at 3:00 pm with a trumpet fanfare and the arrival of Elizabeth II, as Queen of Canada. The Queen was accompanied by Michael Morris, Lord Killanin, President of the International Olympic Committee, and was greeted to an orchestral rendition of 'O Canada', an arrangement that would be used for many years in schools across the country, as well as in the daily sign-off of TV broadcasts in the country.\nThe Queen entered the Royal Box with her consort, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and her son, Prince Andrew. (Her daughter, Princess Anne, was an equestrian competing at Great Britain equestrian team. Prince Philip was also president of the International Equestrian Federation (FEI) at the time of the 1976 Summer Olympics.) She joined a number of Canadian and Olympic dignitaries, including: Jules L\u00e9ger, Governor General of Canada, and his wife, Gabrielle; Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and wife, Margaret; Robert Bourassa, Premier of the province of Quebec; Roger Rousseau, chief of the Montreal Olympic Organizing Committee (COJOM); Sheila Dunlop, Lady Killanin, wife of the IOC President; Mayor of Montreal, Jean Drapeau, and his wife, Marie-Claire.\nThe parade of athletes began moments later with the arrival of the Greek team, and concluded with the entrance of the Canadian team. All other teams entered the stadium according to French alphabetical order (as the host city main language). The ceremony was marked by the adorning of Israel's flag with a black mourning ribbon, in memory of the eleven athletes and coaches killed by Palestinian terrorists at the previous Summer Olympic Games in Munich four years earlier. Although most would eventually boycott the Games in the days to follow, a number of African delegations did march in the parade. Much of the music performed for the parade was arranged by Victor Vogel and was inspired by late Quebecois composer Andr\u00e9 Mathieu.\nImmediately following the parade, a troupe of 80 women dancers dressed in white (representing the 80th anniversary of the revival of the Olympic Games) performed a brief dance in the outline of the Olympic rings. Following that came the official speeches, first by Roger Rousseau, head of the Montreal Olympic organizing committee, and Lord Killanin. Her Majesty was then invited to proclaim the Games open, which she did, first in French, then in English.\nAccompanied by the Olympic Hymn, the Olympic flag was carried into the stadium and hoisted at the west end of the stadium. The flag was carried by eight men and hoisted by four women, representing the ten provinces and two territories (at the time) of Canada. As the flag was hoisted, an all-male choir performed an a cappella version of the Olympic Hymn.\nOnce the flag was hosted, a troupe of Bavarian dancers representing Munich, host of the previous Summer Olympics, entered the stadium with the Antwerp flag. Following a brief dance, that flag was then passed from the Mayor of Munich to the IOC President and then to the Mayor of Montreal. Next came a presentation of traditional Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois folk dancers. The two troupes merged in dance together to the strains of \"Vive le Compagnie\" and exited the stadium with the Antwerp Flag, which would be displayed at Montreal City Hall until the opening of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow. Three cannons were then fired, as the 80-member troupe of female dancers unfolded special crates that released doves and ribbons in the five Olympic colours.\nAnother trumpet fanfare announced the arrival of the Olympic Flame. The torch was carried by 15-year-olds St\u00e9phane Pr\u00e9fontaine and Sandra Henderson, chosen as representatives of the unity within Canada's linguistic heritage. This would also be the first time two people would light the Olympic flame, and Henderson would become only the second woman to do the honours. The duo would make a lap of the stadium and then climbed a staircase on a special dais at the centre of the stadium to set the Olympic flame alight in a temporary white aluminum cauldron. The flame was later transported to a more permanent cauldron just outside the running track to burn throughout the duration of the Games. A choir then performed the Olympic Cantata as onlookers admired the Olympic flame.\nThe \"Youth of Canada\" took to the track to perform a colourful choreographed segment with flags, ribbons and a variety of rhythmic gymnast performers. The flag bearers of each team then circled around the speaker's dais as Pierre St-Jean recited the Athletes' Oath and Maurice Forget recited the Judges' Oath, in English and in French, with right hand over the heart and the Canadian flag clutched in the left. Finally, a choral performance of \"O Canada\" in both French and English marked the close of the opening ceremony, as the announcers concluded with a declaration of the Games motto: 'Vive les Jeux de Montreal! Long Live the Montreal Games'.\nThe Montreal ceremony would be the last of its kind in Summer Games, as future Olympic ceremonies, beginning with the new Olympic Charter were reinforced before the 1980 Summer Olympics, would become more focused on the host country culture.\nSecurity.\nBecause of the Munich massacre, security at these games was visible. The extensive security measures included the requirement for all workers to hold a valid accreditation. Surveillance of acoustics was installed in the Olympic Village where athletes were accommodated. Furthermore, a systematic installation of closed-circuit television (CCTV) was attempted for the first time in the history of the Olympic games.\nSports.\nThere was a desire by the IOC's program commission to reduce the number of competitors and a number of recommendations were put to the IOC's executive board on February 23, 1973, which were all accepted. Rowing was the only sport where the number of competitors was increased, and women were admitted for the first time in Olympic history. The 1976 Summer Olympic program featured 196 events with 198 medal ceremonies in the following 21 sports:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nParticipating National Olympic Committees.\nFour nations made their first Summer Olympic appearance in Montreal: Andorra (which had its overall Olympic debut a few months before in Innsbruck Winter Olympics), Antigua and Barbuda (as \"Antigua\"), Cayman Islands, and Papua New Guinea.\nNumbers in parentheses indicate the number of athletes from each nation that competed at the Games.\n\"All times are in Eastern Daylight Time (UTC-4)\"\nMedal count.\nThese are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1976 Games. Canada placed 27th with only 11 medals in total, none of them being gold. Canada remains the only host nation of a Summer Olympics to fail to win at least one gold medal. It also did not win any gold medals at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary. However, Canada went on to win the most gold medals at the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver.\nThe Games were dominated by the Soviet Bloc, with the USSR and its satellites occupying seven out of top ten places in the medal standings.\nNon-participating National Olympic Committees.\nTwenty-nine countries boycotted the Games due to the refusal of the IOC to ban New Zealand, after the New Zealand national rugby union team had toured South Africa earlier in 1976. The boycott was led by Congolese official Jean-Claude Ganga. Some of the boycotting nations (including Morocco, Cameroon and Egypt) had already participated, however, and withdrew after the first few days. Senegal and Ivory Coast were the only African countries that competed throughout the duration of the Games. Elsewhere, Afghanistan, Albania, Burma, Iraq, Guyana, Sri Lanka and Syria also opted to join the Congolese-led boycott. South Africa had been banned from the Olympics since 1964 due to its apartheid policies. Other countries, such as El Salvador and Zaire, did not participate in Montreal for purely economic reasons.\nRepublic of China boycott.\nAn unrelated boycott of the Montreal Games was the main issue between the Republic of China (ROC) and the People's Republic of China (PRC). The ROC team withdrew from the games when Canada's Liberal government under Pierre Trudeau told it that the name \"Republic of China\" was not permissible at the Games because Canada had officially recognized the PRC in 1970. Canada attempted a compromise by allowing the ROC the continued use of its national flag and anthem in the Montreal Olympic activities; the ROC refused. In 1979 the IOC established in the Nagoya Resolution that the PRC agreed to participate in IOC activities if the Republic of China was referred to as \"Chinese Taipei\". Another boycott would occur before the ROC would accept the provisions of the 1979 resolution. \nDoping.\nResearchers from Germany in 2013 reported that West Germany had a state-sponsored doping program, and speculated it was in response to doping in East Germany which had existed for decades.\nTelevision coverage.\nABC Sports paid US$25-million for television broadcast rights in the United States, and produced 76.5 hours of coverage.\nCBC Sports budgeted less than CAD$2-million and produced 169 hours of coverage, compared to 14 hours of programming at the 1972 Summer Olympics. The network expanded its coverage in 1976, when convinced there would be increased media interest from Canadians. When the network was criticized for spending taxpayer dollars, executive producer Bob Moir toured the country to explain the project and boasted that, \"the biggest team in Montreal will be the CBC team... It will be bigger than the Canadian Olympic team\". CBC Sports had 245 people on its crew, and aired from 9\u00a0am until 11\u00a0pm daily, taking breaks only for newscasts. Ted Reynolds and Lloyd Robertson co-hosted coverage of the opening ceremonies. In 1976, CBC Sports began its practice of talking live with athletes immediately after events, and built a studio for the interviews. CBC broadcasters were given information kits on the athletes, prepared by Jack Sullivan, the former sports editor of The Canadian Press.\nLegacy.\nThe legacy of the Montreal Olympics is complex. Many citizens regard the Olympiad as a financial disaster for the city as it faced debts for 30 years after the Games had finished. The retractable roof of the Olympic Stadium never properly worked and on several occasions has torn, prompting the stadium to be closed for extended periods of time for repairs. The failure of the Montreal Expos baseball club is largely blamed on the failure of the Olympic Stadium to transition into an effective and popular venue for the club \u2013 given the massive capacity of the stadium, it often looked unimpressive even with regular crowds in excess of 20,000 spectators.\nThe Quebec provincial government took over construction when it became evident in 1975 that work had fallen far behind schedule. Work was still ongoing just weeks before the opening date, and the tower was not built. Mayor Jean Drapeau had confidently predicted in 1970 that \"the Olympics can no more have a deficit than a man can have a baby\", but the debt racked up to a billion dollars that the Quebec government mandated the city pay in full. This would prompt cartoonist Aislin to draw a pregnant Drapeau on the telephone saying, \"Allo, Morgentaler?\" in reference to a Montreal abortion provider.\nThe Olympic Stadium was designed by French architect Roger Taillibert. It is often nicknamed \"The Big O\" as a reference to both its name and to the doughnut-shape of the permanent component of the stadium's roof, though \"The Big Owe\" has been used to reference the astronomical cost of the stadium and the 1976 Olympics as a whole. It has never had an effective retractable roof, and the tower (called the Montreal Tower) was completed only eleven years after the Olympic Games, in 1987. In December 2006 the stadium's costs were finally paid in full. The total expenditure (including repairs, renovations, construction, interest, and inflation) amounted to C$1.61\u00a0billion. Today the stadium lacks a permanent tenant, as the Montreal Alouettes and Montreal Expos have moved, though it does host some individual games of the Alouettes as well as CF Montr\u00e9al (formerly the Montreal Impact).\nOne of the streets surrounding the Olympic Stadium was renamed to honour Pierre de Coubertin, the founder of the Olympics.\nThe boycott by African nations over the inclusion of New Zealand, whose rugby team had played in South Africa that year, was a contributing factor in the massive protests and civil disobedience that occurred during the 1981 Springbok Tour of New Zealand. Official sporting contacts between South Africa and New Zealand did not occur again until after the fall of apartheid.\nAustralia's failure to win a gold medal led the country to create the Australian Institute of Sport.\nIn 2016, the 40th anniversary celebrations were held. In conjunction with the celebrations, the 2016 Quebec Games were held.\nThe games were the subject of \"Games of the XXI Olympiad (Jeux de la XXIe olympiade)\", a 1977 documentary film by Jean Beaudin, Marcel Carri\u00e8re, Georges Dufaux and Jean-Claude Labrecque.\nThe 1976 games were also an inspiration for Australian band Black Cab's double album of 2014 entitled \"Games of the XXI Olympiad\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n*https:// (up to page 279)\n*https:// (from page 280)\n*https://\n*https://\nExternal links.\nVideo clips"}
{"id": "72623", "revid": "24565488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72623", "title": "Government of Tajikistan", "text": ""}
{"id": "72624", "revid": "62058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72624", "title": "Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Eleventh Edition", "text": "1910 encyclopaedia\nThe \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Eleventh Edition (1910\u20131911) is a 29-volume reference work, an edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\". It was developed during the encyclopaedia's transition from a British to an American publication. Some of its articles were written by the best-known scholars of the time. This edition of the encyclopaedia, containing 40,000 entries, has entered the public domain and is readily available on the Internet. Its use in modern scholarship and as a reliable source has been deemed problematic due to the outdated nature of some of its content. Nevertheless, the 11th edition has retained considerable value as a time capsule of scientific and historical information, as well as scholarly attitudes of the era immediately preceding World War I.\nBackground.\nThe 1911 eleventh edition was assembled with the management of American publisher Horace Everett Hooper. Hugh Chisholm, who had edited the previous edition, was appointed editor-in-chief, with Walter Alison Phillips as his principal assistant editor.\nOriginally, Hooper bought the rights to the 25-volume 9th edition and persuaded the British newspaper \"The Times\" to issue its reprint, with eleven additional volumes (35 volumes total) as the tenth edition, which was published in 1902. Hooper's association with \"The Times\" ceased in 1909, and he negotiated with the Cambridge University Press to publish the 29-volume eleventh edition. Though it is generally perceived as a quintessentially British work, the eleventh edition had substantial American influences, in not only the increased amount of American and Canadian content, but also the efforts made to make it more popular. American marketing methods also assisted sales. Some 14% of the contributors (214 of 1507) were from North America, and a New York office was established to coordinate their work.\nThe initials of the encyclopaedia's contributors appear at the end of selected articles or at the end of a section in the case of longer articles, such as that on China, and a key is given in each volume to these initials. Some articles were written by the best-known scholars of the time, such as Edmund Gosse, J. B. Bury, Algernon Charles Swinburne, John Muir, Peter Kropotkin, T. H. Huxley, James Hopwood Jeans and William Michael Rossetti. Among the then lesser-known contributors were some who would later become distinguished, such as Ernest Rutherford and Bertrand Russell. Many articles were carried over from the 9th edition, some with minimal updating. Some of the book-length articles were divided into smaller parts for easier reference, yet others were much abridged. The best-known authors generally contributed only a single article or part of an article. Most of the work was done by journalists, British Museum scholars and other scholars. The 1911 edition was the first edition of the encyclopaedia to include more than just a handful of female contributors, with 34 women contributing articles to the edition. These included Adelaide Anderson, Gertrude Bell, Margaret Bryant, Constance Jocelyn Ffoulkes, Harriette Lombard Hennessy, and Eleanor Mildred Sidgwick.\nThe eleventh edition introduced a number of changes of the format of the \"Britannica\". It was the first to be published complete, instead of the previous method of volumes being released as they were ready. The print type was kept in galley proofs and subject to continual updating until publication. It was the first edition of \"Britannica\" to be issued with a comprehensive index volume in which was added a categorical index, where like topics were listed. It was the first not to include long treatise-length articles. Even though the overall length of the work was about the same as that of its predecessor, the number of articles had increased from 17,000 to 40,000. It was also the first edition of \"Britannica\" to include biographies of living people. Sixteen maps of the famous 9th edition of \"Stielers Handatlas\" were exclusively translated to English, converted to imperial units, printed in Gotha, Germany, by Justus Perthes and the maps became a part of this edition. Later editions only included Perthes' maps as low-quality reproductions.\nAccording to Coleman and Simmons, the content of the encyclopaedia was distributed as follows:\nHooper sold the rights to Sears, Roebuck and Company of Chicago in 1920, completing the \"Britannica\"'s transition to becoming a substantially American publication. In 1922, an additional three volumes (also edited by Hugh Chisholm) where published, covering the events of the intervening years, including World War I. These, together with a reprint of the eleventh edition, formed the twelfth edition of the work. A similar thirteenth edition, consisting of three volumes plus a reprint of the twelfth edition, was published in 1926. The London editor was J.L. Garvin, as Chisholm had died. The twelfth and thirteenth editions were closely related to the eleventh edition and shared much of the same content. However, it became increasingly apparent that a more thorough update of the work was required.\nThe fourteenth edition, published in 1929, was considerably revised, with much text eliminated or abridged to make room for new topics. Nevertheless, the eleventh edition was the basis of every later version of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" until the completely new fifteenth edition was published in 1974, using modern information presentation.\nThe eleventh edition's articles are still of value and interest to modern readers and scholars, especially as a cultural artifact: the British Empire was at its maximum, imperialism was largely unchallenged, much of the world was still ruled by monarchs, and the tumultuous world wars were still in the future. They are a resource for topics omitted from modern encyclopaedias, particularly for biography and the history of science and technology. As a literary text, the encyclopaedia has value as an example of early 20th-century prose. For example, it employs literary devices, such as pathetic fallacy (attribution of human-like traits to impersonal forces or inanimate objects), which are not as common in modern reference texts.\nReviews.\nIn 1917, using the pseudonym of S. S. Van Dine, the US art critic and author Willard Huntington Wright published \"\", a 200+ page criticism of inaccuracies and biases of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" eleventh edition. Wright claimed that \"Britannica\" was \"characterized by misstatements, inexcusable omissions, rabid and patriotic prejudices, personal animosities, blatant errors of fact, scholastic ignorance, gross neglect of non-British culture, an astounding egotism, and an undisguised contempt for American progress\".\nAmos Urban Shirk, known for having read the eleventh and fourteenth editions in their entirety, said he found the fourteenth edition to be a \"big improvement\" over the eleventh, stating that \"most of the material had been completely rewritten\".\nRobert Collison, in \"Encyclopaedias: Their History Throughout The Ages\" (1966), wrote of the eleventh edition that it \"was probably the finest edition of the \"Britannica\" ever issued, and it ranks with the and the \"Espasa\" as one of the three greatest encyclopaedias. It was the last edition to be produced almost in its entirety in Britain, and its position in time as a summary of the world's knowledge just before the outbreak of World War I is particularly valuable\".\nSir Kenneth Clark, in \"Another Part of the Wood\" (1974), wrote of the eleventh edition, \"One leaps from one subject to another, fascinated as much by the play of mind and the idiosyncrasies of their authors as by the facts and dates. It must be the last encyclopaedia in the tradition of Diderot which assumes that information can be made memorable only when it is slightly coloured by prejudice. When T. S. Eliot wrote 'Soul curled up on the window seat reading the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\",' he was certainly thinking of the eleventh edition.\" (Clark refers to Eliot's 1929 poem \"Animula\".) It was one of Jorge Luis Borges's favourite works, and was a source of information and enjoyment for his entire working life.\nIn 1912, mathematician L. C. Karpinski criticised the eleventh edition for inaccuracies in articles on the history of mathematics, none of which had been written by specialists.\nEnglish writer and former priest Joseph McCabe claimed in \"Lies and Fallacies of the Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" (1947) that \"Britannica\" was censored under pressure from the Roman Catholic Church after the 11th edition. Initially, the eleventh edition received criticism from members of the Roman Catholic Church, who accused it of misrepresenting and being biased against Catholics. The most \"vociferous\" American Catholic critics of the eleventh edition were editors of the Christian magazine \"America\".\nAuthorities ranging from Virginia Woolf to professors criticised the 11th edition for having bourgeois and old-fashioned opinions on art, literature, and social sciences. A contemporary Cornell professor, Edward B. Titchener, wrote in 1912, \"the new \"Britannica\" does not reproduce the psychological atmosphere of its day and generation... Despite the halo of authority, and despite the scrutiny of the staff, the great bulk of the secondary articles in general psychology\u00a0... are not adapted to the requirements of the intelligent reader\".\nIn an April 2012 article, Nate Pederson of \"The Guardian\" said that the eleventh edition represented \"a peak of colonial optimism before the slaughter of war\" and that the edition \"has acquired an almost mythic reputation among collectors\".\nCritics have charged several editions with racism, sexism, and antisemitism. The eleventh edition the Ku Klux Klan as protecting the white race and restoring order to the American South after the American Civil War, citing the need to \"control the negro\", and \"the frequent occurrence of the crime of rape by negro men upon white women\". Similarly, argues for eugenics, stating that it is irrational to \"propagate low orders of intelligence, to feed the ranks of paupers, defectives and criminals\u00a0... which to-day constitute so threatening an obstacle to racial progress\". The eleventh edition has no biography of Marie Curie, despite her winning the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911, although she is mentioned briefly under the biography of her husband Pierre Curie. The \"Britannica\" employed a large female editorial staff who wrote hundreds of articles for which they were not given credit.\nPublic domain.\nThe 1911 edition is no longer restricted by copyright, and it is therefore freely available in several more modern forms. While it may once have been a reliable description of the academic consensus of its time, many modern readers find fault with the \"Encyclopedia\" for several major errors, ethnocentric and racist remarks, and other issues:\nThe eleventh edition of \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" has become a commonly quoted source, both because of the reputation of the \"Britannica\" and because it is now in the public domain and has been made available on the Internet. It has been used as a source by many modern projects, including Wikipedia and the \"Project Gutenberg Encyclopedia\".\n\"Project Gutenberg Encyclopedia\".\nThe Project Gutenberg Encyclopedia is the eleventh edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", renamed to address Britannica's trademark concerns. Project Gutenberg's offerings are summarized below in the External links section and include text and graphics. As of 2018[ [update]], Distributed Proofreaders are working on producing a complete electronic edition of the 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOther sources for 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" text.\nThe preceding links adopt the spellings used in the target."}
{"id": "72625", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72625", "title": "Trinidad and Tobago/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "72626", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72626", "title": "Guernsey/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "72627", "revid": "3747202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72627", "title": "Platonic ideal", "text": ""}
{"id": "72628", "revid": "421426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72628", "title": "Shakespeare Authorship", "text": ""}
{"id": "72631", "revid": "17847680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72631", "title": "List of defunct professional sports leagues", "text": "These are notable sports leagues which are no longer operating.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnited States.\nBaseball.\nMajor leagues\nMinor leagues\nBasketball.\nMen:\nWomen:\nFootball.\nCompetitors to NFL\nOther leagues\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72634", "revid": "13162553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72634", "title": "Polyomino", "text": "Geometric shape formed from squares\nA polyomino is a plane geometric figure, connected, formed by joining a finite number of unit squares edge-to-edge. It is a polyform whose cells are squares. It may be regarded as a finite and connected subset of the regular square tiling.\nPolyominoes have been used in popular puzzles since at least 1907, and the enumeration of pentominoes is dated to antiquity. Many results with the pieces made of 1 to 6 squares were first published in \"Fairy Chess Review\" between the years 1937 and 1957, under the name of \"dissection problems.\" The name \"polyomino\" was invented by Solomon W. Golomb in 1953, and it was popularized by Martin Gardner in a November 1960 \"Mathematical Games\" column in \"Scientific American\".\nRelated to polyominoes are polyiamonds, formed from equilateral triangles; polyhexes, formed from regular hexagons; and other plane polyforms. Polyominoes have been generalized to higher dimensions by joining cubes to form polycubes, or hypercubes to form polyhypercubes.\nIn statistical physics, the study of polyominoes and their higher-dimensional analogs (which are often referred to as lattice animals in this literature) is applied to problems in physics and chemistry. Polyominoes have been used as models of branched polymers and of percolation clusters.\nLike many puzzles in recreational mathematics, polyominoes raise many combinatorial problems. The most basic one is enumerating polyominoes of a given size. No formula has been found except for special classes of polyominoes. A number of estimates are known, and there are algorithms for calculating them.\nPolyominoes with holes are inconvenient for some purposes, such as tiling problems. In some contexts polyominoes with holes are excluded, allowing only simply connected polyominoes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEnumeration of polyominoes.\nFree, one-sided, and fixed polyominoes.\nThere are three common ways of distinguishing polyominoes for enumeration:\nThe following table shows the numbers of polyominoes of various types with \"n\" cells.\nFixed polyominoes were enumerated in 2004 up to \"n\" = 56 by Iwan Jensen, and in 2024 up to \"n\" = 70 by Gill Barequet and Gil Ben-Shachar. \nFree polyominoes were enumerated in 2007 up to \"n\" = 28 by Tom\u00e1s Oliveira e Silva, in 2012 up to \"n\" = 45 by Toshihiro Shirakawa, in 2023 up to \"n\" = 50 by John Mason, and in 2025 up to \"n\" = 59 by Toshihiro Shirakawa.\nThe above OEIS sequences, with the exception of A001419, include the count of 1 for the number of null-polyominoes; a null-polyomino is one that is formed of zero squares.\nSymmetries of polyominoes.\nThe dihedral group \"D\"4 is the group of symmetries (symmetry group) of a square. This group contains four rotations and four reflections. It is generated by alternating reflections about the \"x\"-axis and about a diagonal. One free polyomino corresponds to at most 8 fixed polyominoes, which are its images under the symmetries of \"D\"4. However, those images are not necessarily distinct: the more symmetry a free polyomino has, the fewer distinct fixed counterparts it has. Therefore, a free polyomino that is invariant under some or all non-trivial symmetries of \"D\"4 may correspond to only 4, 2 or 1 fixed polyominoes. Mathematically, free polyominoes are equivalence classes of fixed polyominoes under the group \"D\"4.\nPolyominoes have the following possible symmetries; the least number of squares needed in a polyomino with that symmetry is given in each case:\nIn the same way, the number of one-sided polyominoes depends on polyomino symmetry as follows:\nThe following table shows the numbers of polyominoes with \"n\" squares, sorted by symmetry groups. \nAlgorithms for enumeration of fixed polyominoes.\nInductive algorithms.\nEach polyomino of size \"n\"+1 can be obtained by adding a square to a polyomino of size \"n\". This leads to algorithms for generating polyominoes inductively.\nMost simply, given a list of polyominoes of size \"n\", squares may be added next to each polyomino in each possible position, and the resulting polyomino of size \"n\"+1 added to the list if not a duplicate of one already found; refinements in ordering the enumeration and marking adjacent squares that should not be considered reduce the number of cases that need to be checked for duplicates. This method may be used to enumerate either free or fixed polyominoes.\nA more sophisticated method, described by Redelmeier, has been used by many authors as a way of not only counting polyominoes (without requiring that all polyominoes of size \"n\" be stored in size to enumerate those of size \"n\"+1), but also proving upper bounds on their number. The basic idea is that we begin with a single square, and from there, recursively add squares. Depending on the details, it may count each \"n\"-omino \"n\" times, once from starting from each of its \"n\" squares, or may be arranged to count each once only.\nThe simplest implementation involves adding one square at a time. Beginning with an initial square, number the adjacent squares, clockwise from the top, 1, 2, 3, and 4. Now pick a number between 1 and 4, and add a square at that location. Number the unnumbered adjacent squares, starting with 5. Then, pick a number larger than the previously picked number, and add that square. Continue picking a number larger than the number of the current square, adding that square, and then numbering the new adjacent squares. When \"n\" squares have been created, an \"n\"-omino has been created.\nThis method ensures that each fixed polyomino is counted exactly \"n\" times, once for each starting square. It can be optimized so that it counts each polyomino only once, rather than \"n\" times. Starting with the initial square, declare it to be the lower-left square of the polyomino. Simply do not number any square that is on a lower row, or left of the square on the same row. This is the version described by Redelmeier.\nIf one wishes to count free polyominoes instead, then one may check for symmetries after creating each \"n\"-omino. However, it is faster to generate symmetric polyominoes separately (by a variation of this method) and so determine the number of free polyominoes by Burnside's lemma.\nTransfer-matrix method.\nCurrently, the most effective algorithms belong to the transfer-matrix paradigm. They may be called transfer matrix algorithms (TMAs) for short. Andrew Conway first implemented a TMA in the 90s, and calculated 25 terms of the fixed polyomino sequence ( in the OEIS). Iwan Jensen refined Conway's methods and implemented a TMA in parallel for the first time in a pair of papers in the early 2000s. He calculated 56 terms. Because of this work, any TMA is sometimes also called Jensen's Algorithm. In 2024, Gill Barequet and his student Gil Ben-Shachar made another improvement by running a TMA on 45\u00b0 rotation of the square grid, which is an equivalent problem but computationally easier. This approach holds the polyomino-counting record, with 70 terms.\nAs a rule, TMAs are much faster than the previous methods, but still run in time that is exponential in \"n\". Roughly, this is achieved by fixing a width (in the diagonal case, a diagonal width), and counting polyominoes that fit in rectangles of that width. If this is done, it is only necessary to keep track of a polyomino's boundary, and since multiple polyominoes can correspond to a single boundary, this approach is faster than one generating every polyomino. Repeating this for every width gives every polyomino.\nAlthough it has excellent running time, the tradeoff is that this algorithm uses exponential amounts of memory (many gigabytes of memory are needed for \"n\" above 50), is much harder to program than the other methods, and cannot currently be used to count free polyominoes.\nAsymptotic growth of the number of polyominoes.\nFixed polyominoes.\nTheoretical arguments and numerical calculations support the estimate for the number of fixed polyominoes of size n\nformula_1\nwhere \"\u03bb\" = 4.0626 and \"c\" = 0.3169. However, this result is not proven and the values of \"\u03bb\" and \"c\" are only estimates.\nThe known theoretical results are not nearly as specific as this estimate. It has been proven that\nformula_2\nexists. In other words, \"An\" grows exponentially. The best known lower bound for \"\u03bb\", found in 2016, is 4.00253. The best known upper bound is \"\u03bb\" &lt; 4.5252.\nTo establish a lower bound, a simple but highly effective method is concatenation of polyominoes. Define the upper-right square to be the rightmost square in the uppermost row of the polyomino. Define the bottom-left square similarly. Then, the upper-right square of any polyomino of size \"n\" can be attached to the bottom-left square of any polyomino of size \"m\" to produce a unique (\"n\"+\"m\")-omino. This proves \"An\u00b7Am\" \u2264 \"A\"\"n\"+\"m\". Using this inequality, one can show \"\u03bb\" \u2265 (\"An\")1/\"n\" for all \"n\". Refinements of this procedure combined with data for \"An\" produce the lower bound given above.\nThe upper bound is attained by generalizing the inductive method of enumerating polyominoes. Instead of adding one square at a time, one adds a cluster of squares at a time. This is often described as adding \"twigs\". By proving that every \"n\"-omino is a sequence of twigs, and by proving limits on the combinations of possible twigs, one obtains an upper bound on the number of \"n\"-ominoes. For example, in the algorithm outlined above, at each step we must choose a larger number, and at most three new numbers are added (since at most three unnumbered squares are adjacent to any numbered square). This can be used to obtain an upper bound of 6.75. Using 2.8 million twigs, Klarner and Rivest obtained an upper bound of 4.65, which was subsequently improved by Barequet and Shalah to 4.5252.\nFree polyominoes.\nApproximations for the number of fixed polyominoes and free polyominoes are related in a simple way. A free polyomino with no symmetries (rotation or reflection) corresponds to 8 distinct fixed polyominoes, and for large \"n\", most \"n\"-ominoes have no symmetries. Therefore, the number of fixed \"n\"-ominoes is approximately 8 times the number of free \"n\"-ominoes. Moreover, this approximation is exponentially more accurate as \"n\" increases.\nSpecial classes of polyominoes.\nExact formulas are known for enumerating polyominoes of special classes, such as the class of \"convex\" polyominoes and the class of \"directed\" polyominoes.\nThe definition of a \"convex\" polyomino is different from the usual definition of convexity, but is similar to the definition used for the orthogonal convex hull. A polyomino is said to be \"vertically\" or \"column convex\" if its intersection with any vertical line is convex (in other words, each column has no holes). Similarly, a polyomino is said to be \"horizontally\" or \"row convex\" if its intersection with any horizontal line is convex. A polyomino is said to be \"convex\" if it is row and column convex.\nA polyomino is said to be \"directed\" if it contains a square, known as the \"root\", such that every other square can be reached by movements of up or right one square, without leaving the polyomino.\nDirected polyominoes, column (or row) convex polyominoes, and convex polyominoes have been effectively enumerated by area \"n\", as well as by some other parameters such as perimeter, using generating functions.\nA polyomino is equable if its area equals its perimeter. An equable polyomino must be made from an even number of squares; every even number greater than 15 is possible. For instance, the 16-omino in the form of a 4\u00a0\u00d7\u00a04 square and the 18-omino in the form of a 3\u00a0\u00d7\u00a06 rectangle are both equable. For polyominoes with 15 squares or fewer, the perimeter always exceeds the area.\nTiling with polyominoes.\nIn recreational mathematics, challenges are often posed for tiling a prescribed region, or the entire plane, with polyominoes, and related problems are investigated in mathematics and computer science.\nTiling regions with sets of polyominoes.\nPuzzles commonly ask for tiling a given region with a given set of polyominoes, such as the 12 pentominoes. Golomb's and Gardner's books have many examples. A typical puzzle is to tile a 6\u00d710 rectangle with the twelve pentominoes; the 2339 solutions to this were found in 1960. Where multiple copies of the polyominoes in the set are allowed, Golomb defines a hierarchy of different regions that a set may be able to tile, such as rectangles, strips, and the whole plane, and shows that whether polyominoes from a given set can tile the plane is undecidable, by mapping sets of Wang tiles to sets of polyominoes. \nBecause the general problem of tiling regions of the plane with sets of polyominoes is NP-complete, tiling with more than a few pieces rapidly becomes intractable and so the aid of a computer is required. The traditional approach to tiling finite regions of the plane uses a technique in computer science called backtracking. \nIn Jigsaw Sudokus a square grid is tiled with polyomino-shaped regions (sequence in the OEIS).\nTiling regions with copies of a single polyomino.\nAnother class of problems asks whether copies of a given polyomino can tile a rectangle, and if so, what rectangles they can tile. These problems have been extensively studied for particular polyominoes, and tables of results for individual polyominoes are available. Klarner and G\u00f6bel showed that for any polyomino there is a finite set of \"prime\" rectangles it tiles, such that all other rectangles it tiles can be tiled by those prime rectangles. Kamenetsky and Cooke showed how various disjoint (called \"holey\") polyominoes can tile rectangles.\nBeyond rectangles, Golomb gave his hierarchy for single polyominoes: a polyomino may tile a rectangle, a half strip, a bent strip, an enlarged copy of itself, a quadrant, a strip, a half plane, the whole plane, certain combinations, or none of these. There are certain implications among these, both obvious (for example, if a polyomino tiles the half plane then it tiles the whole plane) and less so (for example, if a polyomino tiles an enlarged copy of itself, then it tiles the quadrant). Polyominoes of size up to 6 are characterized in this hierarchy (with the status of one hexomino, later found to tile a rectangle, unresolved at that time).\nIn 2001 Cristopher Moore and John Michael Robson showed that the problem of tiling one polyomino with copies of another is NP-complete.\nTiling the plane with copies of a single polyomino.\nTiling the plane with copies of a single polyomino has also been much discussed. It was noted in 1965 that all polyominoes up to hexominoes and all but four heptominoes tile the plane. It was then established by David Bird that all but 26 octominoes tile the plane. Rawsthorne found that all but 235 polyominoes of size 9 tile, and such results have been extended to higher area by Rhoads (to size 14) and others. Polyominoes tiling the plane have been classified by the symmetries of their tilings and by the number of aspects (orientations) in which the tiles appear in them.\nThe study of which polyominoes can tile the plane has been facilitated using the Conway criterion: except for two nonominoes, all tiling polyominoes up to size 9 form a patch of at least one tile satisfying it, with higher-size exceptions more frequent.\nSeveral polyominoes can tile larger copies of themselves, and repeating this process recursively gives a rep-tile tiling of the plane. For instance, for every positive integer n, it is possible to combine \"n\"2 copies of the L-tromino, L-tetromino, or P-pentomino into a single larger shape similar to the smaller polyomino from which it was formed.\nTiling a common figure with various polyominoes.\nThe \"compatibility problem\" is to take two or more polyominoes and find a figure that can be tiled with each. Polyomino compatibility has been widely studied since the 1990s. Jorge Luis Mireles and Giovanni Resta have published websites of systematic results, and Livio Zucca shows results for some complicated cases like three different pentominoes. The general problem can be hard. The first compatibility figure for the L and X pentominoes was published in 2005 and had 80 tiles of each kind. Many pairs of polyominoes have been proved incompatible by systematic exhaustion. No algorithm is known for deciding whether two arbitrary polyominoes are compatible.\nPolyominoes in puzzles and games.\nIn addition to the tiling problems described above, there are recreational mathematics puzzles that require folding a polyomino to create other shapes. Gardner proposed several simple games with a set of free pentominoes and a chessboard. Some variants of the Sudoku puzzle use nonomino-shaped regions on the grid. The video game \"Tetris\" is based on the seven one-sided tetrominoes (spelled \"Tetriminos\" in the game), and the board game \"Blokus\" uses all of the free polyominoes up to pentominoes.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"polyomino\" and the names of the various sizes of polyomino are all back-formations from the word \"domino\", a common game piece consisting of two squares. The name \"domino\" for the game piece is believed to come from the spotted masquerade garment \"domino\", from Latin \"dominus\". Despite this word origin, in naming polyominoes, the first letter \"d-\" of \"domino\" is fancifully interpreted as a version of the prefix \"di-\" meaning \"two\", and replaced by other numerical prefixes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72637", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72637", "title": "Half lives", "text": ""}
{"id": "72638", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72638", "title": "Israel/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "72639", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72639", "title": "France/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "72640", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72640", "title": "Bulgaria/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "72641", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72641", "title": "Pakistan/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "72642", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72642", "title": "Panama/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "72643", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72643", "title": "Peru/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "72644", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72644", "title": "Oman/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "72645", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72645", "title": "Poland/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "72646", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72646", "title": "Philippines/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "72647", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72647", "title": "Fertiliser", "text": ""}
{"id": "72650", "revid": "50694439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72650", "title": "Florence Griffith Joyner", "text": "American track and field hurdle athlete (1959\u20131998)\nFlorence Delorez Griffith Joyner (born Florence Delorez Griffith; December 21, 1959 \u2013 September 21, 1998), also known as Flo-Jo, was an American track and field athlete and the fastest woman ever recorded, setting world records in the 100m and 200m in 1988. She was married to Al Joyner, a 1984 Olympic gold medalist in the triple jump. He was also her coach and husband during her success as a four-time Olympic medalist. During the late 1980s, she became a popular figure due to both her record-setting athleticism and eclectic personal style.\nGriffith Joyner was born and raised in California. She was athletic from a young age and began running at track meets as a child. While attending California State University, Northridge (CSUN), and the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), she continued to compete in track and field. While still in college, she qualified for the 100 m 1980 Olympics but did not compete due to the U.S. boycott. She made her Olympic debut four years later, winning a silver medal in the 200-meter distance at the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles. At the 1988 U.S. Olympic trials, Griffith set a new world record in the 100-meter sprint. She won three gold medals at the 1988 Olympics.\nIn February 1989, Griffith Joyner abruptly retired from athletics. She remained a pop culture figure through endorsement deals, acting, and designing. In 1998, at age 38, she died in her sleep during an epileptic seizure caused by a birth defect. Griffith Joyner is buried at the El Toro Memorial Park in Lake Forest.\nEarly life.\nGriffith was born in Los Angeles, California, the seventh of eleven children born to Robert, an electrician, and Florence Griffith, a seamstress. The family lived in Littlerock, California, before Florence Griffith moved with her children to the Jordan Downs public housing complex located in the Watts section of Los Angeles.\nWhen Griffith was in elementary school, she joined the Sugar Ray Robinson Organization, running in track meets on weekends. She won the Jesse Owens National Youth Games two years in a row, at the ages of 14 and 15. Griffith ran track at Jordan High School in Los Angeles.\nShowing an early interest in fashion, Griffith persuaded the members of the track team to wear tights with their uniforms. As a high school senior in 1978, she finished sixth at the CIF California State Meet behind future teammates Alice Brown and Pam Marshall. By the time she graduated from Jordan High School in 1978, she had set high-school records in sprinting and long jump.\nCareer.\nGriffith attended CSUN, and was on the track team coached by Bob Kersee. This team, which included Brown and Jeanette Bolden, won the national championship during Griffith's first year of college. Griffith had to drop out to support her family, taking a job as a bank teller. Kersee found financial aid for her and she returned to college in 1980, this time at UCLA where Kersee was working as a coach.\nBrown, Bolden, and Griffith qualified for the 100-meter final at the trials for the 1980 Summer Olympics (with Brown winning and Griffith finishing last in the final). Griffith also ran the 200 meters, narrowly finishing fourth, a foot out of a qualifying position. However, the U.S. Government had already decided to boycott those Olympic Games mooting those results. In 1983, Griffith graduated from UCLA with her bachelor's degree in psychology.\nOlympic runner.\nGriffith finished fourth in the 200-meter sprint at the first World Championship in Athletics in 1983. In the next year, she qualified for the Olympics in the 200-meter distance with the second-fastest time at the United States Olympic trials, held in Los Angeles. Evelyn Ashford, another UCLA alumna and early favorite to medal, dropped out of the 200-meter due to injury. Griffith went on to win a silver medal in the 1984 Summer Olympics, coming in second behind teammate Valerie Brisco-Hooks.\nAfter the 1984 Olympic Games, she spent less time running. Griffith continued to run part-time, winning the 100-meter IAAF Grand Prix Final with the time of 11.00 seconds. She did not compete at the 1985 U.S. National Championship. That same year, she returned to working at a bank and styled hair and nails in her spare time. She married Al Joyner, the Olympic triple jump champion of 1984, in 1987.\nShe returned to athletics in April 1987. Four months later, at the 1987 World Championships in Rome, Griffith Joyner finished second in the 200-meter sprint. Her success during the 1987 season resulted in being ranked second in Track and Field News' 1987 world rankings. The 200 meters remained a stronger event for her than the 100 meters, where she was ranked seventh in the United States.\nBefore the 1988 U.S. Olympic trials, Griffith Joyner continued to work with her coach and husband's brother-in-law, Kersee, two days a week, but with her new husband coaching her three days a week. She ran the 100 meters in 10.96 seconds at the 1987 Cologne Grand Prix Track and Field Meet, a personal best but the mark was not even in the top 40 of all time. She continued to improve, again setting a personal best of 10.89 in the 100 meters in San Diego on June 25, 1988, but remained shy of the American record holder Evelyn Ashford's three best times. A week before the trials she ran a tune-up race in 10.99 in Santa Monica.\nIn the first race of the quarterfinals of the U.S. Olympic trials, she stunned her colleagues when she sprinted 100 meters in 10.49 seconds, a new world record by a margin of 0.27s over the previous record held by Evelyn Ashford. Over the two-day trials, Griffith Joyner recorded the three fastest times for a woman at 100 meters: 10.49 in the quarter-final, 10.70 in the semifinal, and 10.61 in the final. At the same Olympic trials, she also set an American record at the 200-meter distance with a time of 21.77 seconds.\nThe 100-meter record was by far the largest improvement in the world record time since the advent of electronic timing, and still stands. This extraordinary result raised the possibility of a technical malfunction with the wind gauge which read at 0.0\u00a0m/s\u2014a reading at odds with the windy conditions on the day, with high wind speeds being recorded in all other sprints before and after this race as well as the parallel long jump runway at the time of the Griffith Joyner performance. All scientific studies commissioned by the IAAF and independent organizations have since found there was an illegal tailwind of between 5\u00a0m/s and 7\u00a0m/s at the time. The IAAF has not annulled the result, but since 1997 the International Athletics Annual of the Association of Track and Field Statisticians has listed it as \"probably strongly wind assisted, but recognized as a world record.\" The fastest non-wind-assisted performance would then be Griffith Joyner's 10.61s in the final the next day. This mark was equaled by Elaine Thompson-Herah in the 2020 Olympic Final before being surpassed by Thompson-Herah at the post-Olympics Eugene Diamond League meeting in August 2021. Thompson-Herah clocked 10.54 seconds, officially the second-fastest time in women's 100\u00a0m history.\nFollowing the Olympic trials, in late July 1988, Griffith Joyner left coach Kersee saying she wanted a coach able to provide more personal attention. Another contributing factor was her unhappiness with the lack of sponsorship and endorsement opportunities. In addition to being her coach, Kersee was Griffith Joyner's manager, as he required all the athletes he coached to use his management services too. Griffith Joyner's decision to sign with personal manager Gordon Baskin therefore necessitated the coaching change. She left UCLA for UC Irvine with her husband serving as full-time coach.\nBy then known to the world as \"Flo-Jo\", Griffith Joyner was the big favorite for the titles in the sprint events at the 1988 Summer Olympics. In the 100-meter final, she ran a 10.54, beating her nearest rival to the world record, Evelyn Ashford, by 0.30 seconds. In the 200-meter semifinal, she set the world record of 21.56 seconds and then broke this record by 0.22 seconds in winning the final with a time of 21.34 seconds. Like her 100-meter world record, this mark still stands.\nAt the same Olympics, Griffith Joyner also ran with the 4 \u00d7 100 m relay and the 4 \u00d7 400 m relay teams. Her team won the 4 \u00d7 100 m relay and finished second in the 4 \u00d7 400 m relay. This was her first internationally rated 4 \u00d7 400 m relay. She left the games having won four Olympic medals, three gold and one silver. At the time, her medal haul was the second most for female track and field athlete in history, behind only Fanny Blankers-Koen who won four gold medals in 1948.\nIn February 1989, Griffith Joyner announced her retirement from racing. She cited her new business opportunities outside of sprinting. The month after announcing her retirement, she was selected as the winner of the James E. Sullivan Award of 1988 as the top amateur athlete in the United States.\nComeback attempt and other activities.\nGriffith Joyner's success at the 1988 Olympics led to new opportunities. In the weeks following the Olympics, she earned millions of dollars from endorsement deals, primarily in Japan. She also signed a deal with toy maker LJN Toys for a Barbie-like doll in her likeness.\nIn 1989, Griffith Joyner designed the basketball uniforms for the Indiana Pacers NBA team. She made a guest appearance as herself on a fourth-season episode of \"227\". In 1992, she appeared in the soap opera \"Santa Barbara\" as \"Terry Holloway\", a photographer similar to Annie Leibovitz. She served as co-chair of President's Council on Physical Fitness between 1993 and 1998.\nIn 1996, Griffith Joyner appeared on \"Charlie Rose\" and announced her comeback to competitive athletics, concentrating on the 400-meter run. Her reason was that she had already set world marks in both the 100 m and 200 m events, with the 400 m world record being her goal. She trained steadily leading up to the U.S. Olympic trials in June. However, tendinitis in her right leg ended her hopes of becoming a triple-world-record holder.\nStyle.\nBeyond her running prowess, Griffith Joyner was known for her bold fashion choices. She appeared at the World Championships in 1987 in Rome wearing a hooded speed skating body suit. In April 1988, she started wearing a running suit with the right leg of the suit extending to the ankle and the left leg of the suit cut off, a style she called the \"one-legger\". The running suits had bold colors such as lime green and purple with white bikini bottoms and were embellished with lightning bolts.\nHer nails also garnered attention for their length and designs. Her nails were four inches long with tiger stripes at the 1988 Olympic trials before switching to fuchsia. For the Olympic games themselves, she had six-inch nails painted red, white, blue, and gold. Although many sprinters avoided accessories which might slow them down, Griffith Joyner kept her hair long and wore jewelry while competing. She designed many of her outfits herself and preferred looks which were not conventional.\nAllegations of performance-enhancing drug use.\nAfter her record-shattering performances at the 1988 U.S. Olympic trials, she became an object of suspicion when she arrived at the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul. Athletes, including Joaquim Cruz and Ben Johnson, expressed disbelief over Griffith Joyner's dramatic improvement over a short period of time. Before the 1988 track and field season, her best time in the 100-meter sprint was 10.96 seconds (set in 1987). In 1988, she improved that by 0.47 seconds.\nHer best before 1988 at 200 meters was 21.96 seconds (also set in 1987). In 1988, she improved that by 0.62 seconds to 21.34 seconds, another time that has not been approached. Griffith Joyner attributed the change in her physique to new health programs. Al Joyner replaced Bob Kersee as her coach, and he changed her training program to include more lower-body-strength training exercises such as squats and lunges.\nIn a 1989 story for which he was purportedly paid $25,000, Darrell Robinson, a former teammate of Griffith Joyner, claimed that he sold her 10 mL of growth hormone for $2,000 in 1988. He said Joyner told him: \"if you want to make $1 million, you've got to invest some thousands.\" Robinson claimed to have received steroids from coach Bob Kersee and said he saw Carl Lewis inject himself with drugs he believed to be testosterone. In 1990, Lewis alleged in his autobiography that Griffith Joyner had used drugs.\nNeither Robinson nor Lewis provided evidence for their allegations, and Robinson was shunned by the athletics community, leading to the premature end of his career. After the 1988 Olympics, Griffith Joyner retired from competitive track and field, a year before the introduction of mandatory random drug testing in 1989. She was repeatedly tested during competition and passed every test.\nAfter her death in 1998, Prince Alexandre de Merode, who held the controversial position as chairman of the International Olympic Committee's medical commission, claimed that Griffith Joyner was singled out for extra, rigorous drug testing during the 1988 Olympic Games following rumors of steroid use. De Merode told \"The New York Times\" that Manfred Donike, who was at that time considered to be the foremost expert on drugs and sports, failed to discover any banned substances during that testing. The World Anti-Doping Agency was created in the 1990s, removing control of drug testing from the IOC and De Merode. De Merode later stated: \"We performed all possible and imaginable analyses on her. We never found anything. There should not be the slightest suspicion.\"\nPersonal life and death.\nGriffith's nickname among her family was \"Dee Dee\". She was briefly engaged to hurdler Greg Foster. In 1987, Griffith married 1984 Olympic triple-jump champion Al Joyner, whom Griffith had first met at the 1980 Olympic trials. Through her marriage to Joyner she was sister-in-law to track and field athlete Jackie Joyner-Kersee. Griffith and Joyner had one daughter together, Mary Ruth Joyner, born November 15, 1990. \nGriffith Joyner held the support of her loved ones. She came from a family of determination and persistence, with the motto of \"if you try, try again. This motto motivated Joyner to keep going, eventually creating her own motto. \"Believe, Achieve, Succeed\". It was always clear how much love Joyner had for her daughter Mary Ruth Joyner. Mary continues to share the legacy of her mother and continues to support and speak highly of the track icon. Mary Joyner has described her mother as a calm spirit, stating \"when she enters a room, you would feel this aura of calmness and happiness. She brought everybody together.\" \nDeath.\nOn September 21, 1998, Griffith Joyner died in her sleep at home in the Canyon Crest neighborhood of Mission Viejo, California, at the age of 38. The unexpected death was investigated by the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner's office, which on September 22 declared the cause of death to be suffocation during a severe epileptic seizure.\nGriffith Joyner was found to have had a cavernous hemangioma, a congenital vascular brain abnormality that made her subject to seizures. According to a family attorney, she had a tonic\u2013clonic seizure in 1990 and had been treated for seizures in 1993 and 1994. According to the Sheriff-Coroner's office, the only drugs in her system when she died were small amounts of two common over-the-counter drugs, acetaminophen and the antihistamine Benadryl.\nLegacy.\nUSA Track &amp; Field inducted her into its Hall of Fame in 1995. In 2000, the 102nd Street School in Los Angeles was renamed Florence Griffith Joyner Elementary School. Griffith Joyner had attended the school as a child. The city of Mission Viejo dedicated a park at the entrance to her neighborhood in her honor. Griffith Joyner was also an artist and painter. Her work has been on display as part the Art of The Olympians (AOTO). She is one of two posthumous members of AOTO, the other being the founder and Olympian, Al Oerter. In \"Time\"'s 2020 list of the most influential women of the past century, she was named Woman of the Year for 1988.\n World Athlete of the Year (Women): 1988\nStatistics.\nTo date, her 1988 200\u00a0m world and Olympic record (21.34) as well as her 100\u00a0m world record (10.49) still stand, making her the only female athlete to hold simultaneous records. Her 100\u00a0m Olympic record (10.62) was beaten in 2021 at the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo by Elaine Thompson-Herah (10.61).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72651", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72651", "title": "Eukarotic", "text": ""}
{"id": "72654", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72654", "title": "Gail Devers", "text": "American athlete (born 1966)\nYolanda Gail Devers ( ; born November 19, 1966) is an American retired track and field sprinter who competed in the 60 metres, 60 m hurdles, 100 m and 100 m hurdles. One of the greatest and most decorated female sprinters of all time, she was the 1993, 1997 and 2004 world indoor champion in the 60 m, while in the 60 m hurdles, she was the 2003 world indoor champion and 2004 silver medalist. In the 100 m, she is the second woman in history to defend an Olympic 100 m title, winning gold at both the 1992 and 1996 Olympics. She was also the 1993 world champion in the event, becoming the first ever female sprinter to simultaneously hold the world and Olympic titles in the 100 m. In the 100 m hurdles, she was the 1993, 1995 and 1999 world champion, and the 1991 and 2001 world silver medalist. In 2011, she was inducted into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame.\nLife and career.\nDevers was born in Seattle, Washington, and grew up near National City, California, graduating from Sweetwater High School in 1984. Sweetwater's football and track stadium would later be named Gail Devers Stadium. A young talent in the 100 m and 100 m hurdles, Devers was in training for the 1988 Summer Olympics, started experiencing health problems, suffering from among others migraine and vision loss. She qualified for the Olympics 100 m hurdles, in which she was eliminated in the semi-finals, but her health continued to deteriorate.\nDevers started in 800 m in high school and ran a personal best of 2:08.\nIn 1990, she was diagnosed with Graves' disease and underwent radioactive iodine treatment followed by thyroid hormone replacement therapy. During her radiation treatment, Devers began to develop blistering and swelling of her feet. Eventually, she could barely walk. Devers recovered after the radiation treatment was discontinued, and she resumed training. At the 1991 World Championships, she won a silver medal in the 100 m hurdles.\nAt the 1992 Summer Olympics, Devers starred. She qualified for the final of the 100 m, which ended in an exciting finish, with five women finishing close (within 0.06 seconds). The photo finish showed Devers had narrowly beaten Jamaican Juliet Cuthbert. In the final of the 100 m hurdles, Devers' lead event, she seemed to be running towards a second gold medal, when she hit the final hurdle and stumbled over the finish line in fifth place, leaving Voula Patoulidou from Greece as the upset winner.\nIn 1993, Devers won the 1993 World Championships in Athletics 100 m title after \u2013 again \u2013 a photo finish win over Merlene Ottey in an apparent dead heat, and the 100 m hurdles title. She retained her hurdles title in 1995.\nThe 100 m final at the 1996 Summer Olympics was an almost exact repeat of the World Championships final three years before. Ottey and Devers again finished in the same time and did not know who had won the race. Again, both were awarded the same time of 10.94 seconds, but Devers was judged to have finished first and became the first woman to retain the Olympic 100 m title since Wyomia Tyus. Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce duplicated the feat in 2012, and Elaine Thompson-Herah in 2021. In the final of her favorite event, Devers again failed, as she finished fourth and outside of the medals. With the 4 \u00d7 100 m relay team, Devers won her third Olympic gold medal.\nAfter these Olympics, Devers concentrated on the hurdles event, winning the World Championship again in 1999, but she had to forfeit for the semi-finals at the 2000 Summer Olympics.\nDevers competed in the 100 m and 100 m hurdles at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, her fifth Olympic Games.\nDevers left competition in 2005 to give birth to a child with her husband and returned in 2006.\nOn February 2, 2007, at the age of 40, Devers edged 2004 Olympic champion Joanna Hayes to win the 60 m hurdles event at the Millrose Games in 7.86 seconds \u2013 the best time in the world that season and just 0.12 off the record she set in 2003. Furthermore, the time bettered the listed World Record for a 40-year-old by almost 7 tenths of a second.\nDuring her career, Devers was notable for having exceptionally long, heavily decorated fingernails. One of the fastest starters in the world, Devers even had to alter her starting position to accommodate her long nails. Her long nails came as the result of a contest her father devised to get her to stop biting her nails as a child.\nAchievements and recognition.\nIn 2011, she was elected into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame. The following year she was elected into the United States Olympic Hall of Fame. In November 2012, Devers was announced as a 2013 recipient of the NCAA Silver Anniversary Award, presented annually to six distinguished former college student-athletes on the 25th anniversary of the end of their college sports careers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72655", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72655", "title": "Marion Jones", "text": "American athlete (born 1975)\nMarion Lois Jones (born October 12, 1975), also known as Marion Jones-Thompson, is an American former world champion track-and-field athlete and former professional basketball player. She won three gold medals and two bronze medals at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, but was later stripped of her medals after admitting to lying to federal investigators about her use of performance-enhancing drugs.\nJones was one of the most famous athletes to be linked to the BALCO scandal. The performance-enhancing substance usage scandal covered more than 20 top-level athletes, including Jones's ex-husband, shot putter C. J. Hunter, and 100 m sprinter Tim Montgomery.\nJones played college basketball for the North Carolina Tar Heels, where she won the NCAA championship in 1994. She later played two seasons of professional basketball in the Women's National Basketball Association as a point guard for the Tulsa Shock.\nEarly life and education.\nMarion Jones was born to George Jones and his wife, Marion (originally from Belize), in Los Angeles. She holds dual citizenship with the United States and Belize. Her parents split when she was very young, and Jones's mother remarried a retired postal worker, Ira Toler, three years later. Toler became a stay-at-home dad to Jones and her older half-brother, Albert Kelly, until his sudden death in 1987. Jones turned to sports as an outlet for her grief: running, pickup basketball games, and whatever else her brother Albert was doing athletically. By the age of 15, she was routinely dominating California high-school athletics on both the track and the basketball court.\nJones is a 1997 graduate of the University of North Carolina (UNC).\nTrack and field career.\nIn high school, Jones won the CIF California State Meet in the 100 m sprint four years in a row, representing Rio Mesa the first two years and Thousand Oaks high school the last two. In 1992, she was successfully defended by attorney Johnnie Cochran on charges of missing a routine drug test. She was selected the Gatorade Player of the Year for track and field three years in a row, once at Rio Mesa and twice at Thousand Oaks. She was the \"Track and Field News\" \"High School Athlete of the Year\" in 1991 and 1992. She was the third female athlete to achieve the title twice, immediately following Angela Burnham at Rio Mesa High School, who was the second to achieve the title twice.\nShe was invited to participate in the 1992 Olympic trials, and after her showing in the 200 meters finals, would have made the team as an alternate in the 4 \u00d7 100 meter relay, but she declined the invitation. After winning further state-wide sprint titles, she accepted a full scholarship to the University of North Carolina in basketball, where she helped the team win the NCAA championship in her freshman year. Jones redshirted her 1996 basketball season to concentrate on track but was injured and never got the opportunity to try out.\nShe excelled at her first major international competition, winning the 100 m sprint at the 1997 World Championships in Athens, while finishing 10th in the long jump. At the 1999 World Championships, Jones attempted to win four titles, but injured herself in the 200 m after a gold in the 100 m and a long jump bronze.\nAt the Sydney Olympics, Jones finished with three gold medals (100- and 200-meter sprint, and 4 \u00d7 400 m relay) and two bronze medals (long jump and 4 \u00d7 100 m relay). However, she was later stripped of these medals after admitting her use of performance-enhancing drugs. Jones vehemently denied using performance-enhancing drugs until her confession in 2007.\nA dominant force in women's sprinting, Jones was upset in the 100\u00a0m sprint at the 2001 World Championships, as Ukrainian Zhanna Pintusevich-Block beat her for her first loss in the event in six years; Pintusevich-Block was one of the names revealed by Victor Conte during the BALCO scandals. Jones, however, did claim the gold in both the 200\u00a0m and 4 \u00d7 100\u00a0m relay.\nOn her 2004 Olympics experience, Jones said \"It's extremely disappointing, words can't put it into perspective.\" She came in fifth in the long jump and competed in the women's 4x100\u00a0m relay where the team swept past the competition in the preliminaries only to miss a baton pass and finish last in the final race. Jones promised that her latest defeat would not be the end of her Olympic efforts, and reasserted in May 2005 that winning a gold medal at the 2008 Olympics remained her \"ultimate goal.\"\nMay 2006 had Jones run 11.06 at altitude, but into a headwind in her season debut and beat Veronica Campbell and Lauryn Williams in subsequent 100\u00a0m events. By July 8, 2006, Jones appeared to be in top form; she won the 100\u00a0m sprint at Gaz de France with a time of 10.93\u00a0seconds. It was her fastest time in almost four years. Three days later, Jones once more improved on her seasonal best time at the Rome IIAF Golden League (10.91\u00a0seconds), but lost to Jamaica's Sherone Simpson, who clocked 10.87.\nWNBA career.\nIn November 2009, Jones was working out for the San Antonio Silver Stars of the WNBA. She had played basketball while in college at the University of North Carolina, where her team won the national championship in 1994. Her No. 20 jersey, honored by the school, hangs in Carmichael Auditorium. She had been selected in the third round of the 2003 WNBA draft by the Phoenix Mercury. On March 10, 2010, the Tulsa Shock announced that Jones, a rookie, had signed to play with the team. Jones made her debut on May 15, in the Shock's inaugural game at the BOK Center against the Minnesota Lynx. On August 22, 2010, she logged her first start and scored a WNBA career high 15 points in a win against the Chicago Sky. In 47 WNBA games, Jones averaged 2.6 points and 1.3 rebounds per game. Jones was waived by the Shock on July 21, 2011.\nPersonal life.\nWhile at UNC, Jones met and began dating one of the track coaches, shot putter C. J. Hunter. Hunter voluntarily resigned from his position at UNC to comply with the requirements of university rules prohibiting coach-athlete dating. Jones and Hunter were married on October 3, 1998, and trained for the Sydney 2000 Summer Olympics.\nIn the run-up to the 2000 Olympics, Jones declared that she intended to win gold medals in all five of her competition events at Sydney. Hunter had withdrawn from the shotput competition for a knee injury, though he was allowed to keep his coaching credentials and attend the games to support his wife. Just hours after Marion Jones won her first of the planned five golds, though, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) announced that Hunter had failed four pre-Olympic drug tests, testing positive each time for the banned anabolic steroid nandrolone. Hunter was immediately suspended from taking any role at the Sydney games, and he was ordered to surrender his on-field coaching credentials. At a press conference where Hunter broke down in tears, he denied taking any performance-enhancing drugs, much less the easily detected nandrolone. Jones would later write in her autobiography, \"Marion Jones: Life in the Fast Lane\", that Hunter's positive drug tests hurt their marriage and her image as a drug-free athlete. The couple divorced in 2002.\nOn June 28, 2003, Jones gave birth to a son, Tim Montgomery Jr., with then-boyfriend Tim Montgomery, a world-class sprinter himself. Because of her pregnancy, Jones missed the 2003 World Championships, but spent a year preparing for the 2004 Olympics. Montgomery, who did not qualify for the 2004 Olympic track-and-field team for poor performance, was charged by the United States Anti-Doping Agency (USADA), as part of the investigation into the BALCO doping scandal, with receiving and using banned performance-enhancing drugs. The USADA sought a four-year suspension for Montgomery. Montgomery fought the ban, but lost the appeal on December 13, 2005, receiving a two-year ban from track-and-field competition; the Court of Arbitration for Sport also stripped Montgomery of all race results, records, and medals, from March 31, 2001, onward. Montgomery later announced his retirement.\nOn February 24, 2007, Jones married Barbadian sprinter and 2000 Olympic 100 m bronze medalist Obadele Thompson. Jones has two children with Thompson. Thompson and Jones divorced in 2017. Jones now resides in Austin, Texas with her long-time partner, Adele.\nIn 2010, Jones released a book, \"On the Right Track: From Olympic Downfall to Finding Forgiveness and the Strength to Overcome and Succeed\", published by Simon &amp; Schuster. Jones is now a full-time public speaker, trainer and coach. In 2024 Jones partnered with Driven Inc to launch Driven performance which focuses on building resilience skills through coaching and physical fitness.\n\"Top Speed\" film.\nJones appears in the 2003 film \"Top Speed\", along with other speed specialists such as racing driver Lucas Luhr, mountain biker Marla Streb, and Porsche Cayenne designer Stephen Murkett. Directed by Greg MacGillivray and shot in IMAX format, the film covers details from races to mistakes she made within her performances.\nUse of illicit performance-enhancing drugs.\nThroughout most of her athletic career including two Olympiads and several championship meets, Jones had been accused, either directly or by implication, of taking performance-enhancing drugs. These accusations began in high school in the early 1990s, when she missed a random drug test and was consequently banned for four years from track and field competition. Jones, a minor, claimed that she never received the letter notifying her of the required test; and attorney Johnnie Cochran successfully got the four-year ban overturned. Jones tended to train with both coaches and athletes who themselves were dogged by rumors and accusations surrounding performance-enhancing drugs. And until 2007, Jones denied, in almost every way possible and in almost any venue where the question arose, being involved with performance enhancers. She frequently said that she had never tested positive for performance-enhancing substances.\nBALCO investigation.\nOn December 3, 2004, Victor Conte, the founder of BALCO, appeared in an interview with Martin Bashir on ABC's \"20/20\". In the interview, Conte told a national audience that he had personally given Jones four different illegal performance-enhancing drugs before, during, and after the 2000 Sydney Olympic Games. In the course of investigative research, San Francisco-based reporters Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru-Wada reported Jones had received banned drugs from BALCO, citing documentary evidence and testimony from Jones's ex-husband C.J. Hunter, who claims to have seen Jones inject herself in the stomach with the steroids.\nAccording to Hunter's 2004 testimony before a federal grand jury, Jones's use of banned drugs began well before Sydney. Hunter told the investigators that Jones first obtained EPO (erythropoietin) from Graham, who Hunter said had a Mexican connection for the drug. Later, Hunter said, Graham met Conte, who began providing the coach with BALCO \"nutritional supplements\", which were actually an experimental class of \"designer\" steroids said to be undetectable by drug screening procedures available at the time. Graham then distributed the performance enhancers to Jones and other Sprint Capitol athletes. Subsequently, Hunter told federal agents Jones began receiving drugs directly from Conte.\nJones had never failed a drug test using the then-existing testing procedures, and insufficient evidence was found to bring charges regarding other untested performance-enhancing drugs.\n2006 EPO tests.\n\"The Washington Post\", citing unidentified sources with knowledge of drug results from the USA Track and Field Championships in Indianapolis, reported that on June 23, 2006, an \"A\" sample of Marion Jones's urine tested positive for erythropoietin (EPO), a banned performance enhancer. Jones withdrew from the Weltklasse Golden League meet in Switzerland, citing \"personal reasons\", and once more denied using performance-enhancing drugs. She retained lawyer Howard Jacobs, who had represented many athletes in doping cases, including Tim Montgomery and cyclist Floyd Landis. On September 6, 2006, Jones's lawyers announced that her \"B\" sample had tested negative, which cleared her from the doping allegations.\nAdmission of lying during BALCO investigation.\nOn October 5, 2007, Jones admitted to lying to federal agents under oath about her steroids use prior to the 2000 Summer Olympics and pleaded guilty at the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York (in White Plains). She confessed to Judge Kenneth M. Karas that she had made false statements regarding the BALCO and a check-fraud case. She was released on her own recognizance but was required to surrender both her U.S. and Belizean passports, pending sentencing in January. Although a maximum sentence of five years could be imposed, the prosecution recommended no more than six months as part of Jones's plea bargain.\nAfter her admission, Jones held a press conference on the same day, where she publicly admitted to using steroids before the Olympics and acknowledged that she had, in fact, lied when she previously denied steroid use in statements to the press, to various sports agencies, and to two grand juries. One was impaneled to investigate the BALCO \"designer steroid\" ring, and the other was impaneled to investigate a check fraud ring involving many of the same parties from the BALCO case. As a result of these admissions, Jones accepted a two-year suspension from track and field competition issued by USADA and announced her retirement from track and field. She broke down into tears during the press conference as she apologized for her actions, saying: \"And so it is with a great amount of shame, that I stand before you and tell you that I have betrayed your trust... and you have the right to be angry with me. I have let them down. I have let my country down. And I have let myself down.\"\nUSADA stated that their sanction \"also requires disqualification of all her competitive results obtained after September 1, 2000, and forfeiture of all medals, results, points and prizes\". On January 11, 2008, Jones was sentenced to six months in jail. She began her sentence on March 7, 2008, and was released on September 5, 2008.\nIn the BALCO case, she had denied to federal agents her use of the steroid tetrahydrogestrinone, known as \"The Clear\", or \"THG\", from 1999, but claimed she was given the impression she was taking a flaxseed oil supplement for two years while coach Trevor Graham supplied her with the substance. In a published letter in October 2007, Jones said that she had used the substance that was given to her described as flaxseed oil, which was later confirmed to be \"The Clear\" until she stopped training with Graham at the end of 2002. She said she lied when federal agents questioned her in 2003 because she panicked when they presented her with a sample of \"The Clear\".\nU.S. Olympic Committee demands return of Olympic medals.\nPeter Ueberroth, chairman of the U.S. Olympic Committee, reacted to the news of Jones's confession and guilty plea on perjury charges by issuing a statement calling on Jones to \"immediately step forward and return the Olympic medals she won while competing in violation of the rules\". Ueberroth added that her admission was \"long overdue and underscores the shame and dishonor that are inherent with cheating.\" IAAF president Lamine Diack said in a statement: \"Marion Jones will be remembered as one of the biggest frauds in sporting history.\"\nOn October 8, 2007, a source confirmed that Marion Jones surrendered her five medals from the 2000 Summer Olympics. On the same day, Ueberroth said that all the relay medals should be returned, and on April 10, 2008, the IOC voted to strip Jones's relay teammates of their medals as well, although this decision would successfully be appealed by seven of Jones's teammates and overturned in 2010.\nFormal IOC disqualification.\nOn December 12, 2007, the IOC formally stripped Jones of all five Olympic medals dating back to September 2000, and banned her from attending the 2008 Summer Olympics in any capacity. The IOC action also officially disqualified Jones from her fifth-place finish in the long jump at the 2004 Summer Olympics.\nOn October 28, 2008, Jones was interviewed by Oprah Winfrey and stated that she would have won gold at the Sydney Olympics without the drugs that led to her disgrace.\nFinancial troubles.\nSeven years after winning a women's record five Olympic track and field medals and receiving multimillion-dollar endorsement deals, Jones was broke. According to the Associated Press, Jones was heavily in debt and fighting off court judgments, according to court records reviewed by the \"Los Angeles Times\". In 2006, a bank foreclosed on her $2.5 million mansion in Apex, North Carolina. In her prime, Jones was one of track's first female sports millionaires, typically earning between $70,000 and $80,000 a race, plus at least another $1 million from race bonuses and endorsement deals.\nInvolvement in check fraud.\nIn July 2006, Jones was linked to a check-counterfeiting scheme that led to criminal charges against her coach and former boyfriend Montgomery. Documents showed that a $25,000 check made out to Jones was deposited in her bank account as part of the alleged multimillion-dollar scheme. Prosecutors alleged that funds were sent to Jones's track coach, 1976 Olympic gold medalist Steve Riddick, in Virginia, then funneled back to New York through a network of \"friends, relatives and associates.\" Riddick was arrested in February on money-laundering charges. According to the indictment and subsequent documents filed with the court, the link to Jones was made through one of Riddick's business partners, Nathaniel Alexander.\nOn October 5, 2007, Jones pleaded guilty to making false statements to IRS Special Agent Jeff Novitzky leading the ongoing BALCO investigation in California. Jones claimed she had never taken performance-enhancing drugs. \"That was a lie, your honor\", she said from the defense table. The federal government, through grand juries, had been investigating steroid abuse since 2003.\nJones also pleaded guilty to making false statements about her knowledge of a check-cashing scheme to New York U.S. Department of Homeland Security Special Agent Erik Rosenblatt, who has been leading a broad financial investigation that has already convicted Montgomery, sports agent Charles Wells, and her coach, Steve Riddick.\nCriminal sentencing.\nProsecutors told U.S. District Judge Kenneth Karas that any sentence between probation and six months' imprisonment would be fair (with the maximum penalty being five years in prison); Karas responded by seeking advice as to whether he could go beyond the six-month sentence. Meanwhile, Jones's lawyers asked that her penalty be limited to probation and community service, arguing, in part, that she had been punished enough by apologizing publicly, retiring from track and field, and relinquishing her five Olympic medals.\nOn January 11, 2008, Karas sentenced Jones to six months in jail for her involvement in the check fraud case and her use of performance-enhancing drugs. During the sentencing hearing, the judge admonished her, saying that she knew what she was doing and would be punished accordingly. \"The offenses here are serious. They each involve lies made three years apart\", Karas said, adding that Jones's actions were \"not a one-off mistake...but a repetition in an attempt to break the law.\"\nJones was ordered to surrender on March 15, 2008. She reported four days early, on March 11, at the Federal Medical Center, Carswell prison in Fort Worth and was assigned Federal Bureau of Prisons register no. 84868\u2013054. She was released from prison on September 5, 2008.\nPost-scandal.\nJones appeared in season 3 of \"\" where she was medically withdrawn during the third episode.\n World Athlete of the Year (Women): 1997, 1998\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "72656", "revid": "8005368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72656", "title": "Florence Griffith", "text": ""}
{"id": "72660", "revid": "47282471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72660", "title": "Commensalism", "text": "Beneficial symbiosis between species\nCommensalism is a long-term biological interaction (symbiosis) in which members of one species gain benefits while those of the other species neither benefit nor are harmed. This is in contrast with mutualism, in which both organisms benefit from each other; amensalism, where one is harmed while the other is unaffected; and parasitism, where one is harmed and the other benefits.\nThe commensal (the species that benefits from the association) may obtain nutrients, shelter, support, or locomotion from the host species, which is substantially unaffected. The commensal relation is often between a larger host and a smaller commensal; the host organism is unmodified, whereas the commensal species may show great structural adaptation consistent with its habits, as in the remoras that ride attached to sharks and other fishes. Remoras feed on their hosts' fecal matter, while pilot fish feed on the leftovers of their hosts' meals. Numerous birds perch on bodies of large mammal herbivores or feed on the insects turned up by grazing mammals.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"commensalism\" is derived from the word \"commensal\", meaning \"eating at the same table\" in human social interaction, which in turn comes through French from the Medieval Latin \"commensalis\", meaning \"sharing a table\", from the prefix \"com-\", meaning \"together\", and \"mensa\", meaning \"table\" or \"meal\". Commensality, at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, refers to professors eating at the same table as students (as they live in the same \"college\").\nThe Belgian zoologist and paleontologist Pierre-Joseph van Beneden introduced the term \"commensalism\" in 1876.\nExamples of commensal relationships.\nThe commensal pathway was traversed by animals that fed on refuse around human habitats or by animals that preyed on other animals drawn to human camps. Those animals established a commensal relationship with humans in which the animals benefited but the humans received little benefit or harm. Those animals that were most capable of taking advantage of the resources associated with human camps would have been the 'tamer' individuals: less aggressive, with shorter fight-or-flight distances. Later, these animals developed closer social or economic bonds with humans and led to a domestic relationship.\nThe leap from a synanthropic population to a domestic one could only have taken place after the animals had progressed from anthropophily to habituation to commensalism and partnership, at which point the establishment of a reciprocal relationship between animal and human would have laid the foundation for domestication, including captivity and then human-controlled breeding. From this perspective, animal domestication is a coevolutionary process in which a population responds to selective pressure while adapting to a novel niche that includes another species with evolving behaviors.\nDogs and humans.\nThe dog was the first domesticated animal and was domesticated and widely established across Eurasia before the end of the Pleistocene, well before the cultivation of crops or the domestication of other animals. The dog is often hypothesised to be a classic example of a domestic animal that likely traveled a commensal pathway into domestication. Archaeological evidence, such as the Bonn\u2013Oberkassel dog dating to ~14,000 BP, supports the hypothesis that dog domestication preceded the emergence of agriculture and began close to the Last Glacial Maximum when hunter-gatherers preyed on megafauna.\nThe wolves more likely drawn to human camps were the less aggressive, subdominant pack members with lowered flight response, higher stress thresholds, and less wary around humans, and therefore better candidates for domestication.\nProto-dogs might have taken advantage of carcasses left on site by early hunters, assisted in capturing prey, or provided defense from large competing predators at kills. However, the extent to which proto-domestic wolves could have become dependent on this way of life prior to domestication and without human provisioning is unclear and highly debated. In contrast, cats may have become fully dependent on a commensal lifestyle before being domesticated by preying on other commensal animals, such as rats and mice, without any human provisioning. The debate over the extent to which some wolves were commensal with humans before domestication stems from the debate over the level of human intentionality in domestication, which remains untested.\nThe earliest sign of domestication in dogs was the neotenization (retaining juvenile features into adulthood) of skull morphology and the shortening of snout length that results in tooth crowding, reduction in tooth size, and a reduction in the number of teeth, which has been attributed to the strong selection for reduced aggression. This process may have begun during the initial commensal stage of dog domestication, even before humans began to be active partners in the process.\nA mitochondrial, microsatellite, and Y-chromosome assessment of two wolf populations in North America combined with satellite telemetry data revealed significant genetic and morphological differences between one population that migrated with and preyed upon caribou and another territorial ecotype population that remained in a boreal coniferous forest. Although these two populations spend a period of the year in the same place, and though there was evidence of gene flow between them, the difference in prey-habitat specialization has been sufficient to maintain genetic and even coloration divergence.\nA different study has identified the remains of a population of extinct Pleistocene Beringian wolves with unique mitochondrial signatures. The skull shape, tooth wear, and isotopic signatures suggested these remains were derived from a population of specialist megafauna hunters and scavengers that became extinct while less specialized wolf ecotypes survived. Analogous to the modern wolf ecotype that has evolved to track and prey upon caribou, a Pleistocene wolf population could have begun following mobile hunter-gatherers, thus slowly acquiring genetic and phenotypic differences that would have allowed them to adapt to the human habitat more successfully.\n\"Aspergillus\" and \"Staphylococcus\".\nNumerous genera of bacteria and fungi live on and in the human body as part of its natural flora. The fungal genus \"Aspergillus\" is capable of living under considerable environmental stress, and thus is capable of colonising the upper gastrointestinal tract where relatively few examples of the body's gut flora can survive due to highly acidic or alkaline conditions produced by gastric acid and digestive juices. While \"Aspergillus\" normally produces no symptoms, in individuals who are immunocompromised or suffering from existing conditions such as tuberculosis, a condition called aspergillosis can occur, in which populations of \"Aspergillus\" grow out of control.\n\"Staphylococcus aureus\", a common bacterial species, is known best for its numerous pathogenic strains that can cause numerous illnesses and conditions. However, many strains of \"S. aureus\" are metabiotic commensals, and are present on roughly 20 to 30% of the human population as part of the skin flora. \"S. aureus\" also benefits from the variable ambient conditions created by the body's mucous membranes, and as such can be found in the oral and nasal cavities, as well as inside the ear canal. Other \"Staphylococcus\" species including \"S. warneri\", \"S. lugdunensis\" and \"S. epidermidis\", will also engage in commensalism for similar purposes.\n\"Nitrosomonas\" spp and \"Nitrobacter\" spp.\nCommensalistic relationships between microorganisms include situations in which the waste product of one microorganism is a substrate for another species. One good example is nitrification \u2014 the oxidation of ammonium ion to nitrate. Nitrification occurs in two steps: first, bacteria such as \"Nitrosomonas\" spp. and certain crenarchaeotes oxidize ammonium to nitrite; and second, nitrite is oxidized to nitrate by \"Nitrobacter\" spp. and similar bacteria. \"Nitrobacter\" spp. benefit from their association with \"Nitrosomonas\" spp. because they use nitrite to obtain energy for growth.\nCommensalistic associations also occur when one microbial group modifies the environment to make it better suited for another organism. The synthesis of acidic waste products during fermentation stimulates the proliferation of more acid-tolerant microorganisms, which may be only a minor part of the microbial community at neutral pH. A good example is the succession of microorganisms during milk spoilage.\nBiofilm formation provides another example. The colonization of a newly exposed surface by one type of microorganism (an initial colonizer) makes it possible for other microorganisms to attach to the microbially modified surface.\nOctocorals and brittle stars.\nIn deep-sea, benthic environments there is an associative relationship between octocorals and brittle stars. Due to the currents flowing upward along seamount ridges, atop these ridges there are colonies of suspension feeding corals and sponges, and brittle stars that grip tight to them and get up off the sea floor. A specific documented commensal relationship is between the ophiuran \"Ophiocreas oedipus\" Lyman and the octocoral primnoid \"Metallogorgia melanotrichos\".\nHistorically, commensalism has been recognized as the usual type of association between brittle stars and octocorals. In this association, the ophiurans benefit directly by being elevated through facilitating their feeding by suspension, while the octocorals do not seem to benefit or be harmed by this relationship.\nRecent studies in the Gulf of Mexico have suggested that there are actually some benefits to the octocorals, such as receiving a cleaning action by the brittle star as it slowly moves around the coral. In some cases, a close relationship occurs between cohabiting species, with the interaction beginning from their juvenile stages.\nArguments.\nWhether the relationship between humans and some types of gut flora is commensal or mutualistic is still unanswered.\nSome biologists argue that any close interaction between two organisms is unlikely to be completely neutral for either party, and that relationships identified as commensal are likely mutualistic or parasitic in a subtle way that has not been detected. For example, epiphytes are \"nutritional pirates\" that may intercept substantial amounts of nutrients that would otherwise go to the host plant. Large numbers of epiphytes can also cause tree limbs to break or shade the host plant and reduce its rate of photosynthesis. Similarly, phoretic mites may hinder their host by making flight more difficult, which may affect its aerial hunting ability or cause it to expend extra energy while carrying these passengers.\nTypes.\nLike all ecological interactions, commensalisms vary in strength and duration from intimate, long-lived symbioses to brief, weak interactions through intermediaries.\nPhoresy.\nPhoresy is one animal attached to another exclusively for transport, mainly arthropods, examples of which are mites on insects (such as beetles, flies or bees), pseudoscorpions on mammals or beetles, and millipedes on birds. Phoresy can be either obligate or facultative (induced by environmental conditions).\nInquilinism.\nInquilinism is the use of a second organism for permanent housing. Examples are epiphytic plants (such as many orchids) that grow on trees, or birds that live in holes in trees.\nMetabiosis.\nMetabiosis is a more indirect dependency, in which one organism creates or prepares a suitable environment for a second. Examples include maggots, which develop on and infest corpses, and hermit crabs, which use gastropod shells to protect their bodies.\nFacilitation.\nFacilitation or probiosis describes species interactions that benefit at least one of the participants and cause harm to neither.\nNecromeny.\nNecromeny is one animal associating with another until the latter dies, then the former feeds on the corpse of the latter. Examples include some nematodes and some mites.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72662", "revid": "9719271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72662", "title": "Euphorbia mellifera", "text": "Species of flowering plant in the spurge family Euphorbiaceae\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEuphorbia mellifera, the Canary spurge or honey spurge, is a species of flowering plant in the spurge family Euphorbiaceae, native to Madeira and the Canary Islands. It is an evergreen shrub or tree growing to tall and broad, with narrow leaves up to long. In spring it produces brown, honey-scented flowers.\nThe Latin specific epithet \"mellifera\" means \"producing honey\".\nIt has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit. \"Euphorbia\" \u00d7 \"pasteurii\" is listed as a hybrid between \"E. mellifera\" and \"E. stygiana\". The cultivars 'Phrampton Phatty', 'Roundway Titan' and 'John Phillips' have received the RHS AGM.\nLike all euphorbias, this plant contains a milky-white sap, which oozes out of the stems when cut. This can be a skin irritant and is very harmful to the eyes. Gloves should be worn when pruning,\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72663", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72663", "title": "Fritz Kuhn", "text": "German politician (born 1955)\nFritz Kuhn (born 29 June 1955) is a German politician who served as Mayor of Stuttgart from 2012 until 2021. He was co-chairman of Alliance 90/The Greens, the German Green party, in 2002 and its parliamentary group from 2002 to 2013.\nEarly life and education.\nFritz Kuhn was born in Bad Mergentheim (Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg) and grew up in Memmingen (Bayern), where he attended Bernhard Strigel grammar school. After his A-levels he studied German and philosophy at the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich and the University of T\u00fcbingen, with a master's thesis in the field of linguistics.\nPolitical career.\nKuhn was one of the founding members of the Green Party in the Federal Republic of Germany in 1980.\nFrom 1981 to 1984 he worked as a research assistant at Augsburg university and as a consultant to the parliamentary party of the Greens in the state parliament (\"Landtag\") of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg (South-West Germany).\nMember of the State Parliament in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg.\nKuhn became an MP and the leader of the parliamentary party of the Greens (Alliance 90/The Greens from 1993) in the Landtag of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, the state's legislature, in 1984, a position he held until 1988, and then later again from 1992 to 2000, having worked as a Professor of Linguistic Communication in the years in between.\nKuhn was one of the two federal chairpersons of Alliance 90/The Greens from 2000 to 2002, first together with Renate K\u00fcnast, then with Claudia Roth. He resigned from that office in October 2002 after having been elected as a member of the Bundestag, the parliament of the Federal Republic of Germany; at the time, there was a rule in the Green Party that you could not be an MP and hold a party office at the same time.\nMember of the German Parliament, 2002\u20132012.\nFritz Kuhn first became a member of the Bundestag in the 2002 federal elections. In the immediate aftermath of the elections, he was part of the Green Party's team in the negotiations with the Social Democrats on a coalition agreement for the second government under the leadership of Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der.\nIn the Bundestag, Kuhn specialized in the fields of the economy (fighting for \"a green market economy\") and employment, and foreign policy. From 2002 until 2005, he served on the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Between 2005 and 2009, Kuhn was one of the two leaders of the Green parliamentary party (together with Renate K\u00fcnast), from 2009 he served as deputy leader.\nFor the 2005 federal elections, Kuhn was the campaign manager of Alliance 90/The Greens. At the 2009 election, he unsuccessfully contested the single member constituency of Heidelberg.\nBetween 2007 and 2009, Kuhn was one of 32 members of the Second Commission on the modernization of the federal state (\"F\u00f6deralismuskommission II\"), which had been established to reform the division of powers between federal and state authorities in Germany.\nMayor of Stuttgart, 2012\u2013present.\nOn 21 October 2012 Kuhn was elected Lord Mayor of Stuttgart in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg with 52.9% of the votes. His 8-year-term as Mayor \"(Oberb\u00fcrgermeister)\" began in January 2013. Stuttgart has a population of about 600,000 and is capital city of the Federal State of \"Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg\". Kuhn was the first candidate of the German Green party to win in a city of such importance.\nKuhn took over from Wolfgang Schuster, his predecessor, on 7 January 2013. In early 2020, he announced that he would not stand in the next elections but instead resign from active politics by the end of his second term later that year.\nPersonal life.\nKuhn is married and has two sons.\nKuhn also supports the football club FC Bayern M\u00fcnchen.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72664", "revid": "44217974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72664", "title": "Hebei", "text": "Province in North China\nHebei is a province in North China. It is China's sixth-most populous province, with a population of over 75 million people. Shijiazhuang is the capital city. It borders Shanxi to the west, Henan to the south, Shandong and Liaoning to the east, and Inner Mongolia to the north; in addition, Hebei entirely surrounds the direct-administered municipalities of Beijing and Tianjin on land. Its population is 96% Han Chinese, 3% Manchu, 0.8% Hui, and 0.3% Mongol. Varieties of Chinese spoken include Jilu Mandarin, the Beijing dialect of Mandarin, and Jin Chinese.\nDuring the Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods (771\u2013226\u00a0BC), the region was ruled by the states of Yan and Zhao. During the Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368), the region was called Zhongshu. It was called North Zhili during the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644), and simply Zhili during the Qing dynasty (1644\u20131912). The modern province of Hebei was created in 1928. Five UNESCO World Heritage Sites can be found in the province: the Great Wall of China, Chengde Mountain Resort, Grand Canal, Eastern Qing tombs, and Western Qing tombs. It is also home to five National Famous Historical and Cultural Cities: Handan, Baoding, Chengde, Zhengding and Shanhaiguan.\nHebei's economy is based on agriculture and manufacturing; it is China's premier steel producer, which has contributed to serious air pollution.\nEtymology.\n\"Hebei\" means 'north of the river', derived from the province's location north of the Yellow River in the North China Plain. In the \"Yu Gong\", the province is recorded as \"Jizhou\", lending to its traditional abbreviation of \"Ji\" ().\nThe province's nickname is \"Yanzhao\" (), which is the collective name of the Yan and Zhao states that controlled the region during the Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods (771\u2013221\u00a0BC). In 1421, the Yongle Emperor of the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644) moved the capital from Nanjing to Beijing, and the province surrounding the new capital was first called North Zhili or Zhili, meaning 'directly ruled'. When Nanjing became the capital of the Republic of China in 1928, the province of Zhili was abolished and given its present name of Hebei.\nHistory.\nPre and early history.\nPeking Man, an early pre-historic Homo erectus, lived on the plains of Hebei around 200,000 to 700,000 years ago. Neolithic findings at the prehistoric Beifudi site date to 7000 and 8000 BC.\nMany early Chinese myths are set in the province. Fuxi, one of the Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors, is said to have lived in present-day Xingtai. The mythical Battle of Zhuolu, won by the Yellow Emperor, Yan Emperor, and their Yanhuang tribes against the Chiyou-led Jiuli tribes, took place in Zhangjiakou and started the Huaxia civilization.\nDuring the Spring and Autumn period (722\u2013476 BC), Hebei was under the rule of Yan in the north and Jin in the south. Also during this period, a nomadic people known as D\u00ed invaded the plains of northern China and established Zhongshan in central Hebei. In the Warring States period (403\u2013221 BC), Jin was partitioned and much of its territory in Hebei went to Zhao.\nQin and Han dynasties.\nThe Qin dynasty unified China in 221 BC. The Han dynasty (206 BC \u2013 220 AD) ruled the area under two provinces, You Prefecture in the north and Ji Province in the south. At the end of the Han dynasty, most of Hebei was under the control of warlords Gongsun Zan in the north and Yuan Shao further south. Yuan Shao emerged as the victor of the two, but he was defeated by Cao Cao in the Battle of Guandu in 200. Hebei came under the rule of the Kingdom of Wei, established by the descendants of Cao Cao.\nJin through the Three Kingdoms.\nAfter the invasions of northern nomadic peoples at the end of the Western Jin dynasty, chaos ensued in the Sixteen Kingdoms and the Northern and Southern dynasties. Because of its location on the northern frontier, Hebei changed hands many times and was controlled at various times by Later Zhao, Former Yan, Former Qin, and Later Yan. The Northern Wei reunified northern China in 440 but split in 534, with Hebei coming under Eastern Wei; then the Northern Qi, with its capital at Ye near modern Linzhang, Hebei. The Sui dynasty again unified China in 589.\nTang and Five dynasties.\nDuring the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907), the area was officially called Hebei for the first time. The Great Yan State was established in Hebei from 756 to 763 during the An Lushan Rebellion. After the rebellion, Lulong Jiedushi retained its autonomy from Tang during most of the 9th century. During the late Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, Lulong was fragmented among several regimes including the short-lived Yan. It was eventually annexed in 913 by Li Cunxu, who established the Later Tang (923\u2013936). Emperor Gaozu of the Later Jin dynasty ceded much of northern Hebei to the Khitan Liao dynasty. This territory, called the Sixteen Prefectures of Yanyun, became a weakness in the Chinese defense against the Khitans for the next century because it lay within the Great Wall.\nSong through Yuan dynasties.\nDuring the Northern Song dynasty (960\u20131127), the sixteen ceded prefectures continued to be an area of contention between Song China and the Liao dynasty. Later, the Southern Song dynasty abandoned all of North China, including Hebei, to the Jurchen Jin dynasty after the 1127 Jingkang Incident of the Jin\u2013Song wars. Hebei was heavily affected by the flooding of the Yellow River; between 1048 and 1128, the river ran directly through the province rather than to its south.\nThe Mongol Yuan dynasty divided China into provinces but did not establish Hebei as a province. Instead, the area was directly administrated by the Secretariat at the capital Dadu.\nMing and Qing dynasties.\nThe Ming dynasty ruled Hebei as Beizhili, meaning Northern Directly Ruled because the area contained and was directly ruled by the imperial capital in Beijing. The \"Northern\" designation was used because there was a southern counterpart covering present-day Jiangsu and Anhui. When the Manchu Qing dynasty came to power in 1644, they abolished the southern counterpart, and Hebei became known as Zhili or Directly Ruled. During the Qing dynasty, the northern borders of Zhili extended deep into Inner Mongolia and overlapped in jurisdiction with the leagues of Inner Mongolia.\nRepublic of China.\nThe Qing dynasty collapsed in 1912 and was replaced by the Republic of China. In a few years, China descended into a civil war, with regional warlords vying for power. Since Zhili was so close to the capital of Beijing, it was the site of the Zhiwan War, the First Zhifeng War, and the Second Zhifeng War. With the success of the Northern Expedition in 1926 and 1927 by the Kuomintang, the capital was moved from Beijing to Nanjing. As a result, the province's name was changed to Hebei, reflecting the relocation of the capital and its standard provincial administration.\nDuring World War II, Hebei was under the control of the Reorganized National Government of the Republic of China, a puppet state of the Empire of Japan.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nThe founding of the People's Republic of China saw several changes. The region around Chengde, previously part of Rehe Province (historically part of Manchuria), and the region around Zhangjiakou, previously part of Chahar Province (historically part of Inner Mongolia), were merged into Hebei. This extended its borders northwards beyond the Great Wall. Meanwhile, the city of Puyang was carved away, causing Hebei to lose access to the Yellow River. The city became part of the short-lived Pingyuan Province before eventually being annexed into Henan.\nThe capital was also moved from Baoding to the new city of Shijiazhuang, and, for a short period, to Tianjin. On July 28, 1976, Tangshan was struck by the Tangshan earthquake, the deadliest earthquake of the 20th century, killing over 240,000 people. There were a series of smaller earthquakes in the following decade.\nToday, Hebei, along with Beijing and Tianjin municipalities which it includes, make up the Jing-Jin-Ji megalopolis region. With a population of 130 million, it is about six times the size of the New York metropolitan area and is one of the largest megalopolis clusters in China. Beijing had also unloaded some of its non-capital functions to the province with the establishment of the Xiong'an New Area, which integrates the three municipalities.\nGeography.\nHebei is the only province in China to contain plateaus, mountains, hills, shorelines, plains, and lakes. Most of central and southern Hebei lies within the North China Plain. Western Hebei rises into the Taihang Mountains (Taihang Shan), while the Yan Mountains (Yan Shan) runs through northern Hebei. Beyond the mountains are the grasslands of Inner Mongolia. The highest peak is Mount Xiaowutai in Yu County in the northwest of the province, with an altitude of .\nHebei borders the Bohai Sea on the east. The Hai River watershed covers most of the province's central and southern parts; the Luan River watershed covers the northeast. Excluding manmade reservoirs, the largest lake in Hebei is Baiyangdian, located in Anxin County, Baoding.\nMajor cities in Hebei include: Shijiazhuang, Baoding, Tangshan, Qinhuangdao, Handan, and Zhangjiakou.\nHebei has a monsoon-influenced humid continental climate. Its winters are cold and dry, while its summers are hot and humid. Temperatures average in January and in July. The annual precipitation ranges from , concentrated heavily in summer.\nGovernment.\nAs with other provincial-level divisions in mainland China, Hebei is governed under a dual party-government system. The Governor of Hebei is the highest-ranking official in the People's Government of Hebei and is responsible for the provincial administration. However, the most powerful official in the province is the Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) Hebei Provincial Committee, commonly known as the \"Party Secretary\", who holds greater influence than the governor within the province's political structure.\nAdministrative divisions.\nHebei is divided into 11 prefecture-level divisions, all of which are prefecture-level cities:\nThese prefecture-level cities are further subdivided into 168 county-level divisions:\nThese in turn are divided into 2,207 township-level divisions, comprising:\nAs of the end of 2017, Hebei had a population of approximately 75.2 million.\nMap and division table.\nShijiazhuang\nTangshan\nQinhuangdao\nHandan\nXingtai\nBaoding\nZhangjiakou\nChengde\nCangzhou\nLangfang\nHengshui\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Nobold/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Beijing\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Nobold/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Tianjin\"\nUrban areas.\nThe following table lists major urban areas in Hebei based on the 2020 census, along with historical comparisons and total city populations. \"Urban area\" refers to built-up zones and may exclude newer administrative districts established since the 2010 census.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEconomy.\nHebei is one of northern China's major industrial provinces, with a diverse economy shaped by its strategic location surrounding Beijing and Tianjin, and a strong manufacturing base\u2014though by national standards, it ranks relatively low in per capita income and development indicators. As of 2023, Hebei's gross domestic product (GDP) was approximately 4.394 trillion yuan (about US$624 billion), ranking it 12th among China's provincial-level regions. The province's GDP per capita was around 59,300 yuan (roughly US$8,420), placing it 26th nationally.\nIn terms of economic structure, Hebei's economy in 2023 was composed of a primary sector (agriculture, forestry, and fisheries) contributing 446.6 billion yuan, a secondary sector (manufacturing and construction) contributing 1.397 trillion yuan, and a tertiary sector (services) contributing 2.551 trillion yuan. The registered urban unemployment rate was 3.08% as of the latest available data from 2021.\nHebei's economy is supported by a robust industrial base, with mining and heavy industry playing a central role. The province is a key hub for coal and iron ore mining, as well as for steel production. Other important industries include petroleum refining, chemical manufacturing, ceramics, power generation, food processing, and textiles.\nHebei possesses significant mineral resources, which form the backbone of its industrial development. The Kailuan coal mine in Tangshan, with origins dating back to the late 19th century, is one of China's oldest and most historically important modern mines. It remains operational today, producing over 20 million tonnes of coal annually. In addition to coal, the province is rich in iron ore. Major deposits are found in Handan and Qian'an, both of which supply raw materials to nearby steel plants.\nHebei is also home to a portion of the , one of China's largest inland oilfields, which supports the province's petroleum and petrochemical industries.\nDespite its industrial strength, Hebei also retains a significant agricultural workforce, with about 40% of the labor force engaged in agriculture, forestry, and animal husbandry. A large portion of Hebei's agricultural output supplies the neighboring cities of Beijing and Tianjin. Principal crops include wheat, maize, millet, and sorghum, while cash crops such as cotton, peanuts, soybeans, and sesame are also cultivated.\nEconomic and technological development zones.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\nThe population in Hebei is mostly Han Chinese. There are 55 ethnic minorities in Hebei, representing 4.27% of the total population. The largest ethnic groups are Manchu (2.1 million people), Hui (600,000 people), and Mongol (180,000 people). Population totals do not include those in active service with the People's Liberation Army.\nIn 2019, the birth rate was 10.83 births per 1,000 people, while the death rate was 6.12 deaths per 1,000 people. The male population is 37,679,003 (50.50%), the female population is 36,931,232 (49.50%). The gender ratio of the total population was 102.02, decreasing by 0.82 from 2010.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe dominant religions in Hebei are Chinese folk religions, Taoist traditions, and Chinese Buddhism. According to surveys conducted in 2007 and 2009, 5.52% of the population believe in and are involved in ancestor veneration, while 3.05% identify as Christian, belonging mostly to the Catholic Church. As of 2010 Muslims constitute 0.82% of the population of Hebei.\nAlthough the surveys did not provide specific data for other religions, 90.61% of the population are either nonreligious or are involved in worship of nature deities, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, and folk religious sects. Zailiism is a folk religious sect that originated in Hebei. Local worship of deities organized into benevolent churches in reaction to Catholicism in the Qing dynasty.\nHebei has the largest Catholic population in China, with one million members and 1.5 million Catholics according to the Catholic Church. In 1900, apparition of the Virgin Mary was said have appeared in the town of Donglu in Baoding. As a result, Donglu is \"one of the strongholds of the unofficial Catholic Church in China\". Many Catholics in Hebei remain loyal to the Pope and reject the authority of the Catholic Patriotic Church. Four of Hebei's underground bishops have been imprisoned in recent years: Bishop Francis An Shuxin of Donglu since 1996; Bishop James Su Zhimin since October 1997; Bishop Han Dingxiang of Yongnian who died in prison in 2007, and Bishop Julius Jia Zhiguo of Zhengding since late 1999.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nPeople speak dialects of Mandarin across the Hebei, with most classified as part of the Ji Lu Mandarin subdivision of Chinese. Along the western border with Shanxi, dialects are distinct enough for linguists to consider them as part of Jin, another subdivision of Chinese. In general, the dialects of Hebei are similar to the Beijing dialect, which forms the basis for Standard Chinese and the official language of the nation. However, there are also some distinct differences, such as the pronunciation of some words, made by entering tone syllables (syllables ending on a plosive) in Middle Chinese.\nArts.\nTraditional forms of Chinese opera in Hebei include Pingju, Hebei Bangzi (Hebei Clapper Opera), and Cangzhou Kuaiban Dagu. Pingju is especially popular because it tends to use colloquial language which is easier for audiences to understand. Originating from northeastern Hebei, Pingju was influenced by other forms of Chinese opera such as Beijing opera. Traditionally Pingju has a \"xiaosheng\" (young male lead), a \"xiaodan\" (young female lead), and a \"xiaohualian\" (young comic character), though it has diversified to include other roles.\nQuyang County, in central Hebei, is noted for Ding ware, a type of Chinese ceramics which includes various vessels such as bowls, plates, vases, and cups, as well as figurines. Ding ware is usually creamy white, though it is also made in other colors.\nCuisine.\nHebei cuisine is typically based on wheat, mutton, and beans. The donkey burger, originating from the cities of Baoding and Hejian, Cangzhou, is a staple in provincial cuisine and has spread into the two municipalities. Other dishes include local variants of shaobing.\nEntertainment.\nBeidaihe, located near Shanhaiguan, is a popular beach resort.\nArchitectural and cultural sites.\nThe Ming Great Wall crosses the northern part of Hebei, and its eastern end is located on the coast at Shanhaiguan (Shanhai Pass), near Qinhuangdao. Informally known as the First Pass of The World, Shanhaiguan Pass was where Ming general Wu Sangui opened the gates to Manchu forces in 1644, beginning nearly 300 years of Manchu rule.\nThe Chengde Mountain Resort and its outlying temples are a World Heritage Site. Also known as the Rehe Palace, this was the summer resort of the Manchu Qing dynasty emperors. The resort was built between 1703 and 1792. It consists of a palace complex and a large park with lakes, pavilions, causeways, and bridges. There are also several Tibetan Buddhist and Han Chinese temples in the surrounding area.\nThere are Qing dynasty imperial tombs at Zunhua (Eastern Qing Tombs) and Yixian (West Qing Tombs). The Eastern Qing Tombs are the resting place of 161 Qing emperors, empresses, and other members of the Qing imperial family, while the West Qing Tombs have 76 burials. Both tomb complexes are part of a World Heritage Site.\nThe Zhaozhou, or Anji Bridge, was built by Li Chun during the Sui dynasty and is the oldest stone arch bridge in China. It is one of the most significant examples of pre-modern Chinese civil engineering. Baoding, the old provincial capital, contains the historic Zhili governor's residence and the former court.\nXibaipo, a village about from Shijiazhuang in Pingshan County, was the location of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and the headquarters of the People's Liberation Army during the decisive stages of the Chinese Civil War between May 26, 1948, and March 23, 1949. Today, the area houses a memorial site.\nSports.\nThe 2018 Women's Bandy World Championship was held in Hebei. Sports teams based in Hebei include National Basketball League (China), Hebei Springs Benma, and the Chinese Football Association team Hebei F.C., Hebei Elite F.C., and Cangzhou Mighty Lions F.C. Baoding is home to the Baoding balls, a kind of metal ball for exercise and meditation.\nEducation.\nUnder the national Ministry of Education:\nUnder other national agencies:\nUnder the provincial government:\nThere are also Tibetan Buddhist schools in the province.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nIntracity Rail.\nThe Shijiazhuang Metro is the only operational rapid transit system in Hebei. Xiong'an Rail Transit is a planned metro system in Xiong'an.\nIntercity Rail.\nAs of early 2013, railway schedule systems listed 160 passenger train stations within the province. Because Hebei surrounds Beijing and Tianjin, all the important railway lines from these cities pass through Hebei. The Beijing\u2013Guangzhou railway is one of the most important. It passes through many major cities, including Baoding, Shijiazhuang, Xingtai and Handan on its way south to Henan. Other important railways include the Beijing\u2013Kowloon railway, Beijing\u2013Shanghai railway, Beijing\u2013Harbin railway, Beijing\u2013Chengde railway, Beijing\u2013Tongliao railway, Beijing\u2013Baotou railway and Fengtai\u2013Shacheng railway. High-speed rail lines crossing the province include the Beijing\u2013Shanghai high-speed railway, Beijing\u2013Guangzhou high-speed railway, and Shijiazhuang\u2013Taiyuan high-speed railway.\nDuring the Eleventh Five-Year Plan, Beijing and Hebei collaborated on a new passenger railway. The RMB 82.6 billion network will add to the system. Current railway systems for Hebei are also being upgraded and will soon be able to travel at speeds of between per hour.\nHighways and primary routes.\nThe recent expressway boom in China included Hebei. There are expressways to every prefecture-level city in Hebei, totaling approximately . The total length of highways within Hebei is around .\nAir transit.\nShijiazhuang's Zhengding Airport is the province's center for air transportation, with domestic and international flights. Parts of Hebei are served by the Beijing Daxing International Airport in Beijing.\nOcean transit.\nThere are several ports along the Bohai Sea, including Huanghua, Jingtang, and Qinhuangdao. Qinhuangdao is the second busiest port in China and has a capacity of over 100 million tons.\nMedia.\nHebei is served by the province-wide Hebei Television, abbreviated HEBTV. Shijiazhuang Radio &amp; Television is a regional network that covers the provincial capital. Hebei is also served by three major newspapers: \"Hebei Daily\", \"Yanzhao Metropolis Daily\", and \"Yanzhao Evening News\". Hebei Daily Newspaper Group publishes all three newspapers.\nSister subdivisions.\nHebei is a sister district with the following country states, districts, and other subdivisions:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72667", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72667", "title": "Claudia Roth", "text": "German politician, Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media\nClaudia Benedikta Roth (; born 15 May 1955) is a German politician (Alliance 90/The Greens) and member of the Bundestag. \nIn addition to her work in parliament, Roth served as Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media in the government of Chancellor Olaf Scholz from 2021 to 2025. She was one of the two party chairs from 2004 to 2013 and previously served as one of the vice presidents of the \"Bundestag\".\nBiography.\nRoth was born in Ulm, Germany. She began her artistic work, which she always regarded as also being political, in the 1970s as a trained artistic director at a theatre in Memmingen. She then worked at the municipal theatre in Dortmund and the Hoffmanns-Comic-Teater, and subsequently began managing the political rock band \"Ton Steine Scherben\" until 1985, when the band disbanded due to the band's high debt burden.\nShe came into contact with the Green party on election campaign tours. In 1985, she became press spokesperson for the Green Party's parliamentary group in the Bundestag, despite being a newcomer to this line of work.\nMember of the European Parliament.\nIn West Germany's 1989 European elections, Roth was elected for the first time as a Member of the European Parliament for the Greens.\nRoth served as a member of the new Committee on Civic Liberties and Internal Affairs, the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Sub-Committee on Human Rights. In addition, she was a member of two committees of inquiry in the European Parliament, namely the Committee of Inquiry into Racism and Xenophobia and the Committee of Inquiry into Links between Organized Crime and Drugs, as well as of the EC-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee.\nFrom 1989 to 1990, Roth briefly served as deputy chairperson of the Green Group in the European Parliament.\nIn the 1994 European elections, Roth was again elected to the European Parliament as a lead candidate of Alliance 90/The Greens. She was chairperson of the Green Group in the European Parliament until 1998, first alongside co-chairman Alexander Langer (1994\u20131995) and later Magda Aelvoet (1995\u20131998). During this second term as an MEP, she was again a member of the European Parliament Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, the Sub-Committee on Human Rights and the EC-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee, of which she was elected deputy chairperson. She also remained involved with the Committee on Foreign Affairs as a substitute member.\nMember of the German Bundestag.\nClaudia Roth ended her work as an MEP when she became part of the Alliance 90/The Greens parliamentary group in the Bundestag after the 1998 German federal election. She became a member of the Committee on the Affairs of the European Union and a substitute member of the Committee on Internal Affairs of the German Bundestag. Furthermore, she was elected chairperson of the newly established Committee on Human Rights and Humanitarian Aid.\nOn 9 March 2001, Roth was elected Federal chairperson of Alliance 90/The Greens at the party conference in Stuttgart and resigned as a Member of the Bundestag at the end of March 2001 as a result. At the same time, she was spokesperson of the Alliance 90/The Greens on women's affairs.\nIn the 2002 national elections, Roth was elected to the Bundestag as Bavarian lead candidate for Alliance 90/The Greens. Since then, she has been a member of the Bundestag's Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Cultural and Media Affairs. She is also cultural affairs spokesperson for the Alliance 90/The Greens parliamentary group in the Bundestag and chairperson of the German-Turkish Parliamentary Friendship Group.\nBetween March 2003 and October 2004, in Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der's second cabinet, Roth served as the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid at the Federal Foreign Office.\nRoth became federal chairperson of Alliance 90/The Greens again in October 2004 and was re-elected as such several times, most recently in November 2010. In 2012, she failed to become the number-one woman in the campaign for the 2013 national elections. After this defeat she was unsure to run again for the position of leader of the party's board. Fellow party member Volker Beck started a support campaign in favour of her in social media networks and called it candystorm. The party members subsequently re-elected Roth with 88.5 percent backing.\nRoth served as deputy chairwoman of the German-Iranian Parliamentary Friendship Group between 2005 and 2009 and held the same office in the German-Turkish Friendship Group between 2005 and 2013.\nVice-President of the German Bundestag.\nRoth was elected as Vice-President of the German Bundestag on 22 October 2013. In addition, she is a member of the parliament's Council of Elders, which \u2013 among other duties \u2013 determines daily legislative agenda items and assigning committee chairpersons based on party representation. She also serves as a member of the Committee on Economic Cooperation and Development as well as of the Sub-Committee on Cultural Relations and Education Policy. In addition, she is a member of the Art Advisory Board of the German Bundestag.\nIn the unsuccessful negotiations to form a coalition government with the Christian Democrats \u2013 both the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) \u2013 and the Free Democratic Party (FDP) following the 2017 national elections, Roth was part of the 14-member delegation of the Green Party. In the negotiations to form a so-called traffic light coalition of the Social Democrats (SPD), the Green Party and the FDP following the 2021 federal elections, she led her party's delegation in the working group on cultural affairs and media; her co-chairs from the other parties are Carsten Brosda and Otto Fricke.\nPolitical positions.\nOn Turkey.\nSince her time at the European Parliament, Roth has regularly criticized the European Union's \"determination to hold Turkey at bay.\" In 1995, she expressed doubts about Prime Minister Tansu \u00c7iller's ability to bring about human rights reforms as a condition for a European Union\u2013Turkey Customs Union. In June 2013, Roth was at the surroundings of the Taksim Square when the police intervened to evacuate Gezi Park and was among those affected by the tear gas fired by security officers. Following the victory of Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan in the 2014 presidential election, she criticized the \"dramatic erosion of the democratic system in Turkey.\"\nIn May 2017, Roth canceled a visit of a parliamentary delegation to Turkey where participants had planned to talk to opposition lawmakers, governors and rights groups about that year's constitutional referendum, saying Ankara had refused to give them a security detail.\nOn right-wing extremism.\nOn Friday 17 March 2006, Roth reported herself to the German police for displaying a crossed-out swastika on multiple demonstrations against Neo-Nazis, and subsequently got the Bundestag to suspend her immunity from prosecution. She intended to show the absurdity of charging anti-fascists with using fascist symbols: \"We don't need prosecution of non-violent young people engaging against right-wing extremism.\"\nOn the death penalty.\nIn 2008, Roth publicly urged incoming U.S. president Barack Obama to \"be pushing for the banning of the death penalty, not for upholding it. The death penalty is the biggest blow against human rights and the right to live. He is not in a position to determine whether people live or die, not even in punishing them for the worst crimes!\" Speaking in her capacity as leader of the Green Party and underlining the profound divergence in opinion concerning capital punishment in the United States and Western Europe, Roth called the execution of Troy Davis in 2011 \"a cynical and inhumane spectacle that occasions mourning and horror.\" She has also spoken out against capital punishment on numerous other occasions, including the execution of the LaGrand brothers in 1999 which she attended.\nOn patriarchal beauty standards.\nIn 2015, Roth responded to critics of her appearance, stating that for her to have the wart on her nose removed would be \"surrender to the patriarchal standards of beauty pushed by the oppressive right-wing\".\nOn the use of military force.\nShortly after the U.S. launched military operations in Afghanistan in October 2001, Roth criticized the use of antipersonnel cluster bombs was \"not appropriate\". Her statement came a day after some 10,000 people, some of them carrying banners that said \"Against repression and war\" and \"The American way of life is too expensive for our world,\" turned out in Berlin in a peaceful protest against the bombings. When the members of the Green Party later defied their pacifist roots and voted overwhelmingly in favor of sending German soldiers to Afghanistan as part of NATO-led security mission ISAF, Roth maintained that \"[the Greens] are and remain an antiwar party. But I think that under certain circumstances it must be possible to engage militarily in order to stop violence.\"\nAs a consequence, Roth has in the past voted in favor of German participation in United Nations peacekeeping missions as well as in United Nations-mandated European Union peacekeeping missions on the African continent, such as in Somalia (2009, 2010), Darfur/Sudan (2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015), South Sudan (2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015), Mali (2014, 2015) and the Central African Republic (2014). In 2013 and 2014, she abstained from the vote on continuing German participation in Operation Atalanta in Somalia, and she voted has against the European Union Training Mission Somalia (2014, 2015 and 2016).\nArms exports.\nIn 2010, Roth publicly called for \"more stringent control over and sharper criteria governing arms exports.\" In 2014, she \u2013 alongside fellow Green Party parliamentarians Katja Keul and Hans-Christian Str\u00f6bele \u2013 lodged a complaint before the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany, arguing that it was unconstitutional for the government to keep the Bundestag in the dark about planned arms deals because it prevented the parliament from fulfilling its role of keeping the government in check. The court ruled that while the government did not have to disclose information about planned defense exports, it did have an obligation to provide the Bundestag with details, on request, once specific arms deals had been approved. In a 2015 interview with \"Welt am Sonntag\", Roth singled out exports to Saudi Arabia for criticism, calling the country \"the top terror exporter in the Middle East\" and raising concerns that the country's leaders may turn weapons sold by Germany on their own people.\nRelations with Tibet.\nRoth has met the Dalai Lama several times during her time in parliament and has been a supporter of the Tibet movement. In 2015, Roth addressed the official commemoration of the 56th Tibetan National Uprising day alongside Sikyong Lobsang Sangay in Dharamshala. Alongside Robert Badinter and Karel Schwarzenberg, she became one of the first signers of the 2015 Paris Declaration which calls for European governments to develop a coordinated approach in addressing China's policies in Tibet.\nCriticism.\nRoth has been criticized for her positive relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran. Along with fellow lawmakers G\u00fcnter Gloser, Monika Gr\u00fctters, Luc Jochimsen and Peter Gauweiler, she travelled to Iran in 2010 to meet with Ali Larijani, Manouchehr Mottaki and others; the trip was heavily criticized by international human rights organizations. In February 2013, she was reprimanded by German media outlets and Iranian dissidents for warmly greeting the Iranian ambassador to Germany, Alireza Sheikhattar, with a high five; Iranian Kurdish dissidents hold Sheikhattar responsible for the murder of Kurds during his tenure as governor of Iran's Kurdistan and West Azerbaijan provinces from 1980 to 1985.\nIn 2015, Roth again led a German parliamentary delegation for a five-day visit to Tehran, including meetings with Iranian Parliament Speaker Ali Larijani, Deputy Speaker Mohammad-Hassan Aboutorabi Fard, Deputy Foreign Minister Majid Takht-Ravanchi, presidential candidate Mohammad Reza Aref as well as two of President Hassan Rouhani's deputies namely Shahindokht Molaverdi, the vice president for women's affairs, and Masoumeh Ebtekar, the vice president and chairwoman of the Department of Environment; she was, however, denied a meeting with human-rights activist Narges Mohammadi.\nIn late February 2024, as the German Minister of Culture, Roth faced criticism from German politicians for permitting what were perceived as \"anti-Semitic\" remarks by two filmmakers\u2014 one of Jewish-Israeli and the other of Muslim Palestinian heritage\u2014 during the Berlinale film festival. The filmmakers criticized Israel's actions against the Palestinian populations of Gaza and the West Bank, in their various forms, prominently on the festival stage. After widespread criticism, Roth's ministry released a press statement claiming that she had only applauded for the Israeli filmmaker and not for the Palestinian one.\nPersonal life.\nRoth lives in Berlin's Charlottenburg district.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72668", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72668", "title": "Ectosymbiosis", "text": "Symbiosis in which the symbiont lives on the body surface of the host\nEctosymbiosis is a form of symbiotic behavior in which an organism lives on the body surface of another organism (the host), including internal surfaces such as the lining of the digestive tube and the ducts of glands. The ectosymbiotic species, or ectosymbiont, is generally an immobile (or sessile) organism existing off of biotic substrate through mutualism, commensalism, or parasitism. Ectosymbiosis is found throughout a diverse array of environments and in many different species.\nIn some species the symbiotic environment provided by both the parasite and host are mutually beneficial. In recent research it has been found that these micro-flora will evolve and diversify rapidly in response to a change in the external environment, in order to stabilize and maintain a beneficial ectosymbiotic environment.\nEvolutionary history.\nEctosymbiosis has evolved independently many times to fill a wide variety of ecological niches, both temperate and extreme. Such temperate regions include the seas off the coast of Singapore while the extreme regions reach to the depths of Antarctica and hydrothermal vents. It likely evolved as a niche specialization, which allowed for greater diversity in ectosymbiotic behavior among species. Additionally, in the case of mutualism, the evolution improved the fitness of both species involved, propagating the success of ectosymbiosis. Ectosymbiosis has independently evolved through convergent evolution in all domains of life.\nEctosymbiosis allows niches to form that would otherwise be unable to exist without the support of their host. Inherently, this added niche opens up a new branch off of the evolutionary tree. The evolutionary success of ectosymbiosis is based on the benefits experienced by the ectosymbiont and the host. Due to the dependence of the parasite on the host and the associated benefits and cost to both the parasite and host, the two will continue to coevolve as explained by the Red Queen hypothesis. The Red Queen hypothesis states that a host will continually evolve defenses against a parasitic attack, and the parasite species will also adapt to these changes in the host defense, the result being competitive coevolution between the two species.\nEctosymbiosis adds to the biodiversity of the environment, whether on land, in freshwater, in deserts, or in deep sea vents. Specifically, ectosymbiosis provides a new niche or environment from which many new species can differentiate and flourish.\nThis niche specialization between species also leads to stabilization of symbiotic relationships between sessile and motile organisms. The ectosymbiont can increase the fitness of their host by assisting with metabolism, nitrogen fixation, or cleaning the host organism. The diversity of advantages has yet to be fully explored, but by virtue of persisting throughout all of recent evolution, they likely confer an adaptive advantage to many of the species that exist solely due to ectosymbiosis.\nTypes of host and parasite dynamic.\nAlthough ectosymbiosis is typically an evolutionary stable behavior, the different host and parasite dynamics independently vary in their stability.\nCommensalism.\nCommensalism is a form of symbiosis where one species is benefiting from the interactions between species and the other is neither helped nor harmed from the interaction. Ectosymbiotic commensalistic behavior is found frequently in organisms that attach themselves to larger species in order to move long distances or scavenge food easily; this is documented in remoras which attach to sharks to scavenge and travel. An additional ectosymbiotic example of commensalism is the relationship between small sessile organisms and echinoids in the Southern ocean, where the echinoids provide substrate for the small organisms to grow and the echinoids remain unaffected.\nMutualism.\nMutualism is a form of ectosymbiosis where both the host and parasitic species benefit from the interaction. There are many examples of mutualistic ectosymbiosis that occur in nature. One such relationship is between \"Branchiobdellida\" and crayfish in which the \"Branchiobdellida\" acts as a bacterial gut cleaner for the crayfish species. Another example is the iron-oxide associated chemoautotrophic bacteria found crusted to the gills of \"Rimicaris exoculata\" shrimp that provide the shrimp with vital organic material for their survival while simultaneously supporting the bacteria with different organic material that the bacterial cannot produce itself. Groups of organisms \u2013 greater than a single pair of a host and parasite \u2013 can also form mutualistic ectosymbiotic interactions. Bark beetles can work in a dynamic mutualistic fashion with fungi and mites attached to their exoskeletons, both of which feed off of trees to provide vital energy to the beetles while the beetles provide necessary organic material to the fungi and mites to survive. In this case, the relationship between the fungi and mites is functional because while both do the same job, they are optimally functional at different temperatures.\nMutualistic interactions can be evolutionarily unstable because of the constant battle to maximize one's self-benefits. This is due to the limited benefits offered to both the parasite and the host, with the possible outcome for at least one of the species to die out if the other species begins to take advantage of the other. In the case that the mutualistic behavior persists for enough generations, the dynamic can evolve into parasitism, which is a more stable dynamic due to the increased benefit to the parasite that propagates the behavior. In this case the parasite takes advantage of the previously mutualistic host and parasite dynamic, gaining greater benefits for itself.\nParasitism.\nParasitism is a form of symbiosis in which one species benefits from the interactions between species while the other organism is actively harmed. This is the most common form of ectosymbiotic interactions. One of the many examples of ectosymbiotic parasites includes head lice in humans, which feed on blood by attaching to a human's scalp. Additionally, mature \"Branchiobdellida\" bacteria act as a nutrient thief in the gut of crayfish species to exist. In these cases, the head lice and the \"Branchiobdellida\" are both parasites interacting with host species.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72671", "revid": "19569748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72671", "title": "Angela Merkel", "text": "Chancellor of Germany from 2005 to 2021\nAngela Dorothea Merkel (; n\u00e9e\u00a0Kasner; born 17 July 1954) is a German retired politician who served as Chancellor of Germany from 2005 to 2021. She is the only woman to have held the office and the only from former East Germany. She was Leader of the Opposition from 2002 to 2005 and Leader of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) from 2000 to 2018.\nMerkel was born in Hamburg in West Germany. Her family moved to East Germany when she was an infant. A member of the communist East German Free German Youth (FDJ), Merkel obtained a doctorate in quantum chemistry in 1986 and worked as a research scientist until 1989. She then entered politics in the wake of the Revolutions of 1989, briefly serving as deputy spokeswoman for the first democratically elected government of East Germany, led by Lothar de Maizi\u00e8re. Following German reunification in 1990, Merkel was elected to the Bundestag for the state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. As the prot\u00e9g\u00e9e of Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Merkel was appointed as Minister for Women and Youth in 1991, later becoming Minister for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety in 1994. After the CDU lost the 1998 federal election, Merkel was elected general secretary of the party. She then became the party's first female leader, and the first female leader of the Opposition, two years later.\nFollowing the 2005 federal election, Merkel was elected chancellor, leading a grand coalition consisting of the CDU, the Christian Social Union (CSU), and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). She was the first woman to be elected chancellor, and the first chancellor of reunified Germany to have been raised in the former East Germany. In the 2009 federal election, the CDU obtained the largest share of the vote, and Merkel subsequently formed a coalition government with the Free Democratic Party (FDP), an alliance more favourable to the CDU than the grand coalition. In the 2013 federal election, the CDU won a landslide victory and formed a second grand coalition with the SPD, after the FDP lost all of its representation in the Bundestag. In the 2017 federal election, Merkel led the CDU to become the largest party for the fourth time, resulting in the formation of a third grand coalition with the SPD.\nIn foreign policy, Merkel emphasised international cooperation, both in the context of the EU and NATO, and initiating the Russian reset and strengthening of Eurasian and transatlantic economic relations. In the first half of 2007, Merkel served as president of the European Council and played a central role in the negotiation of the Treaty of Lisbon and the Berlin Declaration. Merkel's governments managed the 2008 financial crisis and the Euro area crisis. She negotiated the 2008 European Union stimulus plan, which focused on infrastructure spending and public investment to counteract the Great Recession. Also in 2008, she actively blocked the access of Ukraine and Georgia in the enlargement of NATO during the 2008 Bucharest summit.\nIn domestic policy, Merkel's \"Energiewende\" programme supported the development of renewable energy sources and eventually phased out the use of nuclear power in Germany. Despite the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea, which prompted sanctions around the world, she initiated the construction of the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipelines to Russia and protected their construction from United States sanctions imposed in 2019. Reforms to the , health care reform, the 2010s European migrant crisis, and the COVID-19 pandemic were major issues during her chancellorship. Merkel stepped down as leader of the CDU in 2018 and did not seek a fifth term as chancellor in the 2021 federal election. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, her legacy came under increased scrutiny both in Germany and abroad for her relatively good relations with Russia and increasing the German economy's dependence on Russia, as well as the downsizing of the \"Bundeswehr\" that occurred during her tenure.\nBackground and early life.\nMerkel was born Angela Dorothea Kasner in 1954, in the Eimsb\u00fcttel quarter of Hamburg, the daughter of Horst Kasner (1926\u20132011; \"n\u00e9\" ), a Lutheran pastor and a native of Berlin, and his wife Herlind (1928\u20132019; n\u00e9e Jentzsch), born in Danzig (now Gda\u0144sk, Poland), a teacher of English and Latin. She has two younger siblings, Marcus Kasner, a physicist, and Irene Kasner, an occupational therapist. In her childhood and youth, Merkel was known among her peers by the nickname \"Kasi\", derived from her last name Kasner.\nMerkel is of German and Polish descent. Her paternal grandfather, Ludwik Kasner, was a German policeman of Polish ethnicity. After being captured in France during World War I, he joined the Blue Army and likely fought against Germany. He married Merkel's grandmother Margarethe, a German from Berlin, and relocated to her hometown where he again worked in the police. In 1930, they Germanised the Polish name Ka\u017amierczak to Kasner. Merkel's maternal grandparents were the Danzig politician Willi Jentzsch and Gertrud Alma (n\u00e9e Drange), a daughter of the city clerk of Elbing (now Elbl\u0105g, Poland) Emil Drange. Since the mid-1990s, Merkel has publicly mentioned her Polish heritage on several occasions and described herself as a quarter Polish, but her Polish roots became better known as a result of a 2013 biography.\nReligion played a key role in the Kasner family's migration from West Germany to East Germany. Merkel's paternal grandfather was originally Catholic but the entire family converted to Lutheranism during the childhood of her father, who later studied Lutheran theology in Heidelberg and Hamburg. In 1954, when Angela was just three months old, her father received a pastorate at the church in Quitzow (a district of Perleberg in Brandenburg), which was then in East Germany. The family moved to Templin and Merkel grew up in the countryside north of East Berlin.\nIn 1968, Merkel joined the Free German Youth (FDJ), the official communist youth movement sponsored by the ruling Marxist\u2013Leninist Socialist Unity Party of Germany. Membership was nominally voluntary, but those who did not join found it difficult to gain admission to higher education. She did not participate in the secular coming-of-age ceremony Jugendweihe, however, which was common in East Germany. Instead, she was confirmed. During this time, she participated in several compulsory courses on Marxism\u2013Leninism, with her grades only being regarded as \"sufficient\". Merkel later said that \"Life in the GDR was sometimes almost comfortable in a certain way, because there were some things one simply couldn't influence.\" Merkel learned to speak Russian fluently at school, and she was awarded prizes for her proficiency in Russian and mathematics, being at the top of her class in these subjects. She completed her school education with the best possible average Abitur grade of 1.0.\nAcademic career.\nMerkel continued her education at Karl Marx University, Leipzig, where she studied physics from 1973 to 1978. While a student, she participated in the reconstruction of the ruin of the Moritzbastei, a project students initiated to create their own club and recreation facility on campus. Such an initiative was unprecedented in the GDR of that period, and initially resisted by the university. With the backing of the local leadership of the SED party, the project was allowed to proceed.\nNear the end of her studies, Merkel sought an assistant professorship at an engineering school. As a condition for getting the job, Merkel was told she would need to agree to report on her colleagues to officers of the Stasi. Merkel declined, using the excuse that she could not keep secrets well enough to be an effective spy.\nMerkel worked and studied at the Central Institute for Physical Chemistry of the Academy of Sciences in Berlin-Adlershof from 1978 to 1990. At first, she and her husband squatted in Mitte. At the Academy of Sciences, she became a member of its FDJ secretariat. According to her former colleagues, she openly propagated Marxism as the secretary for \"Agitation and Propaganda\". However, Merkel has denied this claim and stated that she was secretary for culture, which involved activities like obtaining theatre tickets and organising talks by visiting Soviet authors. She stated: \"I can only rely on my memory, if something turns out to be different, I can live with that.\"\nAfter being awarded a doctorate (\"Dr. rer. nat.\") for her thesis on quantum chemistry in 1986, she worked as a researcher and published several academic papers. In 1986, she was allowed to travel to West Germany to attend a congress. She also participated in a multi-week Russian language course in Donetsk, in the then-Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.\nEarly political career.\n1989\u20131990: German reunification.\nThe fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989 served as the catalyst for Merkel's political career. Although she did not participate in the crowd celebrations the night the wall came down, one month later Merkel became involved in the growing democracy movement, joining the new party Democratic Awakening (, abbreviated to DA). Party Leader Wolfgang Schnur appointed her as press spokeswoman of the party in February 1990. However, Schnur was revealed to have served as an \"informal co-worker\" for the Stasi just a few weeks ahead of the first (and only) multi-party election in 1990 and was later expelled from the party. As a result, the DA lost most of its electoral support, only managing to obtain four seats in the Volkskammer. However, because the DA was a member party of the Alliance for Germany, which won the election in a landslide, the DA was included in the government coalition. Merkel was appointed deputy spokesperson of this last pre-unification government under Lothar de Maizi\u00e8re.\nDe Maizi\u00e8re was impressed with the way Merkel handled journalists investigating Schnur's role in the Stasi. In April 1990, the DA merged with the East German Christian Democratic Union, which in turn merged with its western counterpart after reunification.\n1990\u20131994: Minister for Women and Youth.\nElections.\nIn the German federal election of 1990, the first to be held following reunification, Merkel successfully stood for election to the Bundestag in the parliamentary constituency of Stralsund \u2013 Nordvorpommern \u2013 R\u00fcgen in North Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. She received the crucial backing of influential CDU minister and state party chairman G\u00fcnther Krause. She was re-elected from this constituency (renamed, with slightly adjusted borders, Vorpommern-R\u00fcgen \u2013 Vorpommern-Greifswald I in 2003) in every election until the CDU lost its direct mandate from the constituency in the 2021 federal election. Almost immediately following her entry into parliament, Merkel was appointed by Chancellor Helmut Kohl to serve as Minister for Women and Youth in the federal cabinet.\nIn November 1991, Merkel, with the support of the federal CDU, ran for the state leadership of the CDU in the state of Brandenburg, which neighbours Berlin. She lost to Ulf Fink. In June 1993, Merkel was elected leader of the CDU in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, succeeding her former mentor G\u00fcnther Krause.\nPolicy.\nAlthough Merkel had little interest in the political position as such, it has been described as instrumental in building her early political image. During her tenure, the government codified the right to preschool education, although the law only went into effect in 1996. In June 1992, \u00a7 218 of the StGB, which governed abortion rights, was rewritten to allow abortions until the 12th week of pregnancy. Though she was personally opposed to abortion at the time, Merkel abstained during the vote on the bill. The law was later overturned by the Federal Constitutional Court on the basis that there must be a general prohibition of abortion.\n1994\u20131998: Minister for the Environment.\nIn 1994, she was promoted to the position of Minister for the Environment and Nuclear Safety, which gave her greater political visibility and a platform on which to build her personal political career. As one of Kohl's prot\u00e9g\u00e9es and his youngest Cabinet Minister, she was frequently referred to by Kohl as \"my girl\" (). During this period, she was closely mentored by Kohl.\nAs Minister of the Environment, Merkel was instrumental in setting up the United Nations 1995 Berlin Climate Change Conference. She is often credited as having brought about its most notable result, the first international commitment to a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Around this time, she also first hired Beate Baumann, who would remain a close advisor to Merkel. Merkel's performance as Minister of the Environment was criticised as \"pitiful\" by Gerhard Schr\u00f6der.\n1998\u20132000: General Secretary of the CDU.\nAfter the Kohl Government was defeated at the 1998 election, Merkel was appointed Secretary-General of the CDU. The 1998 election had widespread impacts; it was the CDU's worst performance in a federal election since 1949, and it resulted in Germany's first post-war left-wing government, led by the SPD.\nIn the wake of this defeat on the federal level, Merkel oversaw a string of CDU election victories in six out of seven state elections in 1999, breaking the long-standing SPD-Green hold on the Bundesrat. Following a party funding scandal that compromised many leading figures of the CDU\u00a0\u2013 including Kohl himself and his successor as CDU Leader, Wolfgang Sch\u00e4uble\u00a0\u2013 Merkel criticised her former mentor publicly and advocated a fresh start for the party without him.\nEarly 2000s.\nChairperson of the CDU.\nOn 10 April 2000, Merkel was elected to replace Sch\u00e4uble as Chairperson of the CDU, becoming the first female leader of a German party. Her election surprised many observers, as her personality offered a contrast to the party she had been elected to lead; Merkel is a centrist Protestant originating from predominantly Protestant northern Germany, while the CDU is a male-dominated, socially conservative party with strongholds in western and southern Germany, and its Bavarian sister party, the CSU, has deep Catholic roots.\nFollowing Merkel's election as CDU Leader, the CDU did not obtain electoral victories in subsequent state elections. In February 2001, her rival Friedrich Merz voiced his intention to become Gerhard Schr\u00f6der's main challenger for Chancellorship in the 2002 election. Merkel's ambition to become Chancellor was well-known, but she lacked the support of the most influential members within her own party. Rival candidate and leader of the CSU Edmund Stoiber was much more popular within the party at the time. In a private negotiation that came to be known as the Wolfratshausen Breakfast, Merkel agreed to cede the opportunity to challenge Schr\u00f6der to Stoiber; in exchange, she was to become leader of the CDU/CSU faction in the Bundestag following the election. Although pre-election polling had indicated that voters strongly favoured Stoiber, he went on to lose the election by a thin margin. The election campaign was dominated by the Iraq War. While Chancellor Schr\u00f6der had made clear he would not join the war in Iraq, Merkel was in support of the war at the time, although she later claimed that she had opposed it.\n2002\u20132005: Leader of the Opposition.\nAfter Stoiber's defeat in 2002, in addition to her role as CDU Leader, Merkel became Leader of the Opposition in the Bundestag, as had been agreed upon between her and Stoiber. Friedrich Merz, who had held the post prior to the 2002 election, was eased out to make way for Merkel.\nMerkel supported a substantial reform agenda for Germany's economic and social system and was considered more pro-market than her own party (the CDU). She advocated German labour law changes, specifically removing barriers to laying off employees and increasing the allowed number of work hours in a week. She argued that existing laws made the country less competitive, because companies could not easily control labour costs when business was slow.\nMerkel argued that Germany should phase out nuclear power less quickly than the Schr\u00f6der administration had planned.\nMerkel advocated a strong transatlantic partnership and German-American friendship. In the spring of 2003, defying strong public opposition, Merkel came out in favour of the 2003 invasion of Iraq, describing it as \"unavoidable\". She also criticised the government's support for the accession of Turkey to the European Union, instead arguing in favour of a \"privileged partnership\".\n2005\u20132021: Chancellor of Germany.\n2005\u20132009: First CDU\u2013SPD grand coalition.\nElection.\nOn 30 May 2005, Merkel won the CDU/CSU nomination to challenge Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der of the SPD in the 2005 federal elections. Her party began the campaign with a 21\u2013point lead over the SPD in national opinion polls, although her personal popularity lagged behind that of the incumbent. However, the CDU/CSU campaign suffered when Merkel, having made economic competence central to the CDU's platform, confused gross and net income twice during a televised debate. She regained some momentum after she announced that she would appoint Paul Kirchhof, a former judge at the German Constitutional Court and leading fiscal policy expert, as Minister of Finance.\nMerkel and the CDU lost ground after Kirchhof proposed the introduction of a flat tax in Germany, again undermining the party's broad appeal on economic affairs. This was compounded by Merkel's proposal to increase VAT to reduce Germany's deficit and fill the gap in revenue from a flat tax. The SPD were able to increase their support simply by pledging not to introduce flat taxes or increase VAT. Although Merkel's standing recovered after she distanced herself from Kirchhof's proposals, she remained considerably less popular than Schr\u00f6der, who had been perceived as the more generally competent and trustworthy candidate. The CDU's lead was down to 9 percentage points on the eve of the election, with Merkel having a significant lead in popularity based on opinion polls. On 18 September 2005, Merkel's CDU/CSU and Schr\u00f6der's SPD went head-to-head in the national elections, with the CDU/CSU winning 35.2% (CDU 27.8% / CSU 7.5%) of the second votes to the SPD's 34.2%. The result was so close that both Schr\u00f6der and Merkel initially claimed victory. Neither the SPD\u2013Green coalition nor the CDU/CSU and its preferred coalition partners, the Free Democratic Party, held enough seats to form a majority in the Bundestag. A grand coalition between the CDU/CSU and SPD would face the challenge of both parties demanding the chancellorship. However, after three weeks of negotiations, the two parties reached a deal for a grand coalition whereby Merkel would become Chancellor and the SPD would hold 8 of the 16 seats in the cabinet. The deal was approved by both parties at party conferences on 14 November 2005.\nMerkel was elected Chancellor by the majority of delegates (397 to 217) in the newly assembled Bundestag on 22 November 2005, but 51 members of the governing coalition voted against her. Reports at the time indicated that the grand coalition would pursue a mix of policies, some of which differed from Merkel's political platform as leader of the opposition and candidate for Chancellor. The coalition's intent was to cut public spending whilst increasing VAT (from 16 to 19%), social insurance contributions and the top rate of income tax.\nWhen announcing the coalition agreement, Merkel stated that the main aim of her government would be to reduce unemployment, and that it was this issue on which her government would be judged.\nHealthcare reform.\nReform of the German healthcare system was a salient issue during the 2005 election; the previous system had been criticised as inefficient and overly bureaucratic. After a significant period of negotiations, a deal was passed in 2006. While this agreement was described as having \"saved the coalition government\", it was also widely criticised as ineffectual. The deal also increased the tax burden on employers and their publicly insured employees. The 2006 round of reforms introduced the \"health insurance duty\", which establishes that individuals must be insured either through the public insurance system or through private insurance firms and accordingly cannot be uninsured. The reforms also targeted preventive healthcare as a priority, particularly with regards to eldercare.\nEurozone crisis.\nOn 4 October 2008, following the Irish Government's decision to guarantee all deposits in private savings accounts, a move she had strongly criticised, Merkel said there were no plans for the German Government to do the same. The following day, Merkel stated that the government would guarantee private savings account deposits, after all. However, two days later, on 6 October 2008, it emerged that the pledge was simply a political move that would not be backed by legislation. Most other European governments eventually either raised the limits or promised to guarantee savings in full.\nThe German government stepped in to assist the mortgage company Hypo Real Estate with a bailout. The deal was agreed upon on 6 October, with German banks contributing \u20ac30 billion and the Bundesbank \u20ac20 billion to an emergency credit line.\nAt the time of the Greek government-debt crisis, Germany was the largest creditor of the Greek government, giving it significant negotiating power. Merkel is often credited as having \"saved the Euro\", primarily due to her coordinating role in the development of debt relief policy. The austerity measures imposed on debtors such as Greece, which were a significant part of Merkel's position in the negotiations, have been criticised as overly harsh by some observers. Critics also highlighted Germany's own debt management issues. A Bloomberg opinion piece noted that \"irresponsible borrowers can't exist without irresponsible lenders\"; accordingly, \"Germany's banks were Greece's enablers.\"\nIn the course of the 2008 financial crisis, the Merkel cabinet increased the budget of the Kurzarbeit programme significantly and extended the permitted duration of such contracts from 6 months to 18 months. Although similar provisions had existed previously, the Merkel cabinet's expansion of the programme was widely praised and is credited with having saved 500,000 jobs during the 2008 financial crisis.\n2009\u20132013: CDU\u2013FDP coalition.\nMerkel's CDU was re-elected in 2009 with an increased number of seats and could form a governing coalition with the FDP. After brief negotiations, the second Merkel cabinet was sworn in on 28 October 2009. In early 2011, Merkel's approval ratings plummeted, resulting in heavy losses in state elections for her party. An August 2011 poll found her coalition had only 36% support compared to a rival potential coalition's 51%. Notwithstanding the effects of the 2008 financial crisis, unemployment sank below 3 million unemployed people in 2011.\nAbolition of conscription.\nFollowing increased debate on the subject in the summer of 2010, the German government announced plans to abolish conscription in Germany, making the a volunteer military, in November 2010. The decision was finalised in December that year, and conscription was suspended on 1 July 2011. Although somewhat popular at the time, the decision has later come under scrutiny, particularly following to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. It has also been criticised in conjunction with Germany's financial commitments to NATO. In 2023, 61% of Germans said that they were in favour of reestablishing conscription.\nHealthcare reform.\nResponding to a budget deficit of billion in the public healthcare system in 2009, the Merkel government passed widely unpopular healthcare reforms in 2010. The changes reduced healthcare spending in certain areas and increased employer and employee contributions to 15.5% of gross wages. The reforms also established that future contribution increases would only affect the contributions by employers, which was criticised by opposition parties and trade unions.\n2013\u20132017: Second CDU\u2013SPD grand coalition.\nIn the election of September 2013, Merkel won one of the most decisive victories in German history, achieving the best result for the CDU/CSU since reunification and coming within five seats of the first absolute majority in the Bundestag since 1957. However, their preferred coalition partner, the FDP, failed to enter parliament for the first time since 1949, being below the minimum of 5% of second votes required to enter parliament.\nThe CDU/CSU turned to the SPD to form the third grand coalition in postwar German history and the second under Merkel's leadership. The third Cabinet of Angela Merkel was sworn in on 17 December 2013.\nMerkel scored well in opinion polls on her handling of the recent euro crisis (69% rated her performance as good rather than poor), and her approval rating reached an all-time high of 77% in February 2012 and again in July 2014.\n2015 European migrant crisis.\nThroughout the course of the European migrant crisis, Merkel encouraged cooperation between EU member states, urging that Europe needs to act \"as a whole\".\nIn late August 2015, at the height of the crisis, Merkel's government suspended the Dublin Regulation, which stipulated that asylum seekers must seek asylum in the first EU country they arrive in. Merkel announced that Germany would also process asylum applications from Syrian refugees if they had come to Germany through other EU countries. That year, nearly 1.1 million asylum seekers entered Germany. Merkel coined the phrase (literally 'We can do this') around this time.\nJunior coalition partner and Vice Chancellor Sigmar Gabriel said that Germany could take in 500,000 refugees annually for the next several years. German opposition to the government's admission of the new wave of migrants was strong and coupled with a rise in anti-immigration protests. Merkel insisted that Germany had the economic strength to cope with the influx of migrants and reiterated that there is no legal maximum limit on the number of migrants Germany can take. In September 2015, enthusiastic crowds across the country welcomed arriving refugees and migrants.\nHorst Seehofer, leader of the Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU)\u2014the sister party of Merkel's Christian Democratic Union\u2014and then-Bavarian Minister President, attacked Merkel's policies. Seehofer criticised Merkel's decision to allow in migrants, saying that \"[they were] in a state of mind without rules, without system and without order because of a German decision.\" Seehofer argued that as many as 30% of asylum seekers arriving in Germany claiming to be from Syria are in fact from other countries. He argued for a punitive reduction in EU funding for member countries that rejected mandatory refugee quotas. Meanwhile, Yasmin Fahimi, secretary-general of the Social Democratic Party (SPD), the junior partner of the ruling coalition, praised Merkel's policy allowing migrants in Hungary to enter Germany as \"a strong signal of humanity to show that Europe's values are valid also in difficult times\". Merkel's approval rating dropped to 54% in October 2015, the lowest it had been since 2011.\nIn November 2015, there were talks inside the governing coalition to stop family unification for migrants for two years and to establish \"Transit Zones\" on the border. Additionally, there were plans to provide housing to migrants with a low likelihood of getting approved for asylum until the processing of their application. This led to increased tensions between the CSU, who were generally in favour of these measures and threatened to leave the coalition without them, and the SPD, who opposed them; Merkel agreed to the measures. The November 2015 Paris attacks prompted a reevaluation of the German government's stance on EU migration policy. While she did not directly limit the number of immigrants, Merkel tightened asylum policy in Germany, for example through more thorough vetting of migrants with respect to internal safety and security.\nIn August 2016, following the W\u00fcrzburg train attack in Germany and various other Islamist terror attacks in Europe, Merkel's approval rating dropped to 47%. Half of Germans did not want her to serve a fourth term in office, with only 42% in favour of another term in office. In a poll from October that year, her approval rating was found to have risen again; 54% of Germans were found to be satisfied with the work of Merkel as Chancellor. According to another poll taken in November 2016, 59% were to found to be in favour of a renewed Chancellorship candidature in 2017. According to a poll carried out shortly after the 2016 Berlin truck attack, 56% of Germans named Merkel as a political leader they trusted to solve their country's problems.\nIn October 2016, Merkel travelled to Mali and Niger. The diplomatic visit took place to discuss how their governments could improve conditions which caused people to flee those countries and how illegal migration through and from these countries could be reduced.\nThe migrant crisis spurred right-wing electoral preferences across Germany with the Alternative for Germany (AfD) gaining 12% of the vote in the 2017 German federal election. These developments prompted debates over the reasons for increased right-wing populism in Germany. Some researchers have argued that increased right-wing preferences are a result of the European migrant crisis, particularly the increasingly common perception that refugees constitute an ethnic and cultural threat to Germany.\nSome observers have described Merkel's policymaking with respect to the migrant crisis as a success. In 2022, the United Nations' High Commissioner for Refugees granted Merkel the Nansen Award for her \"courage and compassion\" during the crisis. However, Merkel has also faced significant criticism, particularly with regards to her policymaking early in the crisis, which some critics describe as hypocritically unilateral.\n2018\u20132021: Third CDU\u2013SPD grand coalition.\nElection.\nIn the 2017 federal election, Merkel led her party to victory for the fourth time. However, both the CDU/CSU and the SPD received a significantly lower proportion of the vote than they did in 2013, and the CDU/CSU subsequently attempted to form a coalition with the FDP and Greens. The SPD announced that they would go into the Opposition, both due to their loss of popular support and because the idea of another grand coalition was widely unpopular at the time.\nThe FDP eventually withdrew from negotiations with the CDU/CSU, leading to a stalemate. The German President Frank-Walter Steinmeier subsequently appealed successfully to the SPD to change their hard stance against coalition with the CDU/CSU, and the SPD agreed to a third grand coalition with the CDU/CSU. The negotiations leading up to this agreement were the longest in German post-war history, lasting almost six months.\nA YouGov survey published in late December 2017 found that just 36% of all respondents wanted Merkel to stay at the helm until 2021, while half of those surveyed voters called for a change at the top before the end of the legislature.\nThe Fourth Merkel cabinet was sworn in on 14 March 2018.\n2018 government crisis.\nAs part of the newly formed government, the CSU's Horst Seehofer took over the role of Interior Minister. Seehofer announced that he had a \"master plan for faster asylum procedures, and more consistent deportations.\" Under Seehofer's plan, Germany would immediately reject prospective immigrants who had already been deported or were subject to an entry ban. Additionally, the police would be instructed to turn away all applicants who had previously registered elsewhere in the EU, no matter if these countries agreed to take them back. Merkel feared that unilaterally sending migrants back to neighbouring countries without seeking a multilateral European agreement could endanger the stability of the European Union.\nIn June 2018, Seehofer issued an ultimatum to Merkel; as Interior Minister, he could unilaterally implement the policy without her support. Although he eventually agreed to cooperate with Merkel while she negotiated with other EU member countries, he went on to reject the EU agreement that she obtained. On 1 July 2018, during a meeting with party leadership, Seehofer declared his intention to resign from his position in protest. During the night of 2 July 2018, Seehofer and Merkel announced they had settled their differences and agreed to instead accept a compromise of tighter border control. As a result of the agreement, Seehofer agreed to not resign, and to negotiate bilateral agreements with the specific countries himself. Seehofer received some criticism for his stance in the crisis.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nIn the initial phases of the pandemic, Germany established a crisis team to manage Germany's containment policy and pandemic response. In late February 2020, referring to this crisis team, Merkel recommended an approach characterised by moderation and an avoidance of extreme or universal measures ().\nOn 18 March 2020, Merkel gave a widely publicised speech on the COVID-19 pandemic, comparing its challenges to the Second World War:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Please also take this seriously. Since German reunification, no, since the Second World War, there has not been a challenge for our country in which action in a spirit of solidarity on our part was so important.\u2014\u200a\nThe speech was well-received both nationally and internationally, receiving widespread attention and an award for \"speech of the year\".\nOn 6 April 2020, Merkel stated: \"In my view ... the European Union is facing the biggest test since its foundation and member states must show greater solidarity so that the bloc can emerge stronger from the economic crisis unleashed by the pandemic\". Merkel has won international plaudits for her handling of the pandemic in Germany.\nLater that month, Merkel was praised for her accessible explanation of the basic reproduction number, which had been an important metric in the German government's pandemic response. Merkel opposed mandatory vaccinations, instead stressing scientific literacy and education.\nDuring the German presidency of the European Council, Merkel spearheaded negotiations for the Next Generation EU reconstruction package.\nSuccession.\nOn 29 October 2018, Merkel announced that she would not seek reelection as leader of CDU at their party conference in December 2018, but intended to remain as chancellor until the 2021 German federal election was held. She stated that she did not plan to seek any political office after this. The resignations followed October setbacks for the CSU in the Bavarian state election and for the CDU in the Hessian state election. In August 2019, Merkel hinted that she might return to academia at the end of her term in 2021.\nShe decided not to suggest any person as her successor as leader of the CDU. However, political observers had long considered Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer as Merkel's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 groomed for succession. This view was confirmed when Kramp-Karrenbauer \u2013 widely seen as the chancellor's favourite for the post \u2013 was voted to succeed Merkel as leader of the CDU in December 2018. Kramp-Karrenbauer's elevation to Defence Minister after Ursula von der Leyen's departure to become president of the European Commission also boosted her standing as Merkel's most likely candidate for succession. In 2019, media outlets speculated that Kramp-Karrenbauer might take over Merkel's position as Chancellor sooner than planned if the current governing coalition proved unsustainable. The possibility was neither confirmed nor denied by the party. In February 2020, Kramp-Karrenbauer announced that she would resign as party leader of the CDU in the summer, after party members in Thuringia defied official party lines and voted with Alternative for Germany to support an FDP candidate for minister-president. Kramp-Karrenbauer was succeeded by Armin Laschet at the 2021 CDU leadership election.\nIn the 2021 federal election, the SPD won the most votes. This necessitated long negotiations among the various parties to form a government. On 23 November 2021, a new grand coalition was announced, with Olaf Scholz nominated to succeed Merkel. Merkel continued to serve as chancellor until 8 December 2021, when Scholz was sworn in. The constituency she had held since its establishment in the German reunification was won by Anna Kassautzki (SPD).\n2022\u2013present: Post-chancellorship.\nOn 31 January 2022, less than two months after she left office, her long-time rival Friedrich Merz, whom she beat in 2002 to become leader of the opposition, took over as leader of the CDU.\nOn 25 February 2022, only 24 hours after the Russian invasion of Ukraine began, Merkel told the \"DPA\" that she \"condemned in the strongest terms [...] the war of aggression led by Russia, which marks a profound break in the history of post-Cold War Europe.\"\nIn April that year, a spokesperson for Merkel stated that she \"stood by her position at the NATO summit in Bucharest in 2008\", when she had opposed Ukraine's membership in the North Atlantic Alliance, a decision that had come under increased scrutiny.\nOn 1 June 2022, Merkel made her first semi-public comments about political affairs since leaving office, at a retirement party for Reiner Hoffmann, the president of the German Trade Union Confederation. She criticised the \"blatant violation of international law by Russia\", expressed solidarity with Ukraine, and argued that \"peace and freedom can never be taken for granted.\"\nOn 7 June 2022, Merkel made her first public comments. In an interview with journalist Alexander Osang, she defended her past decisions on Ukraine and called Putin's aggression,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;not just unacceptable, but also a major mistake from Russia... It's an objective breach of all international laws and of everything that allows us in Europe to live in peace at all. If we start going back through the centuries and arguing over which bit of territory should belong to whom, then we will only have war. That's not an option whatsoever.\nShe also said that by the end of her chancellorship in September 2021, it had been clear that Putin was moving in the direction of conflict and that he was finished with the Normandy Format talks.\nFollowing her retirement, Merkel wrote a memoir called \"Freedom\" (), with her longtime assistant and adviser, Beate Baumann. It was released on 26 November 2024 with the title \"Freedom: Memories 1954\u20132021\". The book was published in 30 languages and consists of 736 pages.\nIn January 2025, Merkel criticised Friedrich Merz for introducing a non-binding resolution supporting restrictions on immigration that passed in the Bundestag with the help of the AfD. Following the CDU/CSU's victory in the 2025 German federal election, Merkel attended the first round of voting in the Bundestag to elect Merz as Chancellor on 6 May 2025.\nIn October 2025 Merkel gave a long interview to Hungarian media in which she made a number of controversial statements, partly reverting her previous position. She said that in 2021 she attempted to build a \"new diplomatic format\" to speak to Putin \"as EU\", but this was \"opposed by Poland and Baltic states\" and then she left her position shortly before the war broke out in 2022, thus indirectly blaming the countries for the war. She also said that \"coronavirus pandemic that played a decisive role in Russia\u2019s invasion of Ukraine\" because Putin was afraid of the virus and didn't want to talk face to face.\nPolitical positions.\nImmigration, refugees and migration.\nIn October 2010, Merkel told a meeting of younger members of her conservative Christian Democratic Union (CDU) party at Potsdam that attempts to build a multicultural society in Germany had \"utterly failed\", stating that: \"The concept that we are now living side by side and are happy about it\" does not work and \"we feel attached to the Christian concept of mankind, that is what defines us. Anyone who doesn't accept that is in the wrong place here.\" She continued to say that immigrants should integrate and adopt Germany's culture and values. This added to a growing debate within Germany on the acceptable levels and mechanisms of immigration, its effects on Germany, and the degree to which Muslim immigrants had integrated into German society.\nMerkel is in favour of a \"mandatory solidarity mechanism\" for relocation of asylum-seekers from Italy and Greece to other EU member states as part of the long-term solution to Europe's migrant crisis.\nForeign policy.\nMerkel's foreign policy has focused on strengthening European cooperation and international trade agreements. She and her governments have been closely associated with the change through trade () policy. For this, she has come under criticism, especially after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. Merkel has been widely described as the \"de facto\" leader of the European Union throughout her tenure as Chancellor.\nIn 2015, with the absence of Stephen Harper, Merkel became the only leader to have attended every G20 meeting since the first in 2008, having been present at a record fifteen summits as of 2021. She hosted the twelfth meeting at the 2017 G20 Hamburg summit.\nMerkel favors the Association Agreement between Ukraine and the European Union. In December 2012, she stated that its implementation depends on reforms in Ukraine.\nMerkel expressed support for Israel's right to self-defence in the context of the 2014 Israel\u2013Gaza conflict. She telephoned Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on 9 July to condemn \"without reservation rocket fire on Israel\".\nOn 20 June 2018, which was World Refugee Day, Merkel said that there had been \"no moral or political justification\" for the post-war expulsion of ethnic Germans from Central and Eastern European countries.\nSocial expenditure.\nAt the World Economic Forum in Davos, 2013, Merkel said that Europe had only 7% of the global population and produced only 25% of the global GDP, but that it accounted for almost 50% of global social expenditure. She went on to say that Europe could only maintain its prosperity by being innovative and measuring itself against the best. After this, the comparison became a central element in major speeches. The international financial press has widely commented on her thesis, with \"The Economist\" saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If Mrs Merkel's vision is pragmatic, so too is her plan for implementing it. It can be boiled down to three statistics, a few charts and some facts on an A4 * sheet of paper. The three figures are 7 percent, 25 percent and 50 percent. Mrs Merkel never tires of saying that Europe has 7 percent of the world's population, 25 percent of its GDP and 50 percent of its social spending. If the region is to prosper in competition with emerging countries, it cannot continue to be so generous. ... She produces graphs of unit labour costs\u00a0... at EU meetings in much the same way that the late Margaret Thatcher used to pull passages from Friedrich Hayek's \"Road to Serfdom\" from her handbag.\nThe \"Financial Times\" commented: \"Although Ms Merkel stopped short of suggesting that a ceiling on social spending might be one yardstick for measuring competitiveness, she hinted as much in the light of soaring social spending in the face of an ageing population.\nClimate policy.\nMerkel has been credited as a key part of 2007 G8 negotiations that led to a significantly more ambitious renewable energy transition commitment than had been anticipated.\nIn September 2010, the coalition government published a long-term plan for sustainable development of the electrical grid until 2050; efforts to transition to sustainable and otherwise preferable sources of energy have been termed Energy Transition (). Although the initial plan was criticised for lifetime extensions of nuclear power plants, it was amended following the Fukushima nuclear disaster, and the last nuclear power plants in Germany were shut down in April 2023. The plan also aimed at a 40% reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 2020, a goal that was initially achieved largely due to reductions in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, emissions increased to a level above the target in 2022.\nIn preparation for the 2015 Paris Climate Change Conference, Merkel announced that Germany would significantly increase its contributions to international climate aid and financing by 2020. In 2016, some observers criticised Merkel's lack of action with regards to climate change that year. In 2017, Merkel criticised the Trump administration's decision to withdraw from the 2015 Paris Agreement and reaffirmed the commitment of the remaining G20 members to the treaty.\nIn early 2019, a governmental commission appointed by the coalition government approved a plan to phase out coal power plants by 2038, allocating a budget of billion to the plan.\nIn September 2019, the Merkel government announced a set of climate change mitigation policies with a total budget of billion. Although described as a \"new beginning for Germany's climate policy\" by then-minister of the environment Svenja Schulze, the package was widely criticised; environmental protection groups have labelled it insufficient, and opposition parties have argued that it is ineffective. Prominent climate scientists have called it \"a failure of the political system\" and \"ridiculous\".\nFiscal policy.\nIn 2009, Merkel announced plans to take on additional government debt in order to stimulate economic growth, arguing that this should take priority over other fiscal concerns. The Merkel government's tax policy at the time was widely criticised, mostly for taking on additional debt instead of increasing tax rates at high levels of income. In 2010, Merkel expressed support for a global financial transaction tax, but was ultimately unsuccessful in international negotiations on the matter.\nIn 2019, Merkel argued for the importance of a balanced government budget, rejecting calls for additional investment to stimulate growth.\nCriticism.\nMerkel has been criticised for being personally present and involved at the M100 Media Award handover to Danish cartoonist Kurt Westergaard, who had triggered the Muhammad cartoons controversy. This happened at a time of fierce debate over a book by the former Deutsche Bundesbank executive and finance senator of Berlin Thilo Sarrazin, which was critical of Muslim immigration. At the same time, she condemned a planned burning of Qurans by a fundamentalist pastor in Florida. The Central Council of Muslims in Germany and the Left Party (Die Linke) as well as the German Green Party criticised the action by the centre-right chancellor. The \"Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung\" newspaper wrote: \"This will probably be the most explosive moment of her chancellorship so far.\"\nThe term \"alternativlos\" (German for \"without an alternative\"), which was frequently used by Angela Merkel to describe her measures addressing the European sovereign-debt crisis, was named the Un-word of the Year 2010 by a jury of linguistic scholars. The wording was criticised as undemocratic, as any discussion on Merkel's politics would thus be deemed unnecessary or undesirable. The expression is credited for the name of the political party Alternative for Germany, which was founded in 2013.\nDuring a visit of U.S. President Barack Obama in Berlin, Merkel said on 19 June 2013 in the context of the 2013 mass surveillance disclosures: \"The Internet is uncharted territory for us all\" (). This statement led to various internet memes and online mockery of Merkel.\nDuring a state visit of the Turkish prime minister Ahmet Davuto\u011flu in January 2015, Merkel, citing former German president Christian Wulff, stated that \"Islam is part of Germany\",F which induced criticism from within her party. Parliamentary group leader Volker Kauder stated that Muslims belong to Germany, but Islam does not, and that Muslims should \"ask themselves why so many violent people refer to the Quran.\"\nAt the conclusion of the May 2017 Group of Seven's leaders in Sicily, Merkel criticised American efforts to renege on earlier commitments on climate change. According to Merkel, the discussions were difficult and marred by dissent. \"Here we have the situation where six members, or even seven if you want to add the EU, stand against one.\"\nMerkel has faced criticism for failing to take a tough line on the People's Republic of China. The \"Asia Times\" reported that \"Unlike certain of her European counterparts, her China diplomacy has focused on non-interference in Beijing's internal affairs. As such, Merkel was reportedly furious when her Foreign Minister Heiko Maas received Hong Kong dissident Joshua Wong in Berlin in September [2019], a move that Beijing publicly protested.\"\nMerkel's government decided to phase out both nuclear power and coal plants and supported the European Commission's Green Deal plans. Critics blamed the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) and closure of nuclear plants for contributing to the 2021\u20132022 global energy crisis.\nFollowing the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Merkel faced renewed criticisms that she had failed to curb Russian president Vladimir Putin's ambitions and aggression by insisting on diplomacy and d\u00e9tente policies. Critics argued that under her tenure, Germany and Europe was weakened by a dependency on Russian natural gas, including the Nord Stream 1 and Nord Stream 2 pipelines, and that the German military was neglected, disorganised, and underfunded. By late 2021, Germany was importing 55% of its gas, 34% of its oil, and 52% of its coal from Russia.\nMerkel's chancellorship has become tightly associated with the policy of Wandel durch Handel, which advocates pursuing close economic ties with authoritarian governments with the goal of inducing democratization. When the \"Wandel durch Handel\" policy came under intense domestic and international scrutiny following the Russian invasion, Merkel received much of the blame, leading Politico to write \"[n]o German is more responsible for the crisis in Ukraine than Merkel\". Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy also blamed Merkel and then-French president Nicolas Sarkozy's decision to block Ukraine from joining NATO in 2008 for the war; Merkel released a statement that she stands by her decision, later adding that the war would have broken out earlier at a greater military disadvantage for Ukraine.\nMerkel's handling of the European sovereign-debt crisis likewise attracted criticism. Commentators and politicians in several EU member states argued that Berlin's insistence on fiscal consolidation and structural reforms amounted to excessive austerity, deepening social hardship in countries such as Greece, Spain and Portugal and fuelling anti-EU sentiment there. In early 2015 Merkel came under fire after reports that her government was prepared to contemplate a Greek exit from the eurozone if the new Greek government abandoned agreed reforms, a scenario widely described as \"Grexit\". During the climactic 2015 bailout negotiations, opposition politicians and commentators inside Germany and abroad accused Merkel and finance minister Wolfgang Sch\u00e4uble of blackmailing Athens and risking a split in Europe by using the threat of Grexit as leverage.\nScholars have linked the eurozone crisis and the subsequent austerity policies to the rise of Euroscepticism and radical parties across the continent, arguing that the management of the crisis helped to erode trust in EU institutions and mainstream parties in several member states.\nMerkel's response to the European migrant crisis of 2015 was similarly divisive. Her decision to allow large numbers of asylum seekers to enter Germany, captured in the phrase \"Wir schaffen das\" (\"We can manage this\"), was praised by supporters as a humanitarian stance but criticised by opponents for encouraging further irregular migration and overstretching local authorities. Analysts have argued that the size and speed of the inflow, and subsequent management failures, contributed to a backlash that benefited the right-wing Alternative for Germany party and reshaped the German party system.\nMore broadly, the eurozone crisis and the refugee crisis have been identified in the academic literature as key drivers of rising Euroscepticism and support for radical parties across Europe in the 2010s. In debates about the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the EU, some politicians and commentators argued that continental Europe, including Germany under Merkel, bore part of the responsibility for Brexit, either because EU leaders did not do enough to accommodate British concerns or because the migration and eurozone crises had strengthened anti-EU sentiment in the UK. Studies of far-right discourse in Germany have noted that AfD politicians sometimes portrayed Merkel's refugee policy as contributing to the UK's decision to leave the EU.\nLegacy and public image.\nInternational perceptions.\nMerkel was widely described as the \"de facto\" leader of the European Union throughout her tenure as Chancellor. She was named the world's second most powerful person by \"Forbes\" magazine in 2012 and 2015, following Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin respectively, the highest ranking ever achieved by a woman. On 26 March 2014, Merkel became the longest-serving incumbent head of government in the European Union. In December 2015, Merkel was named as \"Time\" magazine's Person of the Year, with the magazine's cover declaring her to be the \"Chancellor of the Free World\". In 2018, Merkel was named the most powerful woman in the world for a record fourteenth time by \"Forbes\". Following the election of Donald Trump to the US presidency in 2016, Merkel was described by \"The New York Times\" as \"the Liberal West's Last Defender\", and as the \"leader of the free world\" by a number of commentators, including Hillary Clinton. In a 2018 survey, Merkel was found to be the most widely respected world leader. \"The Atlantic\" described her in 2019 as \"the world's most successful living politician, on the basis of both achievement and longevity\". Harvard University President Larry Bacow described her as \"one of the most widely admired and broadly influential statespeople of our time\".\nCritics have argued that Merkel's policymaking during the 2015 migrant crisis has damaged the integrity of the EU. Some have also commented that Germany's failure to meet financial commitments to NATO, Merkel's blocking of the accession of Ukraine to NATO in 2008, and the abolishment of conscription have together weakened the positions of Germany and Europe following the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nDomestic image.\nMerkel has been described as having significantly shaped the political landscape of Germany, particularly the perceptions of those who grew up during her chancellorship; this demographic group has been referred to (transl.\u2009children of Merkel).\nComparisons.\nAs a woman who is a politician from a centre-right party and also a scientist, Merkel has been compared by many in the English-language press to 20th-century British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. Thatcher also had a science degree from Oxford University in chemistry. Some have referred to her as \"Iron Lady\", \"Iron Girl\", and even \"The Iron Frau\", all alluding to Thatcher, whose nickname was \"The Iron Lady\". Political commentators have debated the precise extent to which their agendas are similar. Later in her tenure, Merkel acquired the nickname \"Mutti\" (a German familiar form of \"mother\"). She has also been called the \"Iron Chancellor\", in reference to Otto von Bismarck.\n\"Al Jazeera\" has criticised the \"Iron Lady\" nickname for Merkel as \"wrong-headed\", noting her pro-European stance, her efforts to combat \"profit-seeking speculators\" during the euro crisis, and her lacking Thatcher's \"my-way-or-the-highway\" attitude towards politics.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1977, at the age of 23, Merkel, then Angela Kasner, married physics student Ulrich Merkel (born 1953) and took his surname. The couple divorced in 1982. Her second and current husband is quantum chemist and professor Joachim Sauer, who has largely avoided media attention during and after Merkel's political career. They first met in 1981 and married in 1998. Merkel has no children, but Sauer has two adult sons from a previous marriage.\nHaving grown up in East Germany, Merkel learned Russian at school. She was able to speak informally to Vladimir Putin in Russian but conducted diplomatic dialogue through an interpreter. She rarely spoke English in public, but delivered a small section of an address to the British Parliament in English in 2014.\nMerkel is a fervent football fan and was known to listen to games while in the Bundestag and to attend games of the national team in her official capacity, including Germany's 1\u20130 victory against Argentina in the 2014 World Cup Final.\nMerkel has stated that her favorite film is \"The Legend of Paul and Paula\", an East German movie released in 1973.\nMerkel has a fear of dogs, which developed after she was attacked by one in 1995. Vladimir Putin brought in his Labrador Retriever during a press conference in 2007. Putin claims he did not mean to scare her, though Merkel later observed, \"I understand why he has to do this \u2013 to prove he's a man. ... He's afraid of his own weakness.\"\nSince 2017, Merkel has occasionally been seen shaking visibly on several public occasions, recovering shortly afterwards. After one such occasion, she attributed the shaking to dehydration, saying that she felt better after a drink of water.\nIn September 2021, after evading the question for most of her career, Merkel said that she considered herself a feminist. The statement came in a conference along with Nigerian writer and feminist Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie.\nSince her retirement, Merkel has commented on the Russian invasion of Ukraine but has otherwise limited her involvement in political matters. She has instead focused on travelling, attending only \"feel-good events\" () in a private capacity.\nMerkel reportedly \"detested\" U.S. President Donald Trump, according to \"Politico\", citing a forthcoming book by Jonathan Karl.\nReligion.\nAngela Merkel is a Lutheran member of the Evangelical Church in Berlin, Brandenburg and Silesian Upper Lusatia (), a United Protestant (i.e. both Reformed and Lutheran) church body under the umbrella of the Protestant Church in Germany. The EKBO is a member of the Union of Protestant Churches in the EKD. Before the 2004 merger of the Evangelical Church in Berlin-Brandenburg and the Evangelical Church in Silesian Upper Lusatia, Merkel belonged to the former. In 2012, Merkel said, regarding her faith: \"I am a member of the Protestant Church. I believe in God and religion is also my constant companion, and has been for the whole of my life. We as Christians should above all not be afraid of standing up for our beliefs.\" She also publicly declared that Germany suffers not from \"too much Islam\" but \"too little Christianity\".\nIn the arts and media.\nSince 1991, Merkel has sat annually for sitting and standing portraits by, and interview with, Herlinde Koelbl.\nMerkel was portrayed by Swiss actress Anna Katarina in the 2012 political satire film \"The Dictator\".\nMerkel features as a main character in two of the three plays that make up the Europeans Trilogy (\"Bruges\", \"Antwerp\", and \"Tervuren\") by Paris-based UK playwright Nick Awde: \"Bruges\" (2014) and \"Tervuren\" (2016). A character named Merkel, accompanied by a sidekick called Sch\u00e4uble, also appears as the sinister female henchman in Michael Paraskos's novel \"In Search of Sixpence\".\nOn the American sketch-comedy series \"Saturday Night Live\", Merkel has been parodied by Kate McKinnon.\nOn the British sketch-comedy \"Tracey Ullman's Show\", comedian Tracey Ullman has parodied Merkel to international acclaim.\nIn 2016, a documentary film \"Angela Merkel \u2013 The Unexpected\" was produced by Broadview TV and MDR in collaboration with Arte and Das Erste.\nIn 2024, a German TV show called 'Miss Merkel' reimagined her as a detective. It is based on the bestselling novels by German writer David Safier and is a comedy that was a hit in Germany and then shown on public broadcaster RAI, dubbed into Italian.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72672", "revid": "18174831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72672", "title": "Exocrine gland", "text": "Gland that secretes substances onto an epithelial surface by way of a duct\nExocrine glands are glands that secrete substances onto an epithelial surface by way of a duct. Examples of exocrine glands include sweat, salivary, mammary, ceruminous, lacrimal, sebaceous, prostate and mucous glands. Exocrine glands are one of two types of glands in the human body, the other being endocrine glands, which secrete their products directly into the bloodstream. The liver and pancreas are both exocrine and endocrine glands; they are exocrine glands because they secrete products\u2014bile and pancreatic juice\u2014into the gastrointestinal tract through a series of ducts, and endocrine because they secrete other substances directly into the bloodstream. Exocrine sweat glands are part of the integumentary system; they have merocrine and apocrine types.\nClassification.\nStructure.\nExocrine glands contain a glandular portion and a duct portion, the structures of which can be used to classify the gland.\nMethod of secretion.\nDepending on how their products are secreted, exocrine glands are categorized as merocrine, apocrine, or holocrine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72673", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72673", "title": "Guido Westerwelle", "text": "German politician (1961\u20132016)\nGuido Westerwelle (; 27 December 1961 \u2013 18 March 2016) was a German politician who served as foreign minister in the second cabinet of Chancellor Angela Merkel and Vice-Chancellor of Germany from 2009 to 2011, being the first openly gay person to hold any of these positions. He also led the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP) from 2001 until he stepped down in 2011. A lawyer by profession, he was a member of the Bundestag from 1996 to 2013.\nEarly life and education.\nGuido Westerwelle was born in Bad Honnef in the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia. His parents were lawyers. He graduated from Ernst Moritz Arndt Gymnasium in 1980 after academic struggles resulted in his departure from previous institutions where he was considered an average student at best, but substandard otherwise. He studied law at the University of Bonn from 1980 to 1987. Following the First and Second State Law Examinations in 1987 and 1991 respectively, he began practising as an attorney in Bonn in 1991. In 1994, he earned a doctoral degree in law from the University of Hagen.\nCareer in the FDP.\nWesterwelle joined the Free Democratic Party (FDP) in 1980. He was a founding member of the \"Junge Liberale\" (Young Liberals), which became the party's official youth organization in 1983, and he was its chairman from 1983 to 1988. In a 1988 newspaper interview, he singled out the FDP's rejection of an amnesty for tax offenders and its diminished enthusiasm for nuclear power as fruits of the youth wing's labors.\nHe was a member of the executive board of the FDP from 1988, and in 1994, he was appointed secretary general of the party.\nIn 1996, Westerwelle was first elected a member of the Bundestag, filling in for Heinz Lanfermann, who had resigned from his seat after entering the Ministry of Justice. In the 1998 national elections, he was re-elected to parliament. As his parliamentary group's home affairs spokesman, he was instrumental in swinging the FDP behind a 1999 government bill to make German citizenship available to children born in Germany of non-German parents.\nIn 2001, Westerwelle succeeded Wolfgang Gerhardt as party chairman. Gerhardt, however, remained chairman of the FDP's parliamentary group. Westerwelle, the youngest party chairman at the time, emphasized economics and education, and espoused a strategy initiated by his deputy J\u00fcrgen M\u00f6llemann, who, as chairman of the North Rhine-Westphalia branch of the FDP, had led his party back into the state parliament, gaining 9.8% of the vote. This strategy, transferred to the federal level, was dubbed \"Project 18\", referring both to the envisioned percentage and the German age of majority. Leading up to the 2002 elections, he positioned his party equidistantly from the major parties and refused to commit his party to a coalition with either the Christian Democrats or the Social Democrats. He was also named the FDP's candidate for the office of chancellor. Since the FDP had never claimed such a candidacy (and hasn't done since) and had no chance of attaining it against the two major parties, this move was widely seen as political marketing alongside other ploys, such as driving around in a campaign van dubbed the \"Guidomobile\", wearing the figure \"18\" on the soles of his shoes or appearing in the \"Big Brother\" TV show. Eventually, the federal elections yielded a slight increase of the FDP's vote from 6.2% to 7.4%. Despite this setback, he was reelected as party chairman in 2003.\nIn the federal elections of 2005, Westerwelle was his party's front-runner. When neither Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der's Social Democrats and Greens nor a coalition of Christian and Free Democrats, favored by Angela Merkel and Westerwelle, managed to gain a majority of seats, Westerwelle rejected overtures by Chancellor Schr\u00f6der to save his chancellorship by entering his coalition, preferring to become one of the leaders of the disparate opposition of the subsequently formed \"Grand Coalition\" of Christian and Social Democrats, with Merkel as chancellor. Westerwelle became a vocal critic of the new government. In 2006, according to an internal agreement, Westerwelle succeeded Wolfgang Gerhardt as chairman of the parliamentary group.\nOver the following years, in an effort to broaden the party's appeal, Westerwelle embraced its left wing under former justice minister Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger and focused his campaign messages on tax cuts, education and civil rights.\nForeign Minister and Vice-Chancellor of Germany.\nIn the federal elections of 2009, Westerwelle committed his party to a coalition with Merkel's CDU/CSU, ruling out a coalition with Social Democrats and Greens, and led his party to an unprecedented 14.6% share of the vote. In accordance with earlier announcements, he formed a coalition government with the CDU/CSU.\nOn 28 October, Westerwelle was sworn in as Foreign Minister and Vice-Chancellor, becoming the head of the Foreign Office. His deputies at the Foreign Office were his close political ally Cornelia Pieper and foreign policy expert Werner Hoyer as Ministers of State. Hoyer had previously held the same office in the fifth Kohl cabinet. In a much-discussed move, Westerwelle travelled to Poland, the Netherlands and Belgium before visiting France.\nOn 19 November 2009, Westerwelle joined around 800 dignitaries from around the world \u2013 including US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner and British Foreign Secretary David Miliband \u2013 to witness Afghan president Hamid Karzai\u2019s swearing in for a second term in office.\nWikiLeaks controversy and election defeats.\nIn late November 2010, leaked U.S. diplomatic cables revealed that American diplomats considered Westerwelle an obstacle to deeper transatlantic relations and were sceptical of his abilities, with one cable comparing him unfavorably to former German foreign minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher. On 3 December 2010, Westerwelle dismissed his personal assistant Helmut Metzner following a WikiLeaks diplomatic cables release which led to Metzner admitting that he regularly spied for the U.S. By May 2011, opinion polls ranked Westerwelle as one of the most unpopular and ineffective foreign ministers since the late 1940s. At the time, his party had collapsed in several states, including Rhineland-Palatinate and Bremen where they failed to secure the 5% threshold necessary for a seat in parliament. Analysts said one of the main reasons Westerwelle had become so unpopular was that he had been unable to fulfill the expectations of his voters, the majority of whom were middle-class professionals or entrepreneurs. Westerwelle subsequently stepped down as party leader. By July the party was only receiving 3% support in opinion polls, a record low, reflecting what political insiders had called his \"last stand\" in January, comparing Westerwelle and his party to Captain Ahab and the \"Pequod\".\nInternational crisis.\nDuring his tenure as foreign minister, Westerwelle prevailed over lawmakers in his party who opposed bailing out Greece during the European debt crisis. Amid efforts by the United States and European nations to isolate Iran's then-president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Westerwelle traveled to Tehran in February 2011 to bring home two journalists for the weekly newspaper \"Bild am Sonntag\" who were released after being arrested in October 2010. After weeks of negotiations, the Iranians reached out to discuss the release of the pair, the reporter Marcus Hellwig and the photographer Jens Koch. The two reporters had been arrested while interviewing the son of Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani, a woman sentenced to death for adultery. A condition of their release was that Westerwelle meet with Ahmadinejad, causing Iranian exile groups in Europe to condemn the visit and to argue that Germany was bowing to the Tehran government at a time when security forces were cracking down on pro-democracy demonstrators. When Iran briefly refused to allow a plane carrying German Chancellor Angela Merkel to India to cross its air space in May 2013, Westerwelle summoned Iran's ambassador to Germany, Alireza Sheikhattar, complaining about \"a disrespect for Germany that we will not accept.\" He later temporarily recalled Germany's ambassador to Iran for consultation after an attack on the British Embassy in Tehran in November 2013. In November 2010, Westerwelle became the first German minister to visit Gaza since the territory was sealed off by the Israeli army at the end of 2007.\nIn April 2011, Westerwelle summoned China's ambassador to Germany, Wu Hongbo, for a meeting about detained Chinese artist-activist Ai Weiwei, calling for his release and denouncing China's growing use of extrajudicial detentions against dissidents.\nIn September 2012, Westerwelle joined his Jordanian counterpart Nasser Judeh in visiting the Zaatari refugee camp to learn more about the plight of Syrians fleeing the violence in the ongoing Syrian civil war that erupted in 2011.\nAfter the offices of both the Konrad Adenauer Foundation in St Petersburg and the Friedrich Ebert Foundation in Moscow were investigated by prosecutors and tax inspectors in March 2013, Westerwelle summoned the envoy at the Russian embassy in Berlin to relay his \"concern over the concerted action\".\nOn 4 December 2013, Westerwelle walked with opposition leaders through an encampment on Kiev's Maidan Nezalezhnosti, the focus of protests over the Yanukovych government's U-turn away from the European Union and toward Russia; Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev subsequently called any participation by foreign officials in the political events unfolding in Ukraine \"interference in internal affairs.\"\nArab Spring.\nWhen the insurgency against Libya's dictator Muammar Gaddafi broke out in early 2011, Westerwelle promptly stated his support for the repressed opposition. Earlier, he had initially been cautious before making any pronouncements about Tunisia and Egypt, but in the case of Libya, he quickly called out Gaddafi as a dictator, and argued in favor of EU-level sanctions against the regime in Tripoli. Strongly motivated by a widespread aversion in Germany to the use of military force, he shared with Chancellor Merkel a deep scepticism about a no-fly zone as it was suggested by France and the United Kingdom. At a UN Security Council meeting in March 2011, Westerwelle abstained in the vote on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 to establish a no-fly zone, along with veto powers Russia and China as well as Brazil and India. Shortly after, he expelled five Libyan diplomats for intimidating Libyan citizens living in Germany. During a visit to Benghazi in June 2011, Westerwelle announced that Germany would recognize the rebel National Transitional Council as the legitimate representative of Libyans.\nAmid the Egyptian Revolution of 2011, Westerwelle visited the country six times between February 2011 and November 2012. In December 2011, he summoned Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy, the Egyptian ambassador in Berlin, to protest over what he called an \"unacceptable\" raid on the Cairo office of the Konrad Adenauer Foundation among those searched during a crackdown on pro-democracy and human rights organizations. In February 2012, he harshly criticized Egypt for trying 44 people, including German citizens, over the alleged illegal funding of aid groups. When the Konrad Adenauer Foundation was ordered to close in Abu Dhabi later that year, Westerwelle personally pressed his UAE counterpart Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan to rethink the decision.\nCrisis in Sudan.\nIn June 2011, Westerwelle became the first German foreign minister to travel to Darfur, where he visited the United Nations/African Union operation UNAMID toward which Germany had contributed military, police and civilian personnel. He was also the first to visit South Sudan shortly before its independence, where he met the country's founding President Salva Kiir Mayardit; as the rotating chair of the UN Security Council at the time, Germany was responsible for accepting the newly independent country into the United Nations. During his trip, however, he made no appointment to meet Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir who is wanted by the International Criminal Court on charges of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide allegedly committed in Darfur.\nIn September 2012, Westerwelle summoned the Sudanese ambassador in Berlin after violent attacks on Germany's embassy in Khartoum, and called on the Sudanese government to guarantee the security of the embassy; thousands of protesters had previously vandalized the embassies of Germany and Britain, outraged by \"Innocence of Muslims\", a film which has been described as denigrating to the Islamic prophet, Muhammad.\nRole in the United Nations.\nDuring July 2011, Westerwelle was the President of the United Nations Security Council as he headed the German delegation to the United Nations. In an attempt to continue to play an important role within the United Nations, he led the German government's successful campaign for a three-year seat on the United Nations Human Rights Council in late 2012.\nIn October 2013, Israeli daily \"Haaretz\" published the text of a letter sent by Westerwelle to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, saying that failure to appear at a periodical hearing regarding human rights at the United Nations Human Rights Council would cause severe diplomatic damage to Israel, and that its allies around the world would be hard-pressed to help it. Shortly after, Israel renewed its cooperation with the Human Rights Council after a year and a half of boycott.\nNonproliferation.\nDuring his time in office, Westerwelle campaigned for the removal of B61 nuclear bombs at US air bases in Europe, arguing that a planned missile shield protecting Europe against ballistic rocket attack also meant that the tactical nuclear bombs are not needed. Against resistance from France, Westerwelle and German defense minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg demanded greater NATO commitment to nuclear disarmament at a meeting of the organization's foreign and defense ministers in October 2010. After the U.S. midterm elections in 2010, Westerwelle called on newly empowered Republicans in the U.S. Congress to stand by President Barack Obama\u2019s goals of non- proliferation and the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons.\nIn coordination with his foundation and The ATOM Project, Westerwelle continued to advocate for the elimination of nuclear weapons testing.\nRelations with Belarus.\nIn the belief that the European Union had to engage Belarus to prevent it from moving closer to Russia, Westerwelle \u2013 accompanied by his Polish counterpart Radek Sikorski \u2013 visited Minsk in November 2010, the first such visit in 15 years. Shortly after, Westerwelle publicly condemned the judgments against President Alexander Lukashenko's main political opponent Andrei Sannikov and other opposition supporters. As a consequence, Poland, France and Germany pressed their EU partners in to impose tougher sanctions against the Belarusian leadership following the crackdown and trials of opposition leaders in the country who held peaceful protests against the fraudulent presidential elections.\nIn March 2012, Lukashenko criticized EU politicians who threatened him with further sanctions over human rights abuses and in an apparent riposte to Westerwelle branding him \"Europe's last dictator,\" said: \"Better to be a dictator than gay.\" Westerwelle subsequently responded: \"This statement condemns itself. I won't budge one millimeter from my commitment to human rights and democracy in Belarus after these comments.\"\nRelations with Russia.\nWhile being foreign minister, Westerwelle maintained a fairly low profile when it came to Germany's Russia-policy. He supported the policy of \"change through trade\" with Russia, but was widely criticized for not having a clear foreign policy doctrine. He called for more inclusion of Russia in the international community, but criticized Moscow, for example, for supporting President Assad's government in Syria.\nViews on WWII and its aftermath.\nUpon taking office, Westerwelle opposed the appointment of Erika Steinbach, a German politician and member of Chancellor Merkel's party, to a board overseeing the creation of the Center against Expulsions, a place documenting the expulsion of Germans from Eastern Europe after World War II. In November 2010, together with his Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov, he opened the Nuremberg Trials Memorial permanent exhibition in the Palace of Justice building in Nuremberg.\nUnder Westerwelle's leadership, the Foreign Office released a report in 2011 called \"The Ministry and the Past\", which alleged the ministry's collusion with the Nazis. Westerwelle said the report \"shamed\" the institution. In February 2012, he signed an agreement granting 10 million euros (13 million dollars) to Israel's Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial Center over the following 10 years.\nFollowing the controversial 2012 Munich artworks discovery, he called for greater transparency in dealing with the find, which he warned could have lasting damage to Germany's international friendships.\nPolitical positions.\nOn economic policy.\nWesterwelle was a staunch supporter of the free market and proposed reforms to curtail the German welfare state and deregulate German labor-law. In an interview in February 2003, Westerwelle described labor unions as a \"plague on our country\" and said union officials were \"the pall bearers of the welfare state and of the prosperity in our country\". He called for substantial tax cuts and smaller government, in line with the general direction of his party.\nOn sexual equality.\nWesterwelle was a staunch campaigner for sexual equality. He long criticized German law's not giving complete adoption rights to gay couples. In 2012, he and finance minister Wolfgang Sch\u00e4uble were at loggerheads after a high-court ruling demanded the government provide equal tax treatment to gay civil servants and armed forces members. In the German daily \"Bild\", Westerwelle said that if \"registered partnerships have the same responsibilities as married couples then they should have the same rights. It is not weakening marriage but ending discrimination. We do not live in the 1950s.\"\nOn data-protection.\nIn 2001, Westerwelle was one of the first politicians to push for a biometric passport.\nHe opposed Google Street View's automated photography of streetscapes, and stated \"I will do all I can to prevent it\". In 2013, he announced plans to launch an initiative at the United Nations General Assembly to agree an optional protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that would give greater data protection to internet users.\nControversy.\nWesterwelle's party chairmanship saw considerable controversy. Critics inside and outside the FDP accused him of focusing on public relations, as opposed to developing and promoting sound public policy, especially in the election campaign of 2002. Westerwelle himself, who was made party chairman particularly because his predecessor Wolfgang Gerhardt had been viewed by many as dull and stiff, labelled his approach as \"Spa\u00dfpolitik\" (fun-politics).\nIn 2006, former Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der won a court order against Westerwelle who had criticized Schr\u00f6der for accepting a lucrative job at Gazprom, the Russian state-owned gas company, soon after losing the parliamentary election to Angela Merkel. Despite losing, Westerwelle said he would stick to his original assessment that Schr\u00f6der's appointment as chairman of the North European Gas Pipeline Company was \"problematic\".\nOn 27 September 2009, at a press conference after the election, Westerwelle refused to answer a question in English from a BBC reporter, stating that \"it is normal to speak German in Germany\". Critics have noted that this was in part due to Westerwelle's poor command of English. He earned the epithet \"Westerwave\" (a literal translation of his surname into English) as a consequence of these remarks.\nWesterwelle made public statements in 2010 about the \"welfare state\", saying that promising the people effortless prosperity may lead to \"late Roman decadence\", in reference to a verdict in the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany regarding Hartz IV.\nIn 2010, Westerwelle announced he would not be taking his civil partner Michael Mronz to anti-gay countries. Other official trips as foreign minister included Mronz, an event manager, and Ralf Marohn, a partner in his brother's company, also causing controversy. Westerwelle retorted that it was normal for foreign ministers to take industry representatives on their trips, calling himself a victim of \"a left-wing \"zeitgeist\" that considers making business questionable\".\nAccording to Politico Europe Westerwelle contributed to the decline of the power of the German foreign ministry due to his lack of expertise in the area and was considered ineffective in the role.\nPersonal life.\nOn 20 July 2004, Westerwelle attended Angela Merkel's 50th birthday party accompanied by his partner, Michael Mronz. It was the first time he had attended an official event with his partner and this was considered his public coming-out. The couple registered their partnership on 17 September 2010 in a private ceremony in Bonn.\nDeath.\nOn 20 June 2014, it was reported that Westerwelle was suffering from acute myeloid leukemia. He underwent chemotherapy and a bone-marrow transplant. He last appeared in public in November 2015, presenting a book on his battle with blood cancer called \"Between Two Lives\". Westerwelle died of the disease in Cologne on 18 March 2016, at the age of 54.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72674", "revid": "29077096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72674", "title": "Gabi Zimmer", "text": "German politician, Member of the European Parliament (born 1955)\nGabriele \"Gabi\" Zimmer (born 7 May 1955) is a German politician who served as leader of the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) from 2000 to 2003. After leaving office as leader, she was a member of the European Parliament from 2004 to 2019. Zimmer sat with the European United Left\u2013Nordic Green Left (GUE/NGL) group, which she chaired from 2012 to 2019.\nPersonal life.\nZimmer was born in East Berlin in 1955. After graduating from high school, she studied Russian and French in the Theoretical and Applied Linguistics section of the Karl Marx University in Leipzig from 1973 to 1977, graduating as a qualified linguist. Then she worked as a clerk at VEB vehicle and hunting weapons factory \"Ernst Th\u00e4lmann\" in Suhl. From 1981 to 1987 she was the editor of the company's newspaper, and from 1987 to 1989 she was a member of the SED party leadership of this company.\nZimmer is non-denominational, married, and has two children.\nPolitical career.\nShe joined the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED), the ruling party of the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), in 1981. After its transformation into the Party of Democratic Socialism in 1990, she became the party's leader in the new state of Thuringia, a position she held until 1998. She was a member of the Landtag of Thuringia from 1990 until 2004.\nZimmer became federal deputy leader of PDS in 1996. She was elected federal leader in 2000 after the resignation of Lothar Bisky. The party suffered a major defeat in the 2002 federal election, failing to pass the 5% electoral threshold and returning only two representatives. Zimmer was re-elected as leader at the first party congress after the election, but after internal party disputes, announced she would step down and not seek re-election at an extraordinary party congress in 2003. She left the leadership in May of that year.\nZimmer remained active in the party, and was elected to the European Parliament in 2004. In 2007, the PDS merged into The Left. Zimmer was re-elected as an MEP representing The Left in 2009 and 2014. In 2012, she became the chairwoman of the GUE/NGL group in the European Parliament. She did not seek re-election in the 2019 European Parliament election.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72675", "revid": "50609413", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72675", "title": "Dan Coats", "text": "American politician, attorney, and diplomat (born 1943)\nDaniel Ray Coats (born May 16, 1943) is an American politician, attorney, and diplomat. From 2017 to 2019, he served as the Director of National Intelligence in the Trump administration. A member of the Republican Party, he served as a United States Senator from Indiana from 1989 to 1999 and again from 2011 to 2017. He was the United States Ambassador to Germany from 2001 to 2005, and a member of the United States House of Representatives from 1981 to 1989. Coats served on the United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence while in the U.S. Senate.\nBorn in Jackson, Michigan, Coats graduated from Wheaton College in Illinois and the Indiana University School of Law \u2013 Indianapolis. He served in the U.S. Army from 1966 to 1968. Coats represented Indiana's 4th congressional district in the United States House of Representatives from 1981 to 1989. He was appointed to fill the Senate seat vacated by Dan Quayle following Quayle's election as Vice President of the United States. Coats won the 1990 special election to serve the remainder of Quayle's unexpired term, as well as the 1992 election for a full six-year term. He did not seek reelection in 1998 and was succeeded by Democrat Evan Bayh.\nAfter retiring from the Senate, Coats served as U.S. ambassador to Germany from 2001 to 2005 and then worked as a lobbyist in Washington, D.C. He was reelected to the Senate by a large margin in 2010, succeeding Bayh, who announced his own retirement shortly after Coats declared his candidacy. Coats declined to run for reelection in 2016 and was succeeded by Todd Young. He was nominated as Director of National Intelligence in January 2017, succeeding James R. Clapper. His term in office commenced on March 16, 2017, and ended on August 15, 2019.\nEarly life and education.\nCoats was born in Jackson, Michigan, the son of Vera (Nora) Elisabeth (n\u00e9e Swanlund) and Edward Raymond Coats. His father was of English and German descent, and his maternal grandparents emigrated from Sweden. Coats attended local public schools, and graduated from Jackson High School in 1961. He then studied at Wheaton College in Wheaton, Illinois, where he earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science in 1965. At Wheaton, he was an active student athlete on the soccer team. Following his military service, Coats enrolled at the Indiana University School of Law \u2013 Indianapolis (now Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law). Serving as associate editor of the \"Indiana Law Review\", Coats completed his Juris Doctor in 1972.\nCareer.\nCoats served in the United States Army Corps of Engineers from 1966 to 1968. He also served as assistant vice president of a Fort Wayne life insurance company.\nPolitical staffer in Washington (1976\u20131980).\nFrom 1976 to 1980, Coats worked for then-Congressman Dan Quayle, a Republican from Indiana's 4th congressional district, as Quayle's district representative.\nU.S. House of Representatives (1981\u20131988).\nWhen Quayle decided to challenge three-term Democratic incumbent Birch Bayh in the 1980 U.S. Senate election, Coats ran for and won Quayle's seat in the U.S. House. He was reelected four times from this Fort Wayne-based district, usually without serious difficulty.\nU.S. Senate (1988\u20131998; 2011\u20132016).\nWhen Quayle resigned from the Senate after being elected Vice President of the United States in 1988, Coats, who had just been elected to a fifth term in the House, was appointed to Quayle's former seat. He subsequently won a special election in 1990 for the balance of Quayle's second term, and was elected to a full term in 1992. Coats declined to run for a second full term in 1998. He served in the Senate until January 1999, at which time he was succeeded by Evan Bayh.\nCoats announced on February 3, 2010, he would run for his old Senate seat; and on February 16, 2010, Bayh announced his intention to retire. Coats went on to win the seat. In March 2015, he announced that he would not run for reelection in 2016. He served on the United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.\nOn February 10, 2010, Coats confirmed that he would return to Indiana to run for the seat held by incumbent Evan Bayh in the 2010 United States Senate election. Bayh had made no previous announcements and was fully expected to run for another term, but after Coats announced his candidacy, Bayh announced his retirement on February 15, 2010. On May 4, 2010, Coats won the Republican primary over State Senator Marlin Stutzman and former U.S. Representative John Hostettler.\nCoats defeated Democratic U.S. Representative Brad Ellsworth by a 15-point margin to return to the Senate. Coats became the senior senator from Indiana after Richard Lugar lost a challenge in the 2012 Republican primary election and subsequently was not re-elected to the Senate in 2012. Coats served the remainder of his term with Democrat Joe Donnelly.\nCounselor (1998\u20132001).\nCoats worked as special counsel member in the firm Verner, Liipfert, Bernhard, McPherson and Hand in 2000 and 2001. In 2001, Coats was reportedly one of George W. Bush's top choices to be secretary of defense, a job eventually given to Donald Rumsfeld who had previously held the post under President Gerald Ford.\nUS Ambassador to Germany (2001\u20132005).\nFrom August 15, 2001, to February 28, 2005, Coats was George W. Bush's ambassador to Germany. As ambassador during the lead-up to the Iraq War, he unsuccessfully pressured the Government of Germany led by Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der not to oppose the war, threatening worsened U.S. relations with Germany. As Ambassador he also played a critical role in establishing robust relations with then opposition leader Angela Merkel, who approved the Iraq war, and in the construction of a new United States Embassy in the heart of Berlin next to the Brandenburg Gate.\nAgain in private life (2005\u20132010).\nCoats served as co-chairman of the Washington government relations office of King &amp; Spalding.\nIn 2005, Coats drew attention when he was chosen by President George W. Bush to shepherd Harriet Miers's failed nomination to the Supreme Court through the Senate. Echoing Senator Roman Hruska's famous 1970 speech in defense of Harrold Carswell, Coats said to CNN regarding the nomination: \"If [being a] great intellectual powerhouse is a qualification to be a member of the court and represent the American people and the wishes of the American people and to interpret the Constitution, then I think we have a court so skewed on the intellectual side that we may not be getting representation of America as a whole.\"\nIn 2007, Coats served as co-chairman of a team of lobbyists for Cooper Industries, a Texas corporation that moved its principal place of business to Bermuda, where it would not be liable for U.S. taxes. In that role, he worked to block Senate legislation that would have closed a tax loophole, worth hundreds of millions of dollars to Cooper Industries.\nDirector of National Intelligence (2017\u20132019).\nOn January 5, 2017, Coats was announced as then-President-elect Donald Trump's nominee for the Cabinet-level position of Director of National Intelligence, to succeed the outgoing James R. Clapper. His confirmation hearing was held on February 28, 2017, by the United States Senate Intelligence Committee, which approved his nomination on March 9, 2017, with a 13\u20132 vote. The Senate confirmed his nomination with an 85\u201312 vote on March 15, 2017, and he was sworn into office on March 16, 2017.\nOn July 16, 2018, Coats released a statement affirming the consensus of the United States Intelligence Community (IC) that the Russian government interfered in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, a day after the 2018 Russia\u2013United States Summit where President Trump recanted his endorsement of the IC's assessment.\nOn September 6, 2018, Director Coats denied that he had authored the anonymous op-ed piece from a senior Trump administration official that criticized the President which had been published by \"The New York Times\" the day prior. The day before, MSNBC host Lawrence O'Donnell speculated that Coats was the author of the guest essay, which was later revealed to have been written by then-United States Department of Homeland Security Chief of Staff Miles Taylor.\nCoats released the DNI's \"Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community\" on January 29, 2019, listing the major threats to the United States. The reports states that the \"international system is coming under increasing strain amid continuing cyber and WMD proliferation threats, competition in space, and regional conflicts. Among the disturbing trends are hostile states and actors' intensifying online efforts to influence and interfere with elections here and abroad and their use of chemical weapons. Terrorism too will continue to be a top threat to US and partner interests worldwide, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, South Asia, and Southeast Asia. The development and application of new technologies will introduce both risks and opportunities, and the US economy will be challenged by slower global economic growth and growing threats to U.S. economic competitiveness.\" In the report, Coats also highlighted the potential negative impacts to US national security as a result of climate change, with this statement: \"The United States will probably have to manage the impact of global human security challenges, such as threats to public health, historic levels of human displacement, assaults on religious freedom, and the\nnegative effects of environmental degradation and climate change.\"\nReporting to Congress in January 2019, the subject advised that Russia acting in concert with their allies will use novel strategies that build on their previous experience in election meddling. In July 2019, Coats appointed an election security \"czar,\" Shelby Pierson, to oversee efforts across intelligence agencies. She is the first to have that role. Coats also directed other intelligence agencies to appoint executives to coordinate election security.\nDuring his tenure Coats sometimes took public positions that conflicted with Trump's statements or actions. Areas of disagreement included Russia, and particularly Russia's interference in the 2016 election, as well as North Korea and Iran. On July 28, 2019, following multiple anonymous reports that he was about to be let go, Trump announced on Twitter that Coats would depart on August 15 and that he would nominate U.S. Representative John Ratcliffe (R-Texas) to replace him as Director of National Intelligence.\nLater, it was revealed that Trump had spoken by phone to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy on July 25, three days before Trump fired Coats. (Trump was impeached for pressuring Ukraine.) When the Ukraine scandal came to light, some speculated that Coats's firing had been related to the Ukraine phone call.\nPolitical positions.\nGun laws.\nOn multiple occasions, Coats has supported gun control measures. In 1991, he voted in favor of the Biden-Thurmond Violent Crime Control Act. This act, which did not become law, would have created a waiting period for handgun purchases and placed a ban on assault weapons. Subsequently, he supported the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act that President Clinton signed into law in 1993. The legislation imposed a waiting period before a handgun could be transferred to an individual by a licensed dealer, importer, or manufacturer. This waiting period ended when the computerized instant check system came online. Coats also supported Feinstein Amendment 1152 to the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1993. The purpose of the Feinstein Amendment was to \"restrict the manufacture, transfer, and possession of certain semiautomatic assault weapons and large capacity ammunition feeding devices\".\nIn April 2013, Coats was one of 46 senators to vote against passage of a bill which would have expanded background checks for gun buyers. Coats voted with 40 Republicans and five Democrats to stop the passage of the bill.\nTaxes.\nIn 1995, Coats introduced S. 568: Family, Investment, Retirement, Savings, and Tax Fairness Act which would provide \"family tax credits, increase national savings through individual retirement plus accounts, indexing for inflation the income thresholds for taxing social security benefits, etc\". The bill did not become law.\nLGBT issues.\nIn 1993, Coats emerged as an opponent of President Clinton's effort to allow LGBT individuals to serve openly in the armed forces. Coats was one of the authors of the Don't Ask, Don't Tell policy and opposed its 2011 repeal. He does not support same-sex marriage but opposes interference with \"alternative lifestyles\".\nRussia and Ukraine.\nCoats pressed President Barack Obama to punish Russia harshly for its March 2014 annexation of Crimea. For this stance, the Russian government banned Coats and several other U.S. lawmakers from traveling to Russia.\nIn January 2019, Coats warned against the alliance between Russia and China.\nIran and Iraq.\nCoats supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq on the grounds of uncovering what he believed to be \nIraq's weapons of mass destruction.\nCoats opposed the 2015 nuclear deal between Iran and six world powers \u2013 the U.S., U.K., Russia, France, China, and Germany. He described Iran as the foremost \"state sponsor of terrorism\".\nDuring testimony before the Senate Intelligence Committee in January 2019, Coats said that Iran \"continues to sponsor terrorism\". According to Coats, \"Iran's regional ambitions and improved military capabilities almost certainly will threaten US interests in the coming year.\"\nPalestine.\nCoats co-sponsored the Taylor Force Act. The legislation proposes to stop American economic aid to the Palestinian Authority unless it stops payments to individuals who commit acts of terrorism and to the families of deceased terrorists.\nIn September 2016, in advance of a UN Security Council resolution 2334 condemning Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories, Coats signed an AIPAC-sponsored letter urging President Barack Obama to veto \"one-sided\" resolutions against Israel.\nOther.\nCoats co-sponsored, with former senators Ted Kennedy, Christopher Dodd, and Jim Jeffords, S.2206: Coats Human Services Reauthorization Act of 1998. This bill, which was enacted into law, \"amended the Head Start Act, the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981, and the Community Services Block Grant Act... in order to provide an opportunity for persons with limited means to accumulate assets.\"\nIn 1996, Coats co-sponsored the Line Item Veto Act of 1996, which President Clinton signed into law. The bill allowed the President to \"rewrit[e] legislation by vetoing single items of spending or specific tax breaks approved by Congress.\" In June 1998, The Supreme Court of the United States declared the law unconstitutional in \"Clinton v. City of New York\" in a 6\u20133 decision.\nCoats made headlines in August 1998, when he publicly questioned the timing of President Bill Clinton's cruise missile attacks on Afghanistan and Sudan, suggesting they might be linked to the Lewinsky scandal: \"While there is clearly much more we need to learn about this attack and why it was ordered today, given the president's personal difficulties this week, it is legitimate to question the timing of this action.\"\nPolitical campaigns.\nstyle=\"width:100%\""}
{"id": "72676", "revid": "35763168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72676", "title": "Wolfgang Ischinger", "text": "German diplomat\nWolfgang Friedrich Ischinger (born April 6, 1946) is a German diplomat who served as chairman of the Munich Security Conference from 2008 to 2022.\nFrom 2001 to 2006, Ischinger was the German ambassador to the United States, and from 1998 to 2001, he was Staatssekret\u00e4r (Deputy Foreign Minister) in Berlin. He was Germany's ambassador to the Court of St. James's (the United Kingdom) from 2006 to May, 2008. He was also Global Head of Government Relations of Allianz SE from March 2008 until December 2014. He serves on the supervisory board of Allianz Deutschland AG, on the European Advisory Board of Investcorp (London/New York) and on the governing board of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. He has been described as \"Germany's best-connected former diplomat\".\nEarly life and education.\nIschinger was born in Beuren, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, near Stuttgart, Germany. In 1963\u201364, he was an American Field Service foreign exchange student in Watseka, Illinois, where he graduated from the local high school in June 1964. After German Abitur, Ischinger studied law at the University of Bonn, Germany and the University of Geneva, Switzerland and obtained his law degree in 1972. He earned a master's degree from the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy in Medford, Massachusetts, in 1973.\nDiplomatic career.\nFrom 1973 to 1975, Ischinger served on the staff of the Secretary General of the United Nations in New York. He joined the German Foreign Service in 1975, and has served in Washington, D.C., Paris, and in a number of senior functions in the German Foreign Office. In 1982, he became personal assistant to Hans-Dietrich Genscher, West German foreign minister and leader of the Free Democratic Party.\nFrom 1993 to 1995, Ischinger was director of the Policy Planning Staff under Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel; from 1995 to 1998, as director general for political affairs (political director), Ischinger participated in a number of international negotiating processes, including the Bosnia Peace Talks at Dayton, Ohio, the negotiations concerning the NATO-Russia Founding Act, as well as the negotiations on EU and NATO enlargement and on the Kosovo crisis.\nAs Staatssekret\u00e4r (deputy foreign minister) under Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer between 1998 and 2001, Ischinger represented Germany at numerous international and European conferences, including the 1999 G8 and EU summit meetings in Cologne/Germany and the 2000 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) at the United Nations in New York.\nIn 2007, Ischinger was the European Union Representative in the Troika negotiations on the future of Kosovo, which ended up leading to the declaration of independence of Kosovo and the recognition of Kosovo by most EU member countries, the United States, and a number of other countries, in February 2008. Reportedly, Ischinger entered the talks \"with only one goal and idea: for Kosovo to become independent in the end, with the Serbian authority's willing consent\".\nLater career.\nFrom 2019 until 2020, Ischinger co-chaired the Transatlantic Task Force of the German Marshall Fund and the Bundeskanzler-Helmut-Schmidt-Stiftung (BKHS), alongside Karen Donfried.\nIschinger has published widely on foreign policy, security, and arms control policy as well as on European and transatlantic issues.\nOther activities.\nNon-profit organizations.\nSince 2011, Ischinger also acts as advisor to Fair Observer on global politics and security topics.\nPersonal life.\nIschinger is married to Jutta Falke, a journalist and writer, and the couple have one child. Ischinger also has two children from a previous marriage with Barbara Ischinger (born 1949). Before departing from Berlin to Washington, D.C., in 2001, Jutta Falke-Ischinger was the Berlin bureau chief of the German weekly \"Rheinischer Merkur\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72677", "revid": "16759563", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72677", "title": "Vice-Chancellor of Germany", "text": "German cabinet member\nThe vice-chancellor of Germany, officially the deputy to the federal chancellor (), is the second highest ranking German cabinet member. The chancellor is the head of government and, according to the constitution, gives this title of deputy to one of the federal ministers. It is custom that the title is given to a minister of the largest coalition partner, since 1966 typically the foreign minister. Since 2011, the minister for economic affairs has held the title most often.\nIn everyday politics, being vice-chancellor is considered more of an honorary title. The vice-chancellor may head cabinet meetings when the chancellor is absent. The function of vice-chancellor is to use the specific constitutional powers of the chancellor in case that the chancellor is unable to perform their duties. This kind of substitution has never been made use of in the history of the Federal Republic. Should a chancellor resign, die or be permanently unable to perform the duties of office, the vice-chancellor does not automatically become the next chancellor. In such a case the Federal President assigns a minister to serve as acting chancellor until the Bundestag (parliament) elects a new chancellor.\nAlthough is the constitutional term, vice-chancellor () is used more commonly. \"Chancellor\" () is the traditional term for the German head of government since 1867/71. A general deputy was introduced by law in 1878 (). In the Weimar Republic of 1919\u20131933, the office of was mentioned in the internal regulation of the government. The current title has existed since the constitution of 1949.\nLars Klingbeil (Social Democratic Party) is the current officeholder since 6 May 2025.\nHistory.\nSuch an office was initially established by the 1878 (Deputation Act), which provided for the imperial chancellor appointing a deputy, officially known as (General Deputy to the Imperial Chancellor). In addition to the general deputy, who could sign for all the affairs of the chancellor, the chancellor could appoint deputies with limited responsibilities. The act was revised on 28 October 1918, when the possibility of appointing deputies with limited responsibilities was removed and the vice-chancellor was given the right to appear before parliament.\nIn the Weimar Republic, the office was considered less important. It was not even mentioned in the constitution. Usually it was held by the minister of justice or the interior. The most known office holder is Franz von Papen, a former chancellor who formed a coalition government of national socialists and conservatives. Adolf Hitler became chancellor, and Papen vice-chancellor. It became soon obvious that the position of vice-chancellor provided no powers and was unsuited to constrain Hitler. Papen was convinced that him being trusted by president Hindenburg made him an important political player; soon, Hindenburg's trust went from Papen to Hitler.\nIn the Federal Republic (since 1949), the chancellors have had no interest in allowing the deputy to use the title for self-promotion. Since 1966 it became customary that the coalition partner of the governing party received the ministry of foreign affairs, who was also appointed deputy. The ministry of foreign affairs was considered to be the most important cabinet post besides the chancellorship. This tradition faded away during the tenure of Angela Merkel, partially because the leaders of her coalition partners chose a different ministry.\nOffice and appointment mechanism.\nThe German cabinet consists of the chancellor and the federal ministers. According to the Basic Law (Article 69.1), the chancellor appoints one of the ministers as vice-chancellor. In contrast to the appointment of a cabinet minister, there is no need for a formal appointment by the president. The appointment is an exclusive power of the chancellor.\nThe chancellor is theoretically free to choose a deputy chancellor. In practice, a German government is usually based on a coalition of two or more parties and the chancellor gives the title to a minister of the second largest coalition party upon recommendation of that party's leadership.\nThe German vice-chancellor can be regarded as the equivalent of a deputy prime minister in other parliamentary systems. Unlike the vice president post in presidential systems of governments, the German vice-chancellor is not the automatic successor in the event that a sitting chancellor suddenly leaves office.\nA German cabinet exists only as long as the current chancellor is in office. The end of a chancellor's term in office (either by death or resignation or the first meeting of a newly elected Bundestag) automatically terminates the office of any minister. If this happens, the president of Germany appoints the former chancellor or, if this is not possible, one of the former cabinet ministers (not necessarily, but most likely the former vice-chancellor) as acting chancellor, until the parliament elects a new chancellor. When in 1974 Chancellor Willy Brandt resigned and refused to remain in office until his successor's election, President Gustav Heinemann ensured a corresponding precedent and appointed former vice-chancellor Walter Scheel as acting chancellor.\nThe Basic Law does not state who shall perform the chancellor's powers and duties, if both the chancellor and the vice-chancellor are unable to do so. The German cabinet's rules of procedure state that in absence of both office-holders cabinet meetings shall be chaired by a cabinet member designated for this purpose by either the chancellor or the vice-chancellor or, if such a designation has not taken place or if the designee is not able to do so, by the present cabinet member with the longest uninterrupted membership in the federal government (\u00a722.1). It is however unclear, whether this provision extends to other powers of the office of chancellor. In an expertise issued by the Bundestag's scientific service in 2014, the legal opinion is that this is the case.\nList of vice-chancellors.\nGerman Reich (1871\u20131945).\nGerman Empire (1871\u20131918).\nPolitical party:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0FKP\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0FVP\nWeimar Republic (1918\u20131933).\nPolitical party:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0DDP\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Centre\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0DVP\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0SPD\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0DNVP\nFederal Republic of Germany (1949\u2013present).\nPolitical party:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0FDP\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0CDU\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0SPD\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Green\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72678", "revid": "898126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72678", "title": "Olympic athletics medalists (men)", "text": ""}
{"id": "72679", "revid": "898126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72679", "title": "Olympic biathlon medalists", "text": ""}
{"id": "72680", "revid": "898126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72680", "title": "Olympic athletics medalists (women)", "text": ""}
{"id": "72681", "revid": "898126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72681", "title": "Olympic baseball medalists", "text": ""}
{"id": "72682", "revid": "671535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72682", "title": "Olympic basketball medalists", "text": ""}
{"id": "72687", "revid": "1099904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72687", "title": "List of waterfalls", "text": "This list of notable waterfalls of the world is sorted by continent, then country, then province, state or territory. A waterfall is included if it is at least tall, or it is considered significant.\nThere is no standard way to measure the height or width of a waterfall. No ranking of waterfalls should be assumed because of the heights or widths provided in the list. Many numbers are estimated and measurements may be imprecise. See additional lists of waterfalls by height, flow rate and type.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEurope.\nItaly.\nhighest in Italy\nNorth America.\nUnited States.\nHawaii.\n (listed after \"Australia\" in the \"Oceania\" section below)\nMichigan.\nSee also \nNorth Carolina.\nSee also \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72691", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72691", "title": "Gilyaks", "text": ""}
{"id": "72696", "revid": "38716918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72696", "title": "Rhine Falls", "text": "Swiss waterfall\nThe Rhine Falls ( / Swiss German: , a singular noun) is a waterfall on the High Rhine in Switzerland. It is the most powerful waterfall in Europe and a popular tourist attraction.\nThe falls are located on the border between the cantons of Schaffhausen (SH) and Zurich (ZH), between the municipalities of Neuhausen am Rheinfall (SH) and Laufen-Uhwiesen/Dachsen (ZH), ca. south of the town of Schaffhausen and close to the border with Germany.\nThe falls are wide and high. In the winter months, the average water flow is , while in the summer, the average water flow is . The highest flow ever measured was in 1965, and the lowest, in 1921. The highest waterfall in Switzerland are the M\u00fcrrenbach Falls ().\nGeology.\nThe Rhine Falls were formed during the last ice age, approximately 14,000 to 17,000 years ago, by erosion-resistant rocks narrowing the riverbed. The first glacial advances created today's landforms approximately 500,000 years ago. Up to the end of the Wolstonian Stage, approximately 132,000 years ago, the Rhine flowed westwards from Schaffhausen through the Klettgau valley. This earlier riverbed later filled up with gravel.\nAbout 132,000 years ago the course of the river changed southwards at Schaffhausen and formed a new channel, which also filled up with gravel. Part of the Rhine today includes this ancient riverbed.\nDuring the W\u00fcrm glaciation, the Rhine was pushed far to the south to its present course, over a hard Late Jurassic limestone bed. As the river flowed over both the hard limestone and the easily eroded gravel from previous glaciations, formed the waterfall. The , a large rock in the middle of the falls, is the remnant of the original limestone cliff flanking the former channel. The rock has eroded very little over the years because relatively little sediment comes down the Rhine from Lake Constance.\nThe formation of the Rhine Falls is shown in a permanent exhibition at the Museum zu Allerheiligen in Schaffhausen.\nEconomics.\nThe north side of the falls is a millsite. In the 17th century, a blast furnace for smelting iron ore found in the limestone was built. It was in operation until the first half of the 19th century.\nIn 1887, the ironworks applied for permission to divert between one fifth to one half of the river's flow for electricity generation. The Swiss Alpine Club, the (a nature group) and several scientific societies opposed the plan.\nIn 1913, an international competition was held for the best plan for a shipping route between the city of Basel and Lake Constance ().\nIn 1919, a company wanting to build power stations in northern Switzerland were told that any such station at the Rhine Falls \"must serve the economic interest of the public\".\nIn 1944, the Swiss Council of States granted permission to build the proposed power station. The permission was to become effective on 1 February 1948, with construction to begin in 1952. But in 1951, the \"Neue Helvetische Gesellschaft\" (lit.\u2009'New Swiss Society'), under the leadership of Emil Egli, got 150,000 Swiss citizens to sign a petition protesting the project; among the signatories were 49 famous citizens, including Hermann Hesse and Carl Jacob Burckhardt. The petition not only scuttled the power station project, but effectively prevented all future hydropower and navigation engineering projects on the upper Rhine to the present day.\nToday, the falls are still under consideration for hydropower projects. If the full water flow were used, the power generated would average approximately 50 MW. The economic value of the falls as a tourist attraction may be greater.\nTourism.\nThe nearest communities are Neuhausen am Rheinfall just north of the Rhine Falls, where tourists can also view the W\u00f6rth Castle (Swiss German: ), and Laufen-Uhwiesen, with the Laufen Castle () overlooking the waterfall. Access to the other side of the river is possible through boat services or via a sidewalk on the railway bridge () upstream of the waterfall.\nAside from boat tours to the Rhine Falls' rock (), there are also viewing platforms with views on the waterfall built on both sides of the Rhine. These are reached via steep and narrow stairs (access by fee on the side). Elevators exist in some places. Guided tours of various lengths start from Laufen Castle on the Zurich side of the falls \u2013 a youth hostel is also located in . Various restaurants are located in , and the Rheinfall park next to the basin.\nTransport.\nPublic transport in Switzerland is famous for its density and its coordination between services (trains, busses and boats) due to the clock-face schedule.\nThere are several train stations near the Rhine Falls. The closest ones, within walking distance, are Neuhausen Rheinfall on the northern side of the falls and Schloss Laufen am Rheinfall on the southern banks of the river. Both stations are serviced by S-Bahn trains only. The town of Neuhausen has two additional S-Bahn railway stations, Neuhausen and Neuhausen Badischer Bahnhof (Neuhausen Bad Bf), which are further away from the Rhine Falls.\nSchaffhausen, the largest railway station in the area, is even farther away (ca. ), but can be reached by frequent bus services operated by Verkehrsbetriebe Schaffhausen (vbsh) and PostAuto. The closest bus stops in walking distance to the waterfall are \"Neuhausen Zentrum\" (Neuhausen Central) and \"Schloss Laufen, Rheinfall\". \nAs of December 2022, the following services exist from/to railway stations near the Rhine Falls:\nBus.\nTrolley bus line 1 of vbsh (direction: \"Herbst\u00e4cker\") is the most direct bus service between Schaffhausen railway station and the Rhine Falls.\nBoat.\nDuring warmer seasons, frequent boat trips are offered from the Rhine Falls basin to one of the rocks in the middle of the waterfall ().\nThere are no boat lines between the Rhine Falls and Schaffhausen (or any other town south of the Rhine Falls), but from April to October there are regular boat services along the scenic High Rhine () between Schaffhausen and Kreuzlingen (Lake Constance), via Konstanz,operated by the Schweizerische Schifffahrtsgesellschaft Untersee und Rhein (URh). Frequent bus services (vbsh lines , , ) operate between (bus stop has the same name) and Schaffhausen railway station. There is also a trackless train () running directly between the Rhine Falls and during the warmer season.\nPrivate transport.\nThe Rhine Falls are easily accessible by car, coach, or bicycle. Large pay-parking lots are located on both sides of the falls. The nearest exits on the A4 motorway are \"Uhwiesen\", \"Flurlingen\" or \"Schaffhausen S\u00fcd\". The Rhine Falls are located on Swiss National Bike Route 2 (Rhine Route).\nHistory.\nTourists have been awed by the Rhine Falls for centuries. In the 19th century, the painter J. M. W. Turner made several studies and larger paintings of the falls, and the lyrical poet Eduard M\u00f6rike wrote of the falls:\n\"Halte dein Herz, o Wanderer, fest in gewaltigen H\u00e4nden!\"\n\" Mir entst\u00fcrzte vor Lust zitternd das meinige fast.\"\n\"Rastlos donnernde Massen auf donnernde Massen geworfen,\"\n\" Ohr und Auge, wohin retten sie sich im Tumult?\"\n(Hold your heart, oh traveller, tightly in mighty hands!\nMine nearly collapsed, shivering with pleasure.\nRestlessly thundering masses thrown upon thundering masses,\nEar and eye, whither can they save themselves in such an uproar?)\nIn 1840, author Mary Shelley visited the Falls while on a tour of Europe with her son. She described her visit in a travel narrative that she published in 1844, \"Rambles in Germany and Italy\". She says: \"A portion of the cataract arches over the lowest platform, and the spray fell thickly on us, as standing on it and looking up, we saw wave, and rock, and cloud, and the clear heavens through its glittering ever-moving veil. This was a new sight, exceeding anything I had ever before seen; however, not to be wet through, I was obliged quickly to tear myself away.\""}
{"id": "72697", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72697", "title": "Eric Dolphy", "text": "American jazz musician (1928\u20131964)\nEric Allan Dolphy Jr. (June 20, 1928 \u2013 June 29, 1964) was an American jazz multi-instrumentalist, composer, and bandleader. Primarily an alto saxophonist, bass clarinetist, and flautist, Dolphy was one of several multi-instrumentalists to gain prominence during the same era. His use of the bass clarinet helped to establish the unconventional instrument within jazz. Dolphy extended the vocabulary and boundaries of the alto saxophone, and was among the earliest significant jazz flute soloists.\nHis improvisational style was characterized by the use of wide intervals, in addition to employing an array of extended techniques to emulate the sounds of human voices and animals. He used melodic lines that were \"angular, zigzagging from interval to interval, taking hairpin turns at unexpected junctures, making dramatic leaps from the lower to the upper register.\" Although Dolphy's work is sometimes classified as free jazz, his compositions and solos were often rooted in conventional (if highly abstracted) tonal bebop harmony.\nEarly life, family and education.\nEric Dolphy was born and raised in Los Angeles, California. His parents were Sadie and Eric Dolphy, Sr., who immigrated to the United States from Panama. He began music lessons at the age of six, studying clarinet and saxophone privately. While still in junior high, he began to study the oboe, aspiring to a professional symphonic career, and received a two-year scholarship to study at the music school of the University of Southern California. When aged 13, he received a \"Superior\" award on clarinet from the California School Band and Orchestra festival. He attended Dorsey High School, where he continued his musical studies and learned additional instruments. By 1946, he was co-director of the Youth Choir at the Westminster Presbyterian Church run by Reverend Hampton B. Hawes, father of the jazz pianist of the same name. He graduated in 1947, then attended Los Angeles City College, during which time he played contemporary classical works such as Stravinsky's \"L'Histoire du soldat\" and, along with Jimmy Knepper and Art Farmer, performed with Roy Porter's \"17 Beboppers\". He went on to make eight recordings with Porter by 1949. On these early sessions, Dolphy occasionally played baritone saxophone, as well as alto saxophone, flute, and soprano clarinet.\nDolphy entered the U.S. Army in 1950 and was stationed at Fort Lewis, Washington. Beginning in 1952, he attended the Navy School of Music. Following his discharge in 1953, he returned to L.A., where he worked with many musicians, including Buddy Collette, Eddie Beal, and Gerald Wilson, to whom he later dedicated the tune \"G.W.\", recorded on \"Outward Bound\". Dolphy often had friends come by to jam, enabled by the studio that his father had built for him in the family's backyard. Recordings made in 1954 with Clifford Brown document this early period.\nCareer.\nDolphy had his big break when he was invited to join Chico Hamilton's quintet in 1958. With the group he became known to a wider audience and was able to tour extensively through 1958\u201359, when he left Hamilton's group and moved to New York City. Dolphy appears on flute with Hamilton's band in the film \"Jazz on a Summer's Day\", documenting a performance at the 1958 Newport Jazz Festival.\nPartnerships.\nCharles Mingus.\nCharles Mingus had known Dolphy from growing up in Los Angeles, and the younger man joined Mingus' Jazz Workshop in 1960, shortly after arriving in New York. He took part in Mingus' big band recording \"Pre-Bird\" (sometimes re-released as \"Mingus Revisited\"), and is featured on \"Bemoanable Lady\". Later he joined Mingus' working band at the Showplace during 1960 (memorialized in the poem \"Mingus at the Showplace\" by William Matthews), and appeared on the leader's two Candid label albums, \"Charles Mingus Presents Charles Mingus\" and \"Mingus\". Dolphy, Mingus said, \"was a complete musician. He could fit anywhere. He was a fine lead alto in a big band. He could make it in a classical group. And, of course, he was entirely his own man when he soloed... He had mastered jazz. And he had mastered all the instruments he played. In fact, he knew more than was supposed to be possible to do on them.\" In the same year, Dolphy took part in the Mingus led Jazz Artist Guild project and its Newport Rebels recording session.\nTouring in Europe with Mingus in 1961, Dolphy continued on to perform as a solo artist, and he was recorded in Scandinavia and Berlin. (See \"The Berlin Concerts\", \"The Complete Uppsala Concert\", \"Eric Dolphy in Europe\" Volumes 1, 2, and 3 (1 and 3 were also released as \"Copenhagen Concert\"), and \"Stockholm Sessions\".) He was later among the musicians who worked on \"Mingus Mingus Mingus Mingus Mingus\" in 1963, and is featured on \"Hora Decubitus\".\nIn early 1964, Dolphy returned to Mingus' working band, now including Jaki Byard, Johnny Coles, and Clifford Jordan. This sextet worked at the Five Spot before playing at Cornell University and Town Hall in New York (both were recorded: \"Cornell 1964\" and \"Town Hall Concert\") and subsequently touring Europe. The short tour is well-documented on \"Revenge!\", \"The Great Concert of Charles Mingus\", \"Mingus in Europe Volume I\", and \"Mingus in Europe Volume II\".\nJohn Coltrane.\nDolphy and John Coltrane knew each other long before they formally played together, having met when Coltrane was in Los Angeles with Johnny Hodges in 1954. They would often exchange ideas and learn from each other, and eventually, after many nights sitting in with Coltrane's band, Dolphy was asked to become a full member in early 1961. Coltrane had gained an audience and critical notice with Miles Davis's quintet, but alienated some leading jazz critics when he began to move away from hard bop. Although Coltrane's quintets with Dolphy (including the \"Village Vanguard\" and \"Africa/Brass\" sessions) are now accepted, they originally provoked \"DownBeat\" magazine to brand Coltrane and Dolphy's music as 'anti-jazz'. Coltrane later said of this criticism: \"they made it appear that we didn't even know the first thing about music (...) it hurt me to see [Dolphy] get hurt in this thing.\"\nThe initial release of Coltrane's residency at the Vanguard selected three tracks, only one of which featured Dolphy. After being issued haphazardly over the next 30 years, a comprehensive box-set featuring the music recorded at the Vanguard was released on \"Impulse!\" in 1997, called \"The Complete 1961 Village Vanguard Recordings\". The set features Dolphy heavily on both alto saxophone and bass clarinet, with Dolphy the featured soloist on their renditions of \"Naima\". A 2001 Pablo box set, drawing on recordings of Coltrane's performances from his European tours of the early 1960s, features tunes absent from the 1961 Village Vanguard material, such as \"My Favorite Things\", which Dolphy performs on flute.\nBooker Little.\nTrumpeter Booker Little and Dolphy had a short-lived musical partnership. Little's leader date for Candid, \"Out Front\", featured Dolphy mainly on alto sax, though he played bass clarinet and flute on some ensemble passages. In addition, Dolphy's album \"Far Cry\", recorded for Prestige, features Little on five tunes (one of which, \"Serene\", was not included on the original LP release).\nDolphy and Little also co-led a quintet at the Five Spot during 1961. The rhythm section consisted of Richard Davis, Mal Waldron and Ed Blackwell. One night was documented and has been released as \"At the Five Spot\" (plus a \"Memorial Album\") as well as the compilation \"Here and There\". In addition, both Dolphy and Little backed Abbey Lincoln on her album \"Straight Ahead\" and played on Max Roach's \"Percussion Bitter Sweet\". Little died at the age of 23 in October 1961.\nOthers.\nDolphy also performed on key recordings by George Russell (\"Ezz-thetics\"), Oliver Nelson (\"Screamin' the Blues\", \"The Blues and the Abstract Truth\", and \"Straight Ahead\"), and Ornette Coleman (\"\" and the \"Free Jazz\" outtake on \"Twins\"). He also worked and recorded with Gunther Schuller (\"Jazz Abstractions\"), multi-instrumentalist Ken McIntyre (\"Looking Ahead\"), bassist Ron Carter (\"Where?\"), and pianist Mal Waldron (\"The Quest\").\nAs a leader.\nDolphy's recording career as a leader began with Prestige. His association with the label spanned 13 albums recorded from April 1960 to September 1961, though he was not the leader for all of the sessions. Fantasy released a 9-CD box set in 1995 containing all of Dolphy's recorded output for Prestige.\nDolphy's first two albums as leader were \"Outward Bound\" and \"Out There\"; both featured cover artwork by Richard \"Prophet\" Jennings. The first, sounding closer to hard bop than some later releases, was recorded at Rudy Van Gelder's studio in New Jersey with trumpeter Freddie Hubbard, who shared rooms with Dolphy for a time when the two men first arrived in New York. The album features three Dolphy compositions: \"G.W.\", dedicated to Gerald Wilson, and the blues \"Les\" and \"245\". \"Out There\" is closer to third stream music, which would also form part of Dolphy's work, and features Ron Carter on cello. Charles Mingus's \"Eclipse\" from this album is one of the rare instances where Dolphy solos on soprano clarinet (others being \"Warm Canto\" from Mal Waldron's \"The Quest\", \"Densities\" from the compilation \"Vintage Dolphy\", and \"Song For The Ram's Horn\" from an unreleased recording from a 1962 Town Hall concert).\nDolphy occasionally recorded unaccompanied saxophone solos; his only predecessors were the tenor players Coleman Hawkins (\"Picasso\", 1948) and Sonny Rollins (for example, \"Body and Soul\", 1958), making Dolphy the first to do so on alto. The album \"Far Cry\" contains his performance of the Gross-Lawrence standard \"Tenderly\" on alto saxophone, and, on his subsequent tour of Europe, Billie Holiday's \"God Bless the Child\" was featured in his sets. (The earliest known version was recorded at the Five Spot during his residency with Booker Little.) He also recorded two takes of a short solo rendition of \"Love Me\" in 1963, released on \"Conversations\" and \"Muses\".\nTwentieth-century classical music was also part of Dolphy's musical career. He was very familiar with the music of composers such as Anton Webern and Alban Berg, had a large record collection that included music by these composers, as well as by Debussy, Ravel, Stravinsky, and Bart\u00f3k, and owned scores by composers such as Milton Babbitt, Donald Erb, Charles Ives, and Olivier Messiaen. He visited Edgard Var\u00e8se at his home, and performed the composer's \"Density 21.5\" for solo flute at the Ojai Music Festival in 1962. Dolphy also participated in Gunther Schuller's and John Lewis's Third Stream efforts of the 1960s, appearing on the album \"Jazz Abstractions\", and admired the Italian flute virtuoso Severino Gazzelloni, after whom he named his composition \"Gazzelloni\".\nAround 1962\u201363, one of Dolphy's working bands included the pianist Herbie Hancock, who can be heard on \"The Illinois Concert\", \"Gaslight 1962\", and the unissued Town Hall concert with poet Ree Dragonette.\nIn July 1963, producer Alan Douglas arranged recording sessions for which Dolphy's sidemen were emerging musicians of the day, and the results produced the albums \"Iron Man\" and \"Conversations\", as well as the \"Muses\" album released in Japan in late 2013. These sessions marked the first time Dolphy played with Bobby Hutcherson, whom he knew from Los Angeles, and whose sister he dated at one point. The sessions are perhaps best known for the three duets Dolphy performs with bassist Richard Davis on \"Alone Together\", \"Ode To Charlie Parker\", and \"Come Sunday\"; the aforementioned release \"Muses\" adds another take of \"Alone Together\" and an original composition for duet from which the album takes its name.\nIn 1964, Dolphy signed with Blue Note Records and recorded \"Out to Lunch!\" with Freddie Hubbard, Bobby Hutcherson, Richard Davis and Tony Williams. This album features Dolphy's fully developed avant-garde yet structured compositional style rooted in tradition. It is often considered his \"magnum opus\".\nEuropean career.\nAfter \"Out to Lunch!\" and an appearance on pianist/composer Andrew Hill's Blue Note album \"Point of Departure\", Dolphy left for Europe with Charles Mingus' sextet in early 1964. Before a concert in Oslo, Norway, he informed Mingus that he planned to stay in Europe after their tour was finished, partly because he had become disillusioned with the United States' reception of musicians who were trying something new. Mingus then named the blues they had been performing \"So Long Eric\". Dolphy intended to settle in Europe with his fianc\u00e9e Joyce Mordecai, who was working in the ballet scene in Paris, France. After leaving Mingus, he performed and recorded a few sides with various European bands, and American musicians living in Paris, such as Donald Byrd and Nathan Davis. \"Last Date\", originally a radio broadcast of a concert in Hilversum in the Netherlands, features Misha Mengelberg and Han Bennink, although it was not Dolphy's last public performance. Dolphy was also planning to join Albert Ayler's group, and, according to Jeanne Phillips, quoted in A. B. Spellman's \"Four Jazz Lives\", was preparing himself to play with Cecil Taylor. He also planned to form a band with Woody Shaw, Richard Davis, and Billy Higgins, and was writing a string quartet, \"Love Suite\".\nPersonal life and death.\nDolphy was engaged to marry Joyce Mordecai, a classically trained dancer who lived in Paris. He did not smoke and did not use drugs or alcohol.\nBefore he left for Europe in 1964, Dolphy left papers and other effects with his friends Hale Smith and Juanita Smith. Eventually much of this material was passed on to the musician James Newton. It was announced in May 2014 that six boxes of music papers had been donated to the Library of Congress.\nOn June 27, 1964, Dolphy traveled to West Berlin to play with a trio led by Karl Berger at the opening of a jazz club called The Tangent. He was apparently seriously ill when he arrived, and during the first concert was barely able to play. He was hospitalized that night, but his condition worsened. On June 29, Dolphy died after falling into a diabetic coma. While certain details of his death are still disputed, it is largely accepted that he fell into a coma caused by undiagnosed diabetes. The liner notes to the \"Complete Prestige Recordings\" box set say that Dolphy \"collapsed in his hotel room in Berlin and when brought to the hospital he was diagnosed as being in a diabetic coma. After being administered a shot of insulin he lapsed into insulin shock and died\". A later documentary and liner notes dispute this, saying Dolphy collapsed on stage in Berlin and was brought to a hospital. Allegedly, the attending hospital physicians did not know Dolphy was a diabetic and assumed, based on a stereotype of jazz musicians, that he had overdosed on drugs. In this account, he was left in a hospital bed for the drugs to run their course. Ted Curson recalled the following: \"That really broke me up. When Eric got sick on that date [in Berlin], and him being black and a jazz musician, they thought he was a junkie. Eric didn't use any drugs. He was a diabetic\u2014all they had to do was take a blood test and they would have found that out. So he died for nothing. They gave him some detox stuff and he died, and nobody ever went into that club in Berlin again. That was the end of that club.\" Shortly after Dolphy's death, Curson recorded and released \"Tears for Dolphy\", featuring a title track that served as an elegy for his friend.\nCharles Mingus remarked of Dolphy shortly after his death that \"Usually, when a man dies, you remember\u2014or you say you remember\u2014only the good things about him. With Eric, that's all you could remember. I don't remember any drags he did to anybody. The man was absolutely without a need to hurt.\"\nDolphy is buried in Angelus-Rosedale Cemetery in Los Angeles. His headstone bears the inscription: \"He Lives In His Music.\"\nLegacy.\nJohn Coltrane acknowledged Dolphy's influence in a 1962 \"DownBeat\" interview, stating: \"After he sat in... We began to play some of the things we had only talked about before. Since he's been in the band, he's had a broadening effect on us. There are a lot of things we try now that we never tried before. This helped me... We're playing things that are freer than before.\" Coltrane biographer Eric Nisenson stated: \"Dolphy's effect on Coltrane ran deep. Coltrane's solos became far more adventurous, using musical concepts that without the chemistry of Dolphy's advanced style he might have kept away from the ears of his public.\" In his book \"Free Jazz\", Ekkehard Jost provided specific examples of how Coltrane's playing began to change during the time he spent with Dolphy, noting that Coltrane started using wider melodic intervals like sixths and sevenths, and began focusing on integrating sound coloration and multiphonics into his solos. Jost contrasted Coltrane's solo on \"India\", recorded in November 1961 while Dolphy was with the group, and released on \"Impressions\", with his solo on \"My Favorite Things\", recorded roughly a year earlier, and released on the Atlantic album, and observed that on \"My Favorite Things\", Coltrane \"accepted the mode as more or less binding, occasionally aiming away from it... at tones foreign to the scale,\" whereas on \"India\", Coltrane, like Dolphy, played \"\"around\" the mode more than \"in\" it.\"\nDolphy's musical presence was also influential to many young jazz musicians who would later become prominent. Dolphy worked intermittently with Ron Carter and Freddie Hubbard throughout his career, and in later years he hired Herbie Hancock, Bobby Hutcherson and Woody Shaw to work in his live and studio bands. \"Out to Lunch!\" featured yet another young performer, drummer Tony Williams, and Dolphy's participation on Hill's \"Point of Departure\" session brought him into contact with the tenor player Joe Henderson.\nThere is a celebration held at Le Moyne College based on a Frank Zappa song, \"The Eric Dolphy Memorial Barbecue,\" inspired by him.\nCarter, Hancock and Williams would go on to become one of the quintessential rhythm sections of the decade, both together on their own albums and as the backbone of Miles Davis's second great quintet. This aspect of the second great quintet is an ironic footnote for Davis, who was critical of Dolphy's music: in a 1964 \"DownBeat\" \"Blindfold Test\", Miles quipped: \"The next time I see [Dolphy] I'm going to step on his foot.\" However, Davis new quintet's rhythm section had all worked under Dolphy, thus creating a band whose brand of \"out\" was strongly influenced by Dolphy.\nDolphy's virtuoso instrumental abilities and unique style of jazz, deeply emotional and free but strongly rooted in tradition and structured composition, heavily influenced such musicians as Anthony Braxton, members of the Art Ensemble of Chicago, Oliver Lake, Arthur Blythe, Don Byron, and Evan Parker.\nAwards, honors, and tributes.\nDolphy was posthumously inducted into the \"DownBeat\" magazine Hall of Fame in 1964. John Coltrane paid tribute to Dolphy in an interview: \"Whatever I'd say would be an understatement. I can only say my life was made much better by knowing him. He was one of the greatest people I've ever known, as a man, a friend, and a musician.\" After Dolphy died, his mother gave Coltrane his flute and bass clarinet, and Coltrane, who traveled with Dolphy's photograph, hanging it on his hotel room walls, proceeded to play the instruments on several subsequent recordings.\nFrank Zappa acknowledged Dolphy as a musical influence in the liner notes to the 1966 album \"Freak Out!\" and included a Dolphy tribute entitled \"The Eric Dolphy Memorial Barbecue\" on his 1970 album \"Weasels Ripped My Flesh\".\nPianist Geri Allen analyzed Dolphy's music for her master's thesis at the University of Pittsburgh, and paid tribute to Dolphy in tunes like \"Dolphy's Dance,\" recorded and released on her 1992 album \"Maroons\".\nIn 1989, Po Torch Records released an album titled \"The Ericle of Dolphi,\" featuring Evan Parker, Paul Rutherford, Dave Holland, and Paul Lovens.\nIn 1997, the Vienna Art Orchestra released \"Powerful Ways: Nine Immortal Non-evergreens for Eric Dolphy\" as part of its 20th anniversary box-set.\nIn 2003, to mark what would have been Dolphy's 75th birthday, a performance was made in his honor of an original composition by Phil Ranelin at the William Grant Still Arts Center in Dolphy's hometown Los Angeles. Additionally, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors designated June 20 as Eric Dolphy Day.\nIn 2014, marking 50 years since Dolphy's death, Berlin-based pianists Alexander von Schlippenbach and Aki Takase led a project called \"So Long, Eric!\", celebrating Dolphy's music and featuring musicians such as Han Bennink, Karl Berger, Tobias Delius, Axel D\u00f6rner, and Rudi Mahall. That year also saw a Dolphy tribute by a Berlin-based group led by Gebhard Ullmann, who had previously founded a quartet named \"Out to Lunch\" in 1983. In the United States, the arts group \"Seed Artists\" presented a two-day festival entitled \"Eric Dolphy: Freedom of Sound\" in Montclair, New Jersey, that year.\nDolphy's compositions are the inspiration for many tribute albums, including Oliver Lake's \"Prophet\" and \"Dedicated to Dolphy\", Jerome Harris' \"Hidden In Plain View\", Otomo Yoshihide's re-imagining of \"Out to Lunch!\", Silke Eberhard's \"Potsa Lotsa: The Complete Works of Eric Dolphy\", and Aki Takase and Rudi Mahall's duo album \"Duet For Eric Dolphy\".\nThe ballad \"Poor Eric\", composed by pianist Larry Willis and appearing on Jackie McLean's 1966 Right Now! album, is dedicated to Dolphy.\nDolphy was the subject of a 1991 documentary titled \"Last Date\", directed by Hans Hylkema, written by Hylkema and Thierry Bruneau, and produced by Akka Volta. The film includes video clips from Dolphy's television appearances, along with interviews with the members of the Misha Mengelberg trio, with whom Dolphy recorded in June 1964, as well as commentary from Buddy Collette, Ted Curson, Jaki Byard, Gunther Schuller, and Richard Davis.\nDiscography.\nAs sideman.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72699", "revid": "318264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72699", "title": "Encyclopedia of Marxism", "text": ""}
{"id": "72701", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72701", "title": "Tommaso Buscetta", "text": "Sicilian Mafia boss and government informant\nTommaso Buscetta (; 13 July 1928 \u2013 2 April 2000) was a high-ranking Italian mobster and a member of the Sicilian Mafia. He became one of the first of its members to turn informant and explain the inner workings of the organization.\nBuscetta participated in criminal activity in Italy, the United States and Brazil before being arrested and extradited from Brazil to Italy. He became disillusioned with the Mafia after the murders of several of his family members, and in 1984, decided to cooperate with the authorities. He provided important testimony at the 1986/87 Maxi Trial, the largest anti-Mafia trial in history. After the murder of the judges Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino, Buscetta gave further testimony to the Antimafia Commission linking Italian politicians to the Mafia. Buscetta entered the Witness Protection Program in the United States, where he remained until his death in 2000.\nEarly life.\nTommaso Buscetta was born on 13 July 1928, in Palermo, Sicily, the youngest of 17 children; his father was a glazier. Buscetta was raised in Kalsa, a poverty-stricken area of Palermo, which he escaped by getting involved with crime at a young age. He first became involved with the Sicilian Mafia in 1945, and in the following years, he became a full-fledged member of the Porta Nuova mandamento, where he worked mostly in cigarette smuggling.\nBuscetta married his first wife Melchiorra Cavallaro in 1944 and had three children. In 1949, he moved to Argentina and then to Brazil, where he opened a glassworks store, but in 1956, he returned to Palermo where he joined Angelo La Barbera and Salvatore \"Ciaschiteddu\" Greco together with mafiosi Antonino Sorci, Pietro Dav\u00ec and Gaetano Badalamenti, dealing with the cigarette and drug smuggling. He married his second wife Vera Girotti in 1966 and had one child. Two years later, he married his third wife Cristina De Almeida Guimar\u00e3es after moving to Brazil, and had four children. In 1958 he was arrested for cigarette smuggling and criminal association during an investigation conducted by the Guardia di Finanza against the Corsican Pascal Molinelli and the Tangerian Salomon Gozal, indicated as major suppliers of cigarettes and drugs for the Sicilian gangs. In January 1959 he was arrested again for the smuggling of two tons of cigarettes to supply Yugoslavia.\nFirst arrest.\nAfter the Ciaculli Massacre in 1963, part of an internal Mafia conflict known as the First Mafia War, he was wanted by the police. Buscetta fled to Switzerland, Mexico, Canada, and finally, the United States. In 1968, Buscetta was convicted \"in absentia\" by an Italian court of two murders related to the Ciaculli Massacre.\nOn 25 August 1970, Buscetta was arrested in Brooklyn, New York, but was released on 4 December 1970. On 21 July 1971, an arrest warrant was issued by Italian police. Buscetta moved to Brazil, having undergone plastic surgery and vocal cord surgery, he set up a drug trafficking network, but on 3 November 1972, was arrested by the Brazilian military government, and subsequently extradited to Italy exactly one month later where he began a ten-year sentence at Palermo's Ucciardone prison for drug trafficking, reduced to eight years after appeal. He was later transferred to the Le Nuove prison in Turin.\nSecond arrest.\nIn February 1980, he was granted \"half-freedom\", immediately fleeing back to Brazil to escape the brewing Second Mafia War instigated by Salvatore Riina. On 11 September 1982, Buscetta's two sons from his first wife, Benedetto and Antonio, disappeared, never to be found again, which prompted his collaboration with Italian authorities. This was followed by the deaths of his brother Vincenzo, son-in-law Giuseppe Genova, brother-in-law Pietro and four of his nephews, Domenico and Benedetto Buscetta, and Orazio and Antonio D'Amico. The war subsequently led to the deaths of many of Buscetta's allies, including Stefano Bontade. Buscetta was arrested again in S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil on 23 October 1983. He was extradited to Italy on 28 June 1984, where he attempted suicide by ingestion of barbiturates; when that failed, he decided that he was utterly disillusioned with the Mafia. Buscetta asked to talk to the anti-Mafia judge Giovanni Falcone, and began his life as an informant, referred to as a \"pentito\".\n\"Pentito\".\nBuscetta revealed information to Falcone for 45 days, explaining the inner workings and hierarchical structures of Cosa Nostra including the Sicilian Mafia Commission, that, until then, were unclear because of the strict code of silence. This became known as the \"Buscetta theorem\". He also revealed Mafia initiation rituals. Buscetta refused to speak with Falcone of the political ties of Cosa Nostra because, in his opinion, the state was not ready for statements of that magnitude, and proved to be quite general on that subject.\nIn December 1984, he was extradited to the United States where he received a new identity from the government and American citizenship and was placed in the Witness Protection Program in exchange for new revelations against the American Mafia. He testified in the Pizza Connection Trial, which took place in 1985 in New York and saw defendants Gaetano Badalamenti and other Sicilian-American mafiosi accused of drug trafficking. He also testified in 1986 at the largest trial against the Mafia in history, the Maxi Trial in Palermo, arising from the statements made to Falcone. Buscetta helped judges Falcone and Paolo Borsellino achieve significant success in the fight against organized crime, which led to 475 Mafia members indicted and 338 convicted; those sentences were upheld in 1992.\nIn mid-1992, following the bomb attacks in which Falcone and Borsellino were killed, Buscetta began to speak of the political ties of the Cosa Nostra with magistrates, accusing Salvo Lima, killed a few months earlier, and Giulio Andreotti of being the main political referents of the organization; in particular, he reported that he had known Lima personally since the late 1950s, and had met him last in 1980, and also reported that he had learned that the murder of the journalist Mino Pecorelli in 1979 would have been carried out in Andreotti's interest. Buscetta was one of the main witnesses of the trials against Andreotti for mafia association and for the Pecorelli murder. Andreotti was eventually acquitted in 1999 of the charge of having commissioned the assassination of Pecorelli. In court, Buscetta also elaborated in great detail the hidden exchanges that linked politicians and the Mafia. He stated: \nIt is not Cosa Nostra that contacts the politician; instead a member of the Cosa Nostra says, that president is mine (\u00e8 cosa mia), and if you need a favor, you must go through me. In other words, the Cosa Nostra figure maintains a sort of monopoly on that politician. Every family head in the Mafia selects a man whose characteristics already make him look approachable. Forget the idea that some pact is reached first. On the contrary, one goes to that candidate and says, \"Onorevole, I can do this and that for you now, and we hope that when you are elected you will remember us\". The candidate wins and he has to pay something back. You tell him, \"We need this, will you do it or not?\". The politician understands immediately and acts always.\nDuring a trial in 1993, the Mafia member Salvatore Cancemi confessed to Buscetta that he had strangled two of Buscetta's sons to death. After the trial, Buscetta embraced Cancemi and said: \"You could not refuse the order. I forgive you because I know what it means to be in Cosa Nostra.\"\nDeath.\nBuscetta died of cancer on 2 April 2000, aged 71, having lived out most of his life in hiding with his third wife and family in Florida, United States, under false names. He was buried under a false name in North Miami, Florida.\nIn popular culture.\nHe was played by F. Murray Abraham in the 1999 film \"Excellent Cadavers\". He was played by Vincent Riotta in the 2007 mini-series \"Il Capo dei Capi\". He was portrayed by Sergio Vespertino in the 2016 Italian TV series \"The Mafia Kills Only in Summer\". He was portrayed by Pierfrancesco Favino in the 2019 film \"The Traitor\", directed by Marco Bellocchio and selected to compete for the Palme d'Or at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival. Also released in 2019, \"Our Godfather\" is a documentary by Mark Franchetti and Andrew Meier which includes onscreen testimony by Buscetta's third wife and surviving children \"who still live in anonymity because of fear of reprisal\", according to one review.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72705", "revid": "1723027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72705", "title": "Out-of-place artifact", "text": "Artifacts that challenge historical chronology\nAn out-of-place artifact (OOPArt or oopart) is an artifact of historical, archaeological, or paleontological interest to someone that is claimed to have been found in an unusual context, which someone claims to challenge conventional historical chronology by its presence in that context. Some people might think that those artifacts are too advanced for the technology known to have existed at the time, or that human presence existed at a time before humans are known to have existed. Other people might hypothesize about a contact between different cultures that is hard to account for with conventional historical understanding.\nThis description of archaeological objects is used in fringe science such as cryptozoology, as well as by proponents of ancient astronaut theories, young Earth creationists, and paranormal enthusiasts. It can describe a wide variety of items, from anomalies studied by mainstream science to pseudoarchaeology to objects that have been shown to be hoaxes or to have conventional explanations.\nCritics argue that most purported OOPArts which are not hoaxes are the result of mistaken interpretation and wishful thinking, such as a mistaken belief that a particular culture could not have created an artifact or technology due to a lack of knowledge or materials. In some cases, the uncertainty results from inaccurate descriptions. For example, the cuboid Wolfsegg Iron is not a perfect cube, nor are the Klerksdorp spheres perfect spheres. The Iron pillar of Delhi was said to be \"rust proof\", but it has some rust near its base; its relative resistance to corrosion is due to slag inclusions left over from the manufacturing conditions and environmental factors.\nSupporters regard OOPArts as evidence that mainstream science is overlooking huge areas of knowledge, either willfully or through ignorance. Many writers or researchers who question conventional views of human history have used purported OOPArts in attempts to bolster their arguments. Creation science often relies on allegedly anomalous finds in the archaeological record to challenge scientific chronologies and models of human evolution. Claimed OOPArts have been used to support religious descriptions of prehistory, ancient astronaut theories, and the notion of vanished civilizations that possessed knowledge or technology more advanced than that known in modern times. Proponents of OOPArts also hint at the existence of an \"alternative history\" and authors whose works provide such explanations are popular within conspiracy circles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72706", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72706", "title": "Roman Colosseum", "text": ""}
{"id": "72707", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72707", "title": "List of bishops", "text": ""}
{"id": "72708", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72708", "title": "Christian X", "text": "King of Denmark (1912\u20131947) and Iceland (1918\u20131944)\nChristian X (; 26 September 1870\u00a0\u2013 20 April 1947) was King of Denmark from 1912 until his death in 1947, and the only King of Iceland as Kristj\u00e1n X, holding the title as a result of the personal union between Denmark and independent Iceland between 1918 and 1944.\nHe was a member of the House of Gl\u00fccksburg, a branch of the House of Oldenburg, and the first monarch since King Frederick VII born into the Danish royal family; both his father and his grandfather were born as princes of a ducal family from Schleswig. Among his siblings was King Haakon VII of Norway. His son became Frederick IX of Denmark. Among his cousins were King George V of the United Kingdom, Emperor Nicholas II of Russia, and King Constantine I of Greece, while Queen Maud of Norway, was both his cousin and sister-in-law.\nHis character has been described as authoritarian and he strongly stressed the importance of royal dignity and power. His reluctance to fully embrace democracy resulted in the Easter Crisis of 1920, in which he dismissed the democratically elected Social Liberal cabinet with which he disagreed, and installed one of his own choosing. This was in accordance with the letter of the constitution, but the principle of parliamentarianism had been considered a constitutional custom since 1901. Faced with mass demonstrations, a general strike organized by the Social Democrats, and the risk of the monarchy being overthrown, he was forced to accept that a monarch could not keep a government in office against the will of parliament as well as his reduced role as a symbolic head of state.\nDuring the German occupation of Denmark, Christian became a popular symbol of resistance, particularly because of the symbolic value of the fact that he rode every day through the streets of Copenhagen unaccompanied by guards. With a reign spanning two world wars, and his role as a rallying symbol for Danish national sentiment during the German occupation, he became one of the most popular Danish monarchs of modern times. In Iceland however, the Danish government's capitulation to the Germans was seen as an abandonment of the agreed defensive relationship that the Danish crown was to hold over the island. As head of state, Christian became deeply unpopular in Iceland, contributing to the country's redesignation as the modern Republic of Iceland.\nEarly life.\nBirth.\nChristian was born on 26 September 1870 at his parents' country residence, the Charlottenlund Palace, located on the shores of the \u00d8resund Strait 10 kilometers north of Copenhagen on the island of Zealand in Denmark, during the reign of his paternal grandfather, King Christian IX. He was the first child of Crown Prince Frederick of Denmark and his wife Louise of Sweden. His father was the eldest son of King Christian IX of Denmark and Louise of Hesse-Kassel, and his mother was the only daughter of King Charles XV of Sweden and Norway and Louise of the Netherlands. The Danish author Hans Christian Andersen wrote the next day in his diary: \"The night before 12 a Prince was born by the Crown Princess, the whole city flagged today in the beautiful weather.\" He was baptised with the names \"Christian Carl Frederik Albert Alexander Vilhelm\" in the chapel of Christiansborg Palace on 31 October 1870 by the Bishop of Zealand, Hans Lassen Martensen. The royal christening gown, which has been used for the baptism of almost all royal children in Denmark ever since, was used for the first time at his christening. This gown is made of Brussels lace, and was bought by Crown Princess Louise in Belgium for her eldest son's christening.\nPrince Christian was raised with his siblings in the royal household in Copenhagen, and grew up between his parents' residence in Copenhagen, the Frederick VIII's Palace, an 18th century palace which forms part of the Amalienborg Palace complex in central Copenhagen, and their country residence, the Charlottenlund Palace, located by the coastline of the \u00d8resund strait north of the city. As a grandchild of the reigning Danish monarch in the male line and the eldest son of the Crown Prince, he was second in line to the throne, after his father. In contrast to the usual practise of the period, where royal children were brought up by governesses, the children were raised by Crown Princess Louise herself. Under the supervision of their mother, the children of the Crown Princess received a rather strict Christian-dominated upbringing, which was characterized by severity, the fulfillment of duties, care and order. Prince Christian was less than two years older than his brother Prince Carl, and the two princes had a joint confirmation at the chapel of Christiansborg Palace in 1887. The two princes were educated at home by private tutors. In 1889 Prince Christian passed the examen artium (the university entrance examination in Denmark) in 1889 as the first member of the Danish royal family. Afterwards he started a military education as was customary for princes at that time. He subsequently served with the 5th Dragoon Regiment and later studied at the Officers Academy in Randers from 1891 to 1892.\nMarriage.\nAs a young man, Prince Christian fell in love with the French Princess Marguerite of Orl\u00e9ans, who was the younger sister of his uncle Prince Valdemar's wife Princess Marie of Orl\u00e9ans. The feelings, however, were not reciprocated, and after a few years of unhappy infatuation, she married in 1896 Marie Armand Patrice de Mac Mahon, 2nd Duke of Magenta, son of the French Marshal and President Patrice de MacMahon.\nDuring a stay in Cannes in March 1897, Christian met and fell in love with Duchess Alexandrine of Mecklenburg-Schwerin; she was a daughter of Frederick Francis III, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, and Grand Duchess Anastasia Mikhailovna of Russia. They were engaged in Schwerin on 24 March 1897 and married in Cannes on 26 April 1898. She eventually became his queen consort. They had two sons:\nThe couple were given Christian VIII's Palace at Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen as their residence and Sorgenfri Palace north of Copenhagen as a summer residence. Furthermore, the couple received Marselisborg Palace in Aarhus as a wedding present from the people of Denmark in 1898. In 1914, the King also built the villa Klitg\u00e5rden in Skagen.\nCrown Prince.\nOn 29 January 1906, King Christian IX died, and Christian's father ascended the throne as King Frederick VIII. Christian himself became crown prince.\nReign.\nAccession.\nOn 14 May 1912, King Frederick VIII died at the age of 68 after collapsing from shortness of breath while taking an evening walk in Hamburg, Germany. He had been returning from a recuperation stay in Nice, France, and was staying anonymously in the city before continuing to Copenhagen. Christian was in Copenhagen when he heard about his father's demise and succeeded to the throne at the age of 41. He was proclaimed king from the balcony of Christian VII's Palace at Amalienborg by the Prime Minister Klaus Berntsen as King Christian X.\nWorld War I.\nAt the start of the First World War in 1914, King Christian and the Danish government advocated that Denmark pursue a policy of neutrality. The King supported the policy of neutrality by participating in the so-called meeting of the Three Kings held on 18 December 1914 in Malm\u00f6 in Sweden. There, the three Scandinavian monarchs King Christian X of Denmark, King Haakon VII of Norway (Christian's brother) and King Gustav V of Sweden (Christian's mother's cousin) met along with their foreign ministers to discuss and emphasize the neutrality of the Nordic countries, and in a joint declaration, confirmed the three states' strict neutrality during the war. The meeting in 1914 was followed by another three-kings meeting in Kristiania in November 1917.\nDenmark in fact managed to maintain its neutrality during the war. However, the Danish government bowed to pressure from Germany, and had naval mines laid in Danish waters with tacit British acceptance, despite the fact that Denmark was obliged under international law to keep its territorial waters open.\nIn 1915, the Constitution of Denmark was changed to introduce universal suffrage, and women were given the right to vote along with domestic servants. Although the king was reluctant to the constitutional changes, the Danish Women's Society organized a procession with approximately 20,000 participants who went to Amalienborg to thank the king. In his address to the procession, the king stated, among other things: In one place, women cannot be dispensed with, and that is in the homes. Here, the influence of women cannot be replaced, because through the child's love for the home, the one for our common home, Denmark, is awakened.\nEaster Crisis of 1920.\nIn April 1920, Christian instigated the Easter Crisis, perhaps the most decisive event in the evolution of the Danish monarchy in the twentieth century. The immediate cause was a conflict between the King and the cabinet over the reunification with Denmark of Schleswig, a former Danish fiefdom, which had been lost to Prussia during the Second War of Schleswig. Danish claims to the region persisted to the end of World War I, at which time the defeat of the Germans made it possible to resolve the dispute. According to the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, the disposition of Schleswig was to be determined by two plebiscites: one in Northern Schleswig (Denmark's South Jutland County 1971\u20132006), the other in Central Schleswig (today part of the German state of Schleswig-Holstein). No plebiscite was planned for Southern Schleswig, as it was dominated by an ethnic German majority and, in accordance with prevailing sentiment of the times, remained part of the post-war German state.\nIn Northern Schleswig, seventy-five percent voted for reunification with Denmark and twenty-five percent for remaining with Germany. In this vote, the entire region was considered to be an indivisible unit, and the entire region was awarded to Denmark. In Central Schleswig, the situation was reversed with eighty percent voting for Germany and twenty percent for Denmark. In this vote, each municipality decided its own future, and German majorities prevailed everywhere. In light of these results, the government of Prime Minister Carl Theodor Zahle determined that reunification with Northern Schleswig could go forward, while Central Schleswig would remain under German control.\nMany Danish nationalists felt that at least the city of Flensburg, in Central Schleswig, should be returned to Denmark regardless of the plebiscite's results, due to the sizeable Danish minority there and a general desire to see Germany permanently weakened in the future. Christian X agreed with these sentiments, and ordered Prime Minister Zahle to include Flensburg in the re-unification process. As Denmark had been operating as a parliamentary democracy since the Cabinet of Deuntzer in 1901, Zahle felt he was under no obligation to comply. He refused the order and resigned several days later after a heated exchange with the King.\nSubsequently, Christian X dismissed the rest of the cabinet and replaced it with a \"de facto\" conservative caretaker cabinet. The dismissal caused demonstrations and an almost revolutionary atmosphere in Denmark, and for several days the future of the monarchy seemed very much in doubt. In light of this, negotiations were opened between the King and members of the Social Democrats. Faced with the potential overthrow of the Danish Crown, Christian X stood down and dismissed his own government, installing a compromise cabinet until elections could be held later that year.\nTo date, this is the last time a reigning Danish monarch has attempted to take political action without the full support of parliament. Following the crisis, Christian X bowed fully to his drastically reduced status, and spent the last quarter-century of his rule as a model constitutional monarch.\nWorld War II.\nOn 9 April 1940 at 4\u00a0am Nazi Germany invaded Denmark in a surprise attack, overwhelming Denmark's Army and Navy and destroying the Danish Army Air Corps. Christian X quickly realized that Denmark was in an impossible position. Its territory and population were far too small to hold out against Germany for any sustained period of time. Its flat land would have resulted in it being easily overrun by German panzers; Jutland, for instance, would have been overrun in short order by a panzer attack from Schleswig-Holstein immediately to the south. Unlike its Nordic neighbours, Denmark had no mountain ranges from which a drawn-out resistance could be mounted against the German army. With no prospect of being able to hold out for any length of time, and faced with the explicit threat of the Luftwaffe bombing the civilian population of Copenhagen, and with only one general in favour of continuing to fight, Christian X and the entire Danish government capitulated at about 6\u00a0am, in exchange for retaining political independence in domestic matters, beginning the occupation of Denmark, which lasted until 5 May 1945.\nIn contrast to his brother, King Haakon VII of Norway, and Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands, King George II of the Hellenes, Grand Duchess Charlotte of Luxembourg, King Peter II of Yugoslavia, President Edvard Bene\u0161 of Czechoslovakia and President W\u0142adys\u0142aw Raczkiewicz of Poland, all of whom went into exile during the Nazi occupation of their countries, Christian X (like King Leopold III of the Belgians, unlike President Albert Lebrun of France who was deposed) remained in his capital throughout the occupation of Denmark, being to the Danish people a visible symbol of the national cause (Haakon escaped the German advance after refusing to accept a Nazi-friendly puppet regime).\nUntil the imposition of martial law by Germany in August 1943, Christian's official speeches reflected the government's official policy of cooperation with the occupying forces, but this did not prevent his being seen by the Danish people as a man of \"mental resistance.\" During the first two years of the German occupation, despite his age and the precarious situation, he took a daily ride on his horse, Jubilee, through Copenhagen, unaccompanied by a groom, let alone a guard. A popular way for Danes to display patriotism and silent resistance to the German occupation was wearing a small square button with the Danish flag and the crowned insignia of the king. This symbol was called the \"Kongem\u00e6rket\" (\"King's Emblem pin\"). In addition, he helped finance the transport of Danish Jews to unoccupied Sweden, where they would be safe from Nazi persecution.\nIn 1942, Adolf Hitler sent Christian a long telegram congratulating him on his seventy-second birthday. The king's reply telegram was a mere, \"Spreche Meinen besten Dank aus. Chr. Rex\" (\"Giving my best thanks, King Christian\"). This perceived slight, known as the Telegram Crisis, greatly outraged Hitler and he immediately recalled his ambassador from Copenhagen and expelled the Danish ambassador from Germany. German pressure then resulted in the dismissal of the government led by Vilhelm Buhl and its replacement with a new cabinet led by non-party member and veteran diplomat Erik Scavenius, whom the Germans expected to be more cooperative. (In any event, whatever independence Denmark had been able to maintain during the first years of the occupation ended abruptly with the German \"Putsch\" in August 1943.) After a fall with his horse on 19 October 1942, Christian was more or less an invalid for the rest of his reign. The role he played in creating the Easter Crisis of 1920 had greatly reduced his popularity, but his daily rides, the Telegram Crisis, and the admiring stories spread by Danish-American circles once again made him popular to the point of being a beloved national symbol.\nReign over Iceland.\nThe accession of a new Danish\u2013Icelandic Act of Union in late 1918 redefined Iceland, a longtime part of the Danish realm, as a sovereign state in a personal union with the Kingdom of Denmark. This made Christian the king of the mostly autonomous Kingdom of Iceland in addition to being King of Denmark. Christian (whose name in Iceland was officially \"Kristj\u00e1n X\") was the first and only monarch to ever reign over Iceland as a sovereign kingdom as opposed to ruling it as a province of a larger kingdom. In 1941, after the German occupation of Denmark and the Allied occupation of Iceland, the Icelandic government concluded that Christian was unable to perform his duties as head of state of Iceland, and thus appointed Sveinn Bj\u00f6rnsson as regent to act as provisional head of state. Sveinn had previously been Iceland's ambassador in Copenhagen.\nIn 1944, while Denmark was still under German occupation, Icelanders voted in a plebiscite to sever all ties with the King of Denmark and to found a republic. Thus, Christian's title as King of Iceland became null and void and Sveinn Bj\u00f6rnsson was elected the first President of Iceland by the Icelandic parliament. Christian, who believed that Sveinn had given him assurances that Iceland would not make further moves toward independence while the occupation was ongoing, felt quite badly betrayed. However, at the urging of his relative, the King of Sweden, Christian still accepted the outcome and sent a message of congratulations to Iceland during the celebration of the founding of the Republic on 17 June 1944. The reading of the King's letter provoked cheers at \u00deingvellir during the celebration. Despite this implicit acceptance of Iceland's independence, Christian never actually stopped using the title \"King of Iceland\", and continued including it in his regnal name until his death in 1947.\nDeath.\nChristian X died at the Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen, on 20 April 1947, at the age of 76. Christian X was interred along with other members of the Danish royal family in Roskilde Cathedral near Copenhagen. A cloth armband of the type worn by members of the Danish resistance movement was placed on his coffin under a castrum doloris.\nLegends.\nOn 22 November 1942, \"The Washington Post\" published a photograph of Christian X, facetiously calling him a victim of Hitler, and stated that the nation of this monarch did not oppose German occupation with arms. It then became important for Danish Americans to prove the contrary, and a number of stories were invented in the turmoil of the war. The most successful of these was the legend of the King wearing the yellow star to support the Jews.\nKing Christian used to ride daily through the streets of Copenhagen unaccompanied while the people stood and waved to him. One apocryphal story relates that one day, a German soldier remarked to a young boy that he found it odd that the King would ride with no bodyguard. The boy reportedly replied, \"All of Denmark is his bodyguard.\" This story was recounted in Nathaniel Benchley's bestselling book \"Bright Candles\" as well as in Lois Lowry's book \"Number the Stars\". The contemporary patriotic song \"Der rider en Konge\" (\"There Rides a King\") centers on the King's rides. In this song, the narrator replies to a foreigner's inquiry about the King's lack of a guard that \"he is our freest man\" and that the King is not shielded by physical force but that \"hearts guard the king of Denmark.\"\nAnother popular, but apocryphal, legend carried by the American press concerned the supposed flying of the German flag over the Hotel d'Angleterre (then being used as the German military headquarters in Copenhagen). The King, riding by and seeing the flag, told a German sentry that it was a violation of the armistice agreement and that the flag must be taken down. The sentry replied that this would not be done. The King then said that if the flag was not taken down, he would send a Danish soldier to take it down. The sentry responded, \"The soldier will be shot.\" The King replied, \"the Danish soldier will be me.\" According to the story, the flag was taken down.\nKing Christian X became the hero of a number of myths about his defense of the Danish Jews. He became the subject of a persistent urban legend according to which, during Nazi occupation, Nazis forced the Jews to wear the Star of David and the king donned the Star of David himself as a symbol of solidarity with them. However, in Denmark, unlike other Nazi-controlled territories, Jews were never forced to wear the Star of David. The legend likely stems from a 1942 British report that claimed he threatened to don the star if this was forced upon Danish Jews, and was popularised when it was included in Leon Uris's best-selling novel \"Exodus\".\nIt is true, however, that the King intended to wear the star in case the Danish Jews were forced to do so. In his personal diary, he wrote this entry: \"When you look at the inhumane treatment of Jews, not only in Germany but occupied countries as well, you start worrying that such a demand might also be put on us, but we must clearly refuse such this due to their protection under the Danish constitution. I stated that I could not meet such a demand towards Danish citizens. If such a demand is made, we would best meet it by all wearing the Star of David.\"\nThe myth may originate from a Swedish newspaper cartoon, in which the King is asked what to do if Nazi-supported prime minister Erik Scavenius makes the Jews wear yellow stars. The King replied that in that case, all Danes would have to wear such stars.\nTitles, styles and honours.\nHonours.\nKing Christian X Land in Greenland is named after him.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72710", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72710", "title": "Conceptual metaphor", "text": "In cognitive linguistics, relating conceptual domains\nIn cognitive linguistics, conceptual metaphor, or cognitive metaphor, refers to the understanding of one idea, or conceptual domain, in terms of another. An example of this is the understanding of quantity in terms of directionality (e.g. \"the price of peace is \"rising\"\") or the understanding of time in terms of money (e.g. \"I \"spent\" time at work today\").\nA conceptual domain can be any mental organization of human experience. The regularity with which different languages employ the same metaphors, often perceptually based, has led to the hypothesis that the mapping between conceptual domains corresponds to neural mappings in the brain. This theory gained wide attention in the 1990s and early 2000s, although some researchers question its empirical accuracy.\nThe conceptual metaphor theory proposed by George Lakoff and his colleagues arose from linguistics but became of interest to cognitive scientists due to its claims about the mind, the brain and their connections to the body. There is empirical evidence supporting the claim that at least some metaphors are conceptual. However, the empirical evidence for some aspects of the theory has been mixed. It is generally agreed that metaphors form an important part of human verbal conceptualization, but there is disagreement about the more specific claims conceptual metaphor theory makes about metaphor comprehension. For instance, metaphoric expressions of the form \"X is a Y\" (e.g. \"My job is a jail\") may not activate conceptual mappings in the same way that other metaphoric expressions do. Furthermore, evidence suggests that the links between the body and conceptual metaphor, while present, may not be as extreme as some conceptual metaphor theorists have suggested.\nFurthermore, certain claims from early conceptual metaphor theory have not been borne out. For instance, Lakoff asserted that human metaphorical thinking seems to work effortlessly,\nbut psychological research on comprehension (as opposed, for example, to invention) has found that metaphors are actually more difficult to process than non-metaphoric expressions. Furthermore, when metaphors lose their novelty and become conventionalized, they eventually lose their status as metaphors and become processed like ordinary words (an instance of grammaticalization). Therefore, the role of the conceptual metaphor in processing human thinking is more limited than what was claimed by some linguistic theories.\nBackground.\nThe idea of conceptual metaphors as being the basis of rational thinking, and a detailed examination of the underlying processes, was first extensively explored by George Lakoff and Mark Johnson in their work \"Metaphors We Live By\" in 1980. Since then, the field of metaphor studies within the larger discipline of cognitive linguistics has increasingly developed, with several annual academic conferences, scholarly societies, and research labs contributing to the subject area. Some researchers, such as Gerard Steen, have worked to develop empirical investigative tools for metaphor research, including the Metaphor Identification Procedure, or MIP. In Psychology, Raymond W. Gibbs, Jr., has investigated conceptual metaphor and embodiment through a number of psychological experiments. Other cognitive scientists, for example Gilles Fauconnier, study subjects similar to conceptual metaphor under the labels \"analogy\", \"conceptual blending\" and \"ideasthesia\".\nConceptual metaphors are useful for understanding complex ideas in simple terms and therefore are frequently used to give insight to abstract theories and models. For example, the conceptual metaphor of viewing communication as a conduit is one large theory explained with a metaphor. So not only is our everyday communication shaped by the language of conceptual metaphors, but so is the very way we understand scholarly theories. These metaphors are prevalent in communication and we do not just use them in language; we actually perceive and act in accordance with the metaphors.\nCriticism and perspectives.\nHistorical.\nIn the Western philosophical tradition, Aristotle is often situated as the first commentator on the nature of metaphor, writing in the \"Poetics\", \"A 'metaphorical term' involves the transferred use of a term that properly belongs to something else,\" and elsewhere in the \"Rhetoric\" he says that metaphors make learning pleasant; \"To learn easily is naturally pleasant to all people, and words signify something, so whatever words create knowledge in us are the pleasantest.\" Aristotle's writings on metaphor constitute a \"substitution view\" of metaphor, wherein a metaphor is simply a decorative word or phrase substituted for a more ordinary one. This has been sometimes called the \"Traditional View of Metaphor\" and at other times the \"Classical Theory of Metaphor\". Later in the first century A.D., the Roman rhetorician Quintilian builds upon Aristotle's earlier work of metaphor by focusing more on the comparative function of metaphorical language. In his work \"Institutio Oratoria,\" Quintilian states,\" In totum autem metaphora brevior est similitudo\" or \"on the whole, metaphor is a shorter form of simile\". Other philosophers throughout history have lent their perspectives to the discussion of metaphor as well. Friedrich Nietzsche for example, claimed that language as a whole did not portray reality but instead made a series of bold metaphors. Nietzsche believed that each step of cognition, the transfer of real world information to nerve stimuli, the culmination of nerve stimuli into mental images, the translation of mental images to words, was metaphorical. Modern interpretations of these early theories have also been intensely debated. Janet Soskice, Professor of Philosophical Theology at the University of Cambridge, writes in summary that \"it is certain that we shall taste the freshness of their insights only if we free them from the obligation to answer questions that were never theirs to ask\". George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, although originally taking a hard-line interpretation of these early authors later concede that Aristotle was working within a different philosophical framework from what we engage with today and that critical interpretations should take this in to account.\nModern.\nIn his 2007 book \"The Stuff of Thought\", cognitive scientist Steven Pinker lays out several useful classifications for the study of conceptual metaphor. Pinker first contrasts two perspectives on metaphor, what he calls the killjoy theory and the messianic theory. The killjoy theory categorizes metaphors as \"dead\", that is it asserts that modern day speakers are not aware of the comparison made between source and target domains in the everyday metaphors they use. For example, many are not cognizant that the phrase \"to come to a head\" refers to the accumulation of pus in a pimple. In contrast, the messianic theory correlates more closely with Lakoff and Johnson's idea of a conceptual metaphor. This view states that users of metaphors are aware of how the metaphor maps onto the domains and use them to relate shared perceptual experiences to more complex thoughts.\nAnother important distinction made by Pinker is that between literary, or poetic metaphors, and conceptual, or generative metaphors. Poetic metaphors are used for a variety of reasons but ultimately highlight similarities or incongruencies in an expressive manner. Pinker's example of this being the classic Shakespearian line \"Juliet is the sun\". These metaphors can often appear convoluted or unclear without deeper context. Conceptual metaphors result from some inherent relation between two domains. These metaphors, so innate they are considered cliche, are interestingly able to generate infinite new metaphors. For example, thinking back on the conceptual metaphor ARGUMENT IS WAR, one can build many new metaphors such as \"I shot him down\" or \"he blew my argument to pieces\".\nPinker himself settles on a moderate view that falls in between the messianic and killjoy theories on metaphor. Perhaps most interestingly, while Pinker concedes that metaphor is a useful way to combat the limited ability of language to express thought, he postulates that a higher level of abstract thought must still be present. Otherwise, Pinker points out, how could we engage in critique of metaphors or employ metaphors for comedic effect?\nMajor criticisms of work done on conceptual metaphor stem from the way many researchers conduct their research. Many study metaphors in a \"top-down\" direction, looking first at a few examples to suggest conceptual metaphors, then examining the structure of those metaphors. Researchers would look at their own lexicon, dictionaries, thesauri, and other corpora to study metaphors in language. Critics say this ignored the way language was actually used and focused too much on the hypothetical metaphors, so many irregularities were overlooked in favor of postulating universal conceptual metaphors. In 2007, Pragglejaz Group came up with a methodology for identifying metaphorical expressions as a response to these criticisms.\nMappings.\nThere are two main roles for the conceptual domains posited in conceptual metaphors:\nA mapping is the way in which a source domain tracks onto and describes aspects of the target domain. Mappings describe the mental organization of information in domains, the underlying phenomenon that drives metaphorical usage in language. This conceptualization relates closely to image schemas, mental representations used in reasoning, through the extension of spatial and physical laws to more complex situations.\nA primary tenet of this theory is that metaphors are matter of thought and not merely of language: hence, the term \"conceptual metaphor\". The metaphor may seem to consist of words or other linguistic expressions that come from the terminology of the more concrete conceptual domain, but conceptual metaphors underlie a system of related metaphorical expressions that appear on the linguistic surface. Similarly, the mappings of a conceptual metaphor are themselves motivated by image schemas which are pre-linguistic schemas concerning space, time, moving, controlling, and other core elements of embodied human experience.\nConceptual metaphors typically employ a more abstract concept as target and a more concrete or physical concept as their source. For instance, metaphors such as 'the days [the more abstract or target concept] ahead' or 'giving my time' rely on more concrete concepts, thus expressing time as a path into physical space, or as a substance that can be handled and offered as a gift. Different conceptual metaphors tend to be invoked when the speaker is trying to make a case for a certain point of view or course of action. For instance, one might associate \"the days ahead\" with leadership, whereas the phrase \"giving my time\" carries stronger connotations of bargaining. Selection of such metaphors tends to be directed by a subconscious or implicit habit in the mind of the person employing them.\nThe principle of unidirectionality states that the metaphorical process typically goes from the more concrete to the more abstract, and not the other way around. Accordingly, abstract concepts are understood in terms of prototype concrete processes. The term \"concrete,\" in this theory, has been further specified by Lakoff and Johnson as more closely related to the developmental, physical neural, and interactive body (see embodied philosophy). One manifestation of this view is found in the cognitive science of mathematics, where it is proposed that mathematics itself, the most widely accepted means of abstraction in the human community, is largely metaphorically constructed, and thereby reflects a cognitive bias unique to humans that uses embodied prototypical processes (e.g. counting, moving along a path) that are understood by all human beings through their experiences.\nConduit metaphor.\nThe conduit metaphor is a dominant class of figurative expressions used when discussing communication itself (metalanguage). It operates whenever people speak or write as if they \"insert\" their mental contents (feelings, meanings, thoughts, concepts, etc.) into \"containers\" (words, phrases, sentences, etc.) whose contents are then \"extracted\" by listeners and readers. Thus, language is viewed as a \"conduit\" conveying mental content between people.\nDefined and described by linguist Michael J. Reddy, PhD, his proposal of this conceptual metaphor refocused debate within and outside the linguistic community on the importance of metaphorical language.\nLanguage and culture as mappings.\nIn their 1980 work, Lakoff and Johnson closely examined a collection of basic conceptual metaphors, including:\nThe latter half of each of these phrases invokes certain assumptions about concrete experience and requires the reader or listener to apply them to the preceding abstract concepts of love or organizing in order to understand the sentence in which the conceptual metaphor is used.\nThere are numerous ways in which conceptual metaphors shape human perception and communication, especially in mass media and in public policy. Recent experiments by Thibodeau and Boroditsky substantiate this line of thought, termed \"framing\". In the experiments, conceptual metaphors that compared crime to either a beast or a disease had drastic effects on public policy opinions.\nConceptual metaphors are commonplace in language. George Lakoff and Mark Johnson suggest that metaphors may unconsciously shape the way we think and act in their founding work, \"Metaphors We Live By\" (1980). For example, take the commonly used conceptual metaphor, ARGUMENT IS WAR. This metaphor shapes our language in the way we view argument as a battle to be won. It is not uncommon to hear someone say \"He won that argument\" or \"I attacked every weak point in his argument\". The very way argument is conceptualized is shaped by this metaphor of arguments being a war. Argument can be seen in other ways than a battle, but we use this concept to shape the way we think of argument and the way we go about arguing. The same applies for the other conceptual metaphors.\nSimilarly, Colin Murray Turbayne suggested in his \"The Myth of Metaphor\" (1962) that ancient \"dead metaphors\" have also influenced the evolution over time of modern scientific theories in a subtle manner. As examples of mankind's victimization by dead metaphors, Turbayne points to the incorporation of mechanistic metaphors first developed by Isaac Newton and Ren\u00e9 Descartes into modern theories developed by philosophers including: Immanuel Kant, George Berkeley and David Hume. In his \"Metaphors for the Mind: The Creative Mind and Its Origins\" (1991), he also points to the manner in which metaphors first found in Plato's \"Timaeus\" have exerted a profound influence upon the development of modern theories of both thought and language in general.\nLakoff and Johnson focus on English, and cognitive scholars writing in English have tended not to investigate the discourse of foreign languages in any great detail to determine the creative ways in which individuals negotiate, resist, and consolidate conceptual metaphors. Andrew Goatly in his book \"Washing the Brain\" (2007) considers ideological conceptual metaphors as well as Chinese conceptual metaphors.\nJames W. Underhill, a modern Humboldtian scholar, attempts to reestablish Wilhelm von Humboldt's concern for the different ways languages frame reality, and the strategies individuals adopt in creatively resisting and modifying existing patterns of thought. Taking on board the Lakoff-Johnson paradigm of conceptual metaphor, he investigates the way in which Czech communists appropriated the concept of the people, the state and struggle, and the way German Communists harnessed concepts of eternity and purity. He also reminds us that, as Klemperer demonstrates, resisting patterns of thought means engaging in conceptual metaphors and refusing the logic that ideologies impose upon them. In multilingual studies (based on Czech, German, French &amp; English), Underhill considers how different cultures reformulate key concepts such as truth, love, hate and war.\nFamily roles and ethics.\nGeorge Lakoff makes similar claims on the overlap of conceptual metaphors, culture, and society in his book \"Moral Politics\" and his later book on framing, \"Don't Think of an Elephant!.\" Lakoff claims that the public political arena in America reflects a basic conceptual metaphor of 'the family.' Accordingly, people understand political leaders in terms of 'strict father' and 'nurturant mother' roles. Two basic views of political economy arise from this desire to see the nation-state act 'more like a father' or 'more like a mother.' He further amplified these views in his latest book, \"The Political Mind.\"\nUrban theorist and ethicist Jane Jacobs made this distinction in less gender-driven terms by differentiating between a 'Guardian Ethic' and a 'Trader Ethic'. She states that guarding and trading are two concrete activities that human beings must learn to apply metaphorically to all choices in later life. In a society where guarding children is the primary female duty and trading in a market economy is the primary male duty, Lakoff posits that children assign the 'guardian' and 'trader' roles to their mothers and fathers, respectively.\nLinguistics and politics.\nLakoff, Johnson, and Pinker are among the many cognitive scientists that devote a significant amount of time to current events and political theory, suggesting that respected linguists and theorists of conceptual metaphor may tend to channel their theories into political realms.\nCritics of this ethics-driven approach to language tend to accept that idioms reflect underlying conceptual metaphors, but that actual grammar, and the more basic cross-cultural concepts of scientific method and mathematical practice tend to minimize the impact of metaphors. Such critics tend to see Lakoff and Jacobs as 'left-wing figures,' and would not accept their politics as any kind of crusade against an ontology embedded in language and culture, but rather, as an idiosyncratic pastime, not part of the science of linguistics nor of much use. And others further, such as Deleuze and Guattari, Michel Foucault and, more recently, Manuel de Landa would criticize both of these two positions for mutually constituting the same old ontological ideology that would try to separate two parts of a whole that is greater than the sum of its parts.\nLakoff's 1987 work, \"Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things,\" answered some of these criticisms before they were even made: he explores the effects of cognitive metaphors (both culturally specific and human-universal) on the grammar per se of several languages, and the evidence of the limitations of the classical logical-positivist or Anglo-American School philosophical concept of the category usually used to explain or describe the scientific method. Lakoff's reliance on empirical scientific evidence, \"i.e.\" specifically falsifiable predictions, in the 1987 work and in \"Philosophy in the Flesh\" (1999) suggests that the cognitive-metaphor position has no objections to the scientific method, but instead considers the scientific method a finely developed reasoning system used to discover phenomena which are subsequently understood in terms of new conceptual metaphors (such as the metaphor of fluid motion for conducted electricity, which is described in terms of \"current\" \"flowing\" against \"impedance,\" or the gravitational metaphor for static-electric phenomena, or the \"planetary orbit\" model of the atomic nucleus and electrons, as used by Niels Bohr).\nFurther, partly in response to such criticisms, Lakoff and Rafael E. N\u00fa\u00f1ez, in 2000, proposed a cognitive science of mathematics that would explain mathematics as a consequence of, not an alternative to, the human reliance on conceptual metaphor to understand abstraction in terms of basic experiential concretes.\nLiterature.\nThe Linguistic Society of America has argued that \"the most recent linguistic approach to literature is that of cognitive metaphor, which claims that metaphor is not a mode of language, but a mode of thought. Metaphors project structures from source domains of schematized bodily or enculturated experience into abstract target domains. We conceive the abstract idea of life in terms of our experiences of a journey, a year, or a day. We do not understand Robert Frost's 'Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening' to be about a horse-and-wagon journey but about life. We understand Emily Dickinson's 'Because I could not stop for Death' as a poem about the end of the human life span, not a trip in a carriage. This work is redefining the critical notion of imagery. Perhaps for this reason, cognitive metaphor has significant promise for some kind of rapprochement between linguistics and literary study.\"\nEducation.\nTeaching thinking by analogy (metaphor) is one of the main themes of The Private Eye Project. The idea of encouraging use of conceptual metaphors can also be seen in other educational programs touting the cultivation of \"critical thinking skills\".\nThe work of political scientist R\u016bta Kazlauskait\u0117 examines metaphorical models in school-history knowledge of the controversial Polish-Lithuanian past. On the basis of Lakoff and Johnson's conceptual metaphor theory, she shows how the implicit metaphorical models of everyday experience, which inform the abstract conceptualization of the past, truth, objectivity, knowledge, and multiperspectivity in the school textbooks, obstruct an understanding of the divergent narratives of past experience.\nLanguage learning.\nThere is some evidence that an understanding of underlying conceptual metaphors can aid the retention of vocabulary for people learning a foreign language. To improve learners' awareness of conceptual metaphor, one monolingual learner's dictionary, the Macmillan English Dictionary has introduced 50 or so 'metaphor boxes' covering the most salient Lakoffian metaphors in English. For example, the dictionary entry for \"conversation\" includes a box with the heading: 'A conversation is like a journey, with the speakers going from one place to another', followed by vocabulary items (words and phrases) which embody this metaphorical schema. Language teaching experts are beginning to explore the relevance of conceptual metaphor to how learners learn and what teachers do in the classroom.\nMapping in animals.\nA current study showed a natural tendency to systematically map an abstract dimension, such as social status, in our closest and non-linguistic relatives, the chimpanzees. In detail, discrimination performances between familiar conspecific faces were systematically modulated by the spatial location and the social status of the presented individuals, leading to discrimination facilitation or deterioration. High-ranked individuals presented at spatially higher position and low-ranked individuals presented at lower position led to discrimination facilitation, while high-ranked individuals at lower positions and low-ranked individuals at higher position led to discrimination deterioration. This suggests that this tendency had already evolved in the common ancestors of humans and chimpanzees and is not uniquely human, but describes a conceptual metaphorical mapping that predates language.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72711", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72711", "title": "Cognitive linguistics", "text": "Discipline combining linguistics, psychology and cognitive science\nCognitive linguistics is an interdisciplinary branch of linguistics, combining knowledge and research from cognitive science, cognitive psychology, neuropsychology and linguistics. Models and theoretical accounts of cognitive linguistics are considered as psychologically real, and research in cognitive linguistics aims to help understand cognition in general and is seen as a road into the human mind. \nThere has been scientific and terminological controversy around the label \"cognitive linguistics\"; there is no consensus on what specifically is meant with the term.\nBackground.\nThe roots of cognitive linguistics are in Noam Chomsky's 1959 critical review of B. F. Skinner's \"Verbal Behavior\". Chomsky's rejection of behavioural psychology and his subsequent anti-behaviourist activity helped bring about a shift of focus from empiricism to mentalism in psychology under the new concepts of cognitive psychology and cognitive science.\nChomsky considered linguistics as a subfield of cognitive science in the 1970s but called his model transformational or generative grammar. Having been engaged with Chomsky in the linguistic wars, George Lakoff united in the early 1980s with Ronald Langacker and other advocates of neo-Darwinian linguistics in a so-called \"Lakoff\u2013Langacker agreement\". It is suggested that they picked the name \"cognitive linguistics\" for their new framework to undermine the reputation of generative grammar as a cognitive science.\nConsequently, there are three competing approaches that today consider themselves as true representatives of cognitive linguistics. One is the Lakoffian\u2013Langackerian brand with capitalised initials (Cognitive Linguistics). The second is generative grammar, while the third approach is proposed by scholars whose work falls outside the scope of the other two. They argue that cognitive linguistics should not be taken as the name of a specific selective framework, but as a whole field of scientific research that is assessed by its evidential rather than theoretical value.\nApproaches.\nGenerative grammar.\nGenerative grammar functions as a source of hypotheses about language computation in the mind and brain. It is argued to be the study of 'the cognitive neuroscience of language'. Generative grammar studies behavioural instincts and the biological nature of cognitive-linguistic algorithms, providing a computational\u2013representational theory of mind.\nThis in practice means that sentence analysis by linguists is taken as a way to uncover cognitive structures. It is argued that a random genetic mutation in humans has caused syntactic structures to appear in the mind. Therefore, the fact that people have language does not rely on its communicative purposes.\nFor a famous example, it was argued by linguist Noam Chomsky that sentences of the type \"Is the man who is hungry ordering dinner\" are so rare that it is unlikely that children will have heard them. Since they can nonetheless produce them, it was further argued that the structure is not learned but \"acquired\" from an innate cognitive language component. Generative grammarians then took as their task to find out all about innate structures through introspection in order to form a picture of the hypothesised language faculty. \nGenerative grammar promotes a modular view of the mind, considering language as an autonomous mind module. Thus, language is separated from mathematical logic to the extent that inference cannot explain language acquisition. The generative conception of human cognition is also influential in cognitive psychology and computer science.\nCognitive Linguistics (linguistics framework).\nOne of the approaches to cognitive linguistics is called Cognitive Linguistics, with capital initials, but it is also often spelled cognitive linguistics with all lowercase letters. This movement saw its beginning in early 1980s when George Lakoff's metaphor theory was united with Ronald Langacker's cognitive grammar, with subsequent models of construction grammar following from various authors. The union entails two different approaches to linguistic and cultural evolution: that of the conceptual metaphor, and the construction. \nCognitive Linguistics defines itself in opposition to generative grammar, arguing that language functions in the brain according to general cognitive principles. Lakoff's and Langacker's ideas are applied across sciences. In addition to linguistics and translation theory, Cognitive Linguistics is influential in literary studies, education, sociology, musicology, computer science and theology.\nConceptual metaphor theory.\nAccording to American linguist George Lakoff, \"metaphors\" are not just figures of speech, but modes of thought. Lakoff hypothesises that principles of abstract reasoning may have evolved from visual thinking and mechanisms for representing spatial relations that are present in lower animals. Conceptualisation is regarded as being based on the \"embodiment\" of knowledge, building on physical experience of vision and motion. For example, the 'metaphor' of emotion builds on downward motion while the metaphor of reason builds on upward motion, as in saying \"The discussion \"fell\" to the emotional level, but I \"raised it back up\" to the rational plane.\" It is argued that language does not form an independent cognitive function but fully relies on other cognitive skills which include perception, attention, motor skills, and visual and spatial processing. Same is said of various other cognitive phenomena such as the sense of time:\n\"In our visual systems, we have detectors for motion and detectors for objects/locations. We do not have detectors for time (whatever that could mean). Thus, it makes good biological sense that time should be understood in terms of things and motion.\" \u2014George Lakoff\nIn Cognitive Linguistics, thinking is argued to be mainly automatic and unconscious. Cognitive linguists study the embodiment of knowledge by seeking expressions which relate to modal schemas. For example, in the expression \"It is quarter to eleven\", the preposition \"to\" represents a modal schema which is manifested in language as a visual or sensorimotoric 'metaphor'.\nCognitive and construction grammar.\n\"Constructions\", as the basic units of grammar, are conventionalised form\u2013meaning pairings which are comparable to memes as units of linguistic evolution. These are considered multi-layered. For example, idioms are higher-level constructions which contain words as middle-level constructions, and these may contain morphemes as lower-level constructions. It is argued that humans do not only share the same body type, allowing a common ground for embodied representations; but constructions provide common ground for uniform expressions within a speech community. Like biological organisms, constructions have life cycles which are studied by linguists.\nAccording to the cognitive and \"constructionist\" view, there is no grammar in the traditional sense of the word. What is commonly perceived as grammar is an inventory of constructions; a complex adaptive system; or a population of constructions. Constructions are studied in all fields of language research from language acquisition to corpus linguistics.\nIntegrative cognitive linguistics.\nThere is also a third approach to cognitive linguistics, which neither directly supports the modular (Generative Grammar) nor the anti-modular (Cognitive Linguistics) view of the mind. Proponents of the third view argue that, according to brain research, language processing is specialized although not autonomous from other types of information processing. Language is thought of as one of the human cognitive abilities, along with perception, attention, memory, motor skills, and visual and spatial processing, rather than being subordinate to them. Emphasis is laid on a cognitive semantics that studies the contextual\u2013conceptual nature of meaning.\nComputational approaches.\nCognitive perspective on natural language processing.\nCognitive linguistics offers a scientific first principle direction for quantifying states-of-mind through natural language processing. As mentioned earlier, Cognitive Linguistics approaches grammar with a nontraditional view. Traditionally grammar has been defined as a set of structural rules governing the composition of clauses, phrases and words in a natural language. From the perspective of Cognitive Linguistics, grammar is seen as the rules of arrangement of language which best serve communication of the experience of the human organism through its cognitive skills which include perception, attention, motor skills, and visual and spatial processing. Such rules are derived from observing the conventionalized pairings of meaning to understand sub-context in the evolution of language patterns. The cognitive approach to identifying sub-context by observing what comes before and after each linguistic construct provides a grounding of meaning in terms of sensorimotoric embodied experience. When taken together, these two perspectives form the basis of defining approaches in computational linguistics with strategies to work through the symbol grounding problem which posits that, for a computer, a word is merely a symbol, which is a symbol for another symbol and so on in an unending chain without grounding in human experience. The broad set of tools and methods of computational linguistics are available as natural language processing or NLP. Cognitive linguistics adds a new set of capabilities to NLP. These cognitive NLP methods enable software to analyze sub-context in terms of internal embodied experience.\nMethods.\nThe goal of natural language processing (NLP) is to enable a computer to \"understand\" the contents of text and documents, including the contextual nuances of the language within them. \nThe perspective of traditional https:// offers NLP three approaches or methods to identify and quantify the literal contents, the who, what, where and when in text \u2013 in linguistic terms, the semantic meaning or semantics of the text. The perspective of cognitive linguistics offers NLP a direction to identify and quantify the contextual nuances, the why and how in text \u2013 in linguistics terms, the implied pragmatic meaning or pragmatics of text.\nThe three NLP approaches to understanding literal semantics in text based on traditional linguistics are symbolic NLP, statistical NLP, and neural NLP. The first method, symbolic NLP (1950s \u2013 early 1990s) is based on first principles and rules of traditional linguistics. The second method, statistical NLP (1990s\u20132010s), builds upon the first method with a layer of human curated &amp; machine-assisted corpora for multiple contexts. The third approach neural NLP (2010 onwards), builds upon the earlier methods by leveraging advances in deep neural network-style methods to automate tabulation of corpora &amp; parse models for multiple contexts in shorter periods of time. All three methods are used to power NLP techniques like stemming and lemmatisation in order to obtain statistically relevant listing of the who, what, where &amp; when in text through named-entity recognition and Topic model programs. The same methods have been applied with NLP techniques like a bag-of-words model to obtain statistical measures of emotional context through sentiment analysis programs. The accuracy of a sentiment analysis system is, in principle, how well it agrees with human judgments. Because evaluation of sentiment analysis is becoming more and more specialty based, each implementation needs a separate training model and specialized human verification raising Inter-rater reliability issues. However, the accuracy is considered generally acceptable for use in evaluating emotional context at a statistical or group level.\nA developmental trajectory of NLP to understand contextual pragmatics in text involving emulating intelligent behavior and apparent comprehension of natural language is cognitive NLP. This method is a rules based approach which involves assigning meaning to a word, phrase, sentence or piece of text based on the information presented before and after the piece of text being analyzed.\nControversy.\nThe specific meaning of cognitive linguistics, the proper address of the name, and the scientific status of the enterprise have been called into question. Criticism includes an overreliance on introspective data, a lack of experimental testing of hypotheses and little integration of findings from other fields of cognitive science.\nSome researchers go as far as to consider calling the field 'cognitive' at all a misnomer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"It would seem to me that [cognitive linguistics] is the sort of linguistics that uses findings from cognitive psychology and neurobiology and the like to explore how the human brain produces and interprets language. In other words, cognitive linguistics is a cognitive science, whereas Cognitive Linguistics is not. Most of generative linguistics, to my mind, is not truly cognitive either.\"\u2014\u200a\nThere has been criticism regarding the brain-related claims of both Chomsky's generative grammar, and Lakoff's Cognitive Linguistics. These are said to advocate too extreme views on the axis of modular versus general processing. The empirical evidence points to language being partially specialized and interacting with other systems. However, to counter behaviorism, Chomsky postulated that language acquisition occurs inside an autonomous module, which he calls the language faculty, thus suggesting a very high degree of specialization of language in the brain. To offer an alternative to his view, Lakoff, in turn, postulated the opposite by claiming that language acquisition is not specialized at all because language does not constitute a cognitive capacity of its own but occurs in the sensory domains such as vision and kinesthesis. According to the critical view, these ideas were not motivated by brain research but by a struggle for power in linguistics. Members of such frameworks are also said to have used other researchers' findings to present them as their own work. While this criticism is accepted for most part, it is claimed that some of the research has nonetheless produced useful insights."}
{"id": "72712", "revid": "1297650973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72712", "title": "Iconicity", "text": "Aspect of linguistics and semiotics\nIn functional-cognitive linguistics, as well as in semiotics, iconicity is the conceived similarity or analogy between the form of a sign (linguistic or otherwise) and its meaning, as opposed to arbitrariness (which is typically assumed in structuralist, formalist and generative approaches to linguistics). The principle of iconicity is also shared by the approach of linguistic typology.\nIconic principles:\nQuantity principle.\nThe use of quantity of phonetic material to iconically mark increased quality or quantity can be noted in the lengthening of words to indicate a greater degree, such as \"looong\". It is also common to use reduplication to iconically mark increase, as Edward Sapir is quoted, \u201cThe process is generally employed, with self-evident symbolism, to indicate such concepts as distribution, plurality, repetition, customary activity, increase of size, added intensity, continuance\u201d (1921:79). This has been confirmed by the comparative studies of Key (1965) and Moravcsik (1978). This can be seen, for example, in Amharic, where ' means \"it was broken\" and ' means that \"it was shattered\".\nIconic coding principles may be natural tendencies in language and are also part of our cognitive and biological make-up. Whether iconicity is a part of language is an open debate in linguistics. For instance, Haspelmath has argued against iconicity, claiming that most iconic phenomena can be explained by frequency biases: since simpler meanings tend to be more frequent in the language use they tend to lose phonological material.\nOnomatopoeia (and mimesis more broadly) may be seen as a kind of iconicity, though even onomatopoeic sounds have a large degree of arbitrariness.\nThe evolution of language.\nDerek Bickerton has posited that iconic signs, both verbal and gestural, were crucial in the evolution of human language. Animal communication systems, Bickerton has argued, are largely composed of indexical (and, occasionally, iconic) signs, whereas in human language, \"most words are symbolic, and\u00a0... without symbolic words we couldn\u2019t have language\". The distinction Bickerton draws between these categories is one of displacement, with the indexical signs of animal communication systems having no capacity for displacement, and the symbolic signs of human language requiring it. Iconic signs, however, \"may or may not have it depending on how they\u2019re used\u00a0... iconicity, therefore, is the most probable road that our ancestors took into language\".\nUsing a niche-construction view of human evolution, Bickerton has hypothesized that human ancestors used iconic signs as recruitment signals in the scavenging of dead megafauna. This process \"would have created new words and deployed old words in new contexts, further weakening the uncoupling of words from situations, from current occurrence\u2014even from fitness\", and thus allowing for the creation of symbolic language.\nIn \"The Symbolic Species\", Terrence Deacon argues that the emanation of symbolic capacities unique to language was a critical factor in the evolution of the human brain, and that these symbolic capacities are vital to differentiating animal from human forms of communication, processes of learning, and brain anatomy. \"The doorway into this virtual world was opened to us alone by the evolution of language, because language is not merely a mode of communication, it is also the outward expression of an unusual mode of thought\u2014symbolic representation.\"\nEndophoric and exophoric.\nWinfried N\u00f6th distinguishes between endophoric and exophoric iconicity: exophoric where the signifier is iconic with the world beyond language signs, and endophoric where the signifier is iconic to another signifier within language. By endophoric he does not mean \"trivial\" recurrences like the letter 'e' in one sentence being iconic with the letter 'e' in another sentence, which are not iconic signs of one another according to N\u00f6th.\nTextual endophoric iconicity can be divided between intratextual and intertextual. An example of intratextual endophoric iconicity is \"the various recurrences of the word icon and its derivatives iconic or iconicity...Insofar as the morpheme icon refers back to earlier of its recurrences in the text and the traces of them in our memory, it is an iconic sign. Insofar as these morphemes constitute a coherent pattern of relations which create a line of mentation, they form a diagrammatic icon\". Intertextual iconicity would include things like allusions, quotations etc.\nSpecific utterances which adhere to the rules of a language are iconic with one another. Phonemes can also be iconic with one another in that they could both be consonants or plosives. Another example is \u201cthe relationship\nbetween great, greater, greatest\u2026.since the morphological pattern of adjective grading is the same as in loud, louder, loudest\u201d.\nCalls and gestures.\nIconic calls and gestures mimic the forms of the things they stand for (such as outlining shapes or moving your hands back and forth multiple times to show repetition). Iconic calls and gestures are not formally considered language or language-like communication in that they do not contrast or possess arbitrary characteristics. Noises that imitate sounds of the surrounding environment (ideophones) are also iconic. Though humans possess a repertoire of iconic calls and gestures, other mammals produce few iconic signals. Despite this, a few captive chimpanzees have shown the beginning stages of iconicity. Burling \"et al.\" states: \"Chimpanzees in the wild do not point, and rarely do so in captivity, however there is a documented case of one named Kanzi, described by Savage-Rumbaugh et al., who could indicate direction of travel by \"extending his hand\". Another chimpanzee, Viki (Hayes and Nissen 1971:107) made motions of kneading or ironing when she wanted to knead dough or iron napkins. Bee dances are another example of iconicity in animal communication systems.\nSign languages.\nIconicity is often argued to play a large role in the production and perception of gesture. In sign languages iconicity was often argued to be largely confined to sign formation (comparable to onomatopoeia). Some proponents believe that iconicity does not play an actual role in perception and production of signs once they have undergone phonological reduction and become part of the conventionalized vocabulary. More recently, the possible role of iconicity is being evaluated again. Current research on sign language phonology acknowledges that certain aspects are semantically motivated. Further, the ability to modify sign meaning through phonological changes to signs is gaining attention. The ability to work creatively with sign language in this way has been associated with accomplished, or native signers.\nIconicity is expressed in the grammatical structure of sign languages called classifiers. These are used to give descriptive information about a subject or verb. In American Sign language (ASL) a grammatical marker denoting \u201cintensity\u201d is characterized by a movement pattern with two parts: an initial pause, followed by a quick completion. When this pattern is added to the adjective GOOD, the resulting meaning is VERY-GOOD. The ASL marker for \"intensity\" is iconic in that the intended meaning (building of pressure, a sudden release) is matched by the articulatory form (a pause, a quick completion).\nLike in vocal languages, developmental trends in ASL shy away from iconicity in favor of arbitrariness. These changes \"contribute toward symmetry, fluidity, locational displacement and assimilation\". For example, the sign WE used to contain the sign for each individual being described by the WE. So the signer would sign ME + YOU + YOU + YOU + ME. Now the sign has turned into a smooth symbolic sign where the signer makes two touches on the chest, one on each side, with a sweep of the wrist in between.\nOn the whole, some researchers stress that iconicity plays an important role in sign languages, while others downplay its role. The reason for this also lies in the fact that it was, for a long time, assumed that it is a major property of natural languages that there is no relation between the surface form of a word and its potential referents (thus, there is no relationship between how the word \"computer\" is pronounced and what a computer, for example, looks like, see also arbitrariness). The idea that iconicity should not play a role in natural languages was, for example, stressed by Charles Hockett. Thus, many linguists concerned with sign languages tried to downplay the role of iconicity in sign languages. It was, however, later acknowledged that iconicity also plays a role in many spoken languages (see, for example Japanese sound symbolism). Today it is often recognized that sign languages exhibit a greater degree of iconicity compared to spoken languages due to the visual natural of sign languages. However, the structure of sign languages also puts limits to the degree of iconicity: From a truly iconic language one would expect that a concept like SMILING would be expressed by mimicking a smile (i.e., by performing a smiling face). All known sign languages, however, do not express the concept of SMILING by a smiling face, but by a manual sign.\nPoetry.\nIconicity often occurs within poetry through the use of onomatopoeia, which may be called auditory iconicity. Sometimes the form of the poem resembles or enacts the poem's content, and in this case, a visual iconicity is present. One poet well known for his visual poems, and therefore visual iconicity, is E. E. Cummings. Another poet known for \"shape poems\" is George Herbert. In his poem \"A Wreath\" (1633) each line overlaps the next while the rhyme scheme makes a circle, thus mimicking the form of a wreath.\nA subset of visual iconicity involves a spatial iconicity. For instance, in Cummings's grasshopper poem (\"r-p-o-p-h-e-s-s-a-g-r\") the word \"arriving\" begins on the far right of the poem with the \"a\", the \"r\" is near the middle of the poem, and the rest of the word is on the left of the poem. The reader must travel a great distance across the poem, therefore, in order to \"arrive\". The spatial dimension, then, can relate to a temporal dimension. In the poems \"The Fish\" and \"The Moose\" by Elizabeth Bishop, temporal iconicity is at work. The amount of time it takes to read \"The Fish\" coincides with the length of time a fish could live outside of water; likewise, the duration of the long bus ride in \"The Moose\" coincides with the poem's long first sentence as well as the twenty-some stanzas it takes before the passengers on the bus (and the reader) actually encounters the moose.\nLanguage acquisition.\nIt has been suggested that iconicity can be used in the teaching of languages. There are two ways this has been suggested. The first being \u201cHorizontal-Iconicity\u201d and the second being vowel magnitude relationships. Horizontal-Iconicity is the phenomenon of opposition of meaning and spelling. For example, in Egyptian , which means right hand, and , which means left hand. Because people are more likely to remember things they have more mnemonic tags for, it is suggested that it may be helpful to point these things out in the teaching of language.\nVowel magnitude.\nVowel magnitude relationships suggest that, the larger the object, the more likely its name has open vowels such as , , and ; the smaller the object, the more likely its name has closed vowel sounds such as , , and . Open vowel sounds are also more likely to be associated with round shapes and dark or gloomy moods, where closed vowel sounds are more likely to be associated with pointed shapes and happy moods.\nA test run by Sapir asked subjects to differentiate between two different sized tables using invented word pairs such as \"mal\" and \"mil\". He discovered a word containing was at four times more likely to be judged as larger if paired with a word containing . Nuckolls states: \"Newman discovered that\u00a0... as the tongue recedes in articulating vowels from the front to the back of the mouth, and as acoustic frequencies become lower, the vowels are judged to be larger and darker\". Bentley and Varron (1933) ran tests asking subjects to differentiate between vowel sounds without providing them, beforehand, contrasting attributes (such as bright and dark.) They found only moderate success rates that decreased when vowel sounds were closer in tone. However, they still found that sounds were judged larger or lower than sounds.\nIn morphology, examples from degree adjectives, such as long, longer, longest, show that the most extreme degree of length is iconically represented by the word with the greatest number of phonemes. Jakobson cites examples of word order mimicking the natural order of ideas. In fact, iconicity is now widely acknowledged to be a significant factor at many levels of linguistic structure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72713", "revid": "5106682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72713", "title": "Social stereotype", "text": ""}
{"id": "72715", "revid": "49853791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72715", "title": "Metonymy", "text": "Figure of speech in which something is referred to by the name of an associated thing\nMetonymy () is a figure of speech in which a concept is referred to by the name of something associated with that thing or concept. For example, the word \"suit\" may refer to a person from groups commonly wearing business attire, such as business executives, bankers or attorneys.\nMetonymies are common in everyday speech and encapsulate a range of other ideas, such as synecdoche and metalepsis. Metonymies are similar to metaphors but where metaphors rely on analogous characteristics to form a comparison, a metonymy is caused by general association of the two objects of comparison. \nEtymology.\nThe words \"metonymy\" and \"metonym\" come from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'a change of name'; from \" ' ()\"\u00a0'after, post, beyond' and \" ' ()\", a suffix that names figures of speech, from \" ' () \"or \" ()\"\u00a0'name'.\nBackground.\nMetonymy and related figures of speech are common in everyday speech and writing. Synecdoche and metalepsis are considered specific types of metonymy. Polysemy, the capacity for a word or phrase to have multiple meanings, sometimes results from relations of metonymy. Both metonymy and metaphor involve the substitution of one term for another. In metaphor, this substitution is based on some specific analogy between two things, whereas in metonymy the substitution is based on some understood association or contiguity.\nAmerican literary theorist Kenneth Burke considers metonymy as one of four \"master tropes\": metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche, and irony. He discusses them in particular ways in his book \"A Grammar of Motives\". Whereas Roman Jakobson argued that the fundamental dichotomy in trope was between metaphor and metonymy, Burke argues that the fundamental dichotomy is between irony and synecdoche, which he also describes as the dichotomy between dialectic and representation, or again between reduction and perspective.\nIn addition to its use in everyday speech, metonymy is a figure of speech in some poetry and in much rhetoric. Greek and Latin scholars of rhetoric made significant contributions to the study of metonymy.\nRelated concepts.\nMetaphor substitutes the name by an analogy, rather than by an association.\nSynecdoche uses a part to refer to the whole, or the whole to refer to the part.\nMetalepsis uses a familiar word or a phrase in a new context. For example, \"lead foot\" may describe a fast driver; lead is proverbially heavy, and a foot exerting more pressure on the accelerator causes a vehicle to go faster (in this context unduly so). The figure of speech is a \"metonymy of a metonymy\".\nMany cases of polysemy originate as metonyms: for example, \"chicken\" means the meat as well as the animal; \"crown\" for the object, as well as the institution.\nVersus metaphor.\nMetonymy works by the contiguity (association) between two concepts, whereas the term \"metaphor\" is based upon their analogous similarity. When people use metonymy, they do not typically wish to transfer qualities from one referent to another as they do with metaphor. There is nothing press-like about reporters or crown-like about a monarch, but \"the press\" and \"the crown\" are both common metonyms.\nSome uses of figurative language may be understood as both metonymy and metaphor; for example, the relationship between \"a crown\" and a \"king\" could be interpreted metaphorically (i.e., the king, like his gold crown, could be seemingly stiff yet ultimately malleable, over-ornate, and consistently immobile). In the phrase \"lands belonging to the crown\", the word \"crown\" is a metonymy. The reason is that monarchs by and large indeed wear a crown, physically. In other words, there is a pre-existent link between \"crown\" and \"monarchy\". On the other hand, when Ghil'ad Zuckermann argues that the Israeli language is a \"phoenicuckoo cross with some magpie characteristics\", he is using metaphors. There is no physical link between a language and a bird. The reason the metaphors \"phoenix\" and \"cuckoo\" are used is that on the one hand hybridic \"Israeli\" is based on Hebrew, which, like a phoenix, rises from the ashes; and on the other hand, hybridic \"Israeli\" is based on Yiddish, which like a cuckoo, lays its egg in the nest of another bird, tricking it to believe that it is its own egg. Furthermore, the metaphor \"magpie\" is employed because, according to Zuckermann, hybridic \"Israeli\" displays the characteristics of a magpie, \"stealing\" from languages such as Arabic and English.\nTwo examples using the term \"fishing\" help clarify the distinction. The phrase \"to fish pearls\" uses metonymy, drawing from \"fishing\" the idea of taking things from the ocean. What is carried across from \"fishing fish\" to \"fishing pearls\" is the domain of metonymy. In contrast, the metaphorical phrase \"fishing for information\" transfers the concept of fishing into a new domain. If someone is \"fishing\" for information, we do not imagine that the person is anywhere near the ocean; rather, we transpose elements of the action of fishing (waiting, hoping to catch something that cannot be seen, probing, and most importantly, trying) into a new domain (a conversation). Thus, metaphors work by presenting a target set of meanings and using them to suggest a similarity between items, actions, or events in two domains, whereas metonymy calls up or references a specific domain (here, removing items from the sea).\nSometimes, metaphor and metonymy may both be at work in the same figure of speech, or one could interpret a phrase metaphorically or metonymically. For example, the phrase \"lend me your ear\" could be analyzed in a number of ways. One could imagine the following interpretations:\nIt is difficult to say which analysis above most closely represents the way a listener interprets the expression, and it is possible that different listeners analyse the phrase in different ways, or even in different ways at different times. Regardless, all three analyses yield the same interpretation. Thus, metaphor and metonymy, though different in their mechanism, work together seamlessly.\nExamples.\nBelow are notable categories of metonymy uses:\nPlaces and institutions.\nThe name of a capital city or notable government building is often used to refer to the authority headquartered there, Brussels for the European Union, The Hague for the International Court of Justice or International Criminal Court (and often international courts generally), Nairobi for the government of Kenya, the Kremlin for that of Russia (and historically, the Soviet Union), or the White House and Foggy Bottom for the United States' Executive Office and State Department, respectively, or Zhongnanhai for the central government of China. A notable historical example is the use of the Sublime Porte to refer to the central government (or more particularly, sometimes the foreign ministry) of the Ottoman Empire.\nA place (or places) can represent an entire industry. For instance: Wall Street, used metonymically, can stand for the United States' financial sector and major banks; K Street for Washington, D.C.'s lobbying industry or lobbying in the United States in general; Hollywood for the U.S. film industry, and the people associated with it; Broadway for the American commercial theatrical industry; Madison Avenue for the American advertising industry; and Silicon Valley for the American technology industry. The High Street (of which there are over 5,000 in Britain) is a term commonly used to refer to the entire British retail sector. Common nouns and phrases can also be metonyms: \"red tape\" can stand for bureaucracy, whether or not that bureaucracy uses actual red tape to bind documents. In Commonwealth realms, the Crown is a legal metonym for the state in all its aspects.\nArt.\nMetonyms can also be wordless. For example, Roman Jakobson argued that cubist art relied heavily on nonlinguistic metonyms, while surrealist art relied more on metaphors.\nLakoff and Turner argued that all words are metonyms: \"Words stand for the concepts they express\". Some artists have used actual words as metonyms in their paintings. For example, Mir\u00f3's 1925 painting \"Photo: This is the Color of My Dreams\" has the word \"photo\" to represent the image of his dreams. This painting comes from a series of paintings called peintures-po\u00e9sies (paintings-poems) which reflect Mir\u00f3's interest in dreams and the subconscious and the relationship of words, images, and thoughts. Picasso, in his 1911 painting \"Pipe Rack and Still Life on Table\" inserts the word \"Ocean\" rather than painting an ocean: These paintings by Mir\u00f3 and Picasso are, in a sense, the reverse of a rebus: the word stands for the picture, instead of the picture standing for the word.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72716", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72716", "title": "Hari (Afghanistan)", "text": "River flowing from Afghanistan to Turkmenistan \nThe Hari River ( or ; ) or Herat River or Tejen River or Harirud is a river flowing from the mountains of central Afghanistan to Turkmenistan, where it forms the Tejen oasis and disappears in the Karakum Desert. In its lower course, the river forms a northern part of the border between Afghanistan and Iran, and a southeastern part of the border between Turkmenistan and Iran.\nThe name of the river derives from the Old Persian word Harawaiah 'river rich in water'.\nIn Turkmenistan, the Hari is known as the Tejen or Tedzhen river and passes close to the city of Tejen. To the ancient Greeks, it was known as the Arius. In Latin, it was known as the Tarius.\nHistory.\nOne theory suggests that the Rigvedic Sarayu and the Hari are the same river. \nA Buddhist monastery hand-carved in the bluff of the river Harirud existed in the first centuries during the prevalence of Buddhism. The artificial caves revealed testimony of daily life of the Buddhist monks.\nCourse.\nThe river originates in the eastern part of Ghor Province in the Baba mountain range, part of the extensions of Hindu Kush system, and follows a relatively straight course to the west.\nSome upstream from Herat, the river meets the Jam River at the site of the Minaret of Jam, the second tallest ancient minaret in the world at .\nIn western Afghanistan, the Hari Rud flows to the south of Herat. The valley around Herat with the Paropamisus Mountains (\"Selseleh-ye Saf\u0113d K\u014dh\") on the right river bank was historically famous for its fertility and dense cultivation. After Herat, the river turns northwest, then north, forming the northern part of the border between Afghanistan and Iran. Farther north it forms the south-eastern part of the border between Iran and Turkmenistan. The Iran\u2013Turkmenistan Friendship Dam is on the river.\nSalma Dam, a hydroelectric and irrigation dam project, is located on the Hari Rud in Chishti Sharif District of Herat Province in western Afghanistan.\nThe average annual discharge of the Hari Rud is about 55 m3/s, but during a spring flood in 1939 the discharge went up to 1090 m3/s.\nIn 2000, the river dried up completely during a 10-month drought.\nBridges.\nPulkhatyn Bridge.\nAn unused stone-bridge of five arches, this falls in the Ahal Region of Turkmenistan. It is about north of Iran\u2013Turkmenistan Friendship Dam.\nPulkhatyn translates to \"wealthy woman.\" In Turkmen lore, the custodian of the bridge was a woman who made a fortune by taxing all travelers; Alexander the Great had apparently refused to pay this fee and crossed further downstream.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72717", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72717", "title": "Cognitive categorization", "text": "Organization of mental concepts\nCategorization is a type of cognition involving conceptual differentiation between characteristics of conscious experience, such as objects, events, or ideas. It involves the abstraction and differentiation of aspects of experience by sorting and distinguishing between groupings, through classification or typification on the basis of traits, features, similarities or other criteria that are universal to the group. Categorization is considered one of the most fundamental cognitive abilities, and it is studied particularly by psychology and cognitive linguistics.\nCategorization is sometimes considered synonymous with classification (cf., Classification synonyms). Categorization and classification allow humans to organize things, objects, and ideas that exist around them and simplify their understanding of the world. Categorization is something that humans and other organisms \"do\": \"doing the right thing with the right kind of thing.\" The activity of categorizing things can be nonverbal or verbal. For humans, both concrete objects and abstract ideas are recognized, differentiated, and understood through categorization. Objects are usually categorized for some adaptive or pragmatic purposes.\nCategorization is grounded in the features that distinguish the category's members from nonmembers. Categorization is important in learning, prediction, inference, decision making, language, and many forms of organisms' interaction with their environments.\nOverview.\nCategories are distinct collections of concrete or abstract instances (category members) that are considered equivalent by the cognitive system. Using category knowledge requires one to access mental representations that define the core features of category members (cognitive psychologists refer to these category-specific mental representations as concepts). \nTo categorization theorists, the categorization of objects is often considered using taxonomies with three hierarchical levels of abstraction. For example, a plant could be identified at a high level of abstraction by simply labeling it a flower, a medium level of abstraction by specifying that the flower is a rose, or a low level of abstraction by further specifying this particular rose as a dog rose. Categories in a taxonomy are related to one another via class inclusion, with the highest level of abstraction being the most inclusive and the lowest level of abstraction being the least inclusive. The three levels of abstraction are as follows:\nBeginning of categorization.\nThe essential issue in studying categorization is how conceptual differentiation between characteristics of conscious experience begins in young, inexperienced organisms. Growing experimental data show evidence of differentiation between characteristics of objects and events in newborns and even in foetuses during the prenatal period. This development succeeds in organisms that only demonstrate simple reflexes (see articles on the binding problem, cognition, cognitive development, infant cognitive development, multisensory integration, and perception). For their nervous systems, the environment is a cacophony of sensory stimuli: electromagnetic waves, chemical interactions, and pressure fluctuations.\nCategorization thought involves the abstraction and differentiation of aspects of experience that rely upon such power of mind as intentionality and perception. The problem is that these young organisms should already grasp the abilities of intentionality and perception to categorize the environment. Intentionality and perception already require their ability to recognise objects (or events), i.e., to identify objects by the sensory system. This is a vicious circle: categorization needs intentionality and perception, which only appear in the categorized environment. So, the young, inexperienced organism does not have abstract thinking and cannot independently accomplish conceptual differentiation between characteristics of conscious experience if it solves the categorization problem alone.\nStudying the origins of social cognition in child development, developmental psychologist Michael Tomasello developed the notion of Shared intentionality to account for unaware processes during social learning after birth to explain processes in shaping intentionality. Further, Latvian professor Igor Val Danilov expanded this concept to the intrauterine period by introducing a Mother-Fetus Neurocognitive model: a hypothesis of neurophysiological processes occurring during Shared intentionality. The hypothesis attempts to explain the beginning of cognitive development in organisms at different levels of bio-system complexity, from interpersonal dynamics to neuronal interactions. Evidence in neuroscience supports the hypothesis. Hyperscanning research studies observed inter-brain activity under conditions without communication in pairs while subjects were solving the shared cognitive problem, and they registered an increased inter-brain activity in contrast to the condition when subjects solved a similar problem alone. These data show that collaborative interaction without sensory cues can emerge in mother-child dyads, providing Shared intentionality. It shows the mode to cognize at the stage without communication and abstract thinking. \nThe significance of this knowledge is that it can reveal the new direction to study consciousness since the latter refers to awareness of internal and external existence relying on intentionality, perception and categorization of the environment.\nTheories.\nClassical view.\nThe classical theory of categorization, is a term used in cognitive linguistics to denote the approach to categorization that appears in Plato and Aristotle and that has been highly influential and dominant in Western culture, particularly in philosophy, linguistics and psychology. Aristotle's categorical method of analysis was transmitted to the scholastic medieval university through Porphyry's Isagoge. The classical view of categories can be summarized into three assumptions: a category can be described as a list of necessary and sufficient features that its membership must have, categories are discrete in that they have clearly defined boundaries (either an element belongs to one or not, with no possibilities in between), and all the members of a category have the same status. (There are no members of the category which belong more than others). In the classical view, categories need to be clearly defined, mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive; this way, any entity in the given classification universe belongs unequivocally to one, and only one, of the proposed categories.\nThe classical view of categories first appeared in the context of Western Philosophy in the work of Plato, who, in his Statesman dialogue, introduces the approach of grouping objects based on their similar properties. This approach was further explored and systematized by Aristotle in his Categories treatise, where he analyzes the differences between classes and objects. Aristotle also applied intensively the classical categorization scheme in his approach to the classification of living beings (which uses the technique of applying successive narrowing questions such as \"Is it an animal or vegetable?\", \"How many feet does it have?\", \"Does it have fur or feathers?\", \"Can it fly?\"...), establishing this way the basis for natural taxonomy.\nExamples of the use of the classical view of categories can be found in the western philosophical works of Descartes, Blaise Pascal, Spinoza and John Locke, and in the 20th century in Bertrand Russell, G.E. Moore, the logical positivists. It has been a cornerstone of analytic philosophy and its conceptual analysis, with more recent formulations proposed in the 1990s by Frank Cameron Jackson and Christopher Peacocke. At the beginning of the 20th century, the question of categories was introduced into the empirical social sciences by Durkheim and Mauss, whose pioneering work has been revisited in contemporary scholarship.\nThe classical model of categorization has been used at least since the 1960s from linguists of the structural semantics paradigm, by Jerrold Katz and Jerry Fodor in 1963, which in turn have influenced its adoption also by psychologists like Allan M. Collins and M. Ross Quillian.\nModern versions of classical categorization theory study how the brain learns and represents categories by detecting the features that distinguish members from nonmembers.\nPrototype theory.\nThe pioneering research by psychologist Eleanor Rosch and colleagues since 1973, introduced the prototype theory, according to which categorization can also be viewed as the process of grouping things based on prototypes. This approach has been highly influential, particularly for cognitive linguistics. It was in part based on previous insights, in particular the formulation of a category model based on family resemblance by Wittgenstein (1953), and by Roger Brown's \"How shall a thing be called?\" (1958).\nPrototype theory has been then adopted by cognitive linguists like George Lakoff. The prototype theory is an example of a similarity-based approach to categorization, in which a stored category representation is used to assess the similarity of candidate category members. Under the prototype theory, this stored representation consists of a summary representation of the category's members. This prototype stimulus can take various forms. It might be a central tendency that represents the category's average member, a modal stimulus representing either the most frequent instance or a stimulus composed of the most common category features, or, lastly, the \"ideal\" category member, or a caricature that emphasizes the distinct features of the category. An important consideration of this prototype representation is that it does not necessarily reflect the existence of an actual instance of the category in the world. Furthermore, prototypes are highly sensitive to context. For example, while one's prototype for the category of beverages may be soda or seltzer, the context of brunch might lead them to select mimosa as a prototypical beverage.\nThe prototype theory claims that members of a given category share a family resemblance, and categories are defined by sets of typical features (as opposed to all members possessing necessary and sufficient features).\nExemplar theory.\nAnother instance of the similarity-based approach to categorization, the exemplar theory likewise compares the similarity of candidate category members to stored memory representations. Under the exemplar theory, all known instances of a category are stored in memory as exemplars. When evaluating an unfamiliar entity's category membership, exemplars from potentially relevant categories are retrieved from memory, and the entity's similarity to those exemplars is summed to formulate a categorization decision. Medin and Schaffer's (1978) Context model employs a nearest neighbor approach which, rather than summing an entity's similarities to relevant exemplars, multiplies them to provide weighted similarities that reflect the entity's proximity to relevant exemplars. This effectively biases categorization decisions towards exemplars most similar to the entity to be categorized.\nConceptual clustering.\nConceptual clustering is a machine learning paradigm for unsupervised classification that was defined by Ryszard S. Michalski in 1980. It is a modern variation of the classical approach of categorization, and derives from attempts to explain how knowledge is represented. In this approach, classes (clusters or entities) are generated by first formulating their conceptual descriptions and then classifying the entities according to the descriptions.\nConceptual clustering developed mainly during the 1980s, as a machine paradigm for unsupervised learning. It is distinguished from ordinary data clustering by generating a concept description for each generated category.\nConceptual clustering is closely related to fuzzy set theory, in which objects may belong to one or more groups, in varying degrees of fitness. A cognitive approach accepts that natural categories are graded (they tend to be fuzzy at their boundaries) and inconsistent in the status of their constituent members. The idea of necessary and sufficient conditions is almost never met in categories of naturally occurring things.\nCategory learning.\n\"While an exhaustive discussion of category learning is beyond the scope of this article, a brief overview of category learning and its associated theories is useful in understanding formal models of categorization.\"\nIf categorization research investigates how categories are maintained and used, the field of category learning seeks to understand how categories are acquired in the first place. To accomplish this, researchers often employ novel categories of arbitrary objects (e.g., dot matrices) to ensure that participants are entirely unfamiliar with the stimuli. Category learning researchers have generally focused on two distinct forms of category learning. Classification learning tasks participants with predicting category labels for a stimulus based on its provided features. Classification learning is centered around learning between-category information and the diagnostic features of categories. In contrast, inference learning tasks participants with inferring the presence/value of a category feature based on a provided category label and/or the presence of other category features. Inference learning is centered on learning within-category information and the category's prototypical features.\nCategory learning tasks can generally be divided into two categories, supervised and unsupervised learning. Supervised learning tasks provide learners with category labels. Learners then use information extracted from labeled example categories to classify stimuli into the appropriate category, which may involve the abstraction of a rule or concept relating observed object features to category labels. Unsupervised learning tasks do not provide learners with category labels. Learners must therefore recognize inherent structures in a data set and group stimuli together by similarity into classes. Unsupervised learning is thus a process of generating a classification structure. Tasks used to study category learning take various forms:\nCategory learning theories.\nCategory learning researchers have proposed various theories for how humans learn categories. Prevailing theories of category learning include the prototype theory, the exemplar theory, and the decision bound theory.\nThe prototype theory suggests that to learn a category, one must learn the category's prototype. Subsequent categorization of novel stimuli is then accomplished by selecting the category with the most similar prototype.\nThe exemplar theory suggests that to learn a category, one must learn about the exemplars that belong to that category. Subsequent categorization of a novel stimulus is then accomplished by computing its similarity to the known exemplars of potentially relevant categories and selecting the category that contains the most similar exemplars.\nDecision bound theory suggests that to learn a category, one must either learn the regions of a stimulus space associated with particular responses or the boundaries (the decision bounds) that divide these response regions. Categorization of a novel stimulus is then accomplished by determining which response region it is contained within.\nFormal models.\nComputational models of categorization have been developed to test theories about how humans represent and use category information. To accomplish this, categorization models can be fit to experimental data to see how well the predictions afforded by the model line up with human performance. Based on the model's success at explaining the data, theorists are able to draw conclusions about the accuracy of their theories and their theory's relevance to human category representations.\nTo effectively capture how humans represent and use category information, categorization models generally operate under variations of the same three basic assumptions. First, the model must make some kind of assumption about the internal representation of the stimulus (e.g., representing the perception of a stimulus as a point in a multi-dimensional space). Second, the model must make an assumption about the specific information that needs to be accessed in order to formulate a response (e.g., exemplar models require the collection of all available exemplars for each category). Third, the model must make an assumption about how a response is selected given the available information.\nThough all categorization models make these three assumptions, they distinguish themselves by the ways in which they represent and transform an input into a response representation. The internal knowledge structures of various categorization models reflect the specific representation(s) they use to perform these transformations. Typical representations employed by models include exemplars, prototypes, and rules.\nExamples.\nPrototype models.\nWeighted Features Prototype Model An early instantiation of the prototype model was produced by Reed in the early 1970s. Reed (1972) conducted a series of experiments to compare the performance of 18 models on explaining data from a categorization task that required participants to sort faces into one of two categories. Results suggested that the prevailing model was the weighted features prototype model, which belonged to the family of average distance models. Unlike traditional average distance models, however, this model differentially weighted the most distinguishing features of the two categories. Given this model's performance, Reed (1972) concluded that the strategy participants used during the face categorization task was to construct prototype representations for each of the two categories of faces and categorize test patterns into the category associated with the most similar prototype. Furthermore, results suggested that similarity was determined by each categories most discriminating features.\nExemplar models.\nGeneralized Context Model Medin and Schaffer's (1978) context model was expanded upon by Nosofsky (1986) in the mid-1980s, resulting in the production of the Generalized Context Model (GCM). The GCM is an exemplar model that stores exemplars of stimuli as exhaustive combinations of the features associated with each exemplar. By storing these combinations, the model establishes contexts for the features of each exemplar, which are defined by all other features with which that feature co-occurs. The GCM computes the similarity of an exemplar and a stimulus in two steps. First, the GCM computes the psychological distance between the exemplar and the stimulus. This is accomplished by summing the absolute values of the dimensional difference between the exemplar and the stimulus. For example, suppose an exemplar has a value of 18 on dimension X and the stimulus has a value of 42 on dimension X; the resulting dimensional difference would be 24. Once psychological distance has been evaluated, an exponential decay function determines the similarity of the exemplar and the stimulus, where a distance of 0 results in a similarity of 1 (which begins to decrease exponentially as distance increases). Categorical responses are then generated by evaluating the similarity of the stimulus to each category's exemplars, where each exemplar provides a \"vote\" to their respective categories that varies in strength based on the exemplar's similarity to the stimulus and the strength of the exemplar's association with the category. This effectively assigns each category a selection probability that is determined by the proportion of votes it receives, which can then be fit to data.\nRule-based models.\nRULEX (Rule-Plus-Exception) Model While simple logical rules are ineffective at learning poorly defined category structures, some proponents of the rule-based theory of categorization suggest that an imperfect rule can be used to learn such category structures if exceptions to that rule are also stored and considered. To formalize this proposal, Nosofsky and colleagues (1994) designed the RULEX model. The RULEX model attempts to form a decision tree composed of sequential tests of an object's attribute values. Categorization of the object is then determined by the outcome of these sequential tests. The RULEX model searches for rules in the following ways:\nThe method that RULEX uses to perform these searches is as follows: First, RULEX attempts an exact search. If successful, then RULEX will continuously apply that rule until misclassification occurs. If the exact search fails to identify a rule, either an imperfect or conjunctive search will begin. A sufficient, though imperfect, rule acquired during one of these search phases will become permanently implemented and the RULEX model will then begin to search for exceptions. If no rule is acquired, then the model will attempt the search it did not perform in the previous phase. If successful, RULEX will permanently implement the rule and then begin an exception search. If none of the previous search methods are successful RULEX will default to only searching for exceptions, despite lacking an associated rule, which equates to acquiring a random rule.\nHybrid models.\nSUSTAIN (Supervised and Unsupervised Stratified Adaptive Incremental Network) It is often the case that learned category representations vary depending on the learner's goals, as well as how categories are used during learning. Thus, some categorization researchers suggest that a proper model of categorization needs to be able to account for the variability present in the learner's goals, tasks, and strategies. This proposal was realized by Love and colleagues (2004) through the creation of SUSTAIN, a flexible clustering model capable of accommodating both simple and complex categorization problems through incremental adaptation to the specifics of problems.\nIn practice, the SUSTAIN model first converts a stimulus' perceptual information into features that are organized along a set of dimensions. The representational space that encompasses these dimensions is then distorted (e.g., stretched or shrunk) to reflect the importance of each feature based on inputs from an attentional mechanism. A set of clusters (specific instances grouped by similarity) associated with distinct categories then compete to respond to the stimulus, with the stimulus being subsequently assigned to the cluster whose representational space is closest to the stimulus'. The unknown stimulus dimension value (e.g., category label) is then predicted by the winning cluster, which, in turn, informs the categorization decision.\nThe flexibility of the SUSTAIN model is realized through its ability to employ both supervised and unsupervised learning at the cluster level. If SUSTAIN incorrectly predicts a stimulus as belonging to a particular cluster, corrective feedback (i.e., supervised learning) would signal sustain to recruit an additional cluster that represents the misclassified stimulus. Therefore, subsequent exposures to the stimulus (or a similar alternative) would be assigned to the correct cluster. SUSTAIN will also employ unsupervised learning to recruit an additional cluster if the similarity between the stimulus and the closest cluster does not exceed a threshold, as the model recognizes the weak predictive utility that would result from such a cluster assignment. SUSTAIN also exhibits flexibility in how it solves both simple and complex categorization problems. Outright, the internal representation of SUSTAIN contains only a single cluster, thus biasing the model towards simple solutions. As problems become increasingly complex (e.g., requiring solutions consisting of multiple stimulus dimensions), additional clusters are incrementally recruited so SUSTAIN can handle the rise in complexity.\nSocial categorization.\nSocial categorization consists of putting human beings into groups in order to identify them based on different criteria. Categorization is a process studied by scholars in cognitive science but can also be studied as a social activity. Social categorization is different from the categorization of other things because it implies that people create categories for themselves and others as human beings. Groups can be created based on ethnicity, country of origin, religion, sexual identity, social privileges, economic privileges, etc. Various ways to sort people exist according to one's schemas. People belong to various social groups because of their ethnicity, religion, or age.\nSocial categories based on age, race, and gender are used by people when they encounter a new person. Because some of these categories refer to physical traits, they are often used automatically when people do not know each other. These categories are not objective and depend on how people see the world around them. They allow people to identify themselves with similar people, and to identify people who are different. They are useful in one's identity formation with the people around them. One can build their own identity by identifying themselves in a group or by rejecting another group.\nSocial categorization is similar to other types of categorization since it aims at simplifying the understanding of people. However, creating social categories implies that people will position themselves in relation to other groups. A hierarchy in group relations can appear as a result of social categorization.\nScholars argue that the categorization process starts at a young age when children start to learn about the world and the people around them. Children learn how to know people according to categories based on similarities and differences. Social categories made by adults also impact their understanding of the world. They learn about social groups by hearing generalities about these groups from their parents. They can then develop prejudices about people as a result of these generalities.\nAnother aspect of social categorization is mentioned by Stephen Reicher and Nick Hopkins and is related to political domination. They argue that political leaders use social categories to influence political debates.\nNegative aspects.\nThe activity of sorting people according to subjective or objective criteria can be seen as a negative process because of its tendency to lead to violence from a group to another. Indeed, similarities gather people who share common traits but differences between groups can lead to tensions and then the use of violence between those groups. The creation of social groups by people is responsible of a hierarchization of relations between groups. These hierarchical relations participate in the promotion of stereotypes about people and groups, sometimes based on subjective criteria. Social categories can encourage people to associate stereotypes to groups of people. Associating stereotypes to a group, and to people who belong to this group, can lead to forms of discrimination towards people of this group. The perception of a group and the stereotypes associated with it have an impact on social relations and activities.\nSome social categories have more weight than others in society. For instance, in history and still today, the category of \"race\" is one of the first categories used to sort people. However, only a few categories of race are commonly used such as \"Black\", \"White\", \"Asian\" etc. It participates in the reduction of the multitude of ethnicities to a few categories based mostly on people's skin color.\nThe process of sorting people creates a vision of the other as 'different', leading to the dehumanization of people. Scholars talk about intergroup relations with the concept of social identity theory developed by H. Tajfel. Indeed, in history, many examples of social categorization have led to forms of domination or violence from a dominant group to a dominated group. Periods of colonisation are examples of times when people from a group chose to dominate and control other people belonging to other groups because they considered them as inferior. Racism, discrimination and violence are consequences of social categorization and can occur because of it. When people see others as different, they tend to develop hierarchical relation with other groups.\nMiscategorization.\nThere cannot be categorization without the possibility of miscategorization. To do \"the right thing with the right \"kind\" of thing.\", there has to be both a right and a wrong thing to do. Not only does a category of which \"everything\" is a member lead logically to the Russell paradox (\"is it or is it not a member of itself?\"), but without the possibility of error, there is no way to detect or define what distinguishes category members from nonmembers.\nAn example of the absence of nonmembers is the problem of the poverty of the stimulus in language learning by the child: children learning the language do not hear or make errors in the rules of Universal Grammar (UG). Hence they never get corrected for errors in UG. Yet children's speech obeys the rules of UG, and speakers can immediately detect that something is wrong if a linguist generates (deliberately) an utterance that violates UG. Hence speakers can categorize what is UG-compliant and UG-noncompliant. Linguists have concluded from this that the rules of UG must be somehow encoded innately in the human brain.\nOrdinary categories, however, such as \"dogs,\" have abundant examples of nonmembers (cats, for example). So it is possible to learn, by trial and error, with error-correction, to detect and define what distinguishes dogs from non-dogs, and hence to correctly categorize them. This kind of learning, called reinforcement learning in the behavioral literature and supervised learning in the computational literature, is fundamentally dependent on the possibility of error, and error-correction. Miscategorization\u2014examples of nonmembers of the category\u2014must always exist, not only to make the category learnable, but for the category to exist and be definable at all.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72718", "revid": "14407584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72718", "title": "Prototype", "text": "Early sample or model built to test a concept or process\nA prototype is an early sample, model, or release of a product built to test a concept or process. It is a term used in a variety of contexts, including semantics, design, electronics, and software programming. A prototype is generally used to evaluate a new design to enhance precision by system analysts and users. Prototyping serves to provide specifications for a real, working system rather than a theoretical one. Physical prototyping has a long history, and paper prototyping and virtual prototyping now extensively complement it. In some design workflow models, creating a prototype (a process sometimes called materialization) is the step between the formalization and the evaluation of an idea.\nA prototype can also mean a typical example of something such as in the use of the derivation 'prototypical'. This is a useful term in identifying objects, behaviours and concepts which are considered the accepted norm and is analogous with terms such as stereotypes and archetypes.\nThe word \"prototype\" derives from the Greek , \"primitive form\", neutral of , \"original, primitive\", from \u03c0\u03c1\u1ff6\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 \"protos\", \"first\" and \u03c4\u03cd\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2 \"typos\", \"impression\" (originally in the sense of a mark left by a blow, then by a stamp struck by a die (note \"typewriter\"); by implication a scar or mark; by analogy a shape i.e. a statue, (figuratively) style, or resemblance; a model for imitation or illustrative example\u2014note \"typical\").\nTypes.\nPrototypes explore different aspects of an intended design: \nDifferences in creating a prototype vs. a final product.\nIn general, the creation of prototypes will differ from creation of the final product in some fundamental ways:\nEngineers and prototype specialists attempt to minimize the impact of these differences on the intended role for the prototype. For example, if a visual prototype is not able to use the same materials as the final product, they will attempt to substitute materials with properties that closely simulate the intended final materials.\nCharacteristics and limitations of prototypes.\nEngineers and prototyping specialists seek to understand the limitations of prototypes to exactly simulate the characteristics of their intended design.\nPrototypes represent some compromise from the final production design. This is due to the skill and choices of the designer(s), and the inevitable inherent limitations of a prototype. Due to differences in materials, processes and design fidelity, it is possible that a prototype may fail to perform acceptably although the production design may have been sound. Conversely, prototypes may perform acceptably but the production design and outcome may prove unsuccessful.\nIn general, it can be expected that individual prototype costs will be substantially greater than the final production costs due to inefficiencies in materials and processes. Prototypes are also used to revise the design for the purposes of reducing costs through optimization and refinement.\nIt is possible to use prototype testing to reduce the risk that a design may not perform as intended, however prototypes generally cannot eliminate all risk. \nBuilding the full design is often expensive and can be time-consuming, especially when repeated several times\u2014building the full design, figuring out what the problems are and how to solve them, then building another full design. As an alternative, rapid prototyping or rapid application development techniques are used for the initial prototypes, which implement part, but not all, of the complete design. This allows designers and manufacturers to rapidly and inexpensively test the parts of the design that are most likely to have problems, solve those problems, and then build the full design.\nEngineering sciences.\nIn technology research, a technology demonstrator is a prototype serving as proof-of-concept and demonstration model for a new technology or future product, proving its viability and illustrating conceivable applications.\nIn large development projects, a testbed is a platform and prototype development environment for rigorous experimentation and testing of new technologies, components, scientific theories and computational tools.\nWith recent advances in computer modeling it is becoming practical to eliminate the creation of a physical prototype (except possibly at greatly reduced scales for promotional purposes), instead modeling all aspects of the final product as a computer model. An example of such a development can be seen in Boeing 787 Dreamliner, in which the first full sized physical realization is made on the series production line. Computer modeling is now being extensively used in automotive design, both for form (in the styling and aerodynamics of the vehicle) and in function\u2014especially for improving vehicle crashworthiness and in weight reduction to improve mileage.\nMechanical and electrical engineering.\nThe most common use of the word prototype is a functional, although experimental, version of a non-military machine (e.g., automobiles, domestic appliances, consumer electronics) whose designers would like to have built by mass production means, as opposed to a mockup, which is an inert representation of a machine's appearance, often made of some non-durable substance.\nAn electronics designer often builds the first prototype from breadboard or stripboard or perfboard, typically using \"DIP\" packages.\nHowever, more and more often the first functional prototype is built on a \"prototype PCB\" almost identical to the production PCB, as PCB manufacturing prices fall and as many components are not available in DIP packages, but only available in SMT packages optimized for placing on a PCB.\nBuilders of military machines and aviation prefer the terms \"experimental\" and \"service test\".\nComputer programming and computer science.\nPrototype software is often referred to as alpha grade, meaning it is the first version to run. Often only a few functions are implemented, the primary focus of the alpha is to have a functional base code on to which features may be added. Once alpha grade software has most of the required features integrated into it, it becomes beta software for testing of the entire software and to adjust the program to respond correctly during situations unforeseen during development.\nOften the end users may not be able to provide a complete set of application objectives, detailed input, processing, or output requirements in the initial stage. After the user evaluation, another prototype will be built based on feedback from users, and again the cycle returns to customer evaluation. The cycle starts by listening to the user, followed by building or revising a mock-up, and letting the user test the mock-up, then back. There is now a new generation of tools called Application Simulation Software which help quickly simulate application before their development.\nExtreme programming uses iterative design to gradually add one feature at a time to the initial prototype.\nOther programming/computing concepts.\nIn many programming languages, a \"function prototype\" is the declaration of a subroutine or function (and should not be confused with software prototyping). This term is rather C/C++-specific; other terms for this notion are \"signature\", \"type\" and \"interface\". In prototype-based programming (a form of object-oriented programming), new objects are produced by cloning existing objects, which are called prototypes.\nThe term may also refer to the Prototype Javascript Framework.\nAdditionally, the term may refer to the prototype design pattern.\nContinuous learning approaches within organizations or businesses may also use the concept of business or process prototypes through software models.\nThe concept of prototypicality is used to describe how much a website deviates from the expected norm, and leads to a lowering of user preference for that site's design.\nData prototyping.\nA \"data prototype\" is a form of \"functional \"or \"working\" prototype. The justification for its creation is usually a data migration, data integration or application implementation project and the raw materials used as input are an instance of all the relevant data which exists at the start of the project.\nThe objectives of \"data prototyping\" are to produce: \nTo achieve this, a data architect uses a graphical interface to interactively develop and execute transformation and cleansing rules using raw data. The resultant data is then evaluated and the rules refined. Beyond the obvious visual checking of the data \"on-screen\" by the data architect, the usual evaluation and validation approaches are to use data profiling software and then to insert the resultant data into a test version of the target application and trial its use.\nPrototyping for human-computer interaction.\nWhen developing software or digital tools that humans interact with, a prototype is an artifact that is used to ask and answer a design question. Prototypes provide the means for examining design problems and evaluating solutions.\nHuman-computer interaction (HCI) practitioners can employ several different types of prototypes:\nArchitecture.\nIn architecture, prototyping refers to either architectural model making (as form of scale modelling) or as part of aesthetic or material experimentation, such as the \"Forty Wall House\" open source material prototyping centre in Australia.\nArchitects prototype to test ideas structurally, aesthetically and technically. Whether the prototype works or not is not the primary focus: architectural prototyping is the revelatory process through which the architect gains insight.\nMetrology.\nIn the science and practice of metrology, a prototype is a human-made object that is used as the standard of measurement of some physical quantity to base all measurement of that physical quantity against. Sometimes this standard object is called an artifact. In the International System of Units (SI), there remains no prototype standard since May 20, 2019. Before that date, the last prototype used was the international prototype of the kilogram, a solid platinum-iridium cylinder kept at the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (International Bureau of Weights and Measures) in S\u00e8vres France (a suburb of Paris) that by definition was the mass of exactly one kilogram. Copies of this prototype are fashioned and issued to many nations to represent the national standard of the kilogram and are periodically compared to the Paris prototype. Now the kilogram is redefined in such a way that the Planck constant h is prescribed a value of exactly \nUntil 1960, the meter was defined by a platinum-iridium prototype bar with two marks on it (that were, by definition, spaced apart by one meter), the international prototype of the metre, and in 1983 the meter was redefined to be the distance in free space covered by light in 1/299,792,458 of a second (thus \"defining\" the speed of light to be 299,792,458 meters per second).\nNatural sciences.\nIn many sciences, from pathology to taxonomy, \"prototype\" refers to a disease, species, etc. which sets a good example for the whole category. In biology, \"prototype\" is the ancestral or primitive form of a species or other group; an archetype. For example, the Senegal bichir is regarded as the prototypes of its genus, \"Polypterus\".\nModel-making.\nMakers of scale models, especially railway, aircraft, ship and military modellers, customarily use \"prototype\" to mean \"full size\", such as in \"The length of this model is not true to prototype\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72720", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72720", "title": "Beaked whale", "text": "Family of mammals\nBeaked whales (systematic name Ziphiidae) are a family of cetaceans noted as being one of the least-known groups of mammals because of their deep-sea habitat, reclusive behavior and apparent low abundance. Only three or four of the 24 existing species are reasonably well-known. Baird's beaked whales and Cuvier's beaked whales were subject to commercial exploitation, off the coast of Japan, while the northern bottlenose whale was extensively hunted in the northern part of the North Atlantic in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.\nReports emerged in late 2020 of the possible discovery of a new beaked whale species off the coast of Mexico, the taxonomy of which had not been determined as of \u00a02020[ [update]].\nPhysical characteristics.\nBeaked whales are moderate in size, ranging from and weighing from . Their key distinguishing feature is the presence of a 'beak', somewhat similar to many dolphins. Other distinctive features include a pair of converging grooves under the throat, and the absence of a notch in the tail fluke. Although Shepherd's beaked whale is an exception, most species have only one or two pairs of teeth, and even these do not erupt in females (other than in the genus \"Berardius\"). Beaked whale species are often sexually dimorphic\u00a0\u2013 one or the other sex is significantly larger. The adult males often possess a large bulging forehead, some to an extreme feature. However, aside from dentition and size, very few morphological differences exist between male and female beaked whales.\nIndividual species may be very difficult to identify in the wild, since many species appear similar. The observer must rely on size, shape, and placement of teeth and often subtle differences in size, color, forehead shape, and beak length. In collected specimens, the expansion of the premaxillary process in the skull can be a key feature to identification.\nThe blubber of these whales is almost entirely (94%) composed of wax ester instead of the more usual triacylglycerols, a unique characteristic of this family.\nDentition.\nBeaked whales are unique among toothed whales in that most species have only one pair of teeth. The teeth are tusk-like, but are visible only in males, which are presumed to use these teeth in combat for females for reproductive rights. In females, the teeth do not develop and remain hidden in the gum tissues.\nIn December 2008, researchers from the Marine Mammal Institute at Oregon State University completed a DNA tree of 13 of 15 known species of \"Mesoplodon\" beaked whales (excluding the spade-toothed whale, which was then only known from a skeletal specimen and a few stranded specimens). Among the results of this study was the conclusion that the male's teeth are actually a secondary sexual characteristic, similar to the antlers of male deer. Each species' teeth have a characteristically unique shape. In some cases, these teeth even hinder feeding; in the strap-toothed whale, for example, the teeth curve over the upper jaw, effectively limiting the gape to a few centimeters. Females are presumed to select mates based on the shape of the teeth, because the different species are otherwise quite similar in appearance.\nTaxonomy.\nAs of 2024, the Society for Marine Mammalogy Committee on Taxonomy recognizes 24 extant (living) species of beaked whales in six genera. Several species have only been formally described in the last two decades, most recently in 2021.\nThe beaked whales are the second-largest family of cetaceans after the oceanic dolphins (Delphinidae). Beaked whales were one of the first extant clades to diverge from the ancestral lineage. The earliest known beaked whale fossils date to the Miocene, about 15 million years ago.\nA 2016 study split the beaked whales into the basal extinct Messapicetus clade (lineage) and the crown Ziphiidae which include all of the living members of the family as well as other extinct forms. Both clades share some key characteristics of the family including thick skull bones and the trend toward loss of teeth. In 2020, a molecular study further resolved the relationships among the crown Ziphiidae and placed Shepherd's beaked whale, the only living species with a full set of erupted teeth, between Berardiinae, whose extant forms have four erupted teeth, and Ziphiinae, whose extant form has two erupted teeth.\nEtymology.\nThe name Ziphiidae was coined from the genus \"Ziphius\" by J. E. Gray in 1865 to move the beaked whales from the family Delphinidae into a new family. Gray noted in 1866, however, that Hyperoodontidae should have priority for the new beaked whale family name owing to earlier usage (in 1846), but Gray preferred Ziphiidae due to an apparent confusion between the upper and lower jaw (or the terminology) in the naming of \"Hyperoodon\".\nHyperoodontidae was preferred in a 1968 phylogeny, which stated that Gray's objection did not qualify as an exception under the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN). Hyperoodontidae is indeed currently marked as the valid name by the Integrated Taxonomic Information System (ITIS) which states no successful petition for Ziphiidae had been made to the ICZN as of 2023. In contrast, Smithsonian researchers J.G. Mead and Robert Brownell Jr. argued in 1993 that due to being the \"name of choice for over 100 years\", Ziphiidae should be given exception under the ICZN Article 23.12. In addition, several authorities, including the Society for Marine Mammalogy Committee on Taxonomy and IUCN Red List of Threatened Species among others continue to use Ziphiidae.\nA further, unrelated confusion has arisen, as noted on the ITIS, due to the propagation of an incorrect citation of \"Gray, 1850\" for Ziphiidae.\nEvolutionary history.\nAs many as 26 genera antedate humans. These include ancestors of giant beaked whales (\"Berardius\"), such as \"Microberardius\", and ancestors of Cuvier's beaked whale (\"Ziphius\"); they had many relatives, such as \"Caviziphius\", \"Archaeoziphius\", and \"Izikoziphius\". They were probably preyed upon by predatory whales and sharks, including \"Otodus megalodon\". Recently, a large fossil ziphiid sample was discovered off the South African coast, confirming the extant ziphiid diversity might just be a remnant of a higher past diversity. After studying numerous fossil skulls off the shore of Iberia and South Africa, researchers discovered the absence of functional maxillary teeth in all South African fossil ziphiids, which is evidence that suction feeding had already developed in several beaked whale lineages during the Miocene. Researchers also found fossil ziphiids with robust skulls, signaling that tusks were used for male-male interactions (speculated with extant beaked whales).\nEcology.\nDiving.\nBeaked whales are deep divers with extreme dive profiles. They regularly dive deeper than to echolocate for food, and these deep dives are often followed by multiple shallower dives less than 500 m. This pattern is not always followed, however. Animals have been observed spending more than an hour at or near the surface breathing. Beaked whales are often seen surfacing synchronously, but asynchronous surfacing has also been observed. In March 2014, a study by Cascadia Research revealed that Cuvier's beaked whales were recorded to dive at least 2992 m in depth, a mammalian record. Another study, published in 2020, reported a Cuvier's beaked whale making a dive that lasted 222 minutes, another mammalian record.\nDeep-diving mammals face a number of challenges related to extended breath-holding and hydrostatic pressure. Cetaceans and pinnipeds that prolong apnea must optimize the size and use of their oxygen stores, and they must deal with the accumulation of lactic acid due to anaerobic metabolism. Beaked whales have several anatomical adaptations to deep diving: large spleens, livers, and body shape. Most cetaceans have small spleens. However, beaked whales have much larger spleens than delphinids, and may have larger livers, as well. These anatomical traits, which are important for filtering blood, could be adaptations to deep diving. Another notable anatomical adaptation among beaked whales is a slight depression in the body wall that allows them to hold their pectoral flippers tightly against their bodies for increased streamlining. However, they are not invulnerable to the effects of diving so deep and so often. Cascadia Research shows that the deeper the whales dive, the less often they dive per day, cutting their efforts by at least 40%.\nThe challenges of deep diving are also overcome by the unique diving physiology of beaked whales. Oxygen storage during dives is mostly achieved by blood hemoglobin and muscle myoglobin. While the whale is diving, its heart rate slows and blood flow changes. This physiological dive response ensures oxygen-sensitive tissues maintain a supply of oxygen, while those tissues tolerant to hypoxia receive less blood flow. Additionally, lung collapse obviates the exchange of lung gas with blood, likely minimizing the uptake of nitrogen by tissues.\nFeeding.\nThe throats of all beaked whales have a bilaterally paired set of grooves that are associated with their unique feeding mechanism, suction feeding. Instead of capturing prey with their teeth, beaked whales suck it into their oral cavity. Suction is aided by the throat grooves, which stretch and expand to accommodate food. Their tongues can move very freely. By suddenly retracting the tongue and distending the gular (throat) floor, pressure immediately drops within the mouth, sucking the prey in with the water.\nDietary information is available from stomach contents analyses of stranded beaked whales and from whaling operations. Their preferred diet is primarily deep-water squid, but also benthic and benthopelagic fish and some crustaceans, mostly taken near the sea floor. In a recent study, gouge marks in the sea floor were interpreted to be a result of feeding activities by beaked whales.\nTo understand the hunting and foraging behavior of beaked whales, researchers used sound and orientation recording devices on two species: Cuvier's beaked whale (\"Ziphius cavirostris\") and Blainville's beaked whale (\"Mesoplodon densirostris\"). These whales hunt by echolocation in deep water (where the majority of their prey is located) between about and usually catch about 30 prey per dive. Cuvier's beaked whales must forage on average at for 58 minutes and Blainville's beaked whales typically forage at deep for an average of 47 minutes.\nRange and habitat.\nThe family Ziphiidae is one of the most widespread families of cetaceans, ranging from the ice edges at both the north and south poles, to the equator in all the oceans. Specific ranges vary greatly by species, though beaked whales typically inhabit offshore waters that are at least 300 m deep.\nBeaked whales are known to congregate in deep waters off the edge of continental shelves, and bottom features, such as seamounts, canyons, escarpments, and oceanic islands, including the Azores and the Canary Islands, and even off the coasts of Hawaii.\nLife history.\nVery little is known about the life history of beaked whales. The oldest recorded age is 84 years for a male Baird's beaked whale and 54 years for a female. For all other beaked whale species studied, the oldest recorded age is between 27 and 39 years. Sexual maturity is reached between seven and 15 years of age in Baird's beaked whales and northern bottlenose whales. Gestation varies greatly between species, lasting 17 months for Baird's beaked whales and 12 months for the northern bottlenose whale. No data is available on their reproductive rates.\nDetermining group size for beaked whales is difficult, due to their inconspicuous surfacing behavior. Groups of beaked whales, defined as all individuals found in the same location at the same time, have been reported as ranging from one to 100 individuals. Nevertheless, some populations' group size has been estimated from repeated observations. For example, northern and southern bottlenose whales (\"H. ampullatus\" and \"H. planifrons\"), Cuvier's beaked whales, and Blainville's beaked whales (\"Mesoplodon densirostris\") have a reported maximum group size of 20 individuals, with the average ranging from 2.5 to 3.5 individuals. \"Berardius\" species and Longman's beaked whales (\"Indopacetus pacificus\") are found in larger groups of up to 100 individuals.\nNot much information is available about group composition of beaked whales. Only four species have been studied in great detail: northern bottlenose whale, Blainville's beaked whale, Baird's beaked whale, and Cuvier's beaked whale. Female northern bottlenose whales appear to form a loose network of social partners with no obvious long-term associations. In contrast to females, some male northern bottlenose whales have been repeatedly recorded together over several years, and possibly form long-term associations. Studies of Blainville's beaked whales have revealed groups usually consist of a number of females, calves, and/or juvenile animals occasionally accompanied by single males. Drawing on similarities with other mammal species, it has been concluded that this species may therefore engage in female-defense polygyny. Baird's beaked whales are known to occur in multiple male groups, and in large groups consisting of adult animals of both sexes. There has been some evidence from the Commander islands of multi-year stability in these groups. Arnoux's beaked whales have also been observed to form large pods of up to 47 individuals off the Southern Ocean off the coast of Kemp Land, Antarctica. While males may form short-term associations in the Cuvier's beaked whale, there do not appear to be long term bonds in this species and relatively high rates of fission and fusion within and among groups have been observed.\nConservation.\nFor many years, most beaked whale species were insulated from anthropogenic impacts because of their remote habitat. However, now several issues of concern include:\nA major conservation concern for beaked whales (family Ziphiidae) is they appear to be vulnerable to modern sonar operations, which arises from recent strandings that temporally and physically coincide with naval sonar exercises. Mid-frequency active sonar (MFAS), developed in the 1950s for submarine detection, is thought to induce panic when experienced by whales at depth. This raises their heart-rates, forcing them to attempt to rapidly ascend toward the surface in search of air. This artificially-induced rapid ascent can cause decompression.\n\"Post mortem\" examinations of the stranded whales in concurrence with naval exercises have reported the presence of hemorrhaging near the ears or gas and fat emboli, which could have a deleterious impact on beaked whales that is analogous to decompression sickness in humans. Gas and fat emboli have been shown to cause nervous and cardiovascular system dysfunction, respiratory distress, pain, and disorientation in both humans and animals. In the inner ear, gas embolism can cause hemorrhages, leading to disorientation or vestibular dysfunction.\nBreath-holding divers, like beaked whales, can develop decompression-related problems (the \"bends\") when they return to the surface after deep dives. This is a possible hypothesis for the mass strandings of pelagic beaked whales associated with sonar-related activities. To illustrate, a diving beaked whale may be surfacing from a deep dive and must pass vertically through varying received sound levels. Since the whale has limited remaining oxygen supplies at the end of a long dive, it probably has limited abilities to display any normal sound avoidance behavior. Instead, the whale must continue to swim toward the surface to replenish its oxygen stores. Avoiding sonar inevitably requires a change in behavior or surfacing pattern. Therefore, sonar in close proximity to groups of beaked whales has the potential to cause hemorrhaging or to disorient the animal, eventually leading to a stranding.\nCurrent research reveals two species of beaked whales are most affected by sonar: Cuvier's (\"Z. cavirostris\") and Blainville's (\"M. densirostris\") beaked whales. These animals have been reported as stranding in correlation with military exercises in Greece, the Bahamas, Madeira, and the Canary Islands. The livers of these animals had the most damage.\nIn 2019, a review of evidence on the mass strandings of beaked whale linked to naval exercises where sonar was used was published. It concluded that the effects of mid-frequency active sonar are strongest on Cuvier's beaked whales but vary among individuals or populations, and the strength of their response may depend on whether the individuals had prior exposure to sonar. The report considered that the most plausible explanation of the symptoms of decompression sickness such as gas embolism found in stranded whales to be the whales' response to sonar. It noted that no more mass strandings had occurred in the Canary Islands once naval exercises where sonar was used were banned there, and recommended that the ban be extended to other areas where mass strandings continue to occur.\nFour species are classified by the IUCN as \"lower risk, conservation dependent\": Arnoux's and Baird's beaked whales, and the northern and southern bottlenose whales. The status of the remaining species is unknown, preventing classification.\nCaptivity.\nBeaked whales have only rarely been kept in captivity and generally for very short time periods. Most animals taken into captivity have been captured after live-stranding and may have been in poor health only to die shortly thereafter.\nThe longest time period for a beaked whale living in captivity was 25 days, the record held by a whale named Alexander, one of two presumed Hubbs' beaked whale calves that stranded on August 24, 1989, on a beach in San Francisco, California, USA. Both whales were taken to Marine World Africa USA, in Vallejo, California. The animals were kept in a 9.7 meter diameter by 2.7 meter deep pool. The second whale, named Nicholas, died after 15 days in captivity. Alexander, the smaller of the two whales, died of pneumonia, while the cause of death for Nicholas was not determined.\nA small number of other beaked whales have been kept in captivity. Notably, a Cuvier's beaked whale captured on 02 February, 1992 and held at Sea World of Florida was released after nine days about 30 miles offshore into the Atlantic Ocean. Perhaps the only successful release of a beaked whale, the animal was freeze branded for future identification before release. A rare True's beaked whale, later named Hope, the only member of its species known to be held in captivity, was taken after live-stranding on 02 January, 1973. It was held for about two days in a backyard swimming pool which had been pumped full of seawater before being transferred to the Coney Island Aquarium where it died approximately 2 days later. A juvenile female Cuvier's beaked whale was found stranded on a kelp bed off of Santa Catalina Island on 23 February 1956. She was taken to Marineland of the Pacific, where she was named Martha Washington. On 16 June 1969, a Blainville's beaked whale live stranded in St. Augustine. The whale, thought to be a male, was then transported to Marineland of Florida. It is unknown what happened to the whale, but it was still alive on 18 June 1969.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72721", "revid": "24043204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72721", "title": "Ziphiidae", "text": ""}
{"id": "72725", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72725", "title": "Margaret Holland, Duchess of Clarence", "text": "English noblewoman (1385\u20131439\nMargaret Holland (1385 \u2013 30 December 1439) was a medieval English noblewoman and a member of the powerful Holland family. Through her marriages she became Countess of Somerset and Duchess of Clarence. She was \"at the very centre of royal power and prestige\" throughout her lifetime.\nEarly life.\nMargaret was a daughter of Thomas Holland, 2nd Earl of Kent, who was the son of Joan \"the Fair Maid of Kent\" (granddaughter of Edward I of England, wife of Edward the Black Prince and mother of Richard II of England). Margaret's mother was Alice FitzAlan, daughter of Richard FitzAlan, 10th Earl of Arundel and Eleanor of Lancaster.\nMarriages and issue.\nMargaret married John Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset, son of John of Gaunt and his mistress Katherine Swynford. They had six children:\nIn 1399, she was invested as a Lady of the Order of the Garter (LG).\nAfter her husband John Beaufort died in 1410, she married his half-nephew Thomas of Lancaster, Duke of Clarence (1387\u20131421), the son of King Henry IV. They had no children, although Thomas was stepfather to her six children from her first marriage, who were his first cousins.\nLater life and death.\nIn 1419 she travelled to Normandy with her sons to be with her husband there, leaving her daughters in the care of the Prioress of Dartford. Her husband died on 22 March 1421 fighting at the Battle of Baug\u00e9, Anjou, France. She was an executrix of his will alongside executors John Colvylle of Neuton, Cambridgeshire, knight, and Henry Merston of Westminster, clerk.\nIn 1430 a book about the life of St. Jerome was made for her by Symon Wynter of Syon Abbey.\nMargaret retired to St. Saviour's Abbey, Bermondsey, London, where she died on 30 December 1439.\nMargaret and both her husbands are buried together in a carved alabaster tomb in Canterbury Cathedral that she commissioned. The monument shows her lying in repose between her two husbands, which is extremely rare. Her husbands had been buried in the Trinity Chapel and were exhumed to be reburied alongside Margaret.\nDescendants.\nThrough her son John, the 1st Duke of Somerset, and his wife Margaret Beauchamp, Lady Margaret is an ancestress to the Tudor monarchs.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "72726", "revid": "39402709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72726", "title": "Thrust fault", "text": "Type of reverse fault that has a dip of 45 degrees or less\nA thrust fault is a break in the Earth's crust, across which older rocks are pushed above younger rocks.\nThrust geometry and nomenclature.\nReverse faults.\nA thrust fault is a type of reverse fault that has a dip of 45 degrees or less.\nIf the angle of the fault plane is lower (often less than 15 degrees from the horizontal) and the displacement of the overlying block is large (often in the kilometer range) the fault is called an \"overthrust\" or \"overthrust fault\". Erosion can remove part of the overlying block, creating a \"fenster\" (or \"window\") \u2013 when the underlying block is exposed only in a relatively small area. When erosion removes most of the overlying block, leaving island-like remnants resting on the lower block, the remnants are called \"klippen\" (singular \"klippe\").\nBlind thrust faults.\nIf the fault plane terminates before it reaches the Earth's surface, it is called a \"blind thrust\" fault. Because of the lack of surface evidence, blind thrust faults are difficult to detect until rupture. The destructive 1994 earthquake in Northridge, Los Angeles, California, was caused by a previously undiscovered blind thrust fault.\nBecause of their low dip, thrusts are also difficult to appreciate in mapping, where lithological offsets are generally subtle and stratigraphic repetition is difficult to detect, especially in peneplain areas.\nFault-bend folds.\nThrust faults, particularly those involved in thin-skinned style of deformation, have a so-called \"ramp-flat\" geometry. Thrusts mainly propagate along zones of weakness within a sedimentary sequence, such as mudstones or halite layers; these parts of the thrust are called \"decollements\". If the effectiveness of the decollement becomes reduced, the thrust will tend to cut up the section to a higher stratigraphic level until it reaches another effective decollement where it can continue as bedding parallel flat. The part of the thrust linking the two flats is known as a \"ramp\" and typically forms at an angle of about 15\u00b0\u201330\u00b0 to the bedding. Continued displacement on a thrust over a ramp produces a characteristic fold geometry known as a \"ramp anticline\" or, more generally, as a \"fault-bend fold\".\nFault-propagation folds.\nFault-propagation folds form at the tip of a thrust fault where propagation along the decollement has ceased, but displacement on the thrust behind the fault tip continues. The formation of an asymmetric anticline-syncline fold pair accommodates the continuing displacement. As displacement continues, the thrust tip starts to propagate along the axis of the syncline. Such structures are also known as \"tip-line folds\". Eventually, the propagating thrust tip may reach another effective decollement layer, and a composite fold structure will develop with fault-bending and fault-propagation folds' characteristics.\nThrust duplex.\nDuplexes occur where two decollement levels are close to each other within a sedimentary sequence, such as the top and base of a relatively strong sandstone layer bounded by two relatively weak mudstone layers. When a thrust that has propagated along the lower detachment, known as the \"floor thrust\", cuts up to the upper detachment, known as the \"roof thrust\", it forms a ramp within the stronger layer. With continued displacement on the thrust, higher stresses are developed in the footwall of the ramp due to the bend on the fault. This may cause renewed propagation along the floor thrust until it again cuts up to join the roof thrust. Further displacement then takes place via the newly created ramp. This process may repeat many times, forming a series of fault-bounded thrust slices known as \"imbricates\" or horses, each with the geometry of a fault-bend fold of small displacement. The final result is typically a lozenge-shaped duplex.\nMost duplexes have only small displacements on the bounding faults between the horses, which dip away from the foreland. Occasionally, the displacement on the individual horses is more significant, such that each horse lies more or less vertically above the other; this is known as an \"antiformal stack\" or imbricate stack. If the individual displacements are still greater, the horses have a foreland dip.\nDuplexing is a very efficient mechanism of accommodating the shortening of the crust by thickening the section rather than by folding and deformation.\nTectonic environment.\nLarge overthrust faults occur in areas that have undergone great compressional forces.\nThese conditions exist in the orogenic belts that result from either two continental tectonic collisions or from subduction zone accretion.\nThe resultant compressional forces produce mountain ranges. The Himalayas, the Alps, and the Appalachians are prominent examples of compressional orogenies with numerous overthrust faults.\nThrust faults occur in the foreland basin, marginal to orogenic belts. Here, compression does not result in appreciable mountain building, which is mostly accommodated by folding and stacking of thrusts. Instead, thrust faults generally cause a thickening of the stratigraphic section. When thrusts are developed in orogens formed in previously rifted margins, inversion of the buried paleo-rifts can induce the nucleation of thrust ramps.\nForeland basin thrusts also usually observe the ramp-flat geometry, with thrusts propagating within units at very low angle \"flats\" (at 1\u20135 degrees) and then moving up-section in steeper ramps (at 5\u201320 degrees) where they offset stratigraphic units. Thrusts have also been detected in cratonic settings, where \"far-foreland\" deformation has advanced into intracontinental areas.\nThrusts and duplexes are also found in accretionary wedges in the ocean trench margin of subduction zones, where oceanic sediments are scraped off the subducted plate and accumulate. Here, the accretionary wedge must thicken by up to 200%, and this is achieved by stacking thrust fault upon thrust fault in a melange of disrupted rock, often with chaotic folding. Here, ramp flat geometries are not usually observed because the compressional force is at a steep angle to the sedimentary layering.\nHistory.\nThrust faults were unrecognised until the work of Arnold Escher von der Linth, Albert Heim and Marcel Alexandre Bertrand in the Alps working on the Glarus Thrust; Charles Lapworth, Ben Peach and John Horne working on parts of the Moine Thrust in the Scottish Highlands; Alfred Elis T\u00f6rnebohm in the Scandinavian Caledonides and R. G. McConnell in the Canadian Rockies. The realisation that older strata could, via faulting, be found above younger strata was arrived at more or less independently by geologists in all these areas during the 1880s. Geikie in 1884 coined the term \"thrust-plane\" to describe this special set of faults. He wrote:\nBy a system of reversed faults, a group of strata is made to cover a great breadth of ground and actually to overlie higher members of the same series. The most extraordinary dislocations, however, are those to which for distinction we have given the name of Thrust-planes. They are strictly reversed faults, but with so low a hade that the rocks on their upthrown side have been, as it were, pushed horizontally forward.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
