{"id": "57998", "revid": "33857400", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57998", "title": "Battle of the Bulge", "text": "World War II battle, 1944\u20131945\nThe Battle of the Bulge, also known as the Ardennes Offensive or Unternehmen Wacht am Rhein, was the last major German offensive campaign on the Western Front during the Second World War, taking place from 16 December 1944 to 25 January 1945. It was launched through the densely forested Ardennes region of eastern Belgium and northern Luxembourg. The offensive was intended to stop Allied use of the Belgian port of Antwerp and to split the Allied lines, allowing the Germans to encircle and destroy each of the four Allied armies and force the western Allies to negotiate a peace treaty in the Axis powers' favor.\nThe Germans achieved a total surprise attack on the morning of 16 December 1944, due to a combination of Allied overconfidence based on the favorable defensive terrain and faulty intelligence about Wehrmacht intentions, poor aerial reconnaissance due to bad weather, and a preoccupation with Allied offensive plans elsewhere. American forces were using this region primarily as a rest area for the U.S. First Army, and the lines were thinly held by fatigued troops and inexperienced replacement units. The Germans also took advantage of heavily overcast weather conditions that grounded the Allies' superior air forces for an extended period. American resistance on the northern shoulder of the offensive, around Elsenborn Ridge, and in the south, around Bastogne, blocked German access to key roads to the northwest and west which they had counted on for success. This congestion and terrain that favored the defenders threw the German advance behind schedule and allowed the Allies to reinforce the thinly placed troops. The farthest west the offensive reached was the village of Foy-Notre-Dame, south east of Dinant, being stopped by the U.S. 2nd Armored Division on 24 December 1944. Improved weather conditions from around 24 December permitted air attacks on German forces and supply lines. On 26 December the lead element of General George S. Patton's U.S. Third Army reached Bastogne from the south ending the siege. Although the offensive was effectively broken by 27 December, when the trapped units of 2nd Panzer Division made two break-out attempts with only partial success, the battle continued for another month before the front line was effectively restored to its position prior to the attack.\nThe Germans committed over 410,000 men, just over 1,400 tanks and armored fighting vehicles, 2,600 artillery pieces, and over 1,000 combat aircraft. Between 63,000 and 104,000 of these men were killed, missing, wounded in action, or captured. The battle severely depleted Germany's armored forces, which remained largely unreplaced throughout the remainder of the war. German Luftwaffe personnel, and later also Luftwaffe aircraft (in the concluding stages of the engagement) also sustained heavy losses. In the wake of the defeat, many experienced German units were effectively out of men and equipment, and the survivors retreated to the Siegfried Line.\nAllied forces eventually came to more than 700,000 men; from these there were from 77,000 to more than 83,000 casualties, including at least 8,600 killed. The \"Bulge\" was the largest and bloodiest single battle fought by the United States in World War II. It was one of the most important battles of the war, as it marked the last major offensive attempted by the Axis powers on the Western front. After this defeat, Nazi forces could only retreat for the remainder of the war.\nBackground.\nAfter the breakout from Normandy at the end of July 1944 and the Allied landings in southern France on 15 August 1944, the Allies advanced towards Germany more quickly than anticipated. The speed of the advance of the Allies caused several military logistics issues:\nBy December 1944, General Dwight D. Eisenhower (the Supreme Allied Commander on the Western Front) and his staff decided to hold the Ardennes region primarily as a rest area for the U.S. First Army, with limited Allied operational objectives in the area.\nThe Allies defended the Ardennes line very thinly, due to the favorable defensive terrain (a densely wooded highland with deep river valleys and a rather thin road network) and because they had intelligence that the Wehrmacht was using the area across the German border as a rest-and-refit area for its own troops.\nAllied supply issues.\nThe Allies faced major supply issues, due to the rate of their advance coupled with the initial lack of deep-water ports. Over-the-beach supply operations using the Normandy landing areas, and direct landing ships on the beaches, were unable to meet operational needs. The only deep-water port the Allies had captured was Cherbourg on the northern shore of the Cotentin peninsula and west of the original invasion beaches, but the Germans had thoroughly wrecked and mined the harbor before it could be taken. It took many months to rebuild its cargo-handling capability. The Allies captured the port of Antwerp intact in the first days of September, but it was not operational until 28 November. The estuary of the Schelde river that controlled access to the port had to be cleared of both German troops and naval mines. These limitations led to differences between General Eisenhower and Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery, commander of the Anglo-Canadian 21st Army Group, over whether Montgomery or Lieutenant General Omar Bradley, commanding the U.S. 12th Army Group, in the south would get priority access to supplies. German forces remained in control of several major ports on the English Channel coast into the autumn, while Dunkirk remained under siege until the end of the war in May 1945.\nThe Allies' efforts to destroy the French railway system prior to D-Day were successful. This destruction hampered the German response to the invasion, but it proved equally hampering to the Allies, as it took time to repair the rail network's tracks and bridges. A trucking system nicknamed the Red Ball Express brought supplies to front-line troops, but used up five times as much fuel to reach the front line near the Belgian border. By early October, the Allies had suspended major offensives to improve their supply lines and supply availability at the front.\nMontgomery and Bradley both pressed for priority delivery of supplies to their respective armies so they could continue their individual lines of advance and maintain pressure on the Germans, while Eisenhower preferred a broad-front strategy. He gave some priority to Montgomery's northern forces. This had the short-term goal of opening the urgently needed port of Antwerp and the long-term goal of capturing the Ruhr area, the biggest industrial area of Germany. With the Allies stalled, German ('Field Marshal') Gerd von Rundstedt was able to reorganize the disrupted German armies into a coherent defensive force.\nField Marshal Montgomery's Operation Market Garden had achieved only some of its objectives, while its territorial gains left the Allied supply situation stretched further than before. In October, the First Canadian Army fought the Battle of the Scheldt, opening the port of Antwerp to shipping. As a result, by the end of October, the supply situation had eased somewhat.\nGerman plans.\nDespite a lull along the front after the Scheldt battles, the German situation remained dire. While operations continued in the autumn, notably the Lorraine Campaign, the Battle of Aachen and fighting in the H\u00fcrtgen Forest, the strategic situation in the west had changed little. The Allies were slowly pushing towards Germany, but no decisive breakthrough was achieved. There were 96 Allied divisions at or near the front, with an estimated ten more divisions on the way from the United Kingdom. Additional Allied airborne units remained in England. The Germans could field a total of 55 understrength divisions.\nAdolf Hitler first outlined his planned counter-offensive to his generals on 16 September 1944. The goal was to pierce the thinly held lines of the U.S. First Army between Monschau and Wasserbillig with Walter Model's Army Group B by the end of the first day, get the armor through the Ardennes by the end of the second day, reach the Meuse between Li\u00e8ge and Dinant by the third day, and seize Antwerp and the western bank of the Scheldt estuary by the fourth day.\nHitler initially promised his generals a total of 18 infantry and 12 armored or mechanized divisions \"for planning purposes.\" The plan was to pull 13 infantry divisions, two parachute divisions and six armored divisions from the strategic reserve.\nOn the Eastern Front, the Soviets' Operation Bagration during the summer had destroyed much of Germany's Army Group Center (). By November, it was clear that Soviet forces were preparing for a winter offensive.\nMeanwhile, the Allied air offensive of early 1944 had effectively grounded the Luftwaffe, leaving the German Army with little battlefield intelligence and no way to interdict Allied supplies. The converse was equally damaging; daytime movement of German forces was rapidly noticed, and interdiction of supplies combined with the bombing of the Romanian oil fields starved Germany of oil and gasoline. This fuel shortage intensified after the Soviets overran those fields in the course of their August 1944 Jassy-Kishinev Offensive.\nOne of the few advantages held by the German forces in November 1944 was that they were no longer defending all of Western Europe. Their front lines in the west had been considerably shortened by the Allied offensive and were much closer to the German heartland. This drastically reduced their supply problems despite Allied control of the air. Additionally, their extensive telephone and telegraph network meant that radios were no longer necessary for communications, which lessened the effectiveness of Allied Ultra intercepts. Nevertheless, some 40\u201350 messages per day were decrypted by Ultra. They recorded the quadrupling of German fighter forces, and a term used in an intercepted Luftwaffe message (, literally, 'Fighter Deployment') implied preparation for an offensive operation. Ultra also picked up communiqu\u00e9s regarding extensive rail and road movements in the region, as well as orders that movements should be made on time.\nDrafting the offensive.\nHitler felt that his mobile reserves allowed him to mount one major offensive. Although he realized nothing significant could be accomplished in the Eastern Front, he still believed an offensive against the Western Allies, whom he considered militarily inferior to the Red Army, would have some chances of success. Hitler believed he could split the Allied forces and compel the Americans and British to settle for a separate peace, independent of the Soviet Union. Success in the west would give the Germans time to design and produce more advanced weapons (such as jet aircraft, new U-boat designs and super-heavy tanks) and permit the concentration of forces in the east. After the war ended, this assessment was generally viewed as unrealistic, given Allied air superiority throughout Europe and their ability to continually disrupt German offensive operations.\nHitler's plan called for a Blitzkrieg attack through the weakly defended Ardennes, mirroring the successful German offensive there during the Battle of France in 1940, and aimed at splitting the armies along the U.S.-British lines and capturing Antwerp. The plan banked on unfavorable weather, including heavy fog and low-lying clouds, which would minimize the Allied air advantage. Hitler originally set the offensive for late November, before the anticipated start of the Russian winter offensive. The disputes between Montgomery and Bradley were well known, and Hitler hoped he could exploit this disunity. If the attack were to succeed in capturing Antwerp, four complete armies would be trapped without supplies behind German lines.\nSeveral senior German military officers, including Model and von Rundstedt, expressed concern as to whether the goals of the offensive could be realized. Model and von Rundstedt both believed aiming for Antwerp was too ambitious, given Germany's scarce resources in late 1944. At the same time, they felt that maintaining a purely defensive posture (as had been the case since Normandy) would only delay defeat, not avert it. They thus developed alternative, less ambitious plans that did not aim to cross the Meuse River (in German and Dutch: Maas); Model's being ('Operation Autumn Mist') and von Rundstedt's ('Plan Martin'). The two field marshals combined their plans to present a joint \"small solution\" to Hitler. When they offered their alternative plans, Hitler would not listen. Rundstedt later testified that while he recognized the merit of Hitler's operational plan, he saw from the very first that \"all, absolutely all conditions for the possible success of such an offensive were lacking.\"\nModel, commander of German Army Group B (), and von Rundstedt, overall commander of the German Army Command in the West (), were put in charge of carrying out the operation.\nThe positions of the Allied armies stretched from southern France all the way north to the Netherlands. German planning for the counteroffensive rested on the premise that a successful strike against thinly manned stretches of the line would halt Allied advances on the entire Western Front.\nOperation names.\nThe Wehrmacht's code name for the offensive was ('Operation Watch on the Rhine'), after the German patriotic hymn , a name that deceptively implied the Germans would be adopting a defensive posture along the Western Front. The Germans also referred to it as ('Ardennes Offensive') and Rundstedt-Offensive, both names being generally used nowadays in modern Germany. The French (and Belgian) name for the operation is , 'Battle of the Ardennes'. The battle was militarily defined by the Allies as the Ardennes Counteroffensive, which included the German drive and the American effort to contain and later defeat it. The phrase 'Battle of the Bulge' was coined by contemporary press to describe the way the Allied front line bulged inward on wartime news maps.\nWhile the Ardennes Counteroffensive is the correct term in Allied military language, the official Ardennes-Alsace campaign reached beyond the Ardennes battle region, and the most popular description in English speaking countries remains simply 'Battle of the Bulge'.\nPlanning.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is a popular impression that the chief trouble in the Ardennes is the lack of good roads. As anyone on the ground will agree, the Ardennes has a fairly good road system. It is not the lack of roads as much as the lack of almost anything else on which to move that matters.\u2014\u200a\nThe OKW decided by mid-September, at Hitler's insistence, that the offensive would be mounted in the Ardennes, as was done in 1940. In 1940 German forces had passed through the Ardennes in three days before engaging the enemy, but the 1944 plan called for battle in the forest itself. The main forces were to advance westward to the Meuse River, then turn northwest for Antwerp and Brussels. The close terrain of the Ardennes would make rapid movement difficult, though open ground beyond the Meuse offered the prospect of a successful dash to the coast.\nFour armies were selected for the operation. Adolf Hitler personally selected for the counter-offensive on the northern shoulder of the western front the best troops available and officers he trusted. The lead role in the attack was given to the 6th Panzer Army, commanded by SS Sepp Dietrich. It included the most experienced formation of the Waffen-SS: the 1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler. It also contained the 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend. They were given priority for supply and equipment and assigned the shortest route to the primary objective of the offensive, Antwerp, starting from the northernmost point on the intended battlefront, nearest the important road network hub of Monschau.\nThe Fifth Panzer Army under General Hasso von Manteuffel was assigned to the middle sector with the objective of capturing Brussels. The Seventh Army, under General Erich Brandenberger, was assigned to the southernmost sector, near the Luxembourgish city of Echternach, with the task of protecting the flank. This Army was made up of only four infantry divisions, with no large-scale armored formations to use as a spearhead unit. As a result, they made little progress throughout the battle.\nIn an indirect, secondary role, the Fifteenth Army, under General Gustav-Adolf von Zangen, recently brought back up to strength and re-equipped after heavy fighting during Operation Market Garden, was located just north of the Ardennes battlefield and tasked with holding U.S. forces in place, with the possibility of launching its own attack given favorable conditions.\nFor the offensive to be successful, four criteria were deemed critical: the attack had to be a complete surprise; the weather conditions had to be poor to neutralize Allied air superiority and the damage it could inflict on the German offensive and its supply lines; the progress had to be rapid\u2014the Meuse River, halfway to Antwerp, had to be reached by day 4; and Allied fuel supplies would have to be captured intact along the way because the combined Wehrmacht forces were short on fuel. The General Staff estimated they only had enough fuel to cover one third to one half of the ground to Antwerp in heavy combat conditions.\nThe plan originally called for just under 45 divisions, including a dozen panzer and divisions forming the armored spearhead and various infantry units to form a defensive line as the battle unfolded. By this time the German Army suffered from an acute manpower shortage, and the force had been reduced to around 30 divisions. Although it retained most of its armor, there were not enough infantry units because of the defensive needs in the East. These 30 newly rebuilt divisions used some of the last reserves of the German Army. Among them were ('People's Grenadier') units formed from a mix of battle-hardened veterans and recruits formerly regarded as too young, too old or too frail to fight. Training time, equipment and supplies were inadequate during the preparations. German fuel supplies were precarious\u2014those materials and supplies that could not be directly transported by rail had to be horse-drawn to conserve fuel, and the mechanized and panzer divisions would depend heavily on captured fuel. As a result, the start of the offensive was delayed from 27 November until 16 December.\nBefore the offensive the Allies were virtually blind to German troop movement. During the liberation of France, the extensive network of the French Resistance had provided valuable intelligence about German dispositions. Once they reached the German border, this source dried up. In France, orders had been relayed within the German army using radio messages enciphered by the Enigma machine, and these could be picked up and decrypted by Allied code-breakers headquartered at Bletchley Park, to give the intelligence known as Ultra. In Germany such orders were typically transmitted using telephone and teleprinter, and a special radio silence order was imposed on all matters concerning the upcoming offensive. The major crackdown in the Wehrmacht after the 20 July plot to assassinate Hitler resulted in much tighter security and fewer leaks. The foggy autumn weather also prevented Allied reconnaissance aircraft from correctly assessing the ground situation. German units assembling in the area were even issued charcoal instead of wood for cooking fires to cut down on smoke and reduce chances of Allied observers deducing a troop buildup was underway.\nFor these reasons Allied High Command considered the Ardennes a quiet sector, relying on assessments from their intelligence services that the Germans were unable to launch any major offensive operations this late in the war. What little intelligence they had led the Allies to believe precisely what the Germans wanted them to believe-\u2013that preparations were being carried out only for defensive, not offensive, operations. The Allies relied too much on Ultra, not human reconnaissance. In fact, because of the Germans' efforts, the Allies were led to believe that a new defensive army was being formed around D\u00fcsseldorf in the northern Rhineland, possibly to defend against British attack. This was done by increasing the number of flak (, i.e., anti-aircraft cannons) in the area and the artificial multiplication of radio transmissions in the area. All of this meant that the attack, when it came, completely surprised the Allied forces. Remarkably, the U.S. First Army intelligence chief, U.S. Third Army intelligence chief Colonel Oscar Koch, and Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) intelligence officer Brigadier General Kenneth Strong all correctly predicted the German offensive capability and intention to strike the U.S. VIII Corps area. These predictions were largely dismissed by the U.S. 12th Army Group. Strong had informed Bedell Smith in December of his suspicions. Bedell Smith sent Strong to warn Lieutenant General Omar Bradley, the commander of the 12th Army Group, of the danger. Bradley's response was succinct: \"Let them come.\" Historian Patrick K. O'Donnell writes that on 8 December 1944 U.S. Rangers at great cost took Hill 400 during the Battle of the H\u00fcrtgen Forest. The next day GIs who relieved the Rangers reported a considerable movement of German troops inside the Ardennes in the enemy's rear, but that no one in the chain of command connected the dots. British forces further north were slightly better prepared. Having received decoded signals from Bletchley Park containing Luftwaffe instructions not to destroy certain bridges on the Meuse, Montgomery opted to put on hold a planned northward move from XXX Corps and instead held in reserve; this would prove significant in the subsequent battle. Despite this however, they too were doubtful of the possibility of a major offensive. \nBecause the Ardennes was considered a quiet sector, considerations of economy of force led it to be used as a training ground for new units and a rest area for units that had seen hard fighting. The U.S. units deployed in the Ardennes thus were a mixture of inexperienced troops (such as the 99th and 106th \"Golden Lions\" Divisions), and battle-hardened troops sent to that sector to recuperate (the 28th Infantry Division).\nTwo major special operations were planned for the offensive. By October it was decided that Otto Skorzeny, the German SS-commando who had rescued the former Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, was to lead a task force of English-speaking German soldiers in Operation Greif. These soldiers were to be dressed in American and British uniforms and wear dog tags taken from corpses and prisoners of war. Their job was to go behind American lines and change signposts, misdirect traffic, generally cause disruption and seize bridges across the Meuse River. By late November another ambitious special operation was added: Col. Friedrich August von der Heydte was to lead a (paratrooper combat group) in Operation St\u00f6sser, a night-time paratroop drop behind the Allied lines aimed at capturing a vital road junction near Malmedy.\nGerman intelligence had set 20 December as the expected date for the start of the upcoming Soviet offensive, aimed at crushing what was left of German resistance on the Eastern Front and thereby opening the way to Berlin. It was hoped that Soviet leader Stalin would delay the start of the operation once the German assault in the Ardennes had begun and wait for the outcome before continuing.\nAfter the 20 July 1944 attempt to assassinate Hitler, and the close advance of the Red Army which would seize the site on 27 January 1945, Hitler and his staff had been forced to abandon the headquarters in East Prussia, in which they had coordinated much of the fighting on the Eastern Front. After a brief visit to Berlin, Hitler traveled on his ('Special Train of the F\u00fchrer') to Giessen on 11 December, taking up residence in the Adlerhorst (eyrie) command complex, co-located with OB West's base at Kransberg Castle. Believing in omens and the successes of his early war campaigns that had been planned at Kransberg, Hitler had chosen the site from which he had overseen the successful 1940 campaign against France and the Low Countries.\nVon Rundstedt set up his operational headquarters near Limburg, close enough for the generals and Panzer Corps commanders who were to lead the attack to visit Adlerhorst on 11 December, traveling there in an SS-operated bus convoy. With the castle acting as overflow accommodation, the main party was settled into the Adlerhorst's Haus 2 command bunker, including Gen. Alfred Jodl, Gen. Wilhelm Keitel, Gen. Blumentritt, von Manteuffel and Dietrich.\nIn a personal conversation on 13 December between Walter Model and Friedrich von der Heydte, who was put in charge of Operation St\u00f6sser, von der Heydte gave Operation St\u00f6sser less than a 10% chance of succeeding. Model told him it was necessary to make the attempt: \"It must be done because this offensive is the last chance to conclude the war favorably.\"\nInitial German assault.\nOn 16 December 1944 at 05:30, the Germans began the assault with a massive, 90-minute artillery barrage using 1,600 artillery pieces across a front on the Allied troops facing the 6th Panzer Army. The Americans' initial impression was that this was the anticipated, localized counterattack resulting from the Allies' recent attack in the Wahlerscheid sector to the north, where the 2nd Division had knocked a sizable dent in the Siegfried Line. Heavy snowstorms engulfed parts of the Ardennes area. While having the effect of keeping the Allied aircraft grounded, the weather also proved troublesome for the Germans because poor road conditions hampered their advance. Poor traffic control led to massive traffic jams and fuel shortages in forward units. Nearly 10 hours into the assault, one of the German V-2 rockets destroyed the \"Cine Rex\" cinema in Antwerp, killing 567 people, the highest death toll from a single rocket attack during the war.\nIn the center, von Manteuffel's Fifth Panzer Army attacked towards Bastogne and St. Vith, both road junctions of great strategic importance. In the south, Brandenberger's Seventh Army pushed towards Luxembourg in its efforts to secure the flank from Allied attacks.\nUnits involved in initial assault.\n\"Forces deployed North to South\"\nNorthern Sector: Monschau to Krewinkel\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCentral Sector: Roth to Gem\u00fcnd\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSouthern Sector: Hochscheid to Mompach\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAttack on the northern shoulder.\nWhile the Siege of Bastogne is often credited as the central point where the German offensive was stopped, the battle for Elsenborn Ridge was actually the decisive component of the Battle of the Bulge. Untested troops of the 99th Infantry Division prevented the best equipped armored units of the German army from advancing and forced them to reroute their troops to unfavorable alternative routes that considerably slowed their advance.\nBest German divisions assigned.\nThe attack on Monschau, H\u00f6fen, Krinkelt-Rocherath, and then Elsenborn Ridge was led by the units personally selected by Adolf Hitler. The 6th Panzer Army was given priority for supply and equipment and was assigned the shortest route to the ultimate objective of the offensive, Antwerp. The 6th Panzer Army included the elite of the Waffen-SS, including four Panzer divisions and five infantry divisions in three corps. SS-\"Obersturmbannf\u00fchrer\" Joachim Peiper led Peiper, consisting of 4,800 men and 600 vehicles, which was charged with leading the main effort. Its newest and most powerful tank, the Tiger II heavy tank, consumed 2 US gallons of fuel per mile (470 litres per 100\u00a0km), and the Germans only had enough fuel for an estimated of travel, not nearly enough to reach Antwerp.\nGerman forces held up.\nThe attacks by the Sixth Panzer Army's infantry units in the north fared badly because of unexpectedly fierce resistance by the U.S. 2nd and 99th Infantry Divisions. Peiper, at the head of Sepp Dietrich's Sixth Panzer Army, had been designated to take the Losheim-Losheimergraben road, a key route through the Losheim Gap, but it was closed by two collapsed overpasses that German engineers failed to repair during the first day. Peiper's forces were rerouted through Lanzerath.\nTo preserve the quantity of armor available, the infantry of the 9th Regiment, 3rd \"Fallschirmjaeger\" Division, had been ordered to clear the village first. A single 18-man Intelligence and Reconnaissance Platoon from the 99th Infantry Division along with four Forward Air Controllers held up the battalion of about 500 German paratroopers until sunset, about 16:00, causing 92 casualties among the Germans.\nThis created a bottleneck in the German advance. Peiper did not begin its advance until nearly 16:00, more than 16 hours behind schedule and didn't reach Bockholtz Station until the early morning of 17 December. Their intention was to control the twin villages of Rocherath-Krinkelt which would clear a path to the high ground of Elsenborn Ridge. Occupation of this dominating terrain would allow control of the roads to the south and west and ensure supply to Peiper's armored task force.\nMalmedy massacres.\nAt 4:30\u00a0a.m. on 17 December 1944, the 1st SS Panzer Division was approximately 16 hours behind schedule when the convoys departed the village of Lanzerath enroute west to the town of Honsfeld. After capturing Honsfeld, Peiper detoured from his assigned route to seize a small fuel depot in B\u00fcllingen, where the infantry summarily executed dozens of U.S. POWs. Afterwards, Peiper advanced to the west, towards the River Meuse and captured Ligneuville, bypassing the towns of M\u00f6dersheid, Schoppen, Ondenval, and Thirimont. The terrain and poor quality of the roads made the advance of difficult; at the exit to the village of Thirimont, the armored spearhead was unable to travel the road directly to Ligneuville, and Peiper deviated from the planned route, and rather than turn to the left, the armored spearhead turned to the right, and advanced towards the crossroads of Baugnez, which is equidistant from the city of Malmedy and Ligneuville and Waimes.\nAt 12:30\u00a0p.m. on 17 December, Peiper was near the hamlet of Baugnez, on the height halfway between the town of Malmedy and Ligneuville, when they encountered elements of the 285th Field Artillery Observation Battalion, U.S. 7th Armored Division. After a brief battle the lightly armed Americans surrendered. They were disarmed and, with some other Americans captured earlier (approximately 150 men), sent to stand in a field near the crossroads under light guard. About fifteen minutes after Peiper's advance guard passed through, the main body under the command of SS- Werner P\u00f6tschke arrived. The SS troopers suddenly opened fire on the prisoners. As soon as the firing began, the prisoners panicked. Most were shot where they stood, though some managed to flee. Accounts of the killing vary, but at least 84 of the POWs were murdered. A few survived, and news of the killings of prisoners of war spread through Allied lines. Following the end of the war, soldiers and officers of Peiper, including Peiper and SS general Dietrich, were tried for the incident at the Malmedy massacre trial.\nKampfgruppe Peiper deflected southeast.\nDriving to the south-east of Elsenborn, Peiper entered Honsfeld, where they encountered one of the 99th Division's rest centers, clogged with confused American troops. They quickly captured portions of the 3rd Battalion of the 394th Infantry Regiment. They destroyed a number of American armored units and vehicles, and took several dozen prisoners who were subsequently murdered. Peiper also captured of fuel for his vehicles.\nPeiper advanced north-west towards B\u00fcllingen, keeping to the plan to move west, unaware that if he had turned north he had an opportunity to flank and trap the entire 2nd and 99th Divisions. Instead, intent on driving west, Peiper turned south to detour around H\u00fcnningen, choosing a route designated Rollbahn D as he had been given latitude to choose the best route west.\nTo the north, the 277th Volksgrenadier Division attempted to break through the defending line of the U.S. 99th and the 2nd Infantry Divisions. The 12th SS Panzer Division, reinforced by additional infantry ( and ) divisions, took the key road junction at Losheimergraben just north of Lanzerath and attacked the twin villages of Rocherath and Krinkelt.\nWereth 11.\nAnother, smaller, massacre was committed in Wereth, Belgium, approximately northeast of Saint-Vith on 17 December 1944. Eleven black American soldiers were tortured after surrendering and then shot by men of the 1st SS Panzer Division belonging to Knittel. Some of the injuries sustained before death included bayonet wounds to the head, broken legs, and their fingers cut off. The perpetrators were never punished for this crime. In 2001, a group of people began working on a tribute to the eleven black American soldiers to remember their sacrifices.\nGermans advance west.\nBy the evening the spearhead had pushed north to engage the U.S. 99th Infantry Division and \"Kampfgruppe\" Peiper arrived in front of Stavelot. Peiper's forces were already behind his timetable because of the stiff American resistance and because when the Americans fell back, their engineers blew up bridges and emptied fuel dumps. Peiper's unit was delayed and his vehicles denied critically needed fuel. They took 36 hours to advance from the Eifel region to Stavelot, while the same advance required nine hours in 1940.\n\"Kampfgruppe\" Peiper attacked Stavelot on 18 December but was unable to capture the town before the Americans evacuated a large fuel depot. Three tanks attempted to take the bridge, but the lead vehicle was disabled by a mine. Following this, 60 grenadiers advanced forward but were stopped by concentrated American defensive fire. After a fierce tank battle the next day, the Germans finally entered the town when U.S. engineers failed to blow the bridge.\nCapitalizing on his success and not wanting to lose more time, Peiper rushed an advance group toward the vital bridge at Trois-Ponts, leaving the bulk of his strength in Stavelot. When they reached it at 11:30 on 18 December, retreating U.S. engineers blew it up. Peiper detoured north towards the villages of La Gleize and Cheneux. At Cheneux, the advance guard was attacked by American fighter-bombers, destroying two tanks and five halftracks, blocking the narrow road. The group began moving again at dusk at 16:00 and was able to return to its original route at around 18:00. Of the two bridges remaining between \"Kampfgruppe\" Peiper and the Meuse, the bridge over the Lienne was blown by the Americans as the Germans approached. Peiper turned north and halted his forces in the woods between La Gleize and Stoumont. He learned that Stoumont was strongly held and that the Americans were bringing up strong reinforcements from Spa.\nTo Peiper's south, the advance of \"Kampfgruppe\" Hansen had stalled. SS-\"Oberf\u00fchrer\" Mohnke ordered \"Schnellgruppe\" Knittel, which had been designated to follow Hansen, to instead move forward to support Peiper. SS-\"Sturmbannf\u00fchrer\" Knittel crossed the bridge at Stavelot around 19:00 against American forces trying to retake the town. Knittel pressed forward towards La Gleize, and shortly afterward the Americans recaptured Stavelot. Peiper and Knittel both faced the prospect of being cut off.\nGerman advance halted.\nAt dawn on 19 December, Peiper surprised the American defenders of Stoumont by sending infantry from the 2nd SS Regiment in an attack and a company of Fallschirmj\u00e4ger to infiltrate their lines. He followed this with a Panzer attack, gaining the eastern edge of the town. An American tank battalion arrived but, after a two-hour tank battle, Peiper finally captured Stoumont at 10:30. Knittel joined up with Peiper and reported the Americans had recaptured Stavelot to their east. Peiper ordered Knittel to retake Stavelot. Assessing his own situation, he determined that his \"Kampfgruppe\" did not have sufficient fuel to cross the bridge west of Stoumont and continue his advance. He maintained his lines west of Stoumont for a while, until the evening of 19 December when he withdrew them to the village edge. On the same evening the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division under Maj. Gen. James Gavin arrived and deployed at La Gleize and along Peiper's planned route of advance.\nGerman efforts to reinforce Peiper were unsuccessful. \"Kampfgruppe\" Hansen was still struggling against bad road conditions and stiff American resistance on the southern route. \"Schnellgruppe\" Knittel was forced to disengage from the heights around Stavelot. \"Kampfgruppe\" Sandig, which had been ordered to take Stavelot, launched another attack without success. Sixth Panzer Army commander Sepp Dietrich ordered Hermann Priess, commanding officer of the I SS Panzer Corps, to increase its efforts to back Peiper's battle group, but Priess was unable to break through.\nSmall units of the U.S. 2nd Battalion, 119th Infantry Regiment, 30th Infantry Division, attacked the dispersed units of \"Kampfgruppe\" Peiper on the morning of 21 December. They failed and were forced to withdraw, and a number were captured, including battalion commander Maj. Hal D. McCown. Peiper learned that his reinforcements had been directed to gather in La Gleize to his east, and he withdrew, leaving wounded Americans and Germans in the Froidcourt Castle. As he withdrew from Cheneux, American paratroopers from the 82nd Airborne Division engaged the Germans in fierce house-to-house fighting. The Americans shelled \"Kampfgruppe\" Peiper on 22 December, and although the Germans had run out of food and had virtually no fuel, they continued to fight. A Luftwaffe resupply mission went badly when SS-\"Brigadef\u00fchrer\" Wilhelm Mohnke insisted the grid coordinates supplied by Peiper were wrong, parachuting supplies into American hands in Stoumont.\nIn La Gleize, Peiper set up defenses waiting for German relief. When the relief force was unable to penetrate the Allied lines, he decided to break through the Allied lines and return to the German lines on 23 December. The men of the \"Kampfgruppe\" were forced to abandon their vehicles and heavy equipment, although most of the 800 remaining troops were able to escape.\nOutcome.\nThe U.S. 99th Infantry Division, outnumbered five to one, inflicted casualties in the ratio of 18 to one. The division lost about 20% of its effective strength, including 465 killed and 2,524 evacuated due to wounds, injuries, fatigue, or trench foot. German losses were much higher. In the northern sector opposite the 99th, this included more than 4,000 deaths and the destruction of 60 tanks and big guns. Historian John S. D. Eisenhower wrote, \"...\u00a0the action of the 2nd and 99th Divisions on the northern shoulder could be considered the most decisive of the Ardennes campaign.\"\nThe stiff American defense prevented the Germans from reaching the vast array of supplies near the Belgian cities of Li\u00e8ge and Spa and the road network west of the Elsenborn Ridge leading to the Meuse River. After more than 10 days of intense battle, they pushed the Americans out of the villages, but were unable to dislodge them from the ridge, where elements of the V Corps of the First U.S. Army prevented the German forces from reaching the road network to their west.\nOperation St\u00f6sser.\nOperation St\u00f6sser was a paratroop drop into the American rear in the High Fens (; ; ) area. The objective was the \"Baraque Michel\" crossroads. It was led by Oberst Friedrich August Freiherr von der Heydte, considered by Germans to be a hero of the Battle of Crete.\nIt was the German paratroopers' only nighttime drop during World War II. Heydte was given only eight days to prepare prior to the assault. He was not allowed to use his own regiment because their movement might alert the Allies to the impending counterattack. Instead, he was provided with a \"Kampfgruppe\" of 800 men. The II Parachute Corps was tasked with contributing 100 men from each of its regiments. In loyalty to their commander, 150 men from Heydte's own unit, the 6th Parachute Regiment, went against orders and joined him. They had little time to establish any unit cohesion or train together.\nThe parachute drop was a complete failure. Heydte ended up with a total of around 300 troops. Too small and too weak to counter the Allies, they abandoned plans to take the crossroads and instead converted the mission to reconnaissance. With only enough ammunition for a single fight, they withdrew towards Germany and attacked the rear of the American lines. Only about 100 of his weary men finally reached the German rear.\nChenogne massacre.\nFollowing the Malmedy massacre, on New Year's Day 1945, having previously received orders to take no prisoners, American soldiers executed approximately sixty German prisoners of war near the Belgian village of Chenogne (8\u00a0km from Bastogne).\nAttack in the center.\nThe Germans fared better in the center (the Schnee Eifel sector) as the Fifth Panzer Army attacked positions held by the U.S. 28th and 106th Infantry Divisions. The Germans lacked the overwhelming strength that had been deployed in the north, but still possessed a marked numerical and material superiority over the very thinly spread 28th and 106th divisions. They succeeded in surrounding two largely intact regiments (422nd and 423rd) of the 106th Division in a pincer movement and forced their surrender, a tribute to the way Manteuffel's new tactics had been applied. The official U.S. Army history states: \"At least seven thousand [men] were lost here and the figure probably is closer to eight or nine thousand. The amount lost in arms and equipment, of course, was very substantial. The Schnee Eifel battle, therefore, represents the most serious reverse suffered by American arms during the operations of 1944\u201345 in the European theater.\"\nBattle for St. Vith.\nIn the center, the town of St. Vith, a vital road junction, presented the main challenge for both von Manteuffel's and Dietrich's forces. The defenders, led by the 7th Armored Division, included the remaining regiment of the 106th U.S. Infantry Division, with elements of the 9th Armored Division and 28th U.S. Infantry Division. These units, which operated under the command of Generals Robert W. Hasbrouck (7th Armored) and Alan W. Jones (106th Infantry), successfully resisted the German attacks, significantly slowing the German advance. At Montgomery's orders, St. Vith was evacuated on 21 December; U.S. troops fell back to entrenched positions in the area, presenting an imposing obstacle to a successful German advance. By 23 December, as the Germans shattered their flanks, the defenders' position became untenable and U.S. troops were ordered to retreat west of the Salm River. Since the German plan called for the capture of St. Vith by 18:00 on 17 December, the prolonged action in and around it dealt a major setback to their timetable.\nMeuse River bridges.\nTo protect the river crossings on the Meuse at Givet, Dinant and Namur, Montgomery ordered those few units available to hold the bridges on 19 December. This led to a hastily assembled force including rear-echelon troops, military police and Army Air Force personnel. The British 29th Armoured Brigade of British 11th Armoured Division, which had turned in its tanks for re-equipping, was told to take back their tanks and head to the area. British XXX Corps was significantly reinforced for this effort. Units of the corps which fought in the Ardennes were the 51st (Highland) and 53rd (Welsh) Infantry Divisions, the British 6th Airborne Division, the 29th and 33rd Armoured Brigades, and the 34th Tank Brigade.\nUnlike the German forces on the northern and southern shoulders who were experiencing great difficulties, the German advance in the center gained considerable ground. The Fifth Panzer Army was spearheaded by the 2nd Panzer Division while the Panzer Lehr Division (Elite Armored Demonstration Division) came up from the south, leaving Bastogne to other units. The Ourthe River was passed at Ourtheville on 21 December. Lack of fuel held up the advance for one day, but on 23 December the offensive was resumed towards the two small towns of Hargimont and Marche-en-Famenne. Hargimont was captured the same day, but Marche-en-Famenne was strongly defended by the American 84th Division. Gen. von L\u00fcttwitz, commander of the XXXXVII Panzer-Korps, ordered the division to turn westwards towards Dinant and the Meuse, leaving only a blocking force at Marche-en-Famenne. Although advancing only in a narrow corridor, 2nd Panzer Division was still making rapid headway, leading to jubilation in Berlin. Headquarters now freed up the 9th Panzer Division for Fifth Panzer Army, which was deployed at Marche.\nOn 22/23 December German forces reached the woods of Foy-Notre-Dame, only a few kilometers ahead of Dinant. The narrow corridor caused considerable difficulties, as constant flanking attacks threatened the division. On 24 December, German forces made their furthest penetration west. The Panzer Lehr Division took the town of Celles, while a bit farther north, parts of 2nd Panzer Division were in sight of the Meuse near Dinant at Foy-Notre-Dame. A hastily assembled British blocking force on the east side of the river prevented the German Battlegroup B\u00f6hm from approaching the Dinant bridge. The 29th Armoured Brigade ambushed the Germans knocking out three Panthers and a number of vehicles in and around Foy-Notre-Dame. By late Christmas Eve the advance in this sector was stopped, as Allied forces threatened the narrow corridor held by the 2nd Panzer Division.\nOperation Greif and Operation W\u00e4hrung.\nFor Operation Greif (\"Griffin\"), Otto Skorzeny successfully infiltrated a small part of his battalion of English-speaking Germans disguised in American uniforms behind the Allied lines. Although they failed to take the vital bridges over the Meuse, their presence caused confusion out of all proportion to their military activities, and rumors spread quickly. Even General George Patton was alarmed and, on 17 December, described the situation to General Dwight Eisenhower as \"Krauts\u00a0... speaking perfect English\u00a0... raising hell, cutting wires, turning road signs around, spooking whole divisions, and shoving a bulge into our defenses.\"\nCheckpoints were set up all over the Allied rear, greatly slowing the movement of soldiers and equipment. American MPs at these checkpoints grilled troops on things that every American was expected to know, like the identity of Mickey Mouse's girlfriend, baseball scores, or the capital of a particular U.S. state\u2014though many could not remember or did not know. General Omar Bradley was briefly detained when he correctly identified Springfield as the capital of Illinois because the American MP who questioned him mistakenly believed the capital was Chicago.\nThe tightened security nonetheless made things very hard for the German infiltrators, and a number of them were captured. Even during interrogation, they continued their goal of spreading disinformation; when asked about their mission, some of them claimed they had been told to go to Paris to either kill or capture General Dwight Eisenhower. Security around the general was greatly increased, and Eisenhower was confined to his headquarters. Because Skorzeny's men were captured in American uniforms, they were executed as spies. This was a standard punishment option for most armies of the time, as many belligerents considered it necessary to protect their territory and forces against the grave dangers of enemy spying. \nSkorzeny said that he was told by German legal experts that as long he did not order his men to fight in combat while wearing American uniforms, such a tactic was a legitimate ruse of war. Skorzeny and his men were fully aware of their likely fate, and most wore their German uniforms underneath their American ones in case of capture. Skorzeny was tried by an American military tribunal in 1947 at the Dachau Trials for allegedly violating the laws of war stemming from his leadership of Operation Greif but was acquitted. He later moved to Spain and South America.\nAttack in the south.\nFurther south on Manteuffel's front, the main thrust was delivered by all attacking divisions crossing the River Our, then increasing the pressure on the key road centers of St. Vith and Bastogne. The more experienced U.S. 28th Infantry Division put up a much more dogged defense than the inexperienced soldiers of the 106th Infantry Division. The 112th Infantry Regiment (the most northerly of the 28th Division's regiments), holding a continuous front east of the Our, kept German troops from seizing and using the Our River bridges around Ouren for two days, before withdrawing progressively westwards.\nThe 109th and 110th Regiments of the 28th Division fared worse, as they were spread so thinly that their positions were easily bypassed. Both offered stubborn resistance in the face of superior forces and threw the German schedule off by several days. The 110th's situation was by far the worst, as it was responsible for an front while its 2nd Battalion was withheld as the divisional reserve. Panzer columns took the outlying villages and widely separated strong points in bitter fighting, and advanced to points near Bastogne within four days. The struggle for the villages and American strong points, plus transport confusion on the German side, slowed the attack sufficiently to allow the 101st Airborne Division (reinforced by elements from the 9th and 10th Armored Divisions) to reach Bastogne by truck on the morning of 19 December. The fierce defense of Bastogne, in which American paratroopers particularly distinguished themselves, made it impossible for the Germans to take the town with its important road junctions. The panzer columns swung past on either side, cutting off Bastogne on 20 December but failing to secure the vital crossroads.\nTwenty years after the battle, General\u00a0McAuliffe praised the men of the 10th Armored \"Tiger\" Division saying, \"It's always seemed regrettable to me, that Combat Command B of the 10th Armored Division didn't get the credit it deserved in the battle of Bastogne. All of the newspaper and radio talk was about the paratroopers. Actually, the 10th\u00a0Armored Division was in there December 18th, a day before we were, and had some very hard fighting before we ever got into it, and I sincerely believe that we would never have been able to get into Bastogne if it had not been for the defensive fighting of the three elements of the 10th Armored Division who were first into Bastogne and protected the town from invasion by the Germans.\"\nIn the extreme south, Brandenberger's three infantry divisions were checked by divisions of the U.S. VIII Corps after an advance of ; that front was then firmly held. Only the 5th Parachute Division of Brandenberger's command was able to thrust forward on the inner flank to partially fulfill its assigned role. Eisenhower and his principal commanders realized by 17 December that the fighting in the Ardennes was a major offensive and not a local counterattack, and they ordered vast reinforcements to the area. Within a week 250,000 troops had been sent. General Gavin of the 82nd Airborne Division arrived on the scene first and ordered the 101st to hold Bastogne while the 82nd would take the more difficult task of facing the SS Panzer Divisions; it was also thrown into the battle north of the bulge, near Elsenborn Ridge.\nSiege of Bastogne.\nSenior Allied commanders met in a bunker in Verdun on 19 December. By this time, the town of Bastogne and its network of 11 hard-topped roads leading through the widely forested mountainous terrain with deep river valleys and boggy mud of the Ardennes region was under severe threat. Bastogne had previously been the site of the VIII Corps headquarters. Two separate westbound German columns that were to have bypassed the town to the south and north, the 2nd Panzer Division and Panzer-Lehr-Division of XLVII Panzer Corps, as well as the Corps' infantry (26th Volksgrenadier Division), coming due west had been engaged and much slowed and frustrated in outlying battles at defensive positions up to from the town proper, but these defensive positions were gradually being forced back onto and into the hasty defenses built within the municipality. Moreover, the sole corridor that was open (to the southeast) was threatened and it had been sporadically closed as the front shifted, and there was expectation that it would be completely closed sooner than later, given the strong likelihood that the town would soon be surrounded.\nGen. Eisenhower, realizing that the Allies could destroy German forces much more easily when they were out in the open and on the offensive than if they were on the defensive, told his generals, \"The present situation is to be regarded as one of opportunity for us and not of disaster. There will be only cheerful faces at this table.\" Patton, realizing what Eisenhower implied, responded, \"Hell, let's have the guts to let the bastards go all the way to Paris. Then, we'll really cut 'em off and chew 'em up.\" Eisenhower, after saying he was not that optimistic, asked Patton how long it would take to turn his Third Army, located in northeastern France, north to counterattack. To the disbelief of the other generals present, Patton replied that he could attack with two divisions within 48 hours. Unknown to the other officers present, before he left, Patton had ordered his staff to prepare three contingency plans for a northward turn in at least corps strength. By the time Eisenhower asked him how long it would take, the movement was already underway. On 20 December, Eisenhower removed the First and Ninth U.S. Armies from Gen. Bradley's 12th Army Group and placed them under Montgomery's 21st Army Group.\nBy 21 December the Germans had surrounded Bastogne, which was defended by the 101st Airborne Division, the all African American 969th Artillery Battalion, and Combat Command B of the 10th Armored Division. Conditions inside the perimeter were tough\u2014most of the medical supplies and medical personnel had been captured. Food was scarce, and by 22 December artillery ammunition was restricted to 10 rounds per gun per day. The weather cleared the next day and supplies (primarily ammunition) were dropped over four of the next five days.\nDespite determined German attacks, the perimeter held. The German commander, L\u00fcttwitz, requested Bastogne's surrender. When Brig. Gen. Anthony McAuliffe, acting commander of the 101st, was told of the German demand to surrender, in frustration he responded, \"Nuts!\" After turning to other pressing issues, his staff reminded him that they should reply to the German demand. One officer, Lt. Col. Harry Kinnard, noted that McAuliffe's initial reply would be \"tough to beat.\" Thus McAuliffe wrote on the paper, which was typed up and delivered to the Germans, the line he made famous and a morale booster to his troops: \"NUTS!\" That reply had to be explained, both to the Germans and to non-American Allies.\nBoth 2nd Panzer and Panzer-Lehr division moved forward from Bastogne after 21 December, leaving only Panzer-Lehr division's 901st Regiment to assist the 26th Volksgrenadier-Division in attempting to capture the crossroads. The 26th VG received one Regiment from the 15th Panzergrenadier Division on Christmas Eve for its main assault the next day. Because it lacked sufficient troops and those of the 26th VG Division were near exhaustion, the XLVII Panzerkorps concentrated its assault on several individual locations on the west side of the perimeter in sequence rather than launching one simultaneous attack on all sides. The assault, despite initial success by its tanks in penetrating the American line, was defeated and all the tanks destroyed. On the following day of 26 December the spearhead of Gen. Patton's 4th Armored Division, supplemented by the 26th (Yankee) Infantry Division, broke through and opened a corridor to Bastogne.\nAllied counterstrikes.\nOn 23 December the weather conditions started improving, allowing the Allied air forces to attack. They launched devastating bombing raids on the German supply points in their rear, and P-47 Thunderbolts started attacking the German troops on the roads. Allied air forces also helped the defenders of Bastogne, dropping much-needed supplies\u2014medicine, food, blankets, and ammunition. A team of volunteer surgeons flew in by military glider and began operating in a tool room.\nBy 24 December the German advance was effectively stalled short of the Meuse. Units of the British XXX Corps were holding the bridges at Dinant, Givet, and Namur and U.S. units were about to take over. The Germans had outrun their supply lines, and shortages of fuel and ammunition were becoming critical. Up to this point the German losses had been light, notably in armor, with the exception of Peiper's losses. On the evening of 24 December, Manteuffel recommended to Hitler's Military Adjutant a halt to all offensive operations and a withdrawal back to the (literally 'Western Rampart'). Hitler rejected this.\nDisagreement and confusion at the Allied command prevented a strong response, throwing away the opportunity for a decisive action. In the center, on Christmas Eve, the 2nd Armored Division attempted to attack and cut off the spearheads of the 2nd Panzer Division at the Meuse, while the units from the 4th Cavalry Group kept the 9th Panzer Division at Marche busy. As a result, parts of the 2nd Panzer Division were cut off. The Panzer-Lehr division tried to relieve them, but was only partially successful, as the perimeter held. For the next two days the perimeter was strengthened. On 26 and 27 December the trapped units of 2nd Panzer Division made two break-out attempts, again only with partial success, as major quantities of equipment fell into Allied hands. Further Allied pressure out of Marche finally led the German command to the conclusion that no further offensive action towards the Meuse was possible.\nIn the south, Patton's Third Army was battling to relieve Bastogne. At 16:50 on 26 December, the lead element, Company D, 37th Tank Battalion of the 4th Armored Division, reached Bastogne, ending the siege.\nGerman supporting efforts across the Western Front.\nOn 1 January, in an attempt to keep the offensive going, the Germans launched two new operations. At 09:15, the Luftwaffe launched (Operation Baseplate), a major campaign against Allied airfields in the Low Countries. Hundreds of planes attacked Allied airfields, destroying or severely damaging some 465 aircraft. The Luftwaffe lost 277 planes, 62 to Allied fighters and 172 mostly because of an unexpectedly high number of Allied flak guns, set up to protect against German V-1 flying bomb/missile attacks and using proximity fused shells, but also by friendly fire from the German flak guns that were uninformed of the pending large-scale German air operation. The Germans suffered heavy losses at an airfield named Y-29, losing 40 of their own planes while damaging only four American planes. While the Allies recovered from their losses within days, the operation left the Luftwaffe ineffective for the remainder of the war.\nOn the same day, German Army Group G () and Army Group Upper Rhine () launched a major offensive against the thinly-stretched, line of the Seventh U.S. Army. This offensive, known as (Operation North Wind), and separate from the Ardennes Offensive, was the last major German offensive of the war on the Western Front. The weakened Seventh Army had, at Eisenhower's orders, sent troops, equipment, and supplies north to reinforce the American armies in the Ardennes, and the offensive left it in dire straits.\nBy 15 January, Seventh Army's VI Corps was fighting on three sides in Alsace. With casualties mounting, and running short on replacements, tanks, ammunition, and supplies, Seventh Army was forced to withdraw to defensive positions on the south bank of the Moder River on 21 January. The German offensive drew to a close on 25 January. In the bitter, desperate fighting of Operation Nordwind, VI Corps, which had borne the brunt of the fighting, suffered a total of 14,716 casualties. The total for Seventh Army for January was 11,609. Total casualties included at least 9,000 wounded. First, Third, and Seventh Armies suffered a total of 17,000 hospitalized from the cold.\nAllied counter-offensive.\nWhile the German offensive toward the Meuse had ground to a halt by the end of December, they still controlled a dangerous salient in the Allied line. Patton's Third Army in the south, centered around Bastogne, would attack north, Montgomery's forces in the north would strike south, and the two forces planned to meet at Houffalize to reduce the bulge, and push east back toward the offensive start line.\nThe temperature during that January was extremely low, which required weapons to be maintained and truck engines run every half-hour to prevent their oil from congealing. The offensive went forward regardless.\nEisenhower wanted Montgomery to go on the counter offensive on 1 January, with the aim of meeting up with Patton's advancing Third Army and cutting off German troops at the tip of the salient, trapping them in a pocket. Montgomery, refusing to risk underprepared infantry in a snowstorm for a strategically unimportant area, did not launch the attack until 3 January. In addition, a series of renewed German attempts to re-encircle and seize Bastogne using units moved to the southern shoulder of the salient from the north, put Patton in a desperate fight for the initiative, with the German maintaining offensive operations in sectors north and east of Bastogne until 7 January, and resulting in heavier fighting than during the 21\u201326 December siege of Bastogne itself; in addition, Patton's Third Army would have to clear out the \"Harlange Pocket\" east of Bastogne on the Belgian-Luxembourg border. One of these fierce actions around Bastogne occurred on 2 January, the Tiger IIs of German Heavy Tank Battalion 506 supported an attack by the 12th SS Hitlerjugend division against U.S. positions of the 6th Armored Division near Wardin and knocked out 15 Sherman tanks.\nAt the start of the offensive, the First and Third U.S. Armies were separated by about . American progress in the south was also restricted to about a kilometer or a little over half a mile per day.\nOn 7/8 January 1945, Hitler agreed to gradually withdraw forces from the tip of the Ardennes salient to east of Houffalize to avoid being cut off, but the Germans continued to resist in the salient and were only gradually pushed back otherwise. Considerable fighting went on for another 3 weeks, with Third Army and First Army linking up on 16 January with the capture of Houffalize. Sixth Panzer Army left the Ardennes and ceded its sector to the Fifth Panzer Army on 22 January, while St. Vith was recaptured by the Americans on 23 January, and the last German units participating in the offensive did not return to their start line until February.\nWinston Churchill, addressing the House of Commons following the Battle of the Bulge said, \"This is undoubtedly the greatest American battle of the war and will, I believe, be regarded as an ever-famous American victory.\"\nStrategy and leadership.\nHitler's chosen few.\nThe plan and timing for the Ardennes attack sprang from the mind of Adolf Hitler. He believed a critical fault line existed between the British and American military commands, and that a heavy blow on the Western Front would shatter this alliance. Planning for the \"Watch on the Rhine\" offensive emphasized secrecy and the commitment of overwhelming force. Due to the use of landline communications within Germany, motorized runners carrying orders, and draconian threats from Hitler, the timing and mass of the attack was not detected by Ultra codebreakers and achieved complete surprise.\nAfter officers of the regular German Army attempted to assassinate him, Hitler had increasingly trusted only the Nazi Party SS and its armed branch, the Waffen-SS. He entrusted them with carrying out his decisive counterattack. But following the Allied Normandy invasion, the SS armored units had suffered significant leadership casualties. This included SS- (Brigadier general) Kurt Meyer, commander of the 12th SS Panzer (Armor) Division, captured by Belgian partisans on 6 September 1944. Thus Hitler gave responsibility for the key right flank of the assault to the best SS troops and a few units under the command of \"Sepp\" (Joseph) Dietrich, a fanatical political disciple of Hitler, and a loyal follower from the early days of the rise of National Socialism in Germany. The leadership composition of the Sixth Panzer Army had a distinctly political nature.\nDespite their loyalty, none of the German field commanders entrusted with planning and executing the offensive believed it was possible to capture Antwerp. Even Dietrich believed the Ardennes was a poor area for armored warfare and that the inexperienced and badly equipped soldiers would clog the roads the tanks needed for their rapid advance. In fact, their horse-drawn artillery and rocket units became a significant obstacle to the armored units. Other than making futile objections to Hitler in private, Dietrich generally stayed out of planning the offensive. Model and Manteuffel, technical experts from the eastern front, told Hitler that a limited offensive with the goal of surrounding and crushing the American 1st Army would be the best goal their offensive could hope to achieve. Their ideas shared the same fate as Dietrich's objections.\nThe German staff planning and organization of the attack was well done. Most of the units committed to the offensive reached their jump off points undetected. They were for the most part well organized and supplied for the attack, although they were counting on capturing American gasoline dumps to fuel their vehicles. As the battle ensued, on the northern shoulder of the offensive, Dietrich stopped the armored assault on the twin villages after two days and changed the axis of their advance southward through the hamlet of Dom\u00e4ne B\u00fctgenbach. The headlong drive on Elsenborn Ridge lacked needed support from German units that had already bypassed the ridge. Dietrich's decision unknowingly played into American hands, as Robertson had already decided to abandon the villages.\nAllied high-command controversy.\nOne of the fault lines between the British and American high commands was Eisenhower's commitment to a broad front advance. This view was opposed by the British Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Field Marshal Alan Brooke, as well as Field Marshal Montgomery, who promoted a rapid advance on a narrow front under his command, with the other allied armies in reserve.\nEisenhower based his decision on various military and political realities. The Allied occupation zones in Germany had been agreed upon in February 1944, and a faster Allied advance in the autumn of 1944 would not have altered this. The Soviet Union would have also benefited from a rapid German collapse, and its participation in the war against Japan was greatly desired. There were reservations about whether the Allied logistical system possessed the required flexibility to support the narrow-front strategy, the reality of terrain and logistics argued strongly against it, and the consequences if the narrow front advance had failed would have been very severe.\nMontgomery's Chief of Staff, Major-General Francis de Guingand, stated in his post-war account that he had opposed Montgomery's narrow front strategy on political and administrative grounds.\nMontgomery's actions.\nMontgomery differed from the U.S. command in how to respond to the German attack and his public statements to that effect caused tension in the American high command. Major-General Freddie de Guingand, Chief of Staff of Montgomery's 21st Army Group, rose to the occasion, and personally smoothed over the disagreements on 30 December.\nAs the Ardennes crisis developed, the U.S. First Army (Hodges) and U.S. Ninth Army (Simpson) on the northern shoulder of the German penetration lost communications with adjacent armies, as well as with Bradley's headquarters in Luxembourg City to the south of the \"bulge\". Consequently, at 10:30\u00a0a.m. on 20 December, Eisenhower transferred the command of the U.S. First and Ninth Armies temporarily from Bradley to Montgomery. Command of the U.S. First Army reverted to the U.S. 12th Army Group on 17 January 1945, and command of the U.S. Ninth Army reverted to the U.S. 12th Army Group on 4 April 1945.\nMontgomery wrote about the situation he found on 20 December:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The First Army was fighting desperately. Having given orders to Dempsey and Crerar, who arrived for a conference at 11\u00a0am, I left at noon for the H.Q. of the First Army, where I had instructed Simpson to meet me. I found the northern flank of the bulge was very disorganized. Ninth Army had two corps and three divisions; First Army had three corps and fifteen divisions. Neither Army Commander had seen Bradley or any senior member of his staff since the battle began, and they had no directive on which to work. The first thing to do was to see the battle on the northern flank \"as one whole\", to ensure the vital areas were held securely, and to create reserves for counter-attack. I embarked on these measures: I put British troops under command of the Ninth Army to fight alongside American soldiers, and made that Army take over some of the First Army Front. I positioned British troops as reserves behind the First and Ninth Armies until such time as American reserves could be created. Slowly but surely the situation was held, and then finally restored. Similar action was taken on the southern flank of the bulge by Bradley, with the Third Army.\nDue to the news blackout imposed on the 16th, the change of leadership to Montgomery did not become public information until SHAEF announced that the change in command had \"absolutely nothing to do with failure on the part of the three American generals\". The announcement resulted in headlines in British newspapers and \"Stars and Stripes\", which for the first time mentioned British contributions to the fighting.\nMontgomery requested permission from Churchill to give a press conference to explain the situation. Though some of his staff were concerned at how the press conference would affect Montgomery's image, it was cleared by CIGS Alan Brooke, who was possibly the only person from whom Montgomery would accept advice.\nOn the same day as Hitler's withdrawal order of 7 January, Montgomery held his press conference at Zonhoven. Montgomery started with giving credit to the \"courage and good fighting quality\" of the American troops, characterizing a typical American as a \"very brave fighting man who has that tenacity in battle which makes a great soldier\", and went on to talk about the necessity of Allied teamwork, and praised Eisenhower, stating, \"Teamwork wins battles and battle victories win wars. On our team, the captain is General Ike.\"\nThen Montgomery described the course of the battle for a half-hour. Coming to the end of his speech he said he had \"employed the whole available power of the British Group of Armies; this power was brought into play very gradually\u00a0... Finally it was put into battle with a bang\u00a0... you thus have the picture of British troops fighting on both sides of the Americans who have suffered a hard blow.\" He stated that he (i.e., the German) was \"headed off\u00a0... seen off\u00a0... and\u00a0... written off\u00a0... The battle has been the most interesting, I think possibly one of the most interesting and tricky battles I have ever handled.\"\nDespite his positive remarks about American soldiers, the overall impression given by Montgomery, at least in the ears of the American military leadership, was that he had taken the lion's share of credit for the success of the campaign and had been responsible for rescuing the besieged Americans.\nHis comments were interpreted as self-promoting, particularly his claim that when the situation \"began to deteriorate,\" Eisenhower had placed him in command in the north. Patton and Eisenhower both felt this was a misrepresentation of the relative share of the fighting played by the British and Americans in the Ardennes (for every British soldier there were thirty to forty Americans in the fight), and that it belittled the part played by Bradley, Patton and other American commanders. In the context of Patton's and Montgomery's well-known antipathy, Montgomery's failure to mention the contribution of any American general besides Eisenhower was seen as insulting. Indeed, Bradley and his American commanders were already starting their counterattack by the time Montgomery was given command of 1st and 9th U.S. Armies.\nFocusing exclusively on his own generalship, Montgomery continued to say he thought the counteroffensive had gone very well but did not explain the reason for his delayed attack on 3 January. He later attributed this to needing more time for preparation on the northern front. According to Churchill, the attack from the south under Patton was steady but slow and involved heavy losses, and Montgomery was trying to avoid this situation. Morelock states that Monty was preoccupied with being allowed to lead a \"single thrust offensive\" to Berlin as the overall commander of Allied ground forces, and that he accordingly treated the Ardennes counteroffensive \"as a sideshow, to be finished with the least possible effort and expenditure of resources.\"\nMany American officers had already grown to dislike Montgomery, who was seen by them as an overly cautious commander, arrogant, and all too willing to say uncharitable things about the Americans. However, on 18 January 1945 Churchill stated to Parliament \"the United States troops have done almost all the fighting\". He ended with \"Care must be taken in telling our proud tale not to claim for the British Army an undue share of what is undoubtedly the greatest American battle of the war and will, I believe, be regarded as an ever famous American victory.\"\nMontgomery subsequently recognized his error and later wrote: \"Not only was it probably a mistake to have held this conference at all in the sensitive state of feeling at the time, but what I said was skillfully distorted by the enemy.\" BBC correspondent Chester Wilmot explained that \"my dispatch to the BBC about it was intercepted by the German wireless, re-written to give it an anti-American bias, and then broadcast by Arnhem Radio, which was then in Goebbels' hands. Monitored at Bradley's HQ, this broadcast was mistaken for a BBC transmission and it was this twisted text that started the uproar.\"\nMontgomery later said, \"Distorted or not, I think now that I should never have held that press conference. So great were the feelings against me on the part of the American generals that whatever I said was bound to be wrong. I should therefore have said nothing.\" Eisenhower commented in his own memoirs: \"I doubt if Montgomery ever came to realize how resentful some American commanders were. They believed he had belittled them\u2014and they were not slow to voice reciprocal scorn and contempt.\"\nBradley and Patton both threatened to resign unless Montgomery's command was changed. Eisenhower, encouraged by his British deputy Arthur Tedder, had decided to sack Montgomery. Intervention by Montgomery's and Eisenhower's Chiefs of Staff, Guingand, and Walter Smith, moved Eisenhower to reconsider and allowed Montgomery to apologize.\nAfter the war Manteuffel, who commanded the 5th Panzer Army in the Ardennes, was imprisoned awaiting trial for war crimes. During this period he was interviewed by B. H. Liddell Hart, a British author who has since been accused of putting words in the mouths of German generals, and attempting to \"rewrite the historical record\". After conducting several interviews via an interpreter, Liddell Hart in a subsequent book attributed to Manteuffel the following statement about Montgomery's contribution to the battle in the Ardennes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The operations of the American 1st Army had developed into a series of individual holding actions. Montgomery's contribution to restoring the situation was that he turned a series of isolated actions into a coherent battle fought according to a clear and definite plan. It was his refusal to engage in premature and piecemeal counter-attacks which enabled the Americans to gather their reserves and frustrate the German attempts to extend their breakthrough.\nHowever, American historian Stephen Ambrose, writing in 1997, maintained that \"Putting Monty in command of the northern flank had no effect on the battle\". Ambrose wrote that: \"Far from directing the victory, Montgomery had gotten in everyone's way, and had botched the counter-attack.\" Bradley blamed Montgomery's \"stagnating conservatism\" for his failure to counterattack when ordered to do so by Eisenhower. In contrast, historian Professor John Buckley, writing in 2013, noted how Montgomery \"must take considerable credit\" for stabilising the position, due to his \"efficient and disciplined system of controlling or gripping subordinates\".\nCasualties.\nAllied.\nThe Battle of the Bulge was the bloodiest battle for US forces during World War II. A preliminary Army report restricted to the First and Third US Armies listed 75,482 casualties (8,407 killed, 46,170 wounded and 20,905 missing); British XXX Corps losses to 17 January 1945 were recorded as 1,408 (200 killed, 969 wounded, and 239 missing.) T.N. Dupuy, David Bongard, and Richard Anderson list battle casualties for XXX Corps combat units as 1,462, including 222 killed, 977 wounded, and 263 missing to 16 January 1945 inclusive. Casualties among American divisions (excluding attached elements, corps and army-level combat support, and rear-area personnel) totaled 62,439 from 16 December 1944 to 16 January 1945, inclusive: 6,238 killed, 32,712 wounded, and 23,399 missing. Historian Charles B. MacDonald lists 81,000 American casualties, 41,315 during the defensive phase and 39,672 during the drive to flatten the \"Bulge\" through 28 January.\nAn official report by the United States Department of the Army lists 105,102 casualties for the entire \"Ardennes-Alsace\" campaign, including 19,246 killed, 62,489 wounded, and 26,612 captured or missing; this number incorporates losses not just for the Battle of the Bulge but also all losses suffered during the period by units with the \"Ardennes-Alsace\" battle credit (the entirety of US First, Third and Seventh Armies), which includes losses suffered during the German offensive in Alsace, Operation Nordwind as well as forces engaged in the Saar and Lorraine campaigns, and the Battle of H\u00fcrtgen Forest during that time period. For the period of December 1944 \u2013 January 1945 on the entire western front, Forrest Pogue gives a total of 28,178 US military personnel captured, including shot down airmen.\nGerman.\nThe German High Command estimated that they lost between 81,834 and 98,024 men on the Western Front between 16 December 1944 and 25 January 1945; the accepted figure was 81,834, of which 12,652 were killed, 38,600 were wounded, and 30,582 were missing. Allied estimates on German casualties range from 81,000 to 103,900. Some authors have estimated German casualties as high as 125,000:\nChrister Bergstr\u00f6m lists between 527 and 554 losses to all causes among German tanks, tank destroyers, and assault guns during the campaign, of which 324 were lost in combat. Of the German write-offs, 16\u201320 were Tigers, 191\u2013194 Panthers, 141\u2013158 Panzer IVs, and 179\u2013182 were tank destroyers and assault guns. Hermann Jung gave figures for 600 German tanks across the entire western front from 16 December 1944, to 1 February 1945. Other sources place German losses in the range of 600\u2013800: Magna E. Bauer's review of OKW records suggests 324 losses in December (77 Panzer IVs, 132 Panthers, 13 Tigers, and 102 assault guns) and even more in January. American losses over the same period were similarly heavy, totaling from 733 tanks and tank destroyers (exclusive of other types and losses suffered by British XXX Corps) to 800 in tanks alone.\nResult.\nAlthough the Germans managed to begin their offensive with complete surprise and enjoyed some initial successes, they were not able to seize the initiative on the Western Front. While the German command did not reach its goals, the Ardennes operation inflicted heavy losses and set back the Allied invasion of Germany by several weeks. The High Command of the Allied forces had planned to resume the offensive by early January 1945, after the wet season rains and severe frosts, but those plans had to be postponed until 29 January 1945 in connection with the unexpected changes in the front.\nThe Allies pressed their advantage following the battle. By the beginning of February 1945, the lines were roughly where they had been in December 1944. In early February, the Allies launched an attack all along the Western front: in the north under Montgomery, they fought Operation Veritable (also known as the Battle of the Reichswald); east of Aachen they fought the second phase of the Battle of H\u00fcrtgen Forest; in the center, under Hodges; and in the south, under Patton.\nThe German losses in the battle were especially critical: their last reserves were now gone, the Luftwaffe had been shattered, and remaining forces throughout the West were being pushed back to defend the Siegfried Line.\nIn response to the early success of the offensive, on 6 January Churchill contacted Stalin to request that the Soviets put pressure on the Germans on the Eastern Front. On 12 January, the Soviets began the massive Vistula\u2013Oder offensive, originally planned for 20 January. It had been brought forward from 20 January to 12 January because meteorological reports warned of a thaw later in the month, and the tanks needed hard ground for the offensive (and the advance of the Red Army was assisted by two Panzer Armies (5th and 6th) being redeployed for the Ardennes attack).\nChurchill was elated at Stalin's offer of help, thanking Stalin for the thrilling news.\nDuring World War II, most U.S. black soldiers still served only in maintenance or service positions, or in segregated units. Because of troop shortages during the Battle of the Bulge, Eisenhower decided to integrate the service for the first time. This was an important step toward a desegregated United States military. More than 2,000 black soldiers had volunteered to go to the front. A total of 708 black Americans were killed in combat during World War II.\nThe Germans officially referred to the offensive by the codename 'Operation Watch on the Rhine', while the Allies designated it the Ardennes Counteroffensive. The phrase \"Battle of the Bulge\" was coined by contemporary press to describe the bulge in German front lines on wartime news maps, and it became the most widely used name for the battle. The offensive was planned by the German forces with utmost secrecy, with minimal radio traffic and movements of troops and equipment under cover of darkness. Intercepted German communications indicating a substantial German offensive preparation were not acted upon by the Allies.\nMedia attention.\nThe battle around Bastogne received a great deal of media attention because in early December 1944 it was a rest and recreation area for many war correspondents. The rapid advance by the German forces who surrounded Bastonge, the spectacular resupply operations via parachute and glider, along with the fast action of General Patton's Third US Army, all were featured in newspaper articles and on radio and captured the public's imagination; there were no correspondents in the area of Saint-Vith, Elsenborn, or Monschau-H\u00f6fen.\nBletchley Park post-mortem.\nMissed indicators.\nAt Bletchley Park, F. L. Lucas and Peter Calvocoressi of Hut 3 were tasked by General Nye (as part of the enquiry set up by the Chiefs of Staff) with writing a report on the lessons to be learned from the handling of pre-battle Ultra. The report concluded that \"the costly reverse might have been avoided if Ultra had been more carefully considered\". \"Ultra intelligence was plentiful and informative\" though \"not wholly free from ambiguity\", \"but it was misread and misused\". Lucas and Calvocoressi noted that \"intelligence staffs had been too apt to assume that Ultra would tell them everything\". Among the signs misread were the formation of the new 6th Panzer Army in the build-up area (west bank of the Rhine about Cologne); the new 'Star' (signals control-network) noted by the 'Fusion Room' traffic-analysts, linking \"all the armoured divisions [assembling in the build-up area], including some transferred from the Russian front\"; the daily aerial reconnaissance of the lightly defended target area by new Arado Ar 234 jets \"as a matter of greatest urgency\"; the marked increase in railway traffic in the build-up area; the movement of 1,000 trucks from the Italian front to the build-up area; disproportionate anxiety about tiny hitches in troop movements, suggesting a tight timetable; the quadrupling of Luftwaffe fighter forces in the West; and decrypts of Japanese diplomatic signals from Berlin to Tokyo, mentioning \"the coming offensive\".\nSHAEF failures.\nFor its part, Hut 3 had grown \"shy of going beyond its job of amending and explaining German messages. Drawing broad conclusions was for the intelligence staff at SHAEF, who had information from all sources,\" including aerial reconnaissance. Lucas and Calvocoressi added that \"it would be interesting to know how much reconnaissance was flown over the Eiffel sector on the U.S. First Army Front\". E. J. N. Rose, head Air Adviser in Hut 3, read the paper at the time and described it in 1998 as \"an extremely good report\" that \"showed the failure of intelligence at SHAEF and at the Air Ministry\". Lucas and Calvocoressi \"expected heads to roll at Eisenhower's HQ, but they did no more than wobble\".\nFive copies of a report by the Chief of the Secret Intelligence Service\u00a0\u2013 \"Indications of the German Offensive of December 1944, derived from ULTRA material, submitted to DMI\"\u00a0\u2013 were issued on 28 December 1944. Copy No. 2 is held by the UK National Archives as file HW 13/45. It sets out the various indications of an impending offensive that were received, then offers conclusions about the wisdom conferred by hindsight; the dangers of becoming wedded to a fixed view of the enemy's likely intentions; over-reliance on \"Source\" (i.e. ULTRA); and improvements in German security. It also stresses the role played by poor Allied security: \"The Germans have this time prevented us from knowing enough about them; but we have not prevented them knowing far too much about us\".\nBattle credit.\nAfter the war ended, the U.S. Army issued battle credit in the form of the Ardennes-Alsace campaign citation to units and individuals that took part in operations in northwest Europe. The citation covered troops in the Ardennes sector where the main battle took place, as well as units further south in the Alsace sector, including those in the northern Alsace who filled in the vacuum created by the U.S. Third Army racing north, engaged in the concurrent Operation Nordwind diversion in central and southern Alsace launched to weaken Allied response in the Ardennes, and provided reinforcements to units fighting in the Ardennes.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58001", "revid": "1185044871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58001", "title": "Teleportation (disambiguation)", "text": "Teleportation is the fictional or imagined process by which matter is instantaneously transferred from one place to another.\nTeleportation may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58003", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58003", "title": "Gentiana", "text": "Genus of flowering plants\nGentiana () is a genus of flowering plants belonging to the gentian family (Gentianaceae), the tribe Gentianeae, and the monophyletic subtribe Gentianinae. With over 300 species, it is considered a large genus. Gentians are notable for their mostly large trumpet-shaped flowers, which are often of an intense blue hue, though some are also bright yellow. The type species of the genus is \"Gentiana lutea\".\nThe genus name is a tribute to Gentius, an Illyrian king who may have discovered tonic properties in gentians.\nHabitat.\nThis is a cosmopolitan genus, occurring in alpine habitats in temperate regions of Asia, Europe and the Americas. Some species also occur in northwestern Africa, eastern Australia, and New Zealand. They are annual, biennial, and perennial plants. Some are evergreen, others are not.\nMany gentians are difficult to grow outside their wild habitat, but several species are available in cultivation. Gentians are fully hardy and can grow in full sun or partial shade. They grow in well-drained, neutral-to-acid soils rich in humus. They are popular in rock gardens.\nUses.\nMany beverages are made with gentian root. \"Gentiana lutea\" is used to produce \"gentian\", a distilled beverage produced in the Alps and in the Auvergne. Some species are harvested for the manufacture of ap\u00e9ritifs, liqueurs, and tonics.\nGentian root is a common beverage flavouring for bitters. The soft drink Moxie contains gentian root. The French ap\u00e9ritif Suze is made with gentian. Americano ap\u00e9ritifs contain gentian root for bitter flavoring. It is an ingredient in the Italian liqueur Aperol. It is also used as the main flavor in the German after-dinner digestif called Underberg, and the main ingredient in Angostura bitters and Peychaud's Bitters.\nThe principal bitter component of gentian root is gentiopicrin (also called gentiopicroside), a glycoside. A 2007 paper by a Japanese group identified 23 compounds in fresh gentian root. Gentiopicrin was absent from the fresh root, so it possibly developed during drying and storage of the root.\nGentian has had limited use in perfumery, most notably as a glycerine soap (Crabtree &amp; Evelyn) and a perfume (Corday's Possession, 1937).\nThe young plant and old leaves of at least one species, \"Gentiana scabra\", are edible when cooked and have historically been used as a famine food when other food sources were scarce.\nPharmacological uses.\nGreat yellow gentian (\"Gentiana lutea\") is used in herbal medicine for digestive problems, fever, hypertension, muscle spasms, parasitic worms, wounds, cancer, sinusitis, and malaria, although studies have shown minimal efficacy beyond that of a placebo with regard to the treatment of anxiety and ADHD in children. Gentian has been shown to manage dyspepsia by eliciting cephalic responses that increase vascular resistance and reduce the workload of the heart during digestion.\n\"Gentiana punctata\" leaves and roots have been used in traditional Austrian medicine internally and externally as liqueur or tea for disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, skin, locomotor system, liver, and bile, and for pediatric problems, fever, flu, rheumatism, and gout.\n\"Gentiana purpurea\", \"Gentiana punctata\", and \"Gentiana pannonica\" are used to produce gentian schnapps, traditionally used as a digestive aid. In Ayurvedic medicine the endangered Indian gentian \"Gentiana kurroo\" has been used as a medical herb, but has been replaced with the Himalayan plant \"Picrorhiza kurroa,\" or \"Picrorhiza scrophulariiflora\" from traditional Chinese medicine.\nSymbolism.\nThe gentian flower was used as the emblem of the Minamoto clan, one of the four great clans that dominated Japanese politics during the Heian period and went on to establish the first Shogunate in the aftermath of the Genpei War. It is the official flower (called ) of the German-speaking community of Belgium.\nSpecies.\nGeneral.\nGentians have oppositely arranged leaves, sometimes in a basal rosette. The trumpet-shaped flowers are usually deep blue or azure but can be white, cream, yellow, or red. Many species are polymorphic concerning flower color, bearing flowers of different colors. Blue-flowered species predominate in the Northern Hemisphere, with red-flowered species dominant in the Andes, where bird pollination is probably more often favored by natural selection. White-flowered species are scattered throughout the range of the genus but dominate in New Zealand. Most flowers are pentamerous, with five lobes in the corolla and five sepals. A few species have four to seven flower parts. The corolla has folds called plicae between the lobes. The style is short or absent. The ovary is mostly sessile and has nectary glands.\nList of accepted species.\nThe following species are recognised in the genus \"Gentiana\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormerly placed here.\nThe genus \"Gentianella\" was often included within \"Gentiana\" in the past.\nCultivation.\nSeveral gentian species may be found in cultivation, and are valued for the unusual intensity of their blue flowers. They have a reputation for being difficult to grow. All require similar conditions \u2013 moist, rich, free-draining soil with an acid to neutral pH. They include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn addition, the following cultivars, of mixed or uncertain parentage, have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58004", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58004", "title": "Gentiana acaulis", "text": "Species of plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGentiana acaulis, the stemless gentian, or trumpet gentian, is a species of flowering plant in the family Gentianaceae, native to central and southern Europe, from Spain east to the Balkans, growing especially in mountainous regions, such as the Alps and Pyrenees, at heights of .\nDescription.\nIt is a perennial plant, growing up to a height of tall and forming a mat up to wide. The leaves, which can be lanceolate, elliptical or obovate, are evergreen, 2\u20133.5\u00a0cm long, in a basal rosette, forming clumps. The trumpet-shaped terminal flowers are blue with olive-green spotted longitudinal throats. They grow on a very short peduncle, 3\u20136\u00a0cm long. The flower stem is often without leaves, or has 1 or 2 pairs of leaves. It likes full sun, is fully hardy and flowers in late spring and summer.\nThe minute single crystals observed in its leaves are not true raphides.\nHorticulture.\nThis plant, like others of its genus, is valued in cultivation for the unusually pure intense blue of its blooms. It has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.\nEtymology.\nThe Latin specific epithet \"acaulis\" means \"short-stemmed\".\nTaxonomy.\nThe closely related \"Gentiana clusii\", often called by the same common name as this species, differs in its preference for limy (alkaline) soils. It also has shorter leaves and the flowers have no olive-green stripes.\nPhylogeny.\nPhylogenetic research suggests \"G. acaulis\" is sister to a clade containing 4 other \"Gentiana\" species: \"G. verna\", \"G. bavarica\", \"G. nivalis\", and \"G. utriculosa\".\nCulture.\nA depiction of a gentian flower can be seen on the obverse side of Austrian \u20ac 0.01 euro coins.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "58005", "revid": "46786653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58005", "title": "Airship", "text": "Powered lighter-than-air aircraft\nAn airship, dirigible balloon or dirigible is a type of aerostat (lighter-than-air) aircraft that can navigate through the air flying under its own power. Aerostats use buoyancy from a lifting gas that is less dense than the surrounding air to achieve the lift needed to stay airborne.\nIn early dirigibles, the lifting gas used was hydrogen, due to its high lifting capacity and ready availability, but the inherent flammability led to several fatal accidents that rendered hydrogen airships obsolete. The alternative lifting gas, helium, is not flammable, but is rare and relatively expensive. Significant amounts were first discovered in the United States and for a while helium was only available for airship usage in North America. Most airships built since the 1960s have used helium, though some have used hot air.\nThe bulk of an airship consists of the lighter-than air \"envelope\", which may either form the gasbag itself or contain a number of gas-filled cells. The engines, crew, and payload capacity necessary for the function of the airship are instead housed in the \"gondola\", one or more enclosed platforms suspended below the envelope.\nThe main types of airship are non-rigid, semi-rigid and rigid airships. Non-rigid airships, often called \"blimps\", rely solely on internal gas pressure to maintain the envelope shape. Semi-rigid airships maintain their shape by internal pressure, but have some form of supporting structure, such as a fixed keel, attached to it. Rigid airships have an outer structural framework that maintains the shape and carries all structural loads, while the lifting gas is contained in one or more internal gasbags or cells. Rigid airships were first flown by Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin and the vast majority of rigid airships built were manufactured by the firm he founded, Luftschiffbau Zeppelin. As a result, rigid airships are often called zeppelins.\nAirships were the first aircraft capable of controlled powered flight, and were most commonly used before the 1940s; their use decreased as their capabilities were surpassed by those of aeroplanes. Their decline was accelerated by a series of high-profile accidents, including the 1930 crash and burning of the British R101 in France, the 1933 and 1935 storm-related crashes of the twin airborne aircraft carrier U.S. Navy helium-filled rigids, the and USS \"Macon\" respectively, and the 1937 burning of the German hydrogen-filled \"Hindenburg\". From the 1960s, helium airships have been used where the ability to hover for a long time outweighs the need for speed and manoeuvrability, such as advertising, tourism, camera platforms, geological surveys and aerial observation.\nTerminology.\nAirship.\nDuring the pioneer years of aeronautics, terms such as \"airship\", \"air-ship\", \"air ship\" and \"ship of the air\" meant any kind of navigable or dirigible flying machine. In 1919 Frederick Handley Page was reported as referring to \"ships of the air\", with smaller passenger types as \"air yachts\". In the 1930s, large intercontinental flying boats were also sometimes referred to as \"ships of the air\" or \"flying-ships\". Nowadays the term \"airship\" is used only for powered, dirigible balloons, with sub-types being classified as rigid, semi-rigid or non-rigid. Semi-rigid architecture is the more recent, following advances in deformable structures and the exigency of reducing weight and volume of the airships. They have a minimal structure that keeps the shape jointly with overpressure of the gas envelope.\nAerostat.\nAn aerostat is an aircraft that remains aloft using buoyancy or static lift, as opposed to the aerodyne, which obtains lift by moving through the air. Airships are a type of aerostat. The term \"aerostat\" has also been used to indicate a tethered or moored balloon as opposed to a free-floating balloon. Aerostats today are capable of lifting a payload of to an altitude of more than above sea level. They can also stay in the air for extended periods of time, particularly when powered by an on-board generator or if the tether contains electrical conductors. Due to this capability, aerostats can be used as platforms for telecommunication services. For instance, Platform Wireless International Corporation announced in 2001 that it would use a tethered airborne payload to deliver cellular phone service to a region in Brazil. The European Union's ABSOLUTE project was also reportedly exploring the use of tethered aerostat stations to provide telecommunications during disaster response.\nBlimp.\nA blimp is a non-rigid aerostat. In British usage it refers to any non-rigid aerostat, including barrage balloons and other kite balloons, having a streamlined shape and stabilising tail fins. Some blimps may be powered dirigibles, as in early versions of the Goodyear Blimp. Later Goodyear dirigibles, though technically \"semi-rigid airships,\" have still been called \"blimps\" by the company.\nZeppelin.\nThe term zeppelin originally referred to airships manufactured by the German Zeppelin Company, which built and operated the first rigid airships in the early years of the twentieth century. The initials LZ, for (German for \"Zeppelin airship\"), usually prefixed their craft's serial identifiers.\nStreamlined rigid (or semi-rigid) airships are often referred to as \"Zeppelins\", because of the fame that this company acquired due to the number of airships it produced, although its early rival was the Parseval semi-rigid design.\nHybrid airship.\nHybrid airships fly with a positive aerostatic contribution, usually equal to the empty weight of the system, and the variable payload is sustained by propulsion or aerodynamic contribution.\nClassification.\nAirships are classified according to their method of construction into rigid, semi-rigid and non-rigid types.\nRigid.\nA rigid airship has a rigid framework covered by an outer skin or envelope. The interior contains one or more gasbags, cells or balloons to provide lift. Rigid airships are typically unpressurised and can be made to virtually any size. Most, but not all, of the German Zeppelin airships have been of this type.\nSemi-rigid.\nA semi-rigid airship has some kind of supporting structure but the main envelope is held in shape by the internal pressure of the lifting gas. Typically the airship has an extended, usually articulated keel running along the bottom of the envelope to stop it kinking in the middle by distributing suspension loads into the envelope, while also allowing lower envelope pressures.\nNon-rigid.\nNon-rigid airships are often called \"blimps\". Most, but not all, of the American Goodyear airships have been blimps.\nA non-rigid airship relies entirely on internal gas pressure to retain its shape during flight. Unlike the rigid design, the non-rigid airship's gas envelope has no compartments. However, it still typically has smaller internal bags containing air (ballonets). As altitude is increased, the lifting gas expands and air from the ballonets is expelled through valves to maintain the hull's shape. To return to sea level, the process is reversed: air is forced back into the ballonets by scooping air from the engine exhaust and using auxiliary blowers.\nConstruction.\nEnvelope.\nThe envelope is the structure which contains the buoyant gas. Envelopes in the early 19th century were made from goldbeater's skin, selected for its low weight, relatively high strength, and impermeability compared to paper or linen. By the 1920s, natural rubber treated with cotton became the predominant elastomer used in envelope construction. The natural rubber was succeeded by neoprene in the 1930s and Nylon and PET in the 1950s. A few airships have been metal-clad. The most successful of which is the Detroit ZMC-2, which logged 2265 hours of flight time from 1929 to 1941 before being scrapped, as it was considered too small for operational use on anti-submarine patrols.\nThe problem of the exact determination of the pressure on an airship envelope is still problematic and has fascinated major scientists such as Theodor Von Karman.\nThe envelope may contain ballonets (see below), allowing adjustment of the density of the buoyant gas by adding or subtracting envelope volume.\nBallonet.\nA ballonet is an air bag inside the outer envelope of an airship which, when inflated, reduces the volume available for the lifting gas, making it more dense. Because air is also denser than the lifting gas, inflating the ballonet reduces the overall lift, while deflating it increases lift. In this way, the ballonet can be used to adjust the lift as required by controlling the buoyancy. By inflating or deflating ballonets strategically, the pilot can control the airship's altitude and attitude.\nBallonets may typically be used in non-rigid or semi-rigid airships, commonly with multiple ballonets located both fore and aft to maintain balance and to control the pitch of the airship.\nLifting gas.\nLifting gas is generally hydrogen, helium or hot air.\nHydrogen gives the highest lift and is inexpensive and easily obtained, but is highly flammable and can detonate if mixed with air. Helium is completely non flammable, but gives lower performance- and is a rare element and much more expensive.\nThermal airships use a heated lifting gas, usually air, in a fashion similar to hot air balloons. The first to do so was flown in 1973 by the British company Cameron Balloons.\nPropulsion and control.\nSmall airships carry their engine(s) in their gondola. Where there were multiple engines on larger airships, these were placed in separate nacelles, termed \"power cars\" or \"engine cars\". To allow asymmetric thrust to be applied for maneuvering, these power cars were mounted towards the sides of the envelope, away from the centre line gondola. This also raised them above the ground, reducing the risk of a propeller strike when landing. Widely spaced power cars were also termed \"wing cars\", from the use of \"wing\" to mean being on the side of something, as in a theater, rather than the aerodynamic device. These engine cars carried a crew during flight who maintained the engines as needed, but who also worked the engine controls, throttle etc., mounted directly on the engine. Instructions were relayed to them from the pilot's station by a telegraph system, as on a ship.\nIf fuel is burnt for propulsion, then progressive reduction in the airship's overall weight occurs. In hydrogen airships, this is usually dealt with by simply venting cheap hydrogen lifting gas. In helium airships water is often condensed from the exhaust and stored as ballast.\nFins and rudders.\nTo control the airship's direction and stability, it is equipped with fins and rudders. Fins are typically located on the tail section and provide stability and resistance to rolling. Rudders are movable surfaces on the tail that allow the pilot to steer the airship left or right.\nEmpennage.\nThe empennage is the tail section of the airship, which includes the fins, rudders, and other aerodynamic surfaces. It plays a crucial role in maintaining stability and controlling the airship's attitude.\nFuel and power systems.\nAirships require a source of power to operate their propulsion systems. This includes engines, generators, or batteries, depending on the type of airship and its design. Fuel tanks or batteries are typically located within the envelope or gondola.\nNavigation and communication equipment.\nTo navigate safely and communicate with ground control or other aircraft, airships are equipped with a range of instruments, including GPS systems, radios, radar, and navigation lights.\nLanding gear.\nSome airships have landing gear that allows them to land on runways or other surfaces. This landing gear may include wheels, skids, or landing pads.\nPerformance.\nEfficiency.\nThe main advantage of airships with respect to any other vehicle is that they require less energy to remain in flight, compared to other air vehicles. The proposed Varialift airship, powered by a mixture of solar-powered engines and conventional jet engines, would use only an estimated 8 percent of the fuel required by jet aircraft. Furthermore, utilizing the jet stream could allow for a faster and more energy-efficient cargo transport alternative to maritime shipping. This is one of the reasons why China has embraced their use recently.\nHistory.\nEarly pioneers.\n17th\u201318th century.\nIn 1670, the Jesuit Father Francesco Lana de Terzi, sometimes referred to as the \"Father of Aeronautics\", published a description of an \"Aerial Ship\" supported by four copper spheres from which the air was evacuated. Although the basic principle is sound, such a craft was unrealizable then and remains so to the present day, since external air pressure would cause the spheres to collapse unless their thickness was such as to make them too heavy to be buoyant. A hypothetical craft constructed using this principle is known as a \"vacuum airship\".\nIn 1709, the Brazilian-Portuguese Jesuit priest Bartolomeu de Gusm\u00e3o made a hot air balloon, the Passarola, ascend to the skies, before an astonished Portuguese court. It would have been on August 8, 1709, when Father Bartolomeu de Gusm\u00e3o held, in the courtyard of the Casa da \u00cdndia, in the city of Lisbon, the first Passarola demonstration. The balloon caught fire without leaving the ground, but, in a second demonstration, it rose to 95 meters in height. It was a small balloon of thick brown paper, filled with hot air, produced by the \"fire of material contained in a clay bowl embedded in the base of a waxed wooden tray\". The event was witnessed by King John V of Portugal and the future Pope Innocent XIII.\nA more practical dirigible airship was described by Lieutenant Jean Baptiste Marie Meusnier in a paper entitled \"\" (Memorandum on the equilibrium of aerostatic machines) presented to the French Academy on 3 December 1783. The 16 water-color drawings published the following year depict a streamlined envelope with internal ballonets that could be used for regulating lift: this was attached to a long carriage that could be used as a boat if the vehicle was forced to land in water. The airship was designed to be driven by three propellers and steered with a sail-like aft rudder. In 1784, Jean-Pierre Blanchard fitted a hand-powered propeller to a balloon, the first recorded means of propulsion carried aloft. In 1785, he crossed the English Channel in a balloon equipped with flapping wings for propulsion and a birdlike tail for steering.\n19th century.\nThe 19th century saw continued attempts to add methods of propulsion to balloons. Rufus Porter built and flew scale models of his \"Aerial Locomotive\", but never a successful full-size implementation. The Australian William Bland sent designs for his \"Atmotic airship\" to the Great Exhibition held in London in 1851, where a model was displayed. This was an elongated balloon with a steam engine driving twin propellers suspended underneath. The lift of the balloon was estimated as 5\u00a0tons and the car with the fuel as weighing 3.5\u00a0tons, giving a payload of 1.5\u00a0tons. Bland believed that the machine could be driven at and could fly from Sydney to London in less than a week.\nIn 1852, Henri Giffard became the first person to make an engine-powered flight when he flew in a steam-powered airship. Airships would develop considerably over the next two decades. In 1863, Solomon Andrews flew his aereon design, an unpowered, controllable dirigible in Perth Amboy, New Jersey and offered the device to the U.S. Military during the Civil War. He flew a later design in 1866 around New York City and as far as Oyster Bay, New York. This concept used changes in lift to provide propulsive force, and did not need a powerplant. In 1872, the French naval architect Dupuy de Lome launched a large navigable balloon, which was driven by a large propeller turned by eight men. It was developed during the Franco-Prussian war and was intended as an improvement to the balloons used for communications between Paris and the countryside during the siege of Paris, but was completed only after the end of the war.\nIn 1872, Paul Haenlein flew an airship with an internal combustion engine running on the coal gas used to inflate the envelope, the first use of such an engine to power an aircraft. Charles F. Ritchel made a public demonstration flight in 1878 of his hand-powered one-man rigid airship, and went on to build and sell five of his aircraft.\nIn 1874, Micajah Clark Dyer filed U.S. Patent 154,654 \"Apparatus for Navigating the Air\". It is believed successful trial flights were made between 1872 and 1874, but detailed dates are not available. The apparatus used a combination of wings and paddle wheels for navigation and propulsion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In operating the machinery the wings receive an upward and downward motion, in the manner of the wings of a bird, the outer ends yielding as they are raised, but opening out and then remaining rigid while being depressed. The wings, if desired, may be set at an angle so as to propel forward as well as to raise the machine in the air. The paddle-wheels are intended to be used for propelling the machine, in the same way that a vessel is propelled in water. An instrument answering to a rudder is attached for guiding the machine. A balloon is to be used for elevating the flying ship, after which it is to be guided and controlled at the pleasure of its occupants.\nMore details can be found in the book about his life.\nIn 1883, the first electric-powered flight was made by Gaston Tissandier, who fitted a Siemens electric motor to an airship.\nThe first fully controllable free flight was made in 1884 by Charles Renard and Arthur Constantin Krebs in the French Army airship \"La France\". La France made the first flight of an airship that landed where it took off; the long, airship covered in 23 minutes with the aid of an electric motor, and a battery. It made seven flights in 1884 and 1885.\nIn 1888, the design of the Campbell Air Ship, designed by Professor Peter C. Campbell, was built by the Novelty Air Ship Company. It was lost at sea in 1889 while being flown by Professor Hogan during an exhibition flight.\nFrom 1888 to 1897, Friedrich W\u00f6lfert built three airships powered by Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft-built petrol engines, the last of which, \"Deutschland\", caught fire in flight and killed both occupants in 1897. The 1888 version used a single cylinder Daimler engine and flew from Canstatt to Kornwestheim.\nIn 1897, an airship with an aluminum envelope was built by the Hungarian-Croatian engineer David Schwarz. It made its first flight at Tempelhof field in Berlin after Schwarz had died. His widow, Melanie Schwarz, was paid 15,000 marks by Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin to release the industrialist Carl Berg from his exclusive contract to supply Schwartz with aluminium.\nFrom 1897 to 1899, Konstantin Danilewsky, medical doctor and inventor from Kharkov, built four muscle-powered airships, of gas volume . About 200 ascents were made within a framework of experimental flight program, at two locations, with no significant incidents.\nEarly 20th century.\nIn July 1900, the Luftschiff Zeppelin LZ1 made its first flight. This led to the most successful airships of all time: the Zeppelins, named after Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin who began working on rigid airship designs in the 1890s, leading to the flawed LZ1 in 1900 and the more successful LZ2 in 1906. The Zeppelin airships had a framework composed of triangular lattice girders covered with fabric that contained separate gas cells. At first multiplane tail surfaces were used for control and stability: later designs had simpler cruciform tail surfaces. The engines and crew were accommodated in \"gondolas\" hung beneath the hull driving propellers attached to the sides of the frame by means of long drive shafts. Additionally, there was a passenger compartment (later a bomb bay) located halfway between the two engine compartments.\nAlberto Santos-Dumont was a wealthy young Brazilian who lived in France and had a passion for flying. He designed 18 balloons and dirigibles before turning his attention to fixed-winged aircraft.\nOn 19 October 1901 he flew his airship \"Number 6\", from the Parc Saint Cloud to and around the Eiffel Tower and back in under thirty minutes. This feat earned him the Deutsch de la Meurthe prize of 100,000 francs. Many inventors were inspired by Santos-Dumont's small airships. Many airship pioneers, such as the American Thomas Scott Baldwin, financed their activities through passenger flights and public demonstration flights. Stanley Spencer built the first British airship with funds from advertising baby food on the sides of the envelope. Others, such as Walter Wellman and Melvin Vaniman, set their sights on loftier goals, attempting two polar flights in 1907 and 1909, and two trans-Atlantic flights in 1910 and 1912.\nIn 1902 the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres Quevedo published details of an innovative airship design in Spain and France titled \"\" (\"Improvements in dirigible aerostats\"). With a non-rigid body and internal bracing wires, it overcame the flaws of these types of aircraft as regards both rigid structure (zeppelin type) and flexibility, providing the airships with more stability during flight, and the capability of using heavier engines and a greater passenger load. A system called \"auto-rigid\". In 1905, helped by Captain A. Kindel\u00e1n, he built the airship \"Torres Quevedo\" at the Guadalajara military base. In 1909 he patented an improved design that he offered to the French Astra company, who started mass-producing it in 1911 as the Astra-Torres airship. This type of envelope was employed in the United Kingdom in the Coastal, C Star, and North Sea airships. The distinctive three-lobed design was widely used during the Great War by the Entente powers for diverse tasks, principally convoy protection and anti-submarine warfare. The success during the war even drew the attention of the Imperial Japanese Navy, who acquired a model in 1922. Torres also drew up designs of a 'docking station' and made alterations to airship designs, to find a resolution to the slew of problems faced by airship engineers to dock dirigibles. In 1910, he proposed the idea of attaching an airships nose to a mooring mast and allowing the airship to weathervane with changes of wind direction. The use of a metal column erected on the ground, the top of which the bow or stem would be directly attached to (by a cable) would allow a dirigible to be moored at any time, in the open, regardless of wind speeds. Additionally, Torres' design called for the improvement and accessibility of temporary landing sites, where airships were to be moored for the purpose of disembarkation of passengers. The final patent was presented in February 1911 in Belgium, and later to France and the United Kingdom in 1912, under the title \"Improvements in Mooring Arrangements for Airships\".\nOther airship builders were also active before the war: from 1902 the French company Lebaudy Fr\u00e8res specialized in semirigid airships such as the \"Patrie\" and the \"R\u00e9publique\", designed by their engineer Henri Julliot, who later worked for the American company Goodrich; the German firm Sch\u00fctte-Lanz built the wooden-framed SL series from 1911, introducing important technical innovations; another German firm Luft-Fahrzeug-Gesellschaft built the \"Parseval-Luftschiff\" (PL) series from 1909, and Italian Enrico Forlanini's firm had built and flown the first two Forlanini airships.\nOn May 12, 1902, the inventor and Brazilian aeronaut Augusto Severo de Albuquerque Maranhao and his French mechanic, Georges Sach\u00e9, died when they were flying over Paris in the airship called Pax. A marble plaque at number 81 of the Avenue du Maine in Paris, commemorates the location of Augusto Severo accident. \"The Catastrophe of the Balloon \"Le Pax\"\" is a 1902 short silent film recreation of the catastrophe, directed by Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s.\nIn Britain, the Army built their first dirigible, the \"Nulli Secundus\", in 1907. The Navy ordered the construction of an experimental rigid in 1908. Officially known as His Majesty's Airship No. 1 and nicknamed the \"Mayfly\", it broke its back in 1911 before making a single flight. Work on a successor did not start until 1913.\nGerman airship passenger service known as DELAG (Deutsche-Luftschiffahrts AG) was established in 1910.\nIn 1910 Walter Wellman unsuccessfully attempted an aerial crossing of the Atlantic Ocean in the airship \"America\".\nWorld War I.\nThe prospect of airships as bombers had been recognized in Europe well before the airships were up to the task. H. G. Wells' \"The War in the Air\" (1908) described the obliteration of entire fleets and cities by airship attack. The Italian forces became the first to use dirigibles for a military purpose during the Italo\u2013Turkish War, the first bombing mission being flown on 10 March 1912. World War I marked the airship's real debut as a weapon. The Germans, French, and Italians all used airships for scouting and tactical bombing roles early in the war, and all learned that the airship was too vulnerable for operations over the front. The decision to end operations in direct support of armies was made by all in 1917.\nMany in the German military believed they had found the ideal weapon with which to counteract British naval superiority and strike at Britain itself, while more realistic airship advocates believed the zeppelin's value was as a long range scout/attack craft for naval operations. Raids on England began in January 1915 and peaked in 1916: following losses to the British defenses only a few raids were made in 1917\u201318, the last in August 1918. Zeppelins proved to be terrifying but inaccurate weapons. Navigation, target selection and bomb-aiming proved to be difficult under the best of conditions, and the cloud cover that was frequently encountered by the airships reduced accuracy even further. The physical damage done by airships over the course of the war was insignificant, and the deaths that they caused amounted to a few hundred. Nevertheless, the raids caused a significant diversion of British resources to defense efforts. The airships were initially immune to attack by aircraft and anti-aircraft guns: as the pressure in their envelopes was only just higher than ambient air, holes had little effect. But following the introduction of a combination of incendiary and explosive ammunition in 1916, their flammable hydrogen lifting gas made them vulnerable to the defending aeroplanes. Several were shot down in flames by British defenders, and many others destroyed in accidents. New designs capable of reaching greater altitude were developed, but although this made them immune from attack it made their bombing accuracy even worse.\nCountermeasures by the British included sound detection equipment, searchlights and anti-aircraft artillery, followed by night fighters in 1915. One tactic used early in the war, when their limited range meant the airships had to fly from forward bases and the only zeppelin production facilities were in Friedrichshafen, was the bombing of airship sheds by the British Royal Naval Air Service. Later in the war, the development of the aircraft carrier led to the first successful carrier-based air strike in history: on the morning of 19 July 1918, seven Sopwith 2F.1 Camels were launched from and struck the airship base at T\u00f8nder, destroying zeppelins L\u00a054 and L\u00a060.\nThe British Army had abandoned airship development in favour of aeroplanes before the start of the war, but the Royal Navy had recognized the need for small airships to counteract the submarine and mine threat in coastal waters. Beginning in February 1915, they began to develop the SS (Sea Scout) class of blimp. These had a small envelope of and at first used aircraft fuselages without the wing and tail surfaces as control cars. Later, more advanced blimps with purpose-built gondolas were used. The NS class (North Sea) were the largest and most effective non-rigid airships in British service, with a gas capacity of , a crew of 10 and an endurance of 24 hours. Six bombs were carried, as well as three to five machine guns. British blimps were used for scouting, mine clearance, and convoy patrol duties. During the war, the British operated over 200 non-rigid airships. Several were sold to Russia, France, the United States, and Italy. The large number of trained crews, low attrition rate and constant experimentation in handling techniques meant that at the war's end Britain was the world leader in non-rigid airship technology.\nThe Royal Navy continued development of rigid airships until the end of the war. Eight rigid airships had been completed by the armistice, (No. 9r, four 23 Class, two R23X Class and one R31 Class), although several more were in an advanced state of completion by the war's end. Both France and Italy continued to use airships throughout the war. France preferred the non-rigid type, whereas Italy flew 49 semi-rigid airships in both the scouting and bombing roles.\nAeroplanes had almost entirely replaced airships as bombers by the end of the war, and Germany's remaining zeppelins were destroyed by their crews, scrapped or handed over to the Allied powers as war reparations. The British rigid airship program, which had mainly been a reaction to the potential threat of the German airships, was wound down.\nThe interwar period.\nBritain, the United States and Germany built rigid airships between the two world wars. Italy and France made limited use of Zeppelins handed over as war reparations. Italy, the Soviet Union, the United States and Japan mainly operated semi-rigid airships.\nUnder the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, Germany was not allowed to build airships of greater capacity than a million cubic feet. Two small passenger airships, LZ\u00a0120 \"Bodensee\" and its sister ship LZ\u00a0121 \"Nordstern\", were built immediately after the war but were confiscated following the sabotage of the wartime Zeppelins that were to have been handed over as war reparations: \"Bodensee\" was given to Italy and \"Nordstern\" to France. On May 12, 1926, the Italian built semi-rigid airship \"Norge\" was the first aircraft to fly over the North Pole.\nThe British R33 and R34 were improved versions of the German L\u00a033, which had come down almost intact in Yorkshire on 24 September 1916. Despite being almost three years out of date by the time they were launched in 1919, they became two of the most successful airships in British service. The creation of the Royal Air Force (RAF) in early 1918 created a hybrid British airship program. The RAF was not interested in airships while the Admiralty was, so a deal was made where the Admiralty would design any future military airships and the RAF would handle manpower, facilities and operations. On 2 July 1919, R34 began the first crossing of the Atlantic by a passenger aircraft. It landed at Mineola, Long Island on 6 July after 108\u00a0hours in the air; the return crossing began on 8 July and took 75 hours. This feat failed to generate enthusiasm for continued airship development, and the British airship program was rapidly wound down.\nDuring World War I, the U.S. Navy acquired its first airship, the DH-1, but it was destroyed while being inflated shortly after delivery to the Navy. After the war, the U.S. Navy contracted to buy the R 38, which was being built in Britain, but before it was handed over it was destroyed because of a structural failure during a test flight.\nAmerica then started constructing the , designed by the Bureau of Aeronautics and based on the Zeppelin L\u00a049. Assembled in Hangar No. 1 and first flown on 4 September 1923 at Lakehurst, New Jersey, it was the first airship to be inflated with the noble gas helium, which was then so scarce that the \"Shenandoah\" contained most of the world's supply. A second airship, , was built by the Zeppelin company as compensation for the airships that should have been handed over as war reparations according to the terms of the Versailles Treaty but had been sabotaged by their crews. This construction order saved the Zeppelin works from the threat of closure. The success of the \"Los Angeles\", which was flown successfully for eight years, encouraged the U.S. Navy to invest in its own, larger airships. When the \"Los Angeles\" was delivered, the two airships had to share the limited supply of helium, and thus alternated operating and overhauls.\nIn 1922, Sir Dennistoun Burney suggested a plan for a subsidised air service throughout the British Empire using airships (the Burney Scheme). Following the coming to power of Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government in 1924, the scheme was transformed into the Imperial Airship Scheme, under which two airships were built, one by a private company and the other by the Royal Airship Works under Air Ministry control. The two designs were radically different. The \"capitalist\" ship, the \"R100\", was more conventional, while the \"socialist\" ship, the R101, had many innovative design features. Construction of both took longer than expected, and the airships did not fly until 1929. Neither airship was capable of the service intended, though the R100 did complete a proving flight to Canada and back in 1930. On 5 October 1930, the R101, which had not been thoroughly tested after major modifications, crashed on its maiden voyage to India at Beauvais in France killing 48 of the 54 people aboard. Among the dead were the craft's chief designer and the Secretary of State for Air. The disaster ended British interest in airships.\nIn 1925 the Zeppelin company started construction of the \"Graf Zeppelin\" (LZ\u00a0127), the largest airship that could be built in the company's existing shed, and intended to stimulate interest in passenger airships. The \"Graf Zeppelin\" burned \"blau gas\", similar to propane, stored in large gas bags below the hydrogen cells, as fuel. Since its density was similar to that of air, it avoided the weight change as fuel was used, and thus the need to valve hydrogen. The \"Graf Zeppelin\" had an impressive safety record, flying over (including the first circumnavigation of the globe by airship) without a single passenger injury. \nThe U.S. Navy experimented with the use of airships as airborne aircraft carriers, developing an idea pioneered by the British. The USS \"Los Angeles\" was used for initial experiments, and the and , the world's largest at the time, were used to test the principle in naval operations. Each carried four F9C Sparrowhawk fighters in its hangar, and could carry a fifth on the trapeze. The idea had mixed results. By the time the Navy started to develop a sound doctrine for using the ZRS-type airships, the last of the two built, USS \"Macon\", had been wrecked. Meanwhile, the seaplane had become more capable, and was considered a better investment.\nEventually, the U.S. Navy lost all three U.S.-built rigid airships to accidents. USS \"Shenandoah\" flew into a severe thunderstorm over Noble County, Ohio while on a poorly planned publicity flight on 3 September 1925. It broke into pieces, killing 14 of its crew. USS \"Akron\" was caught in a severe storm and flown into the surface of the sea off the shore of New Jersey on 3 April 1933. It carried no life boats and few life vests, so 73 of its crew of 76 died from drowning or hypothermia. USS \"Macon\" was lost after suffering a structural failure offshore near Point Sur Lighthouse on 12 February 1935. The failure caused a loss of gas, which was made much worse when the aircraft was driven over pressure height causing it to lose too much helium to maintain flight. Only two of its crew of 83 died in the crash thanks to the inclusion of life jackets and inflatable rafts after the \"Akron\" disaster.\nThe Empire State Building was completed in 1931 with a dirigible mast, in anticipation of future passenger airship service, but no airship ever used the mast. Various entrepreneurs experimented with commuting and shipping freight via airship.\nIn the 1930s, the German Zeppelins successfully competed with other means of transport. They could carry significantly more passengers than other contemporary aircraft while providing amenities similar to those on ocean liners, such as private cabins, observation decks, and dining rooms. Less importantly, the technology was potentially more energy-efficient than heavier-than-air designs. Zeppelins were also faster than ocean liners. On the other hand, operating airships was quite involved. Often the crew would outnumber passengers, and on the ground large teams were necessary to assist mooring and very large hangars were required at airports.\nBy the mid-1930s, only Germany still pursued airship development. The Zeppelin company continued to operate the \"Graf Zeppelin\" on passenger service between Frankfurt and Recife in Brazil, taking 68 hours. Even with the small \"Graf Zeppelin\", the operation was almost profitable. In the mid-1930s, work began on an airship designed specifically to operate a passenger service across the Atlantic. The \"Hindenburg\" (LZ 129) completed a successful 1936 season, carrying passengers between Lakehurst, New Jersey and Germany. The year 1937 started with the most spectacular and widely remembered airship accident. Approaching the Lakehurst mooring mast minutes before landing on 6 May 1937, the \"Hindenburg\" suddenly burst into flames and crashed to the ground. Of the 97 people aboard, 35 died: 13 passengers, 22 aircrew, along with one American ground-crewman. The disaster happened before a large crowd, was filmed and a radio news reporter was recording the arrival. This was a disaster that theater goers could see and hear in newsreels. The \"Hindenburg\" disaster shattered public confidence in airships, and brought a definitive end to their \"golden age\". The day after the \"Hindenburg\" disaster, the \"Graf Zeppelin\" landed safely in Germany after its return flight from Brazil. This was the last international passenger airship flight.\n\"Hindenburg\"'s identical sister ship, the \"Graf Zeppelin II\" (LZ 130), could not carry commercial passengers without helium, which the United States refused to sell to Germany. The \"Graf Zeppelin\" made several test flights and conducted some electronic espionage until 1939 when it was grounded due to the beginning of the war. The two \"Graf Zeppelins\" were scrapped in April, 1940.\nDevelopment of airships continued only in the United States, and to a lesser extent, the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union had several semi-rigid and non-rigid airships. The semi-rigid dirigible SSSR-V6 OSOAVIAKhIM was among the largest of these craft, and it set the longest endurance flight at the time of over 130 hours. It crashed into a mountain in 1938, killing 13 of the 19 people on board. While this was a severe blow to the Soviet airship program, they continued to operate non-rigid airships until 1950.\nWorld War II.\nWhile Germany determined that airships were obsolete for military purposes in the coming war and concentrated on the development of aeroplanes, the United States pursued a program of military airship construction even though it had not developed a clear military doctrine for airship use. When the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941, bringing the United States into World War II, the U.S. Navy had 10 nonrigid airships:\nOnly \"K\"- and \"TC\"-class airships were suitable for combat and they were quickly pressed into service against Japanese and German submarines, which were then sinking American shipping within visual range of the American coast. U.S. Navy command, remembering airship's anti-submarine success in World War I, immediately requested new modern antisubmarine airships and on 2 January 1942 formed the ZP-12 patrol unit based in Lakehurst from the four \"K\" airships. The ZP-32 patrol unit was formed from two \"TC\" and two \"L\" airships a month later, based at NAS Moffett Field in Sunnyvale, California. An airship training base was created there as well. The status of submarine-hunting Goodyear airships in the early days of World War II has created significant confusion. Although various accounts refer to airships \"Resolute\" and \"Volunteer\" as operating as \"privateers\" under a Letter of Marque, Congress never authorized a commission, nor did the President sign one.\nIn the years 1942\u201344, approximately 1,400 airship pilots and 3,000 support crew members were trained in the military airship crew training program and the airship military personnel grew from 430 to 12,400. The U.S. airships were produced by the Goodyear factory in Akron, Ohio. From 1942 till 1945, 154 airships were built for the U.S. Navy (133 \"K\"-class, 10 \"L\"-class, seven \"G\"-class, four \"M\"-class) and five \"L\"-class for civilian customers (serial numbers \"L-4\" to \"L-8\").\nThe primary airship tasks were patrol and convoy escort near the American coastline. They also served as an organization centre for the convoys to direct ship movements, and were used in naval search and rescue operations. Rarer duties of the airships included aerophoto reconnaissance, naval mine-laying and mine-sweeping, parachute unit transport and deployment, cargo and personnel transportation. They were deemed quite successful in their duties with the highest combat readiness factor in the entire U.S. air force (87%).\nDuring the war, some 532 ships without airship escort were sunk near the U.S. coast by enemy submarines. Only one ship, the tanker \"Persephone\", of the 89,000 or so in convoys escorted by blimps was sunk by the enemy. Airships engaged submarines with depth charges and, less frequently, with other on-board weapons. They were excellent at driving submarines down, where their limited speed and range prevented them from attacking convoys. The weapons available to airships were so limited that until the advent of the homing torpedo they had little chance of sinking a submarine.\nOnly one airship was ever destroyed by U-boat: on the night of 18/19 July 1943, the \"K-74\" from ZP-21 division was patrolling the coastline near Florida. Using radar, the airship located a surfaced German submarine. The \"K-74\" made her attack run but the U-boat opened fire first. \"K-74\"'s depth charges did not release as she crossed the U-boat and the \"K-74\" received serious damage, losing gas pressure and an engine but landing in the water without loss of life. The crew was rescued by patrol boats in the morning, but one crewman, Aviation Machinist's Mate Second Class Isadore Stessel, died from a shark attack. The U-boat, , was slightly damaged and the next day or so was attacked by aircraft, sustaining damage that forced it to return to base. It was finally sunk on 24 August 1943 by a British Vickers Wellington near Vigo, Spain.\nFleet Airship Wing One operated from Lakehurst, New Jersey, Glynco, Georgia, Weeksville, North Carolina, South Weymouth NAS Massachusetts, Brunswick NAS and Bar Harbor Maine, Yarmouth, Nova Scotia, and Argentia, Newfoundland.\nSome Navy blimps saw action in the European war theater. In 1944\u201345, the U.S. Navy moved an entire squadron of eight Goodyear K class blimps (K-89, K-101, K-109, K-112, K-114, K-123, K-130, &amp; K-134) with flight and maintenance crews from Weeksville Naval Air Station in North Carolina to Naval Air Station Port Lyautey, French Morocco. Their mission was to locate and destroy German U-boats in the relatively shallow waters around the Strait of Gibraltar where magnetic anomaly detection (MAD) was viable. PBY aircraft had been searching these waters but MAD required low altitude flying that was dangerous at night for these aircraft. The blimps were considered a perfect solution to establish a 24/7 MAD barrier (fence) at the Straits of Gibraltar with the PBYs flying the day shift and the blimps flying the night shift. The first two blimps (K-123 &amp; K-130) left South Weymouth NAS on 28 May 1944 and flew to Argentia, Newfoundland, the Azores, and finally to Port Lyautey where they completed the first transatlantic crossing by nonrigid airships on 1 June 1944. The blimps of USN Blimp Squadron ZP-14 (Blimpron 14, aka \"The Africa Squadron\") also conducted mine-spotting and mine-sweeping operations in key Mediterranean ports and various escorts including the convoy carrying United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill to the Yalta Conference in 1945. Airships from the ZP-12 unit took part in the sinking of the last U-boat before German capitulation, sinking the \"U-881\" on 6 May 1945 together with destroyers USS Atherton and USS Moberly.\nOther airships patrolled the Caribbean, Fleet Airship Wing Two, Headquartered at Naval Air Station Richmond, covered the Gulf of Mexico from Richmond and Key West, Florida, Houma, Louisiana, as well as Hitchcock and Brownsville, Texas. FAW 2 also patrolled the northern Caribbean from San Julian, the Isle of Pines (now called Isla de la Juventud) and Guant\u00e1namo Bay, Cuba as well as Vernam Field, Jamaica.\nNavy blimps of Fleet Airship Wing Five, (ZP-51) operated from bases in Trinidad, British Guiana and Paramaribo, Suriname. Fleet Airship Wing Four operated along the coast of Brazil. Two squadrons, VP-41 and VP-42 flew from bases at Amap\u00e1, Igarap\u00e9-A\u00e7u, S\u00e3o Lu\u00eds Fortaleza, Fernando de Noronha, Recife, Macei\u00f3, Ipitanga (near Salvador, Bahia), Caravelas, Vit\u00f3ria and the hangar built for the \"Graf Zeppelin\" at Santa Cruz, Rio de Janeiro.\nFleet Airship Wing Three operated squadrons, ZP-32 from Moffett Field, ZP-31 at NAS Santa Ana, and ZP-33 at NAS Tillamook, Oregon. Auxiliary fields were at Del Mar, Lompoc, Watsonville and Eureka, California, North Bend and Astoria, Oregon, as well as Shelton and Quillayute in Washington.\nFrom 2 January 1942 until the end of war airship operations in the Atlantic, the blimps of the Atlantic fleet made 37,554 flights and flew 378,237 hours. Of the over 70,000 ships in convoys protected by blimps, only one was sunk by a submarine while under blimp escort.\nThe Soviet Union flew a single airship during the war. The \"USSR-V1\" (also known as the SSSR-V1 or the CCCP-B1), originally built in 1932. and rebuilt in 1942 as the \"USSR-V12\". The V12 entered service in 1942 for hydrogen delivery, paratrooper training, and equipment transport. It made 1432 flights with 300\u00a0metric tons of cargo until 1945. In 1947, the V12 crashed into shed doors and caught fire. It was re-built and re-commissioned, as the \"USSR-V12bis\" \"Patriot\", in the same year.\nOn 1 February 1945, the Soviets commissioned a second airship, \"Pobyeda\" (\"Victory\"). The Pobyeda was used for mine-sweeping and wreckage clearing in the Black Sea, crashing on 29 January 1947.\nPostwar period.\nAlthough airships are no longer used for major cargo and passenger transport, they are still used for other purposes such as advertising, sightseeing, surveillance, research and advocacy.\nThere were several studies and proposals for nuclear-powered airships, starting with a 1954 study by F.W. Locke Jr for US Navy. In 1957 Edwin J. Kirschner published the book \"The Zeppelin in the Atomic Age\", which promoted the use of atomic airships. In 1959 Goodyear presented a plan for nuclear-powered airship for both military and commercial use. Several other proposals and papers were published during the next decades.\nIn the 1980s, Per Lindstrand and his team introduced the \"GA-42\" airship, the first airship to use fly-by-wire flight control, which considerably reduced the pilot's workload.\nAn airship was prominently featured in the James Bond film \"A View to a Kill\", released in 1985. The Skyship 500 had the livery of Zorin Industries.\nThe world's largest thermal airship () was constructed by the Per Lindstrand company for French botanists in 1993. The \"AS-300\" carried an underslung raft, which was positioned by the airship on top of tree canopies in the rain forest, allowing the botanists to carry out their treetop research without significant damage to the rainforest. When research was finished at a given location, the airship returned to pick up and relocate the raft.\nIn June 1987, the U.S. Navy awarded a US$168.9\u00a0million contract to Westinghouse Electric and Airship Industries of the UK to find out whether an airship could be used as an airborne platform to detect the threat of sea-skimming missiles, such as the Exocet. At 2.5 million cubic feet, the Westinghouse/Airship Industries Sentinel 5000 (Redesignated YEZ-2A by the U.S. Navy) prototype design was to have been the largest blimp ever constructed. Additional funding for the Naval Airship Program was killed in 1995 and development was discontinued.\nThe SVAM CA-80 airship, which was produced in 2000 by Shanghai Vantage Airship Manufacture Co., Ltd., had a successful trial flight in September 2001. This was designed for advertisement and propagation, air-photo, scientific test, tour and surveillance duties. It was certified as a grade-A Hi-Tech introduction program (No. 20000186) in Shanghai. The CAAC authority granted a type design approval and certificate of airworthiness for the airship.\nIn the 1990s the Zeppelin company returned to the airship business. Their new model, designated the Zeppelin NT, made its maiden flight on 18 September 1997. As of 2009[ [update]] there were four NT aircraft flying, a fifth was completed in March 2009 and an expanded NT-14 (14,000\u00a0cubic meters of helium, capable of carrying 19 passengers) was under construction. One was sold to a Japanese company, and was planned to be flown to Japan in the summer of 2004. Due to delays getting permission from the Russian government, the company decided to transport the airship to Japan by sea. One of the four NT craft is in South Africa carrying diamond detection equipment from De Beers, an application at which the very stable low vibration NT platform excels. The project included design adaptations for high temperature operation and desert climate, as well as a separate mooring mast and a very heavy mooring truck. NT-4 belonged to Airship Ventures of Moffett Field, Mountain View in the San Francisco Bay Area, and provided sight-seeing tours.\nBlimps are used for advertising and as TV camera platforms at major sporting events. The most iconic of these are the Goodyear Blimps. Goodyear operates three blimps in the United States, and The Lightship Group, now The AirSign Airship Group, operates up to 19 advertising blimps around the world. Airship Management Services owns and operates three Skyship 600 blimps. Two operate as advertising and security ships in North America and the Caribbean. Airship Ventures operated a Zeppelin NT for advertising, passenger service and special mission projects. They were the only airship operator in the U.S. authorized to fly commercial passengers, until closing their doors in 2012.\nSkycruise Switzerland AG owns and operates two Skyship 600 blimps. One operates regularly over Switzerland used on sightseeing tours.\nThe Switzerland-based Skyship 600 has also played other roles over the years. For example, it was flown over Athens during the 2004 Summer Olympics as a security measure. In November 2006, it carried advertising calling it \"The Spirit of Dubai\" as it began a publicity tour from London to Dubai, UAE on behalf of The Palm Islands, the world's largest man-made islands created as a residential complex.\nLos Angeles-based Worldwide Aeros Corp. produces FAA Type Certified Aeros 40D Sky Dragon airships.\nIn May 2006, the U.S. Navy began to fly airships again after a hiatus of nearly 44 years. The program uses a single American Blimp Company A-170 nonrigid airship, with designation MZ-3A. Operations focus on crew training and research, and the platform integrator is Northrop Grumman. The program is directed by the Naval Air Systems Command and is being carried out at NAES Lakehurst, the original centre of U.S. Navy lighter-than-air operations in previous decades.\nIn November 2006 the U.S. Army bought an A380+ airship from American Blimp Corporation through a Systems level contract with Northrop Grumman and Booz Allen Hamilton. The airship started flight tests in late 2007, with a primary goal of carrying of payload to an altitude of under remote control and autonomous waypoint navigation. The program will also demonstrate carrying of payload to The platform could be used for intelligence collection. In 2008, the \"CA-150\" airship was launched by Vantage Airship. This is an improved modification of model \"CA-120\" and completed manufacturing in 2008. With larger volume and increased passenger capacity, it is the largest manned nonrigid airship in China at present.\nIn late June 2014 the Electronic Frontier Foundation flew the GEFA-FLUG AS 105 GD/4 blimp AE Bates (owned by, and in conjunction with, Greenpeace) over the NSA's Bluffdale Utah Data Center in protest.\nPostwar projects.\nHybrid designs such as the Heli-Stat airship/helicopter, the Aereon aerostatic/aerodynamic craft, and the CycloCrane (a hybrid aerostatic/rotorcraft), struggled to take flight. The Cyclocrane was also interesting in that the airship's envelope rotated along its longitudinal axis.\nIn 2005, a short-lived project of the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) was Walrus HULA, which explored the potential for using airships as long-distance, heavy lift craft. The primary goal of the research program was to determine the feasibility of building an airship capable of carrying of payload a distance of and land on an unimproved location without the use of external ballast or ground equipment (such as masts). In 2005, two contractors, Lockheed Martin and US Aeros Airships were each awarded approximately $3 million to do feasibility studies of designs for WALRUS. Congress removed funding for Walrus HULA in 2006.\nModern airships.\nMilitary.\nIn 2010, the U.S. Army awarded a $517 million (\u00a3350.6 million) contract to Northrop Grumman and partner Hybrid Air Vehicles to develop a Long Endurance Multi-Intelligence Vehicle (LEMV) system, in the form of three HAV 304s. The project was cancelled in February 2012 due to it being behind schedule and over budget; also the forthcoming U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan where it was intended to be deployed. Following this the Hybrid Air Vehicles HAV 304 Airlander 10 was repurchased by Hybrid Air Vehicles then modified and reassembled in Bedford, UK, and renamed the Airlander 10. As of 2018, it was being tested in readiness for its UK flight test programme.\nA-NSE, a French company, manufactures and operates airships and aerostats. For 2 years, A-NSE has been testing its airships for the French Army. Airships and aerostats are operated to provide intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) support. Their airships include many innovative features such as water ballast take-off and landing systems, variable geometry envelopes and thrust\u2013vectoring systems.\nThe U.S. government has funded two major projects in the high altitude arena. The Composite Hull High Altitude Powered Platform (CHHAPP) is sponsored by U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command. This aircraft is also sometimes called \"HiSentinel High-Altitude Airship\". This prototype ship made a five-hour test flight in September 2005. The second project, the high-altitude airship (HAA), is sponsored by DARPA. In 2005, DARPA awarded a contract for nearly $150\u00a0million to Lockheed Martin for prototype development. First flight of the HAA was planned for 2008 but suffered programmatic and funding delays. The HAA project evolved into the High Altitude Long Endurance-Demonstrator (HALE-D). The U.S. Army and Lockheed Martin launched the first-of-its kind HALE-D on July 27, 2011. After attaining an altitude of , due to an anomaly, the company decided to abort the mission. The airship made a controlled descent in an unpopulated area of southwest Pennsylvania.\nOn 31 January 2006 Lockheed Martin made the first flight of their secretly built hybrid airship designated the P-791. The design is very similar to the SkyCat, unsuccessfully promoted for many years by the British company Advanced Technologies Group (ATG).\nDirigibles have been used in the War in Afghanistan for reconnaissance purposes, as they allow for constant monitoring of a specific area through cameras mounted on the airships.\nPassenger transport.\nIn the 1990s, the successor of the original Zeppelin company in Friedrichshafen, the \"Zeppelin Luftschifftechnik GmbH\", reengaged in airship construction. The first experimental craft (later christened \"Friedrichshafen\") of the type \"Zeppelin NT\" flew in September 1997. Though larger than common blimps, the \"Neue Technologie\" (New Technology) zeppelins are much smaller than their giant ancestors and not actually Zeppelin-types in the classical sense. They are sophisticated semirigids. Apart from the greater payload, their main advantages compared to blimps are higher speed and excellent maneuverability. Meanwhile, several \"Zeppelin NT\" have been produced and operated profitably in joyrides, research flights and similar applications.\nIn June 2004, a Zeppelin NT was sold for the first time to a Japanese company, Nippon Airship Corporation, for tourism and advertising mainly around Tokyo. It was also given a role at the 2005 Expo in Aichi. The aircraft began a flight from Friedrichshafen to Japan, stopping at Geneva, Paris, Rotterdam, Munich, Berlin, Stockholm and other European cities to carry passengers on short legs of the flight. Russian authorities denied overflight permission, so the airship had to be dismantled and shipped to Japan rather than following the historic \"Graf Zeppelin\" flight from Germany to Japan.\nIn 2008, Airship Ventures Inc. began operations from Moffett Federal Airfield near Mountain View, California and until November 2012 offered tours of the San Francisco Bay Area for up to 12 passengers.\nExploration.\nIn November 2005, De Beers, a diamond mining company, launched an airship exploration program over the remote Kalahari Desert. A Zeppelin NT, equipped with a Bell Geospace gravity gradiometer, was used to find potential diamond mines by scanning the local geography for low-density rock formations, known as kimberlite pipes. On 21 September 2007, the airship was severely damaged by a whirlwind while in Botswana. One crew member, who was on watch aboard the moored craft, was slightly injured but released after overnight observation in hospital.\nThermal.\nSeveral companies, such as Cameron Balloons in Bristol, United Kingdom, build hot-air airships. These combine the structures of both hot-air balloons and small airships. The envelope is the normal cigar shape, complete with tail fins, but is inflated with hot air instead of helium to provide the lifting force. A small gondola, carrying the pilot and passengers, a small engine, and the burners to provide the hot air are suspended below the envelope, beneath an opening through which the burners protrude.\nHot-air airships typically cost less to buy and maintain than modern helium-based blimps, and can be quickly deflated after flights. This makes them easy to carry in trailers or trucks and inexpensive to store. They are usually very slow moving, with a typical top speed of . They are mainly used for advertising, but at least one has been used in rainforests for wildlife observation, as they can be easily transported to remote areas.\nUnmanned remote.\nRemote-controlled (RC) airships, a type of unmanned aerial system (UAS), are sometimes used for commercial purposes such as advertising and aerial video and photography as well as recreational purposes. They are particularly common as an advertising mechanism at indoor stadiums. While RC airships are sometimes flown outdoors, doing so for commercial purposes is illegal in the US. Commercial use of an unmanned airship must be certified under part 121.\nAdventures.\nIn 2008, French adventurer attempted to cross the English Channel with a muscular pedal powered airship.\nStephane Rousson also flies the A\u00e9rosail, a .\nCurrent design projects.\nToday, with large, fast, and more cost-efficient fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters, it is unknown whether huge airships can operate profitably in regular passenger transport, though as energy costs rise, attention is once again returning to these lighter-than-air vessels as a possible alternative. At the very least, the idea of comparatively slow, \"majestic\" cruising at relatively low altitudes and in comfortable atmosphere certainly has retained some appeal. There have been some niches for airships in and after World War II, such as long-duration observations, antisubmarine patrol, platforms for TV camera crews, and advertising; these generally require only small and flexible craft, and have thus generally been better fitted for cheaper (non-passenger) blimps.\nHeavy lifting and buoyancy compensation.\nIt has periodically been suggested that airships could be employed for cargo transport, especially delivering extremely heavy loads to areas with poor infrastructure over great distances. This has also been called roadless trucking. Also, airships could be used for heavy lifting over short distances (e.g. on construction sites); this is described as heavy-lift, short-haul. In both cases, the airships would be heavy haulers. \nThe old Zeppelins already faced the challenge of gaining buoyancy when large amounts of fuel were burnt on long trips, often intercontinental. Letting go lifting gas would be an expensive option. Another idea was to pick up water as ballast, from the sea, or from exhaust fumes. A third was using a kind of lift gas that could be burnt, like Blau gas, as a Buoyancy compensator (aviation). The matter is even worse when heavy freight is delivered.\nOne recent (1996 to 2002) enterprise of this sort was the German \"Cargolifter\" project, in which a hybrid (thus not entirely Zeppelin-type) airship even larger than \"Hindenburg\" was projected. Around 2000, CargoLifter AG built the world's largest self-supporting hall, measuring long, wide and high about south of Berlin. In May 2002, the project was stopped for financial reasons; the company had to file bankruptcy. The enormous CargoLifter hangar was later converted to house the Tropical Islands Resort. Cargolifter had intended to replace its cargo upon delivery with water-filled containers of the same weight.\nAlthough no rigid airships are currently used for heavy lifting, hybrid airships are being developed for such purposes. AEREON 26, tested in 1971, was described in John McPhee's \"The Deltoid Pumpkin Seed\". Flying Whales is a French aeronautic start-up developing an airship for transporting heavy loads. \nAn impediment to the large-scale development of airships as heavy haulers has been figuring out how they can be used in a cost-efficient way. In order to have a significant economic advantage over ocean transport, cargo airships must be able to deliver their payload faster than ocean carriers but more cheaply than airplanes. William Crowder, a fellow at the Logistics Management Institute, has calculated that cargo airships are only economical when they can transport 500 to 1,000 tons, approximately the same as a super-jumbo aircraft. The large initial investment required to build such a large airship has been a hindrance to production, especially given the risk inherent in a new technology. The chief commercial officer of the company hoping to sell the LMH-1, a cargo airship currently being developed by Lockheed Martin, believes that airships can be economical in hard-to-reach locations such as mining operations in northern Canada that currently require ice roads.\nMetal-clad airships.\nA metal-clad airship has a very thin metal envelope, rather than the usual fabric. The shell may be either internally braced or monocoque as in the ZMC-2, which flew many times in the 1920s, the only example ever to do so. The shell may be gas-tight as in a non-rigid blimp, or the design may employ internal gas bags as in a rigid airship. Compared to a fabric envelope the metal cladding is expected to be more durable.\nHybrid airships.\nA hybrid airship is a general term for an aircraft that combines characteristics of heavier-than-air (aeroplane or helicopter) and lighter-than-air technology. Examples include helicopter/airship hybrids intended for heavy lift applications and dynamic lift airships intended for long-range cruising. Most airships, when fully loaded with cargo and fuel, are usually ballasted to be heavier than air, and thus must use their propulsion system and shape to create aerodynamic lift, necessary to stay aloft. All airships can be operated to be slightly heavier than air at periods during flight (descent). Accordingly, the term \"hybrid airship\" refers to craft that obtain a significant portion of their lift from aerodynamic lift or other kinetic means.\nFor example, the Aeroscraft is a buoyancy assisted air vehicle that generates lift through a combination of aerodynamics, thrust vectoring and gas buoyancy generation and management, and for much of the time will fly heavier than air. Aeroscraft is Worldwide Aeros Corporation's continuation of DARPA's now cancelled Walrus HULA (Hybrid Ultra Large Aircraft) project.\nThe Patroller P3 hybrid airship developed by Advanced Hybrid Aircraft Ltd, BC, Canada, is a relatively small () buoyant craft, manned by the crew of five and with the endurance of up to 72 hours. The flight-tests with the 40% RC scale model proved that such a craft can be launched and landed without a large team of strong ground-handlers. Design features a special \"winglet\" for aerodynamic lift control.\nAirships in space exploration.\nAirships have been proposed as a potential cheap alternative to surface rocket launches for achieving Earth orbit. JP Aerospace have proposed the Airship to Orbit project, which intends to float a multi-stage airship up to mesospheric altitudes of 55\u00a0km (180,000\u00a0ft) and then use ion propulsion to accelerate to orbital speed. At these heights, air resistance would not be a significant problem for achieving such speeds. The company has not yet built any of the three stages.\nNASA has proposed the High Altitude Venus Operational Concept, which comprises a series of five missions including crewed missions to the atmosphere of Venus in airships. Pressures on the surface of the planet are too high for human habitation, but at a specific altitude the pressure is equal to that found on Earth and this makes Venus a potential target for human colonization.\nHypothetically, there could be an airship lifted by a vacuum\u2014that is, by material that can contain nothing at all inside but withstand the atmospheric pressure from the outside. It is, at this point, science fiction, although NASA has posited that some kind of vacuum airship could eventually be used to explore the surface of Mars.\nCruiser feeder transport airship.\nEU FP7 MAAT Project has studied an innovative cruiser/feeder airship system, for the stratosphere with a cruiser remaining airborne for a long time and feeders connecting it to the ground and flying as piloted balloons.\nAirships for humanitarian and cargo transport.\nGoogle co-founder Sergey Brin founded LTA Research in 2015 to develop airships for humanitarian and cargo transport. The company's 124-meter-long airship Pathfinder 1 received from the FAA a special airworthiness certificate for the helium-filled airship in September 2023.\nThe certificate allowed the largest airship since the ill-fated Hindenburg to begin flight tests at Moffett Field, a joint civil-military airport in Silicon Valley.\nThe Pathfinder is deemed the largest flying aircraft in size, beating that of the Stratolaunch Roc and many more.\nComparison with heavier-than-air aircraft.\nThe advantage of airships over aeroplanes is that static lift sufficient for flight is generated by the lifting gas and requires no engine power. This was an immense advantage before the middle of World War I and remained an advantage for long-distance or long-duration operations until World War II. Modern concepts for high-altitude airships include photovoltaic cells to reduce the need to land to refuel, thus they can remain in the air until consumables expire. This similarly reduces or eliminates the need to consider variable fuel weight in buoyancy calculations.\nThe disadvantages are that an airship has a very large reference area and comparatively large drag coefficient, thus a larger drag force compared to that of aeroplanes and even helicopters. Given the large frontal area and wetted surface of an airship, a practical limit is reached around , only about one-third the typical airspeed of a modern commercial airplane. Thus, airships are used where speed is not critical.\nThe lift capability of an airship is equal to the buoyant force minus the weight of the airship. This assumes standard air-temperature and pressure conditions. Corrections are usually made for water vapor and impurity of lifting gas, as well as percentage of inflation of the gas cells at liftoff. Based on specific lift (lifting force per unit volume of gas), the greatest static lift is provided by hydrogen (11.15\u00a0N/m3 or 71\u00a0lbf/1000\u00a0cu\u00a0ft) with helium (10.37\u00a0N/m3 or 66\u00a0lbf/1000\u00a0cu\u00a0ft) a close second.\nIn addition to static lift, an airship can obtain a certain amount of dynamic lift from its engines. Dynamic lift in past airships has been about 10% of the static lift. Dynamic lift allows an airship to \"take off heavy\" from a runway similar to fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft. This requires additional weight in engines, fuel, and landing gear, negating some of the static lift capacity.\nThe altitude at which an airship can fly largely depends on how much lifting gas it can lose due to expansion before stasis is reached. The ultimate altitude record for a rigid airship was set in 1917 by the L-55 under the command of Hans-Kurt Flemming when he forced the airship to attempting to cross France after the \"Silent Raid\" on London. The L-55 lost lift during the descent to lower altitudes over Germany and crashed due to loss of lift. While such waste of gas was necessary for the survival of airships in the later years of World War I, it was impractical for commercial operations, or operations of helium-filled military airships. The highest flight made by a hydrogen-filled passenger airship was on the \"Graf Zeppelin's\" around-the-world flight.\nThe greatest disadvantage of the airship is size, which is essential to increasing performance. As size increases, the problems of ground handling increase geometrically. As the German Navy changed from the P class of 1915 with a volume of over to the larger Q class of 1916, the R class of 1917, and finally the W class of 1918, at almost ground handling problems reduced the number of days the Zeppelins were able to make patrol flights. This availability declined from 34% in 1915, to 24.3% in 1916 and finally 17.5% in 1918.\nSo long as the power-to-weight ratios of aircraft engines remained low and specific fuel consumption high, the airship had an edge for long-range or -duration operations. As those figures changed, the balance shifted rapidly in the aeroplane's favour. By mid-1917, the airship could no longer survive in a combat situation where the threat was aeroplanes. By the late 1930s, the airship barely had an advantage over the aeroplane on intercontinental over-water flights, and that advantage had vanished by the end of World War II.\nThis is in face-to-face tactical situations. Currently, a high-altitude airship project is planned to survey hundreds of kilometres as their operation radius, often much farther than the normal engagement range of a military aeroplane. For example, a radar mounted on a vessel platform high has radio horizon at range, while a radar at altitude has radio horizon at range. This is significantly important for detecting low-flying cruise missiles or fighter-bombers.\nSafety.\nThe most commonly used lifting gas, helium, is inert and therefore presents no fire risk. A series of vulnerability tests were done by the UK Defence Evaluation and Research Agency DERA on a Skyship 600. Since the internal gas pressure was maintained at only 1\u20132% above the surrounding air pressure, the vehicle proved highly tolerant to physical damage or to attack by small-arms fire or missiles. Several hundred high-velocity bullets were fired through the hull, and even two hours later the vehicle would have been able to return to base. Ordnance passed through the envelope without causing critical helium loss. The results and related mathematical model have presented in the hypothesis of considering a Zeppelin NT size airship. In all instances of light armament fire evaluated under both test and live conditions, the airship was able to complete its mission and return to base.\nLicensing.\nIn the United Kingdom, the basic pilot licence for airships is the PPL(As), or private pilot licence, which requires a minimum of 35 hours instruction on airships. To fly commercially, a Commercial Pilot Licence (Airships) is required.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58006", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58006", "title": "Marburg haemorrhagic fever", "text": ""}
{"id": "58008", "revid": "2490716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58008", "title": "Bachem Ba 349 Natter", "text": "German rocket-powered interceptor prototype\nThe Bachem Ba 349 Natter () is a World War II German point-defence rocket-powered interceptor, which was to be used in a very similar way to a manned surface-to-air missile. After a vertical take-off, which eliminated the need for airfields, most of the flight to the Allied bombers was to be controlled by an autopilot. The primary role of the relatively untrained pilot was to aim the aircraft at its target bomber and fire its armament of rockets. The pilot and the fuselage containing the rocket engine would then land using separate parachutes, while the nose section was disposable.\nThe first and only manned vertical take-off flight, on 1 March 1945, ended in the death of the test pilot, Lothar Sieber.\nDevelopment.\nBackground.\nIn 1943, \"Luftwaffe\" air superiority was being challenged by the Allies over the \"Reich\" and radical innovations were required to overcome the crisis. Surface-to-air missiles appeared to be a promising approach to counter the Allied strategic bombing offensive; a variety of projects were started, but invariably problems with the guidance and homing systems prevented any of these from attaining operational status. Providing the missile with a pilot, who could operate a weapon during the brief terminal approach phase, offered a solution.\nSubmissions for a simple target defence interceptor were requested by the \"Luftwaffe\" in early 1944 under the umbrella of the , literally \"Emergency Fighter Program\". A number of simple designs were proposed, including the Heinkel P.1077 \"Julia\", in which the pilot lay prone (on his stomach), to reduce the frontal area.\nThe \"Julia\" was the front-runner for the contract. The initial plan was to launch the aircraft vertically, but this concept was later changed to a conventional horizontal take-off from a tricycle-wheeled trolley, similar to that used by the first eight prototypes of the Arado Ar 234 jet reconnaissance bomber.\nBachem's proposal.\nThe Natter was first conceived by Dr Erich Bachem in August 1944, after witnessing an American bombing raid on a major German city. He believed there ought to be a way to break up these large formations of bombers. His BP-20 (\"Natter\") was a development from a design he had worked on at Fieseler, the Fi 166 concept, but considerably more radical than the other submissions. It was built using glued and nailed wooden parts with an armour-plated bulkhead and bulletproof glass windshield at the front of the cockpit. The initial plan was to power the machine with a Walter HWK 109-509A-2 rocket engine; however, only the 109-509A-1, as used in the Me 163, was available. It had a sea level thrust variable between at \"idle\" to at full power, with the \"Natter's\" intended quartet of rear flank-mount Schmidding SG34 solid fuel rocket boosters used in its vertical launch to provide an additional thrust for 10 seconds before they burned out and were jettisoned. The experimental prototypes slid up a -tall vertical steel launch tower for a maximum sliding length of in three guideways, one for each wing tip and one for the lower tip of the ventral tail fin. By the time the aircraft left the tower it was hoped that it would have achieved sufficient speed to allow its aerodynamic surfaces to provide stable flight.\nUnder operational conditions, once the Natter had left the launcher, it would be guided to the proximity of the Allied bombers by an autopilot with the possibility of an added beam guidance similar to that used in some V-2 rocket launches. Only then would the pilot take control, aim and fire the armament, which was originally proposed to be a salvo of nineteen R4M rockets. Later, 28 R4Ms or a number of the larger, Henschel Hs 297 \"F\u00f6hn\" rockets were suggested, with either variety of unguided rocket fired from the Natter's nose-mounted cellular launch tubes. The Natter was intended to fly up and over the bombers, by which time its Walter engine would probably be out of propellant. Following its one-time attack with its rockets, the pilot would dive his Natter, now effectively a glider, to an altitude of around , flatten out, release the nose of the aircraft and a small braking parachute from the rear fuselage. The fuselage would decelerate and the pilot would be ejected forwards by his own momentum and land by means of a personal parachute.\nIn an early proposal in August 1944, the Natter design had a concrete nose; it was suggested that the machine might ram a bomber, but this proposal was subsequently withdrawn in later Project Natter outlines. Bachem stated clearly in the initial proposal that the Natter was not a suicide weapon and much effort went into designing safety features for the pilot. However, owing to the potential dangers for the pilot inherent in the operation of this precarious aircraft, the Natter is sometimes listed as a suicide craft. The design had one decisive advantage over its competitors \u2013 it eliminated the necessity to land an unpowered gliding machine at an airbase, which, as the history of the Me 163 rocket aircraft had clearly demonstrated, made an aircraft extremely vulnerable to attack by Allied fighters.\nModifications.\nHeinrich Himmler became interested in Bachem's design. The Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS granted Bachem an interview and fully supported the project. In the middle of September 1944, the Technical Office of the Waffen-SS made an order for Bachem to develop and manufacture the Natter at his Waldsee factory. The Reichsluftfahrtministerium (RLM/German Aviation Ministry) officially designated the BP-20 the Ba 349A and construction began. During December 1944, the project came largely under the control of the SS and Obergruppenf\u00fchrer Hans Kammler. This decision is said to have been the only time the SS significantly interfered with aircraft design and air fighting strategy. Early-on in the project, the RLM undertook an engineering assessment of the Natter, which it reported on 28 October 1944.\nThe Natter was designed to be built by unskilled labor with poor-quality tools and inexpensive material. Various stringent economies were imposed on an already frugal design. The Natter had no landing gear, which saved weight, expense and construction time. Consequently, one of the most unusual features of the machine was the escape of the pilot and recovery of the machine.\nThe proposed sequence of these events was as follows: After the attack, the Natter might dive to a lower altitude and flatten out into level flight. The pilot would then proceed with a well-practised escape sequence. He would open the cockpit canopy latch, which would allow the canopy to flick backwards on its hinge in the airstream. Next, the pilot would undo his seat belt and remove his feet from the rudder pedal stirrups. By squeezing a lever mounted on the control column, he would release a lock at the base of the column, which would allow him to tilt the column forwards where it could engage in and undo a safety latch for the nose release mechanism. He would then lean a little further forward and pull a lever hinged near the floor at the front of the cockpit, freeing the nose section, which self-jettisoned as a result of the reduced aerodynamic pressure at the front of the fuselage.\nAs the nose section separated, it was intended to briefly pull on two cables that released a small ribbon parachute stored on the starboard side of the rear fuselage. The parachute subsequently opened and decelerated the Natter. The pilot would be ejected from the cockpit by his own momentum and as soon as he was clear of the fuselage, he would open his personal parachute and descend to the ground. A parachute was to eject the valuable Walter rocket engine from the rear, which would decelerate the aircraft and eject the pilot with inertia, however, associated problems with this mechanism were still not fully resolved prior to the conflict's end.\nWind tunnel testing on a wooden model, scaled to 40% of full size, was performed at the \"Deutsche Versuchsanstalt f\u00fcr Luftfahrt\" (DVL), the Institute for Aerodynamics at Berlin-Adlershof in September 1944 at speeds up to . Results from these tests were reported in January 1945 to the Bachem-Werk. Further model tests were carried out at the \"Luftfahrtforschungsanstalt Hermann G\u00f6ring\" (LFA) facility in V\u00f6lkenrode-Braunschweig, at speeds close to Mach 1. In March the Bachem-Werk simply received a statement that satisfactory flying qualities should be expected with speeds up to .\nFlight testing.\nConstruction of the first experimental prototype \"Natter, Versuchsmuster 1\", was completed on 4 October 1944. V1 was subsequently referred to as \"Baumuster1\" (\"BM1\") and later still the \"B\" was dropped and the machine became known as the M1. Most subsequent prototypes were known by 'M' codes, as the later prototypes of the Heinkel He 162 were. Manned glider flights began on 3 November 1944. The first glider M1 was towed to around 3,000 m by a Heinkel He 111 bomber with a cable (\"Tragschlepp\" mode) at Neuburg an der Donau. The pilot was Erich Kl\u00f6ckner, who made all four documented \"Tragschlepp\" (\"towed\") flights.\nAfter carrying out the test programme of the M1, he bailed out and the machine crashed into the ground. It was found that the towing cable, and in the case of the M3, the undercarriage interfered with the flight characteristics of the gliders and consequently the results were difficult to interpret. To resolve doubts about the Natter in the glider mode, Hans Z\u00fcbert made a free flight in the M8 on 14 February, and showed that the Natter was indeed a good flying machine.\nThe vertical take-off trials were conducted on high ground called the Ochsenkopf at the \"Truppen\u00fcbungsplatz\" (military training area) Heuberg near Stetten am kalten Markt, W\u00fcrttemberg. The first successful unmanned vertical take-off from the experimental launch tower occurred on 22 December 1944. The test machine, the M16, was powered only by the Schmidding solid boosters, as were all the early vertical launch trials. Up to and including 1 March 1945, 16 prototypes had been used, 8 in glider trials and 8 in VTO trials.\nManned test flight.\nBy January 1945, Bachem was under pressure from the authorities in Berlin to carry out a manned flight by the end of February. On 25 February, M22 was in the experimental launch tower. It was as complete an operational machine as possible with the Walter HWK 109-509 A1 engine installed for the first time. A dummy pilot was in the cockpit. Lift-off from the tower was perfect. The engineers and ground crew watched as the M22 ascended under the combined power of the four Schmidding boosters and the Walter engine, an estimated total thrust of . The nose separated as programmed and the dummy pilot descended safely under its personal parachute. The remainder of the fuselage came down under its two large salvage parachutes, but when it hit the ground the Walter liquid-propellant rocket engine's residual hypergolic propellants (\"T-Stoff\" oxidizer and \"C-Stoff\" fuel) exploded and the machine was destroyed.\nDespite Bachem's concerns that the test programme had been significantly cut short, a young volunteer \"Luftwaffe\" test pilot, Lothar Sieber, climbed into the cockpit of the fully fuelled M23 on 1 March. The aircraft was equipped with an FM transmitter for the purpose of transmitting flight data from various monitoring sensors in the machine. A hard wire intercom appears to have been provided between Sieber and the engineers in the launch bunker using a system similar to that used in the manned glider flights. Around 11:00\u00a0am, the M23 was ready for take-off. Low stratus clouds lay over the Ochsenkopf. The Walter liquid-fueled rocket engine built up to full thrust and Sieber pushed the button to ignite the four solid boosters.\nInitially, the Natter rose vertically but, at an altitude of about , it suddenly pitched up into an inverted curve at about 30\u00b0 to the vertical. At about the cockpit canopy was seen to fly off. The Natter continued to climb at high speed at an angle of 15\u00b0 from the horizontal and disappeared into the clouds. The Walter engine stalled about 15 seconds after take-off. It is estimated the Natter reached , at which point it nose-dived and hit the ground with great force about 32 seconds later, some kilometres from the launch site. Unknown at the time, one of the Schmidding boosters failed to jettison and its remains were dug up at the crash site in 1998.\nThe pilot was likely unconscious long before the crash. Bachem surmised Sieber had involuntarily pulled back on the control column under the effect of the 3 G acceleration. Examination of the canopy, which fell near the launch site, showed the tip of the latch was bent, suggesting it may not have been in the fully closed position at launch. The pilot's headrest had been attached to the underside of the canopy and as the canopy flew off the pilot's head would have snapped back suddenly about , hitting the solid wooden rear upper cockpit bulkhead, and either knocking Sieber unconscious or breaking his neck.\nThe accident reinforced Bachem's long held belief that the take-off and flight in the vicinity of the target bombers should be fully automated. The canopy latch was strengthened and the headrest was attached to the backboard of the cockpit. Before the introduction of the autopilot in the test programme, the control column would have a temporary locking device on it, which would allow the machine to ascend vertically to at least and then be removed by the pilot. The Walter engine probably ceased operation because the Natter was virtually upside-down and air may have entered the intake pipes in the propellant tanks, starving the engine. Sieber had become the first person to take off vertically from the ground under pure rocket power, 16 years before Yuri Gagarin's \"Vostok 1\" pioneering, peacetime orbital flight. Following Sieber's death, all of the eight subsequent Natter flights were unmanned.\nProduction.\nThe SS ordered 150 Natters, and the \"Luftwaffe\" ordered 50, but none were delivered by the end of the war. Much debate has surrounded the number of Natters built at the Bachem-Werk and their disposition. According to Bachem, 36 \"Natters\" were produced at the Bachem-Werk in Waldsee by the end of the war. Up to April 1945, 17 aircraft had been used in unmanned trials comprising five gliders, all slung under an He 111 in the \"Mistelschlepp\" configuration prior to launch, and 12 VTO examples. Five aircraft were prepared for manned trials, four gliders and one VTO version. The M3 was flown twice, and then rebuilt at which time it was given the new code BM3a but was never flown. The total number of launches to early April 1945 was 22, as was the total number of Natters constructed up to that time. Bachem reported further that there were 14 more finished or almost finished aircraft in April 1945. Four of these were prototype A1 operational Natters built for test launching from a wooden pole launcher, which had been designed for field deployment. This new launcher was also constructed on the Heuberg, not far from the experimental steel tower. There is documentary evidence for two pole launches in April but not three as claimed by Bachem in his post-war presentation. The documentation for this third flight may have been destroyed by the SS at war's end. Ten A1 operational Natters, called \"K-Maschinen\", were constructed for the \"Krokus-Einsatz\" (\"Operation Crocus\").\nThe fate of these 14 A1 Natters was as follows:\nThree were fired from the vertical launch tower according to Bachem, four were burnt at Waldsee, two were burnt at \"Lager\" Schlatt, Oetztal, Austria, four were captured by US troops at Sankt Leonhard im Pitztal, Austria, and one, which had been sent as a sample model to a new factory in Thuringia, was captured by the Red Army. Consequently, the total of 36 test and operational aircraft constructed at the Bachem-Werk can be accounted for. However, Natter carcasses were used for a variety of ground-based purposes; for example, as a static booster rocket, armament and strength testing and pilot seat position tests. Some fuselages were reused after flight testing; for example, the M5, 6 and 7.\nOf the four Natters captured at Sankt Leonhard im Pitztal, two went to the United States. Only one original Natter built in Germany in the Second World War survives in storage at the Paul E. Garber Preservation, Restoration, and Storage Facility in Suitland, Maryland, under the auspices of the Smithsonian Institution. The fate of the other Natter brought to the US is unknown. There is no documentary evidence that a Natter was ever flown from Muroc Field. The tail section of one of the Natters at Sankt Leonhard im Pitztal was broken off while it still rested on its trailer.\nStability.\nIn early February 1945, the positions of the centre of gravity for the A1 operational machine during its flight profile were giving the RLM and the SS cause for concern. They wanted these figures to be decided upon for the upcoming construction of the A1 aircraft for \"Krokus-Einsatz\" (Operation Crocus), the field deployment of the Natter. The position of the centre of gravity is expressed as a percentage of the chord (distance between the leading and trailing edges) of the main wing. Thus 0% is the leading edge and 100% is the trailing edge. In the manned glider trials the centre of gravity had been varied between 20 and 34%.\nAt a meeting of engineers held on 8 February, the variations in the centre of gravity expected in the A1 \"Krokus\" machine were discussed. At take-off with the weight of the four solid boosters, the centre of gravity would be brought back to 65%, but after releasing these rockets it would move forwards to 22%. The free flight by Z\u00fcbert on 14 February had shown unequivocally that the little Natter had excellent flying characteristics as a glider. The centre of gravity problem was solved initially by the addition of one-metre-square auxiliary tailfins that were released simultaneously with the jettisoning of the boosters. The \"Krokus\" aircraft had vanes that would direct the Walter rocket exhaust gases so as to assist vehicle stabilisation at low speed similar to those used in the V-2 rocket.\nLegacy.\nBy 25 April 1945, French forces had captured Waldsee and presumably took control of the Bachem-Werk. Shortly before the French troops arrived, a group of Bachem-Werk personnel set out for Austria with five A1 Natters on trailers. At Bad W\u00f6rishofen, the group waited for another squad retreating from Nabern unter Teck with one completed Natter. Both groups then set out for the Austrian Alps. One group with two Natters ended up at the junction of the river Inn and one of its tributaries, the \u00d6tztaler Ache, at Camp Schlatt. The other group went to St. Leonhard im Pitztal with four aircraft. US troops captured the first group at Camp Schlatt around 4 May and the second group on the following day.\nAt some time during the project, the Bachem-Werk was ordered to give complete details of the BP-20 Natter to the Japanese, but there was doubt over whether they had received them. They were, however, known to have a general knowledge of the Natter and showed considerable interest in the project.\n\"Operation Krokus\" launch pads at Hasenholz wood.\nAn operational launch site for the first Ba 349A-1 operational Natters under the code name \"Operation Krokus\" was being established in a small wooded area called Hasenholz, south of the Stuttgart to Munich autobahn and to the east of Nabern unter Teck. Around the end of February and the beginning of March the Organisation Todt was in action, constructing each set of the trios of concrete foundations (or \"footings\") for the launch towers. These three launch pads and their towers were arranged at the corners of an equilateral triangle, 120 m per side. The specific locations are said to be , and . In the centre of each of the three concrete footings is a square hole approximately 50 centimeters deep, which once served as the foundation for the launch tower. Beside each hole is a pipe, cut off at ground level, which was probably once a cable pit. These three concrete pads were noticed by a surveyor in the autumn of 1945, but not rediscovered until 1999.\nOn 27 January, eight pilots volunteered for the first operational flights and started familiarizing themselves with the Natter at Bachem's factory on 5 February. This training continued until the beginning of April. The pilots were expecting to fly three combat-ready Natters on 20 April, which was Hitler's birthday, but were unaware that the launch pads were still incomplete. But on that day the US 10th Armored Division drove its tanks into Kirchheim unter Teck to the northwest of Hasenholz wood. The next day it crossed the autobahn and headed straight for the Natter operational area. The Natter group subsequently retreated to Waldsee.\nSurviving aircraft and replicas.\nOnly one original A1 Natter survives; it is stored in the Paul E. Garber Preservation, Restoration and Storage Facility in Suitland, Maryland, US. It is in a poor state of repair and is no longer accessible to the general public. The evidence supports the proposition that this machine was captured by US troops at St. Leonhard im Pitztal, Austria in May 1945.\nThe Natter displayed at the Deutsches Museum is said to have been reconstructed partly from sub-assemblies that survived the end of the war. This machine is of the experimental type as launched from the steel tower and is painted to look like an M17. There are several static reproductions of Natters around the world, for example at the Planes of Fame Air Museum, Chino, California and Fantasy of Flight, Polk City, Florida, US.\nFilm.\nIn 2010, Oliver Gortat and Philip Schneider made a documentary film about the Bachem Ba 349.\nSpecifications (Ba 349B-1).\n\"Data from\" \"Aircraft of the Third Reich\"General characteristics* Crew: 1* Length: * Wingspan: * Height: (without fins)* Wing area: * Empty weight: fuel expended* Gross weight: \n bi-fuel rocket engine, thrust \"Hauptofen\" main chamber&lt;br&gt;\n \"Marschofen\" auxiliary chamber* Powerplant: 4 \u00d7 Schmidding SG 34\n solid fuel booster rockets, thrust &lt;br&gt;\n or 2 x solid fuel booster rocket motors\nPerformance* Maximum speed: (, ) at* Cruise speed: (, ) * Range: (, ) after climb at \n after climb at \n after climb at \n after climb at * Endurance: 4.36 minutes at \n 3.15 minutes at* Service ceiling: * Rate of climb: * Time to altitude: 62 seconds to\nArmament\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58009", "revid": "25453028", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58009", "title": "Good Friday", "text": "Christian holiday\nGood Friday, also known as Holy Friday, Great Friday, Great and Holy Friday, or Friday of the Passion of the Lord, is a solemn Christian holy day commemorating the crucifixion of Jesus and his death at Calvary (Golgotha). It is observed during Holy Week as part of the Paschal Triduum.\nMembers of many Christian denominations, including the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Lutheran, Anglican, Methodist, Oriental Orthodox, United Protestant and some Reformed traditions (including certain Continental Reformed, Presbyterian and Congregationalist churches), observe Good Friday with fasting and church services. In many Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican and Methodist churches, the Service of the Great Three Hours' Agony is held from noon until 3p.m.\u2014the hours the Bible records darkness covering the land until Jesus' death on the cross. In the Catholic, Lutheran and Anglican traditions of Christianity, the Stations of the Cross are prayed in the evening of Good Friday, as with other Fridays of Lent. Communicants of the Moravian Church have a Good Friday tradition of cleaning gravestones in Moravian cemeteries.\nThe date of Good Friday varies from one year to the next in both the Gregorian and Julian calendars. Eastern and Western Christianity disagree over the computation of the date of Easter and therefore of Good Friday. Good Friday is a widely instituted legal holiday around the world. Some predominantly Christian countries, such as Germany, have laws prohibiting certain acts\u2014public dancing, horse racing\u2014in remembrance of the sombre nature of Good Friday.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Good Friday\" comes from the sense 'pious, holy' of the word \"good\". Less common examples of expressions based on this obsolete sense of \"good\" include 'the good book\" for the Bible, 'good tide' for Christmas or Shrovetide, and Good Wednesday for the Wednesday in Holy Week. With regard to the usual sense of the word \"good\", \"Christians believe that Jesus's death on the cross was the ultimate sacrifice for humanity's sins, saving mankind from death.\" \nA common folk etymology analyses \"Good Friday\" incorrectly as a corruption of \"God Friday\", of a type similar to the (linguistically correct) derivation of \"goodbye\" from a contraction of 'God be with ye'. In Old English, the day was called \"Long Friday\" ( )\u2014referring to the lengthy observances of fasting and religious services, making it a day of extended devotion\u2014and equivalents of this term are still used in Scandinavian languages and Finnish.\nBiblical accounts.\nAccording to the accounts in the Gospels, the royal soldiers, guided by Jesus' disciple Judas Iscariot, arrested Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane. Judas received money (30 pieces of silver) for betraying Jesus and told the guards that whomever he kisses is the one they are to arrest. Following his arrest, Jesus was taken to the house of Annas, the father-in-law of the high priest, Caiaphas. There he was interrogated with little result and sent bound to Caiaphas the high priest where the Sanhedrin had assembled.\nConflicting testimony against Jesus was brought forth by many witnesses, to which Jesus answered nothing. Finally the high priest adjured Jesus to respond under solemn oath, saying \"I adjure you, by the Living God, to tell us, are you the Anointed One, the Son of God?\" Jesus testified ambiguously, \"You have said it, and in time you will see the Son of Man seated at the right hand of the Almighty, coming on the clouds of Heaven.\" The high priest condemned Jesus for blasphemy, and the Sanhedrin concurred with a sentence of death. Peter, waiting in the courtyard, also denied Jesus three times to bystanders while the interrogations were proceeding just as Jesus had foretold.\nIn the morning, the whole assembly brought Jesus to the Roman governor Pontius Pilate under charges of subverting the nation, opposing taxes to Caesar, and making himself a king. Pilate authorized the Jewish leaders to judge Jesus according to their own law and execute sentencing; however, the Jewish leaders replied that they were not allowed by the Romans to carry out a sentence of death.\nPilate questioned Jesus and told the assembly that there was no basis for sentencing. Upon learning that Jesus was from Galilee, Pilate referred the case to the ruler of Galilee, King Herod, who was in Jerusalem for the Passover Feast. Herod questioned Jesus but received no answer; Herod sent Jesus back to Pilate. Pilate told the assembly that neither he nor Herod found Jesus to be guilty; Pilate resolved to have Jesus whipped and released. Under the guidance of the chief priests, the crowd asked for Barabbas, who had been imprisoned for committing murder during an insurrection. Pilate asked what they would have him do with Jesus, and they demanded, \"Crucify him.\" Pilate's wife had seen Jesus in a dream earlier that day, and she forewarned Pilate to \"have nothing to do with this righteous man.\" Pilate had Jesus flogged and then brought him out to the crowd to release him. The chief priests informed Pilate of a new charge, demanding Jesus be sentenced to death \"because he claimed to be God's son.\" This possibility filled Pilate with fear, and he brought Jesus back inside the palace and demanded to know from where he came.\nComing before the crowd one last time, Pilate declared Jesus innocent and washed his own hands in water to show he had no part in this condemnation. Nevertheless, Pilate handed Jesus over to be crucified in order to forestall a riot. The sentence written was \"Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.\" Jesus carried his cross to the site of execution (assisted by Simon of Cyrene), called the \"place of the Skull\", or \"Golgotha\" in Hebrew and in Latin \"Calvary\". There he was crucified along with two criminals.\nJesus agonized on the cross for three hours, from noon to 3\u00a0pm, darkness fell over the whole land. In the gospels of Mathew and Mark, Jesus is said to have spoken from the cross, quoting the messianic Psalm 22: \"My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?\"\nWith a loud cry, Jesus gave up his spirit. There was an earthquake, tombs broke open, and the curtain in the Temple was torn from top to bottom. The centurion on guard at the site of crucifixion declared, \"Truly this was God's Son!\"\nJoseph of Arimathea, a member of the Sanhedrin and a secret follower of Jesus, who had not consented to his condemnation, went to Pilate to request the body of Jesus. Another secret follower of Jesus and member of the Sanhedrin named Nicodemus brought about a hundred-pound weight mixture of spices and helped wrap the body of Jesus. Pilate asked confirmation from the centurion of whether Jesus was dead. A soldier pierced the side of Jesus with a lance causing blood and water to flow out, and the centurion informed Pilate that Jesus was dead.\nJoseph of Arimathea took Jesus' body, wrapped it in a clean linen shroud, and placed it in his own new tomb that had been carved in the rock in a garden near the site of the crucifixion. Nicodemus also brought 75 pounds of myrrh and aloes, and placed them in the linen with the body, in keeping with Jewish burial customs. They rolled a large rock over the entrance of the tomb. Then they returned home and rested, because Shabbat had begun at sunset.\nEastern Orthodox.\nByzantine Christians (Eastern Christians who follow the Rite of Constantinople: Orthodox Christians and Greek-Catholics) call this day \"Great and Holy Friday\", or simply \"Great Friday\". Because the sacrifice of Jesus through his crucifixion is recalled on this day, the Divine Liturgy (the sacrifice of bread and wine) is never celebrated on Great Friday, except when this day coincides with the Great Feast of the Annunciation, which falls on the fixed date of 25 March (for those churches which follow the traditional Julian Calendar, 25 March currently falls on 7 April of the modern Gregorian Calendar). Also on Great Friday, the clergy no longer wear the purple or red that is customary throughout Great Lent, but instead don black vestments. There is no \"stripping of the altar\" on Holy and Great Thursday as in the West; instead, all of the church hangings are changed to black, and will remain so until the Divine Liturgy on Great Saturday.\nThe faithful revisit the events of the day through the public reading of specific Psalms and the Gospels, and singing hymns about Christ's death. Rich visual imagery and symbolism, as well as stirring hymnody, are remarkable elements of these observances. In the Orthodox understanding, the events of Holy Week are not simply an annual commemoration of past events, but the faithful actually participate in the death and the resurrection of Jesus.\nGreat and Holy Friday is observed as an absolute fast, and adult Byzantine Christians are expected to abstain from all food and drink the entire day to the extent that their health permits. \"On this Holy day neither a meal is offered nor do we eat on this day of the crucifixion. If someone is unable or has become very old [or is] unable to fast, he may be given bread and water after sunset. In this way we come to the holy commandment of the Holy Apostles not to eat on Great Friday.\" (cf. \"Black Fast\")\nMatins of Holy and Great Friday.\nThe Byzantine Christian observance of Holy and Great Friday, which is formally known as The Order of Holy and Saving Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, begins on Thursday night with the Matins of the Twelve Passion Gospels. Scattered throughout this Matins service are twelve readings from all four of the Gospels which recount the events of the Passion from the Last Supper through the Crucifixion and burial of Jesus. Some churches have a candelabrum with twelve candles on it, and after each Gospel reading one of the candles is extinguished.\nThe first of these twelve readings is the longest Gospel reading of the liturgical year, and is a concatenation from all four Gospels. Just before the sixth Gospel reading, which recounts Jesus being nailed to the cross, a large cross is carried out of the sanctuary by the priest, accompanied by incense and candles, and is placed in the center of the nave (where the congregation gathers) \"S\u0113meron Krem\u0101tai Ep\u00ed X\u00fdlou\":\nToday He who hung the earth upon the waters is hung upon the Cross \"(three times)\".&lt;br&gt;He who is King of the angels is arrayed in a crown of thorns.&lt;br&gt;He who wraps the Heavens in clouds is wrapped in the purple of mockery. &lt;br&gt;He who in Jordan set Adam free receives blows upon His face.&lt;br&gt;The Bridegroom of the Church is transfixed with nails. &lt;br&gt;The Son of the Virgin is pierced with a spear.&lt;br&gt;We venerate Thy Passion, O Christ \"(three times)\".&lt;br&gt;Show us also Thy glorious Resurrection.\nThe readings are:\nDuring the service, all come forward to kiss the feet of Christ on the cross. After the Canon, a brief, moving hymn, \"The Wise Thief\" is chanted by singers who stand at the foot of the cross in the center of the nave. The service does not end with the First Hour, as usual, but with a special dismissal by the priest:\nMay Christ our true God, Who for the salvation of the world endured spitting, and scourging, and buffeting, and the Cross, and death, through the intercessions of His most pure Mother, of our holy and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, have mercy on us and save us, for He is good and the Lover of mankind.\nRoyal Hours.\nThe next day, in the forenoon on Friday, all gather again to pray the Royal Hours, a special expanded celebration of the Little Hours (including the First Hour, Third Hour, Sixth Hour, Ninth Hour and Typica) with the addition of scripture readings (Old Testament, Epistle and Gospel) and hymns about the Crucifixion at each of the Hours (some of the material from the previous night is repeated). This is somewhat more festive in character, and derives its name of \"Royal\" from both the fact that the Hours are served with more solemnity than normal, commemorating Christ the King who humbled himself for the salvation of mankind, and also from the fact that this service was in the past attended by the Emperor and his court.\nVespers of Holy and Great Friday.\nIn the afternoon, around 3\u00a0pm, all gather for the Vespers of the Taking-Down from the Cross, commemorating the Deposition from the Cross. Following Psalm 103 (104) and the Great Litany, 'Lord, I call' is sung without a Psalter reading. The first five stichera (the first being repeated) are taken from the Aposticha at Matins the night before, but the final 3 of the 5 are sung in Tone 2. Three more stichera in Tone 6 lead to the Entrance. The Evening Prokimenon is taken from Psalm 21 (22): 'They parted My garments among them, and cast lots upon My vesture.'\nThere are then four readings, with Prokimena before the second and fourth:\nAn Alleluia is then sung, with verses from Psalm 68 (69): 'Save Me, O God: for the waters are come in, even unto my soul.'\nThe Gospel reading is a composite taken from three of the four the Gospels (Matthew 27:1-38; Luke 23:39-43; Matthew 27:39-54; John 19:31-37; Matthew 27:55-61), essentially the story of the crucifixion as it appears according to St. Matthew, interspersed with St. Luke's account of the confession of the Good Thief and St. John's account of blood and water flowing from Jesus' side. During the Gospel, the body of Christ (the \"soma\") is removed from the cross, and, as the words in the Gospel reading mention Joseph of Arimathea, is wrapped in a linen shroud, and taken to the altar in the sanctuary. The Aposticha reflects on the burial of Christ. Either at this point (in the Greek use) or during the troparion following (in the Slav use):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Noble Joseph, taking down Thy most pure body from the Tree, wrapped it in pure linen and spices, and he laid it in a new tomb.\nAn \"epitaphios\" or \"winding sheet\" (a cloth embroidered with the image of Christ prepared for burial) is carried in procession to a low table in the nave which represents the Tomb of Christ; it is often decorated with an abundance of flowers. The epitaphios itself represents the body of Jesus wrapped in a burial shroud, and is a roughly full-size cloth icon of the body of Christ. The service ends with a hope of the Resurrection:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Angel stood by the tomb, and to the women bearing spices he cried aloud: 'Myrrh is fitting for the dead, but Christ has shown Himself a stranger to corruption.\nThen the priest may deliver a homily and everyone comes forward to venerate the epitaphios. In the Slavic practice, at the end of Vespers, Compline is immediately served, featuring a special \"Canon of the Crucifixion of our Lord and the Lamentation of the Most Holy Theotokos\" by Symeon the Logothete.\nMatins of Holy and Great Saturday.\nOn Friday night, the Matins of Holy and Great Saturday, a unique service known as \"The Lamentation at the Tomb\" \"(Epit\u00e1phios Thr\u0113nos)\" is celebrated. This service is also sometimes called \"Jerusalem Matins\". Much of the service takes place around the tomb of Christ in the center of the nave. In Greek communities all over the world, the Epitaphios procession is a ceremonial funeral procession for Christ that takes place in Greek Orthodox and Byzantine Catholic traditions on Good Friday, where a decorated kouvouklion is carried around local cities. The decorated kouvouklion symbolizes the casket or tomb of Jesus Christ, and when it is fully decorated with flowers, candles, and the special iconographic cloth depicting the dead body of Christ known as the epitaphios cloth, the entire object is referred to as the Epitaphios.\nA unique feature of the service is the chanting of the Lamentations or Praises (\"Enk\u014dmia\"), which consist of verses chanted by the clergy 9 interspersed between the verses of Psalm 118 (which is, by far, the longest psalm in the Bible). The \"Enk\u014dmia\" are the best-loved hymns of Greek Byzantine hymnography, both their poetry and their music being uniquely suited to each other and to the spirit of the day.\nThey consist of 185 tercet antiphons arranged in three parts (\"st\u00e1seis\" or \"stops\"), which are interjected with the verses of Psalm 118, and nine short \"doxastik\u00e1\" (\"Gloriae\") and \"Theot\u00f3kia\" (invocations to the Virgin Mary). The three \"st\u00e1seis\" are each set to its own music, and are commonly known by their initial antiphons: , \"Life in a grave\", , \"Worthy it is\", and , \"All the generations\". Musically they can be classified as strophic, with 75, 62, and 48 tercet stanzas each, respectively.\nThe climax of the \"Enk\u014dmia\" comes during the third \"st\u00e1sis\", with the antiphon \"\u03a9 \u03b3\u03bb\u03c5\u03ba\u03cd \u03bc\u03bf\u03c5 \u1f14\u03b1\u03c1\", a lamentation of the Virgin for her dead Child (\"O, my sweet spring, my sweetest child, where has your beauty gone?\"). Later, during a different antiphon of that stasis (\"Early in the morning the myrrh-bearers came to Thee and sprinkled myrrh upon Thy tomb\"), young girls of the parish place flowers on the Epitaphios and the priest sprinkles it with rose-water. The author(s) and date of the \"Enk\u014dmia\" are unknown. Their High Attic linguistic style suggests a dating around the 6th century, possibly before the time of St. Romanos the Melodist.\nThe Evlogitaria (Benedictions) of the Resurrection are sung as on Sunday, since they refer to the conversation between the myrrh-bearers and the angel in the tomb, followed by kathismata about the burial of Christ. Psalm 50 (51) is then immediately read, and then followed by a much loved-canon, written by Mark the Monk, Bishop of Hydrous and Kosmas of the Holy City, with irmoi by Kassiani the Nun. The high-point of the much-loved Canon is Ode 9, which takes the form of a dialogue between Christ and the Theotokos, with Christ promising His Mother the hope of the Resurrection. This Canon will be sung again the following night at the Midnight Office.\nLauds follows, and its stichera take the form of a funeral lament, while always preserving the hope of the Resurrection. The doxasticon links Christ's rest in the tomb with His rest on the seventh day of creation, and the theotokion (\"Most blessed art thou, O Virgin Theotokos...) is the same as is used on Sundays.\nAt the end of the Great Doxology, while the Trisagion is sung, the epitaphios is taken in procession around the outside of the church, and is then returned to the tomb. Some churches observe the practice of holding the epitaphios at the door, above waist level, so the faithful must bow down under it as they come back into the church, symbolizing their entering into the death and resurrection of Christ. The epitaphios will lie in the tomb until the Paschal Service early Sunday morning. In some churches, the epitaphios is never left alone, but is accompanied 24 hours a day by a reader chanting from the Psalter.\nWhen the procession has returned to the church, a troparion is read, similar to the ones read at the Sixth Hour throughout Lent, focusing on the purpose of Christ's burial. A series of prokimena and readings are then said:\nAt the end of the service, a final hymn is sung as the faithful come to venerate the Epitaphios.\nRoman Catholic.\nIn Latin, the name used by the Catholic Church until 1955 was \"Feria sexta in Parasceve\" (\"Friday of Preparation [for the Sabbath]\"). In the 1955 reform of Holy Week, it was renamed \"Feria sexta in Passione et Morte Domini\" (\"Friday of the Passion and Death of the Lord\"), and in the new rite introduced in 1970, shortened to \"Feria sexta in Passione Domini\" (\"Friday of the Passion of the Lord\").\nDay of Fasting.\nThe Catholic Church regards Good Friday and Holy Saturday as the Paschal fast, in accordance with Article 110 of Sacrosanctum Concilium. In the Latin Church, a fast day is understood as having only one full meal and two collations (a smaller repast, the two of which together do not equal the one full meal) \u2013 although this may be observed less stringently on Holy Saturday than on Good Friday.\nServices on the day.\nThe Roman Rite has no celebration of Mass between the Mass of the Lord's Supper on Holy Thursday (Maundy Thursday) evening and the Easter Vigil unless a special exemption is granted for rare solemn or grave occasions by the Vatican or the local bishop. The only sacraments celebrated during this time are Baptism (for those in danger of death), Penance, and Anointing of the Sick. While there is no celebration of the Eucharist, it is distributed to the faithful only in the Celebration of the Passion of the Lord, but can also be taken at any hour to the sick who are unable to attend this celebration.\nThe Collection for the Holy Places is taken up on Good Friday.\nThe Celebration of the Passion of the Lord takes place in the afternoon, ideally at three o'clock; however, for pastoral reasons (especially in countries where Good Friday is not a public holiday), it is permissible to celebrate the liturgy earlier, even shortly after midday, or at a later hour. The celebration consists of three parts: the liturgy of the word, the adoration of the cross, and the Holy communion. The altar is bare, without cross, candlesticks and altar cloths. It is also customary to empty the holy water fonts in preparation of the blessing of the water at the Easter Vigil. Traditionally, no bells are rung on Good Friday or Holy Saturday until the Easter Vigil.\nThe liturgical colour of the vestments used is red. Before 1970, vestments were black except for the Communion part of the rite when violet was used. If a bishop or abbot celebrates, he wears a plain mitre \"(mitra simplex)\". Before the reforms of the Holy Week liturgies in 1955, black was used throughout.\nAside from the celebration of the Solemn Liturgy of the Passion the usual offices of the Liturgy of the Hours are said by all those canonically required and celebrated publicly in religious communities. The liturgy consists of the normal major hours of Matins and Laudes (these first two morning services are often combined to form the office of Good Friday Tenebrae), the minor hours of Terce, Sext and None. It excludes the evening major and minor hours, Vespers and Compline respectively, which are only prayed by those who are unable to attend a celebration of the Liturgy of the Passion, giving the days pattern of worship an abrupt conclusion representing Jesus's death.\nThree Hours' Agony.\nThe Three Hours' Devotion based on the Seven Last Words from the Cross begins at noon and ends at 3 pm, the time that the Christian tradition teaches that Jesus died on the cross.\nLiturgy.\nThe Good Friday liturgy consists of three parts: the Liturgy of the Word, the Veneration of the Cross, and the Holy Communion.\nStations of the Cross.\nIn addition to the prescribed liturgical service, the Stations of the Cross are often prayed either in the church or outside, and a prayer service may be held from midday to 3.00\u00a0pm, known as the Three Hours' Agony. In countries such as Malta, Italy, the Philippines, Puerto Rico and Spain, processions with statues representing the Passion of Christ are held.\nIn Rome, since the papacy of John Paul II, the heights of the Temple of Venus and Roma and their position opposite the main entrance to the Colosseum have been used to good effect as a public address platform. This may be seen in the photograph below where a red canopy has been erected to shelter the Pope as well as an illuminated cross, on the occasion of the Way of the Cross ceremony. The Pope, either personally or through a representative, leads the faithful through meditations on the stations of the cross while a cross is carried from there to the Colosseum.\nPlenary indulgence.\nIn the Roman Catholic Church, plenary indulgence is obtained if the faithful venerates the cross with piety in the solemn Celebration of the Passion of the Lord on Good Friday.\nNovena to the Divine Mercy.\nThe novena to the Divine Mercy begins on that day and lasts until the Saturday before Divine Mercy Sunday. Both days are linked in terms of content, as the mercy of God flows from the Sacred Heart of Jesus that was pierced on the cross.\n\"Collecta Pro Terra Sancta\".\nPaul VI established the \"Collecta Pro Terra Sancta\" to be held on Good Friday, a fundraising that was confirmed by all subsequent popes.\nProtestant.\nLutheran Church.\nIn Lutheran tradition from the 16th to the 20th century, Good Friday was the most important religious holiday, and abstention from all worldly works was expected. During that time, Lutheranism had no restrictions on the celebration of the Eucharist on Good Friday; on the contrary, it was a prime day on which to receive the Eucharist, and services were often accentuated by special music such as the \"St Matthew Passion\" by Johann Sebastian Bach.\nMore recently, Lutheran liturgical practice has recaptured Good Friday as part of the larger sweep of the great Three Days: Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, and the Vigil of Easter. The three days remain one liturgy which celebrates the death and resurrection of Jesus. As part of the liturgy of the three days, Lutherans generally fast from the Eucharist on Good Friday. Rather, it is celebrated in remembrance of the Last Supper on Maundy Thursday and at the Vigil of Easter. One practice among Lutheran churches is to celebrate a tenebrae service on Good Friday, typically conducted in candlelight and consisting of a collection of passion accounts from the four gospels. While being called \"Tenebrae\" it holds little resemblance to the now-suppressed Catholic monastic rite of the same name.\nThe Good Friday liturgy appointed in \"Evangelical Lutheran Worship\", the worship book of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, specifies a liturgy similar to the revised Roman Catholic liturgy. A rite for adoration of the crucified Christ includes the optional singing of the Solemn Reproaches in an updated and revised translation which eliminates some of the anti-Jewish overtones in previous versions. Many Lutheran churches have Good Friday services, such as the Three Hours' Agony centered on the remembrance of the \"Seven Last Words,\" sayings of Jesus assembled from the four gospels, while others hold a liturgy that places an emphasis on the triumph of the cross, and a singular biblical account of the Passion narrative from the Gospel of John.\nAlong with observing a general Lenten fast, many Lutherans emphasize the importance of Good Friday as a day of fasting within the calendar. \"A Handbook for the Discipline of Lent\" recommends the Lutheran guideline to \"Fast on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday with only one simple meal during the day, usually without meat\".\nAnglican Communion.\nIn the Anglican Communion, the Black Fast has been historically observed by devout believers. The Black Fast was especially popular during the 19th century as it sought to imitate \"the fasting of the ancient church.\"\nThe 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\" did not specify a particular rite to be observed on Good Friday but local custom came to mandate an assortment of services, including the Seven Last Words from the Cross and a three-hour service consisting of Matins, Ante-communion (using the Reserved Sacrament in high church parishes) and Evensong. In recent times, revised editions of the Prayer Book and Common Worship have re-introduced pre-Reformation forms of observance of Good Friday corresponding to those in today's Roman Catholic Church, with special nods to the rites that had been observed in the Church of England prior to the Henrican, Edwardian and Elizabethan reforms, including Creeping to the Cross.\nMethodist Church.\nMany Methodist denominations commemorate Good Friday with fasting, as well as a service of worship based on the Seven Last Words from the Cross; this liturgy is known as the Three Hours Devotion as it starts at noon and concludes at 3 pm, the latter being the time that Jesus died on the cross.\nOn Maundy Thursday, the altar and the cross are usually veiled in black for Good Friday, as black is the liturgical colour for Good Friday in the United Methodist Church. A wooden cross may sit in front of the bare chancel.\nMoravian Church.\nMoravians hold a Lovefeast on Good Friday as they receive Holy Communion on Maundy Thursday.\nCommunicants of the Moravian Church practice the Good Friday tradition of cleaning gravestones in Moravian cemeteries.\nReformed Churches.\nIn the Reformed tradition, Good Friday is one of the evangelical feasts and is thus widely observed with church services, which feature the Solemn Reproaches in the pattern of Psalm 78, towards the end of the liturgy.\nOther Christian traditions.\nMany Protestant churches hold an Interdenominational service with Lord's Supper.\nAssociated customs.\nIn many countries and territories with a strong Christian tradition such as Australia, Argentina, Bermuda, Brazil, Canada, the countries of the Caribbean, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Malta, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, the Scandinavian countries, Singapore, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Venezuela, the day is observed as a public or federal holiday. In the United States, 12 states observe Good Friday as state holiday: Connecticut, Texas, Delaware, Hawaii, Indiana, Tennessee, Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, New Jersey, North Carolina and North Dakota. One associated custom is strict adherence to the Black Fast, where believers fast from food and liquids during the day and after sunset, a vegetarian meal with water is consumed. St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom and St. Basil attest to the practice.\nThe processions of the day, hymns \"Crux fidelis\" by King John of Portugal, and Eberlin's \"Tenebrae factae sunt\", followed by \"Vexilla Regis\" is sung, translated from Latin as \"the standards of the King advance\", and then follows a ceremony that is not a real Mass, it is called the \"Mass of the Pre-Sanctified.\". This custom is respected also by forgoing the Mass, this is to take heed to the solemnity of the Sacrifice of Calvary. This is where the host of the prior day is placed at the altar, incensed, elevated so \"that it may be seen by the people\" and consumed. Germany and some other countries have laws prohibiting certain acts, such as dancing and horse racing, that are seen as profaning the solemn nature of the day.\nAustralia.\nGood Friday is a holiday under state and territory laws in all states and territories in Australia. Generally speaking, shops in all Australian states (but not in the two territories of the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory) are required to remain closed for the duration of Good Friday, although there are certain shops which are permitted to open and other shops can apply for exemptions. All schools and universities close on Good Friday in Australia, and Good Friday falls within the school holidays in most years in all states and territories except the Northern Territory, although many states now commence their school holidays in early April regardless of Easter. In 2024, for example, when Good Friday fell on 29 March, only Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia had school holidays which coincided with Good Friday.&lt;ref name=\"https://www.australia.com/en/facts-and-planning/when-to-go/australian-school-holidays.html\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The vast majority of businesses are closed on Good Friday, although many recreational businesses, such as the Sydney Royal Easter Show, open on Good Friday as among non-religious families Good Friday is a popular day to indulge in such activities.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, Good Friday is a federal statutory holiday. In the province of Quebec \"employers can choose to give the day off either on Good Friday or Easter Monday.\"\nCuba.\nIn an online article posted on Catholic News Agency by Alejandro Berm\u00fadez on 31 March 2012, Cuban President Ra\u00fal Castro, with the Communist Party and his advisers, decreed that Good Friday that year would be a holiday. This was Castro's response to a request made personally to him by Pope Benedict XVI during the latter's Apostolic Visitation to the island and Le\u00f3n, Mexico that month. The move followed the pattern of small advances in Cuba's relations with the Vatican, mirroring Pope John Paul II's success in getting Fidel Castro to declare Christmas Day a holiday. Both Good Friday and Christmas are now annual holidays in Cuba.\nGermany.\nIn Germany Good Friday is known as \"Karfreitag\" (\"kara\" means \"sorrow\" in Old High German); it is a \"Stiller Feiertag\" (silent holiday), and there are strict rules banning activities deemed disrespectful to Christians. Rules vary among the sixteen different federal states, but often prohibit dancing and the use of loud appliances such as lawnmowers and leaf blowers. Nightclubs are shut, and films that may be shown in cinemas are restricted.\nIn recent times the holiday has been informally called \"Carfreitag\" by extreme car enthusiasts, including those from other countries who visit Germany, who tune cars illegally and hold illegal races on public roads. Police seek to prevent unauthorised tuning, illegal races, noise, and pollution. Offenders can be fined and have points put on their licences, and in some cases lose their licences and have their cars confiscated.\nHong Kong.\nIn Hong Kong, Good Friday was designated a public holiday in the Holidays Ordinance, 1875. Good Friday continues to be a holiday after the transfer of sovereignty from the UK to China in 1997. Government offices, banks, post offices and most offices are closed on Good Friday.\nIreland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland, Good Friday is not an official public holiday, but most non-retail businesses close for the day. Up until 2018 it was illegal to sell alcoholic beverages on Good Friday, with some exceptions, so pubs and off-licences generally closed. Critics of the ban included the catering and tourism sector, but surveys showed that the general public were divided on the issue. In Northern Ireland, a similar ban operates until 5\u00a0pm on Good Friday.\nMalaysia.\nAlthough Malaysia is a Muslim majority country, Good Friday is declared as a public holiday in the states of Sabah and Sarawak in East Malaysia as there is a significant Christian indigenous population in both states.\nMalta.\nThe Holy Week commemorations reach their peak on Good Friday as the Roman Catholic Church celebrates the Passion of Jesus. Solemn celebrations take place in all churches together with processions in different villages around Malta and Gozo. During the celebration, the narrative of the passion is read in some localities, while the Adoration of the Cross follows. Good Friday processions take place in Birgu, Bormla, G\u0127axaq, Luqa, Mosta, Naxxar, Paola, Qormi, Rabat, Senglea, Valletta, \u017bebbu\u0121 (Citt\u00e0 Rohan) and \u017bejtun. Processions in Gozo occur in Nadur, Victoria (St. George and Cathedral), Xag\u0127ra and \u017bebbu\u0121, Gozo.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, Good Friday is a legal holiday and is a day of mandatory school closure for all New Zealand state and integrated schools. Good Friday is also a restricted trading day in New Zealand, which means that unexempted shops are not permitted to open on this day.\nPhilippines.\nIn the predominantly Roman Catholic Philippines, the day is commemorated with street processions, the Way of the Cross, the chanting of the \"Pasy\u00f3n\", \"Siete Palabras\" or the Seven Last Words of Jesus on the Cross, and performances of the \"Sen\u00e1kulo\" or Passion play. Some devotees engage in self-flagellation and even have themselves crucified as expressions of penance despite health risks and strong disapproval from the Church.\nChurch bells are not rung and Masses are not celebrated, while television features movies, documentaries and other shows focused on the religious event and other topics related to the Catholic faith, broadcasting mostly religious content. Malls and shops are generally closed, as are restaurants as it is the second of three public holidays within the week.\nAfter three o'clock in the afternoon (the time at which Jesus is traditionally believed to have died), the faithful venerate the cross in the local church and follow the procession of the Burial of Jesus.\nIn Cebu and many parts of the Visayan Islands, people usually eat \"binignit\" and \"biko\" as a form of fasting.\nPoland.\nIn Polish churches, a tableau of Christ's Tomb is unveiled in the sanctuary. Many of the faithful spend long hours into the night grieving at the Tomb, where it is customary to kiss the wounds on the Lord's body. A life-size figure of Jesus lying in his tomb is widely visited by the faithful, especially on Holy Saturday. The tableaux may include flowers, candles, figures of angels standing watch, and the three crosses atop Mt Calvary, and much more. Each parish strives to come up with the most artistically and religiously evocative arrangement in which the Blessed Sacrament, draped in a filmy veil, is prominently displayed.\nSingapore.\nGood Friday is a public holiday in Singapore.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK Good Friday was historically a common law holiday; it is today recognised as an official public holiday (bank holiday). All state schools are closed and most businesses treat it as a holiday for staff; however, many retail stores remain open. Government services in Northern Ireland operate as normal on Good Friday, closing instead on Easter Tuesday.\nThere has traditionally been no horse racing on Good Friday in the UK. However, in 2008, betting shops and stores opened for the first time on this day, and in 2014 Lingfield Park and Musselburgh staged the UK's first Good Friday race meetings. The BBC Radio 4 7\u00a0am News broadcast on Good Friday is traditionally introduced with a verse from Isaac Watts' hymn \"When I Survey the Wondrous Cross\".\nThe tradition of Easter plays includes 1960 Eastertime performance of (1916) Artists Ursula O'Leary (Procula), and William Devlin as Pontius Pilate, perform with the atmospheric sound effects of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop. The Hugh Stewart production for the Home Service used soundware such as the EMS Synthi 100 and ARP Odyssey l.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, Good Friday is not a federal government holiday. The postal service operates, and banks regulated by the federal government do not close for Good Friday.\nSome states, counties, municipalities, and territories observe the holiday. Good Friday is a state holiday in Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Hawaii, Indiana, Kentucky (half-day), Louisiana, New Jersey, North Carolina, North Dakota, Tennessee and Texas, and in the territories of Guam, U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Northern Mariana Islands and Puerto Rico.\nState and local government offices and courts are closed, as well as some banks and post offices in these states, and in those counties and municipalities where Good Friday is observed as a holiday.\nThe stock markets have chosen to be closed on Good Friday, but the foreign exchange and bond trading markets open for a partial business day. Some public schools and universities are closed on Good Friday if it falls within spring break.\nIn some governmental contexts Good Friday has been referred to by a generic name such as \"spring holiday\". In 1999, in the case of \"Bridenbaugh v. O'Bannon\", an Indiana state employee sued the governor for giving state employees Good Friday as a day off. The US Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against the plaintiff, stating that the government could give state employees a paid day off when that day is a religious holiday, including Good Friday, but only so long as the state can provide a valid secular purpose that coincides with the obvious religious purpose of the holiday.\nCalculating the date.\nGood Friday is the Friday before Easter, which is calculated differently in Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity (see Computus for details). Easter falls on the first Sunday following the Paschal Full Moon, the full moon on or after 21 March, taken to be the date of the vernal equinox. The Western calculation uses the Gregorian calendar, while the Eastern calculation uses the Julian calendar, whose 21 March now corresponds to the Gregorian calendar's 3 April. The calculations for identifying the date of the full moon also differ.\nIn Eastern Christianity, Easter can fall between 22 March and 25 April on Julian Calendar (thus between 4 April and 8 May in terms of the Gregorian calendar, during the period 1900 and 2099), so Good Friday can fall between 20 March and 23 April, inclusive (or between 2 April and 6 May in terms of the Gregorian calendar).\nCultural references.\nGood Friday assumes a particular importance in the plot of Richard Wagner's music drama \"Parsifal\", which contains an orchestral interlude known as the \"Good Friday Music\".\nMemoration on Wednesday of the Holy Week.\nSome Baptist congregations, the Philadelphia Church of God, and some non-denominational churches oppose the observance of Good Friday, regarding it as a so-called \"papist\" tradition, and instead observe the Crucifixion of Jesus on Wednesday to coincide with the Jewish sacrifice of the Passover Lamb (which some/many Christians believe is an Old Testament pointer to Jesus Christ). A Wednesday Crucifixion of Jesus allows for him to be in the tomb (\"heart of the earth\") for three days and three nights as he told the Pharisees he would be (Matthew 12:40), rather than two nights and a day (by inclusive counting, as was the norm at that time) if he had died on a Friday.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58010", "revid": "43147063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58010", "title": "Pascha", "text": "Pascha or spelling variants may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58011", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58011", "title": "Mediaeval", "text": ""}
{"id": "58013", "revid": "91720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58013", "title": "Sport fishing", "text": ""}
{"id": "58014", "revid": "24050972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58014", "title": "Basque", "text": "Basque may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58015", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58015", "title": "Mohave people", "text": "Indigenous people to the Colorado River in the Mojave Desert\nMohave or Mojave (Mojave: Aha Makhav) are a Native American people from the Colorado River region of the Mojave Desert in Arizona, California, and Nevada. They are enrolled in the federally recognized tribes, the Fort Mojave Indian Tribe of Arizona, California &amp; Nevada and the Colorado River Indian Tribes of the Colorado River Indian Reservation.\nTheir Mojave language belongs to the Yuman language family.\nThe original Colorado River and Fort Mojave reservations were established in 1865 and 1870. Both reservations include substantial senior water rights for the Colorado River.\nCulture.\nIn the 1930s, George Devereux, a Hungarian-French anthropologist, did fieldwork and lived among the Mohave for an extended period of study. He published extensively about their culture and incorporated psychoanalytic thinking in his interpretation of their culture.\nLanguage.\nThe Mojave language belongs to the River Yuman branch of the Yuman language family. It is closely related to the Quechan and Maricopa languages.\nIn 1994, approximately 74 people in total on the Colorado River and Fort Mojave reservations spoke the language, according to linguist Leanne Hinton. The tribe has published language materials, and there are new efforts to teach the language to their children.\nReligion.\nThe Mohave creator is Matavilya, who gave Mojave people their clans. His little brother is Mastamho, who gave them the Colorado River and taught them how to plant. Historically, Mojave were agrarian; they planted in the fertile floodplain of the untamed river, following the age-old customs of the Aha cave. They have traditionally used the indigenous plant Datura as a deliriant hallucinogen in a religious sacrament. A Mohave who is coming of age must consume the plant in a rite of passage, in order to enter a new state of consciousness.\nHistory.\nEarly Mojave history is primarily oral history since the Mojave language was not written in precolonial times. Disease, outside cultures, and white encroachment on their territory disrupted their social organization. Together with having to adapt to a majority culture of another language, this resulted in interrupting the Mojave transmission of their stories and songs to the following generations.\nThe tribal name has been spelled in Spanish and English transliteration in more than 50 variations, such as \"Hamock avi\", \"Amacava,\" \"A-mac-ha ves\", \"A-moc-ha-ve\", \"Jamajabs\", and \"Hamakhav\". This has led to misinterpretations of the tribal name, also partly traced to a translation error in Frederick W. Hodge's 1917 \"Handbook of the American Indians North of Mexico\" (1917). This incorrectly defined the name Mohave as being derived from \"hamock,\" (three), and \"avi,\" (mountain). According to this source, the name refers to the mountain peaks known as The Needles in English, located near the Colorado River. (The city of Needles, California is located a few miles north from here). But, the Mojave call these peaks \"Huuky\u00e1mpve\"\",\" which means \"where the battle took place,\" referring to the battle in which the God-son, Mastamho, slew the sea serpent.\nAncestral lands.\nThe Mojave held lands along the Colorado River, Aha Macav in their language, that stretched from Black Canyon, where the tall pillars of First House of Mutavilya loomed above the river, past Avi kwame or Spirit Mountain, the center of spiritual things, to the Quechan Valley, where the lands of other tribes began. As related to contemporary landmarks, their lands began in the north at Hoover Dam and ended about one hundred miles below Parker Dam on the Colorado River.\nEarly European contact.\nA Spanish expedition entered Mojave territory in 1604. Juan Onate led the expedition in search of silver. In 1775, Francisco Garc\u00e9s, a Spanish friar, met with the Mojave.\n19th century.\nIn 1826, Jedediah Smith entered Mojave territory, followed by other European-American fur trappers in increasingly violent encounters. The United States annexed Arizona in 1850, which brought the US Army into the region.\nThe most famous incident in the 19th century was the adoption of Olive Oatman after her family was massacred by another tribe, all prior to them living on the reservation. \nIn mid-April 1859, United States troops, led by Lieutenant Colonel William Hoffman, on the Expedition of the Colorado, moved upriver into Mojave country with the well-publicized objective of establishing a military post. By this time, white immigrants and settlers had begun to encroach on Mojave lands, and the post was intended to protect east-west European-American emigrants from attack by the Mojave. Hoffman sent couriers among the tribes, warning that the post would be gained by force if they or their allies chose to resist. During this period, several members of the Rose-Baley Party were massacred by the Mojave. The Mojave warriors withdrew as Hoffman's armada approached and the army, without conflict, occupied land near the future Fort Mojave. Hoffman ordered the Mojave men to assemble on April 23, 1859, at the armed stockade adjacent to his headquarters, to hear Hoffman' terms of peace. Hoffman gave them the choice of submission or extermination and the Mojave chose submission. At that time the Mojave population was estimated to be about 4,000, which composed 22 clans identified by totems.\nUnder American law the Mohave were to live on the Colorado River Reservation after its establishment in 1865. However, many refused to leave their ancestral homes in the Mojave Valley. At this time, under jurisdiction of the War Department, officials declined to try to force them onto the reservation and the Mojave in the area were relatively free to follow their tribal ways. In the midsummer of 1890, after the end of the Indian Wars, the War Department withdrew its troops and the post was transferred to the Office of Indian Affairs within the Department of the Interior.\nBeginning in August 1890, the Office of Indian Affairs began an intensive program of assimilation where Mohave and other Native children living on reservations, were forced into Indian boarding schools in which they learned to speak, write, and read English. This assimilation program, which was U.S. federal policy, was based on the belief that this was the only way native peoples could survive. Fort Mojave was converted into a boarding school for local children and other \"non-reservation\" Indians.\n20th century.\nUntil 1931, 41 years after its founding, all Fort Mojave boys and girls between the ages of 6 and 18 were compelled to live at the Fort Mojave Indian School or to attend other Indian boarding schools far removed from Fort Mojave.\nThe assimilation helped to break up tribal culture and governments. In addition to English, schools taught American culture and customs and insisted that the children follow them; students were required to adopt European-American hairstyles (which included hair cutting), clothing, habits of eating, sleeping, toiletry, manners, industry, and language. Use of their own language or customs was a punishable offense; at Fort Mojave five lashes of the whip were issued for the first offense. Such corporal punishment of children scandalized the Mojave, who did not discipline their children in that way.\nAs part of the assimilation the administrators assigned English names to the children and registered as citizens of one of two tribes, the Mojave Tribe on the Colorado River Reservation and the Fort Mojave Indian Tribe on the Fort Mojave Indian Reservation. These divisions did not reflect the traditional Mojave clan and kinship system. In the late 1960s, 30 years after the end of the assimilation program 18 of the 22 traditional clans still survived.\nIn 1957, the Fort Mojave Indian Tribe ratified its constitution.\nPopulation.\nEstimates of the precontact populations of most Native groups in California have varied substantially. Alfred L. Kroeber (1925:883) put the 1770 population of the Mohave at 3,000 and Francisco Garc\u00e9s, a Franciscan missionary-explorer, also estimated the population at 3,000 in 1776 (Garc\u00e9s 1900(2):450).\nA.L. Kroeber estimate of the population in 1910 was 1,050. By 1963 Lorraine M. Sherer's research revealed the population had shrunk to approximately 988, with 438 at Fort Mojave and 550 at the Colorado River Reservation.\nCurrent status.\nThe Mohave, along with the Chemehuevi, some Hopi, and some Navajo, share the Colorado River Indian Reservation and function today as one geopolitical unit known as the federally recognized Colorado River Indian Tribes; each tribe also continues to maintain and observe its individual traditions, distinct religions, and culturally unique identities. The Colorado River Indian Tribes headquarters, library and museum are in Parker, Arizona, about 40 miles (64\u00a0km) north of I-10. The Colorado River Indian Tribes Native American Days Fair &amp; Expo is held annually in Parker, from Thursday through Sunday during the first week of October. The Megathrow Traditional Bird Singing &amp; Dancing social event is also celebrated annually, on the third weekend of March. RV facilities are available along the Colorado River.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58017", "revid": "1625507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58017", "title": "Microwave oven", "text": "Kitchen cooking appliance\nA microwave oven, or simply microwave, is an electric oven that heats and cooks food by exposing it to electromagnetic radiation in the microwave frequency range. This induces polar molecules in the food to rotate and produce thermal energy (heat) in a process known as dielectric heating. Microwave ovens heat food quickly and efficiently because the heating effect is fairly uniform in the outer 25\u201338 mm (1\u20131.5 inches) of a homogeneous, high-water-content food item.\nThe development of the cavity magnetron in the United Kingdom made possible the production of electromagnetic waves of a small enough wavelength (microwaves) to efficiently heat up water molecules. American electrical engineer Percy Spencer is generally credited with developing and patenting the world's first commercial microwave oven, the \"Radarange\", which was first sold in 1947. He based it on British radar technology which had been developed before and during World War II.\nRaytheon later licensed its patents for a home-use microwave oven that was introduced by Tappan in 1955, but it was still too large and expensive for general home use. Sharp Corporation introduced the first microwave oven with a turntable between 1964 and 1966. The countertop microwave oven was introduced in 1967 by the Amana Corporation. After microwave ovens became affordable for residential use in the late 1970s, their use spread into commercial and residential kitchens around the world, and prices fell rapidly during the 1980s. In addition to cooking food, microwave ovens are used for heating in many industrial processes.\nMicrowave ovens are a common kitchen appliance and are popular for reheating previously cooked foods and cooking a variety of foods. They rapidly heat foods which can easily burn or turn lumpy if cooked in conventional pans, such as butter, fats, chocolate, or porridge. Microwave ovens usually do not directly brown or caramelize food, since they rarely attain the necessary temperature to produce Maillard reactions. Exceptions occur in cases where the oven is used to heat frying-oil and other oily items (such as bacon), which attain far higher temperatures than that of boiling water.\nMicrowave ovens have a limited role in professional cooking, because the boiling-range temperatures of a microwave oven do not produce the flavorful chemical reactions that frying, browning, or baking at a higher temperature produces. However, there are hybrid appliances that combine infrared radiation, hot air, and microwaves, such as convection microwave ovens.\nHistory.\nEarly developments.\nThe exploitation of high-frequency radio waves for heating substances was made possible by the development of vacuum tube radio transmitters around 1920. By 1930 the application of short waves to heat human tissue had developed into the medical therapy of diathermy. At the 1933 Chicago World's Fair, Westinghouse demonstrated the cooking of foods between two metal plates attached to a 10\u00a0kW, 60\u00a0MHz shortwave transmitter. The Westinghouse team, led by I. F. Mouromtseff, found that foods like steaks and potatoes could be cooked in minutes.\nThe 1937 United States patent application by Bell Laboratories states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This invention relates to heating systems for dielectric materials and the object of the invention is to heat such materials uniformly and substantially simultaneously throughout their mass. ... It has been proposed therefore to heat such materials simultaneously throughout their mass by means of the dielectric loss produced in them when they are subjected to a high voltage, high frequency field.\nHowever, lower-frequency dielectric heating, as described in the aforementioned patent, is (like induction heating) an electromagnetic heating effect, the result of the so-called near-field effects that exist in an electromagnetic cavity that is small compared with the wavelength of the electromagnetic field. This patent proposed radio frequency heating, at 10 to 20 megahertz (wavelength 30 to 15 meters, respectively). Heating from microwaves that have a wavelength that is small relative to the cavity (as in a modern microwave oven) is due to \"far-field\" effects that are due to classical electromagnetic radiation that describes freely propagating light and microwaves suitably far from their source. Nevertheless, the primary heating effect of all types of electromagnetic fields at both radio and microwave frequencies occurs via the dielectric heating effect, as polarized molecules are affected by a rapidly alternating electric field.\nCavity magnetron.\nThe invention of the cavity magnetron made possible the production of electromagnetic waves of a small enough wavelength (microwaves). The cavity magnetron was a crucial component in the development of short wavelength radar during World War II. In 1937\u20131940, a multi-cavity magnetron was built by British physicist Sir John Turton Randall, FRSE and coworkers, for the British and American military radar installations in World War II. A higher-powered microwave generator that worked at shorter wavelengths was needed, and in 1940, at the University of Birmingham in England, Randall and Harry Boot produced a working prototype. They invented a valve that could produce pulses of microwave radio energy at a wavelength of 10\u00a0cm, an unprecedented discovery.\nSir Henry Tizard traveled to the US in late September 1940 to offer Britain's most valuable technical secrets including the cavity magnetron in exchange for US financial and industrial support (see Tizard Mission). An early 6\u00a0kW version, built in England by the General Electric Company Research Laboratories, Wembley, London, was given to the U.S. government in September 1940. The cavity magnetron was later described by American historian James Phinney Baxter III as \"[t]he most valuable cargo ever brought to our shores\". Contracts were awarded to Raytheon and other companies for the mass production of the cavity magnetron.\nDiscovery.\nIn 1945, the heating effect of a high-power microwave beam was independently and accidentally discovered by Percy Spencer, an American self-taught engineer from Howland, Maine. While employed at Raytheon, he noticed that microwaves from an active radar set he was working on started to melt a candy bar he had in his pocket. The first food deliberately cooked by Spencer was popcorn, and the second was an egg, which exploded in the face of one of the experimenters.\nTo verify his finding, Spencer created a high-density electromagnetic field by feeding microwave power from a magnetron into a metal box from which it had no way to escape. When food was placed in the box with the microwave energy, the temperature of the food rose rapidly. On October 8, 1945, Raytheon filed a United States patent application for Spencer's microwave cooking process, and an oven that heated food using microwave energy from a magnetron was soon placed in a Boston restaurant for testing.\nCommercial availability.\nIn 1947, Raytheon built the \"Radarange\", the first commercially available microwave oven. It was almost tall, weighed and cost between $2,000 and $3,000 ($ to $ in 2024 dollars) each. It consumed 3 kilowatts, about three times as much as today's microwave ovens, and was water-cooled. The name was the winning entry in an employee contest. An early Radarange was installed (and remains) in the galley of the nuclear-powered passenger/cargo ship NS \"Savannah\". An early commercial model introduced in 1954 consumed 1.6 kilowatts and sold for US$2,000 to US$3,000 ($ to $ in 2024 dollars). Raytheon licensed its technology to the Tappan Stove company of Mansfield, Ohio in 1952. Under contract to Whirlpool, Westinghouse, and other major appliance manufacturers looking to add matching microwave ovens to their conventional oven line, Tappan produced several variations of their built-in model from roughly 1955 to 1960. Due to maintenance (some units were water-cooled), in-built requirement, and cost\u2014US$1,295 ($ in 2024 dollars)\u2014sales were limited.\nJapan's Sharp Corporation began manufacturing microwave ovens in 1961. Between 1964 and 1966, Sharp introduced the first microwave oven with a turntable, an alternative means to promote more even heating of food. In 1965, Raytheon, looking to expand their Radarange technology into the home market, acquired Amana to provide more manufacturing capability. In 1967, they introduced the first popular home model, the countertop Radarange, at a price of US$495 ($ in 2024 dollars). Unlike the Sharp models, a motor driven mode stirrer in the top of the oven cavity rotated allowing the food to remain stationary.\nResidential use.\nWhile uncommon today, combination microwave-ranges were offered by major appliance manufacturers through much of the 1970s as a natural progression of the technology. Both Tappan and General Electric offered units that appeared to be conventional stove top/oven ranges, but included microwave capability in the conventional oven cavity. Such ranges were attractive to consumers since both microwave energy and conventional heating elements could be used simultaneously to speed cooking, and there was no loss of countertop space. The proposition was also attractive to manufacturers as the additional component cost could better be absorbed compared with countertop units where pricing was increasingly market-sensitive.\nBy 1972, Litton (Litton Atherton Division, Minneapolis) introduced two new microwave ovens, priced at $349 and $399, to tap into the market estimated at $750 million by 1976, according to Robert I Bruder, president of the division. While prices remained high, new features continued to be added to home models. Amana introduced automatic defrost in 1974 on their RR-4D model, and was the first to offer a microprocessor controlled digital control panel in 1975 with their RR-6 model.\nThe late 1970s saw an explosion of low-cost countertop models from many major manufacturers.\nIn addition to cooking food, microwave ovens are used for heating in many industrial processes. Formerly found only in large industrial applications, microwave ovens increasingly became a standard fixture of residential kitchens in developed countries. By 1986, roughly 25% of households in the U.S. owned a microwave oven, up from only about 1% in 1971; the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that over 90% of American households owned a microwave oven in 1997. In Australia, a 2008 market research study found that 95% of kitchens contained a microwave oven and that 83% of them were used daily. In Canada, fewer than 5% of households had a microwave oven in 1979, but more than 88% of households owned one by 1998. In France, 40% of households owned a microwave oven in 1994, but that number had increased to 65% by 2004.\nAdoption has been slower in less-developed countries, as households with disposable income concentrate on more important household appliances like refrigerators and ovens. In India, for example, only about 5% of households owned a microwave oven in 2013, well behind refrigerators at 31% ownership. However, microwave ovens are gaining popularity. In Russia, for example, the number of households with a microwave oven grew from almost 24% in 2002 to almost 40% in 2008. Almost twice as many households in South Africa owned microwave ovens in 2008 (38.7%) as in 2002 (19.8%). Microwave oven ownership in Vietnam in 2008 was at 16% of households, versus 30% ownership of refrigerators; this rate was up significantly from 6.7% microwave oven ownership in 2002, with 14% ownership for refrigerators that year.\nConsumer household microwave ovens usually come with a cooking power of between 600 and 1200 watts. Microwave cooking power, also referred to as output wattage, is lower than its input wattage, which is the manufacturer's listed power rating.\nThe size of household microwave ovens can vary, but usually have an internal volume of around , and external dimensions of approximately wide, deep and tall. Countertop microwaves vary in weight 23 \u2013 45 lbs.\nSimply radiating microwaves into a chamber intrinsically results in very uneven energy distribution, over- and under-heating various parts of the food. Only the cheapest units lack mechanisms that mitigate this problem, requiring the user to more frequently stop the cooking to stir or move the food. For reasonably even heating, a microwave oven must have either multiple magnetrons, common in commercial units, a microwave stirrer, which is a fan-like mechanism in which microwave-reflective blades spin to vary the radiation pattern (usually at the top of the chamber, hidden above a microwave-transparent plastic cover), or a turntable, which effectively reduces the capacity of the oven to the space above the turntable, wasting at least nearly a quarter of the volume of a square chamber. Food is always placed above the bottom of the microwave-reflecting chamber, allowing microwave energy to reach the bottom of the food; in a \"flatbed\" unit the floor of the visible chamber is of a microwave-transparent material above the microwave-reflecting bottom, and in better units some of the microwave radiation enters through the transparent floor. In a non-flatbed unit there is either a glass tray shaped to fit the chamber, keeping the food some distance from the reflective bottom, or, in a unit with a turntable, the turntable itself is microwave-transparent and sits above the reflective bottom.\nBy position and type, US DOE classifies them as (1) countertop or (2) over the range and built-in (wall oven for a cabinet or a drawer model).\nA conventional microwave oven has only one output power level, with intermediate power settings achieved using duty-cycle modulation, switching the magnetron on and off every few seconds, with more time on for higher settings. An \"inverter\"-type unit, however, can effectively sustain lower power output instead of switching full power on and off, heating food more evenly. Apart from offering superior cooking ability, these microwaves are generally more energy-efficient.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], the majority of countertop microwave ovens (regardless of brand) sold in the United States were manufactured by the Midea Group.\nCategories.\nDomestic microwave ovens are typically marked with the microwave-safe symbol, next to the device's approximate IEC 60705 output power rating, in watts (typically either: 600W, 700W, 800W, 900W, 1000W), and a voluntary Heating Category (A-E).\nPrinciples.\nA microwave oven heats food by passing microwave radiation through it. Microwaves are a form of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation with a frequency in the so-called microwave region (300\u00a0MHz to 300\u00a0GHz). Microwave ovens use frequencies in one of the ISM (industrial, scientific, medical) bands, which are otherwise used for communication amongst devices that do not need a license to operate, so they do not interfere with other vital radio services.\nIt is a common misconception that microwave ovens heat food by operating at a special resonance of water molecules in the food. Instead, microwave ovens heat by causing molecules to spin under the influence of a constantly changing electric field (dielectric heating), usually in the microwave frequencies range, and a higher wattage power of the microwave oven results in faster cooking times. Typically, consumer ovens work around a nominal 2.45\u00a0gigahertz (GHz) \u2013 a wavelength of in the 2.4\u00a0GHz to 2.5\u00a0GHz ISM band \u2013 while large industrial / commercial ovens often use 915\u00a0megahertz (MHz) \u2013 . Among other differences, the longer wavelength of a commercial microwave oven allows the initial heating effects to begin deeper within the food or liquid, and therefore become evenly spread within its bulk sooner, as well as raising the temperature deep within the food more quickly.\nA microwave oven takes advantage of the electric dipole structure of water molecules, fats, and many other substances in the food, using a process known as dielectric heating. These molecules have a partial positive charge at one end and a partial negative charge at the other. In an alternating electric field, they will constantly spin around as they continually try to align themselves with the electric field. This can happen over a wide range of frequencies. The electric field's energy is absorbed by the dipole molecules as rotational energy. Then they hit non-dipole molecules, making them move faster as well. This energy is shared deeper into the substance as molecular rotation and translational movement occurs, signifying an increase in the temperature of the food. Once the electrical field's energy is initially absorbed, heat will gradually spread through the object similarly to any other heat transfer by contact with a hotter body.\nDefrosting.\nMicrowave heating is more efficient on liquid water than on frozen water, where the movement of molecules is more restricted. Defrosting is done at a low power setting, allowing time for conduction to carry heat to still frozen parts of food. Dielectric heating of liquid water is also temperature-dependent: At 0\u00a0\u00b0C, dielectric loss is greatest at a field frequency of about 10\u00a0GHz, and for higher water temperatures at higher field frequencies.\nFats and sugar.\nSugars and triglycerides (fats and oils) absorb microwaves due to the dipole moments of their hydroxyl groups or ester groups. Due to their molecular dipole moment, however, they are heated less efficiently.\nAlthough fats and sugar typically absorb energy less efficiently than water, paradoxically their temperatures rise faster and higher than water when cooking: Fats and oils require less energy delivered per gram of material to raise their temperature by 1\u00a0\u00b0C than does water (they have lower specific heat capacity) and they begin cooling off by \"boiling\" only after reaching a higher temperature than water (the temperature they require to vaporize is higher), so inside microwave ovens they normally reach higher temperatures \u2013 sometimes \"much\" higher. This can induce temperatures in oil or fatty foods like bacon far above the boiling point of water, and high enough to induce some browning reactions, much in the manner of conventional broiling (UK: grilling), braising, or deep fat frying.\nThe effect is most often noticed by consumers from unexpected damage to plastic containers when microwaving foods high in sugar, starch, or fat generates higher temperatures. Foods high in water content and with little oil rarely exceed the boiling temperature of water and do not damage plastic.\nCookware.\nCookware must be transparent to microwaves. Conductive cookware, such as metal pots, reflects microwaves, and prevents the microwaves from reaching the food. Cookware made of materials with high electrical permittivity will absorb microwaves, resulting in the cookware heating rather than the food. Cookware made of melamine resin is a common type of cookware that will heat in a microwave oven, reducing the effectiveness of the microwave oven and creating a hazard from burns or shattered cookware.\nThermal runaway.\nMicrowave heating can cause localized thermal runaways in some materials with low thermal conductivity which also have dielectric constants that increase with temperature. An example is glass, which can exhibit thermal runaway in a microwave oven to the point of melting if preheated. Additionally, microwaves can melt certain types of rocks, producing small quantities of molten rock. Some ceramics can also be melted, and may even become clear upon cooling. Thermal runaway is more typical of electrically conductive liquids such as salty water.\nPenetration.\nAnother misconception is that microwave ovens cook food \"from the inside out\", meaning from the center of the entire mass of food outwards. This idea arises from heating behavior seen if an absorbent layer of water lies beneath a less absorbent drier layer at the surface of a food; in this case, the deposition of heat energy inside a food can exceed that on its surface. This can also occur if the inner layer has a lower heat capacity than the outer layer causing it to reach a higher temperature, or even if the inner layer is more thermally conductive than the outer layer making it feel hotter despite having a lower temperature. In most cases, however, with uniformly structured or reasonably homogeneous food item, microwaves are absorbed in the outer layers of the item at a similar level to that of the inner layers.\nDepending on water content, the depth of initial heat deposition may be several centimetres or more with microwave ovens, in contrast with broiling / grilling (infrared) or convection heating methods which thinly deposit heat at the food surface. Penetration depth of microwaves depends on food composition and the frequency, with lower microwave frequencies (longer wavelengths) penetrating deeper.\nEnergy consumption.\nIn use, microwave ovens can be as low as 50% efficient at converting electricity into microwaves, but energy-efficient models can exceed 64% efficiency. Stovetop cooking is 40\u201390% efficient, depending on the type of appliance used.\nBecause they are used fairly infrequently, the average residential microwave oven consumes only 72\u00a0kWh per year. Globally, microwave ovens used an estimated 77\u00a0TWh per year in 2018, or 0.3% of global electricity generation.\nA 2000 study by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory found that the average microwave drew almost 3 watts of standby power when not being used, which would total approximately 26\u00a0kWh per year. New efficiency standards imposed in 2016 by the United States Department of Energy require less than 1\u00a0watt, or approximately 9\u00a0kWh per year, of standby power for most types of microwave ovens.\nComponents.\nA microwave oven generally consists of:\nIn most ovens, the magnetron is driven by a linear transformer which can only feasibly be switched completely on or off. (One variant of the GE Spacemaker had two taps on the transformer primary, for high and low power modes.) Usually choice of power level does not affect intensity of the microwave radiation; instead, the magnetron is cycled on and off every few seconds, thus altering the large scale duty cycle. Newer models use \"inverter\" power supplies that use pulse-width modulation to provide effectively continuous heating at reduced power settings, so that foods are heated more evenly at a given power level and can be heated more quickly without being damaged by uneven heating.\nThe microwave frequencies used in microwave ovens are chosen based on regulatory and cost constraints. The first is that they should be in one of the industrial, scientific, and medical (ISM) frequency bands set aside for unlicensed purposes. For household purposes, 2.45\u00a0GHz has the advantage over 915\u00a0MHz in that 915\u00a0MHz is only an ISM band in some countries (ITU Region 2) while 2.45\u00a0GHz is available worldwide. Three additional ISM bands exist in the microwave frequencies, but are not used for microwave cooking. Two of them are centered on 5.8\u00a0GHz and 24.125\u00a0GHz, but are not used for microwave cooking because of the very high cost of power generation at these frequencies. The third, centered on 433.92\u00a0MHz, is a narrow band that would require expensive equipment to generate sufficient power without creating interference outside the band, and is only available in some countries.\nThe cooking chamber is similar to a Faraday cage to prevent the waves from coming out of the oven. Even though there is no continuous metal-to-metal contact around the rim of the door, choke connections on the door edges act like metal-to-metal contact, at the frequency of the microwaves, to prevent leakage. The oven door usually has a window for easy viewing, with a layer of conductive mesh some distance from the outer panel to maintain the shielding. Because the size of the perforations in the mesh is much less than the microwaves' wavelength (12.2\u00a0cm for the usual 2.45\u00a0GHz), microwave radiation cannot pass through the door, while visible light (with its much shorter wavelength) can.\nControl panel.\nModern microwave ovens use either an analog dial-type timer or a digital control panel for operation. Control panels feature an LED, LCD or vacuum fluorescent display, buttons for entering the cook time and a power level selection feature. A defrost option is typically offered, as either a power level or a separate function. Some models include pre-programmed settings for different food types, typically taking weight as input. In the 1990s, brands such as Panasonic and GE began offering models with a scrolling-text display showing cooking instructions.\nPower settings are commonly implemented not by actually varying the power output, but by switching the emission of microwave energy off and on at intervals. The highest setting thus represents continuous power. Defrost might represent power for two seconds followed by no power for five seconds. To indicate cooking has completed, an audible warning such as a bell or a beeper is usually present, and/or \"End\" usually appears on the display of a digital microwave.\nMicrowave control panels are often considered awkward to use and are frequently employed as examples for user interface design.\nVariants and accessories.\nA variant of the conventional microwave oven is the convection microwave oven. A convection microwave oven is a combination of a standard microwave oven and a convection oven. It allows food to be cooked quickly, yet come out browned or crisped, as from a convection oven. Convection microwave ovens are more expensive than conventional microwave ovens. Some convection microwave ovens\u2014those with exposed heating elements\u2014can produce smoke and burning odors as food spatter from earlier microwave-only use is burned off the heating elements. Some ovens use high speed air; these are known as impingement ovens and are designed to cook food quickly in restaurants, but cost more and consume more power.\nIn 2000, some manufacturers began offering high power quartz halogen bulbs to their convection microwave oven models, marketing them under names such as \"Speedcook\", \"Advantium\", \"Lightwave\" and \"Optimawave\" to emphasize their ability to cook food rapidly and with good browning. The bulbs heat the food's surface with infrared (IR) radiation, browning surfaces as in a conventional oven. The food browns while also being heated by the microwave radiation and heated through conduction through contact with heated air. The IR energy which is delivered to the outer surface of food by the lamps is sufficient to initiate browning caramelization in foods primarily made up of carbohydrates and Maillard reactions in foods primarily made up of protein. These reactions in food produce a texture and taste similar to that typically expected of conventional oven cooking rather than the bland boiled and steamed taste that microwave-only cooking tends to create.\nIn order to aid browning, sometimes an accessory browning tray is used, usually composed of glass or porcelain. It makes food crisp by oxidizing the top layer until it turns brown. Ordinary plastic cookware is unsuitable for this purpose because it could melt.\nFrozen dinners, pies, and microwave popcorn bags often contain a susceptor made from thin aluminium film in the packaging or included on a small paper tray. The metal film absorbs microwave energy efficiently and consequently becomes extremely hot and radiates in the infrared, concentrating the heating of oil for popcorn or even browning surfaces of frozen foods. Heating packages or trays containing susceptors are designed for a single use and are then discarded as waste.\nHeating characteristics.\nMicrowave ovens have a limited role in professional cooking, because the boiling-range temperatures of a microwave oven do not produce the flavorful chemical reactions that frying, browning, or baking at a higher temperature produces. However, such high-heat sources can be added to microwave ovens in the form of a convection microwave oven.\nMicrowave ovens produce heat directly within the food, but despite the common misconception that microwaved food cooks from the inside out, 2.45\u00a0GHz microwaves can only penetrate approximately into most foods. The inside portions of thicker foods are mainly heated by heat conducted from the outer 1\u00a0cm.\nUneven heating in microwaved food can be partly due to the uneven distribution of microwave energy inside the oven, and partly due to the different rates of energy absorption in different parts of the food. The first problem is reduced by a stirrer, a type of fan that reflects microwave energy to different parts of the oven as it rotates, or by a turntable or carousel that turns the food; turntables, however, may still leave spots, such as the center of the oven, which receive uneven energy distribution.\n The location of dead spots and hot spots in a microwave oven can be mapped out by placing a damp piece of thermal paper in the oven: When the water-saturated paper is subjected to the microwave radiation it becomes hot enough to cause the dye to be darkened which can provide a visual representation of the microwaves. If multiple layers of paper are constructed in the oven with a sufficient distance between them a three-dimensional map can be created. Many store receipts are printed on thermal paper which allows this to be easily done at home.\nThe second problem is due to food composition and geometry, and must be addressed by the cook, by arranging the food so that it absorbs energy evenly, and periodically testing and shielding any parts of the food that overheat. In some materials with low thermal conductivity, where dielectric constant increases with temperature, microwave heating can cause localized thermal runaway. Under certain conditions, glass can exhibit thermal runaway in a microwave oven to the point of melting.\nDue to this phenomenon, microwave ovens set at too-high power levels may even start to cook the edges of frozen food while the inside of the food remains frozen. Another case of uneven heating can be observed in baked goods containing berries. In these items, the berries absorb more energy than the drier surrounding bread and cannot dissipate the heat due to the low thermal conductivity of the bread. Often this results in overheating the berries relative to the rest of the food. \"Defrost\" oven settings either use low power levels or repeatedly turn the power off and on \u2013 intended to allow time for heat to be conducted within frozen foods from areas that absorb heat more readily to those which heat more slowly. In turntable-equipped ovens, more even heating can take place by placing food off-center on the turntable tray instead of exactly in the center, as this results in more even heating of the food throughout.\nThere are microwave ovens on the market that allow full-power defrosting. They do this by exploiting the properties of the electromagnetic radiation LSM modes. LSM full-power defrosting may actually achieve more even results than slow defrosting.\nMicrowave heating can be deliberately uneven by design. Some microwavable packages (notably pies) may include materials that contain ceramic or aluminium flakes, which are designed to absorb microwaves and heat up, which aids in baking or crust preparation by depositing more energy shallowly in these areas. The technical term for such a microwave-absorbing patch is a \"susceptor\". Such ceramic patches affixed to cardboard are positioned next to the food, and are typically smokey blue or gray in colour, usually making them easily identifiable; the cardboard sleeves included with Hot Pockets, which have a silver surface on the inside, are a good example of such packaging. Microwavable cardboard packaging may also contain overhead ceramic patches which function in the same way.\nEffects on food and nutrients.\nAny form of cooking diminishes overall nutrient content in food, particularly water-soluble vitamins common in vegetables, but the key variables are how much water is used in the cooking, how long the food is cooked, and at what temperature. Nutrients are primarily lost by leaching into cooking water, which tends to make microwave cooking effective, given the shorter cooking times it requires and that the water heated is in the food. Like other heating methods, microwaving converts vitamin B12 from an active to inactive form; the amount of conversion depends on the temperature reached, as well as the cooking time. Boiled food reaches a maximum of (the boiling point of water), whereas microwaved food can get internally hotter than this, leading to faster breakdown of vitamin B12. The higher rate of loss is partially offset by the shorter cooking times required.\nSpinach retains nearly all its folate when cooked in a microwave oven; when boiled, it loses about 77%, leaching nutrients into the cooking water. Bacon cooked by microwave oven has significantly lower levels of nitrosamines than conventionally cooked bacon. Steamed vegetables tend to maintain more nutrients when microwaved than when cooked on a stovetop. Microwave blanching is 3\u20134\u00a0times more effective than boiled-water blanching for retaining of the water-soluble vitamins, folate, thiamin and riboflavin, with the exception of vitamin C, of which 29% is lost (compared with a 16% loss with boiled-water blanching).\nSafety benefits and features.\nAll microwave ovens use a timer to switch off the oven at the end of the cooking time.\nMicrowave ovens heat food without getting hot themselves. Taking a pot off a stove, unless it is an induction cooktop, leaves a potentially dangerous heating element or trivet that remains hot for some time. Likewise, when taking a casserole out of a conventional oven, one's arms are exposed to the very hot walls of the oven. A microwave oven does not pose this problem.\nFood and cookware taken out of a microwave oven are rarely much hotter than . Cookware used in a microwave oven is often much cooler than the food because the cookware is transparent to microwaves; the microwaves heat the food directly and the cookware is indirectly heated by the food. Food and cookware from a conventional oven, on the other hand, are the same temperature as the rest of the oven; a typical cooking temperature is . That means that conventional stoves and ovens can cause more serious burns.\nThe lower temperature of cooking (the boiling point of water) is a significant safety benefit compared with baking in the oven or frying, because it eliminates the formation of tars and char, which are carcinogenic. Microwave radiation also penetrates deeper than direct heat, so that the food is heated by its own internal water content. In contrast, direct heat can burn the surface while the inside is still cold. Pre-heating the food in a microwave oven before putting it into the grill or pan reduces the time needed to heat up the food and reduces the formation of carcinogenic char. Unlike frying and baking, microwaving does not produce acrylamide in potatoes, however unlike deep-frying at high-temperatures, it is of only limited effectiveness in reducing glycoalkaloid (i.e., solanine) levels. Acrylamide has been found in other microwaved products like popcorn.\nUse in cleaning kitchen sponges.\nStudies have investigated the use of the microwave oven to clean non-metallic domestic sponges which have been thoroughly wetted. A 2006 study found that microwaving wet sponges for 2\u00a0minutes (at 1000-watt power) removed 99% of coliforms, \"E. coli\", and MS2 phages. \"Bacillus cereus\" spores were killed at 4\u00a0minutes of microwaving.\nA 2017 study was less affirmative: About 60% of the germs were killed but the remaining ones quickly re-colonized the sponge.\nIssues.\nHigh temperatures.\nClosed containers.\nClosed containers, such as eggs, can explode when heated in a microwave oven due to the increased pressure from steam. Intact fresh egg yolks outside the shell also explode as a result of superheating. Insulating plastic foams of all types generally contain closed air pockets, and are generally not recommended for use in a microwave oven, as the air pockets explode and the foam (which can be toxic if consumed) may melt. Not all plastics are microwave-safe, and some plastics absorb microwaves to the point that they may become dangerously hot.\nFires.\nProducts that are heated for too long can catch fire. Though this is inherent to any form of cooking, the rapid cooking and unattended nature of the use of microwave ovens results in additional hazard.\nSuperheating.\nIn rare cases, water and other homogeneous liquids can superheat when heated in a microwave oven in a container with a smooth surface. That is, the liquid reaches a temperature slightly above its normal boiling point without bubbles of vapour forming inside the liquid. The boiling process can start explosively when the liquid is disturbed, such as when the user takes hold of the container to remove it from the oven or while adding solid ingredients such as powdered creamer or sugar. This can result in spontaneous boiling (nucleation) which may be violent enough to eject the boiling liquid from the container and cause severe scalding.\nMetal objects.\nContrary to popular assumptions, metal objects can be safely used in a microwave oven, but with some restrictions. Any metal or conductive object placed into the microwave oven acts as an antenna to some degree, resulting in an electric current. This causes the object to act as a heating element. This effect varies with the object's shape and composition, and is sometimes utilized for cooking.\nAny object containing pointed metal can create an electric arc (sparks) when microwaved. This includes cutlery, crumpled aluminium foil (though some foil used in microwave ovens is safe, see below), twist-ties containing metal wire, the metal wire carry-handles in oyster pails, or almost any metal formed into a poorly conductive foil or thin wire, or into a pointed shape. Forks are a good example: the tines of the fork respond to the electric field by producing high concentrations of electric charge at the tips. This has the effect of exceeding the dielectric breakdown of air, about 3 megavolts per meter. The air forms a conductive plasma, which is visible as a spark. The plasma and the tines may then form a conductive loop, which may be a more effective antenna, resulting in a longer lived spark. When dielectric breakdown occurs in air, some ozone and nitrogen oxides are formed, both of which are unhealthy in large quantities.\nMicrowaving an individual smooth metal object without pointed ends, for example, a spoon or shallow metal pan, usually does not produce sparking. Thick metal wire racks can be part of the interior design in microwave ovens (see illustration). In a similar way, the interior wall plates with perforating holes which allow light and air into the oven, and allow interior-viewing through the oven door, are all made of conductive metal formed in a safe shape.\nThe effect of microwaving thin metal films can be seen clearly on a Compact Disc or DVD (particularly the factory pressed type). The microwaves induce electric currents in the metal film, which heats up, melting the plastic in the disc and leaving a visible pattern of concentric and radial scars. Similarly, porcelain with thin metal films can also be destroyed or damaged by microwaving. Aluminium foil is thick enough to be used in microwave ovens as a shield against heating parts of food items, if the foil is not badly warped. When wrinkled, aluminium foil is generally unsafe in microwaves, as manipulation of the foil causes sharp bends and gaps that invite sparking. The USDA recommends that aluminium foil used as a partial food shield in microwave oven cooking cover no more than one quarter of a food object, and be carefully smoothed to eliminate sparking hazards.\nAnother hazard is the resonance of the magnetron tube itself. If the microwave oven is run without an object to absorb the radiation, a standing wave forms. The energy is reflected back and forth between the tube and the cooking chamber. This may cause the tube to overload and burn out. High reflected power may also cause magnetron arcing, possibly resulting in primary power fuse failure, though such a causal relationship is not easily established. Thus, dehydrated food, or food wrapped in metal which does not arc, is problematic for overload reasons, without necessarily being a fire hazard.\nCertain foods such as grapes, if properly arranged, can produce an electric arc. Prolonged arcing from food carries similar risks to arcing from other sources as noted above.\nSome other objects that may conduct sparks are plastic/holographic print Thermos flasks and other heat-retaining containers (such as Starbucks novelty cups) or cups with metal lining. If any bit of the metal is exposed, all the outer shell can burst off the object or melt.\nThe high electrical fields generated inside a microwave oven often can be illustrated by placing a radiometer or neon glow-bulb inside the cooking chamber, creating glowing plasma inside the low-pressure bulb of the device.\nDirect microwave exposure.\nDirect microwave exposure is not generally possible, as microwaves emitted by the source in a microwave oven are confined in the oven by the material out of which the oven is constructed. Furthermore, ovens are equipped with redundant safety interlocks, which remove power from the magnetron if the door is opened. This safety mechanism is required by United States federal regulations. Tests have shown confinement of the microwaves in commercially available ovens to be so nearly universal as to make routine testing unnecessary. According to the United States Food and Drug Administration's Center for Devices and Radiological Health, a U.S. Federal Standard limits the amount of microwaves that can leak from an oven throughout its lifetime to 5 milliwatts of microwave radiation per square centimeter at approximately 5 cm (2\u00a0in) from the surface of the oven. This is far below the exposure level currently considered to be harmful to human health.\nThe radiation produced by a microwave oven is non-ionizing. It therefore does not have the cancer risks associated with ionizing radiation such as X-rays and high-energy particles. Long-term rodent studies to assess cancer risk have so far failed to identify any carcinogenicity from 2.45 GHz microwave radiation even with chronic exposure levels (i.e. large fraction of life span) far larger than humans are likely to encounter from any leaking ovens. However, with the oven door open, the radiation may cause damage by heating. Microwave ovens are sold with a protective interlock so that it cannot be run when the door is open or improperly latched.\nMicrowaves generated in microwave ovens cease to exist once the electrical power is turned off. They do not remain in the food when the power is turned off, any more than light from an electric lamp remains in the walls and furnishings of a room when the lamp is turned off. They do not make the food or the oven radioactive. In contrast with conventional cooking, the nutritional content of some foods may be altered differently, but generally in a positive way by preserving more micronutrients \u2013 see above. There is no indication of detrimental health issues associated with microwaved food.\nThere are, however, a few cases where people have been exposed to direct microwave radiation, either from appliance malfunction or deliberate action. This exposure generally results in physical burns to the body, as human tissue, particularly the outer fat and muscle layers, has a similar composition to some foods that are typically cooked in microwave ovens and so experiences similar dielectric heating effects when exposed to microwave electromagnetic radiation.\nChemical exposure.\nThe use of unmarked plastics for microwave cooking raises the issue of plasticizers leaching into the food.\nThe plasticizers which received the most attention are bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates, although it is unclear whether other plastic components present a toxicity risk. Other issues include melting and flammability. An alleged issue of release of dioxins into food has been dismissed as an intentional red herring distraction from actual safety issues.\nSome current plastic containers and food wraps are specifically designed to resist radiation from microwaves. Products may use the term \"microwave safe\", may carry a microwave symbol (three lines of waves, one above the other) or simply provide instructions for proper microwave oven use. Any of these is an indication that a product is suitable for microwaving when used in accordance with the directions provided.\nPlastic containers can release microplastics into food when heated in microwave ovens.\nUneven heating.\nMicrowave ovens are frequently used for reheating leftover food, and bacterial contamination may not be repressed if the microwave oven is used improperly. If safe temperature is not reached, this can result in foodborne illness, as with other reheating methods. While microwave ovens can destroy bacteria as well as conventional ovens can, they cook rapidly and may not cook as evenly, similar to frying or grilling, leading to a risk of some food regions failing to reach recommended temperatures. Therefore, a standing period after cooking to allow temperatures in the food to equalize is recommended, as well as the use of a food thermometer to verify internal temperatures.\nInterference.\nMicrowave ovens, although shielded for safety purposes, still emit low levels of microwave radiation. This is not harmful to humans, but can sometimes cause interference to Wi-Fi and Bluetooth and other devices that communicate on the 2.45\u00a0GHz wavebands, particularly at close range.\nConventional transformer ovens do not operate continuously over the mains cycle, but can cause significant slowdowns for many metres around the oven, whereas inverter-based ovens can stop nearby networking entirely while operating.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58018", "revid": "10340692", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58018", "title": "Tora! Tora! Tora!", "text": "1970 film about the attack on Pearl Harbor\nTora! Tora! Tora! () is a 1970 epic war film that dramatizes the events leading up to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, from both American and Japanese positions. The film was produced by Elmo Williams and directed by Richard Fleischer, Toshio Masuda and Kinji Fukasaku. It features an ensemble cast, including Martin Balsam, Joseph Cotten, So Yamamura, E.G. Marshall, James Whitmore, Tatsuya Mihashi, Takahiro Tamura, Wesley Addy, and Jason Robards. It was Masuda and Fukasaku's first English-language film, and first international co-production. \nThe \"tora\" of the title, although literally meaning \"tiger\", is actually an abbreviation of a two-syllable codeword (i.e., \"totsugeki raigeki\" \u7a81\u6483\u96f7\u6483, \"lightning attack\"), used to indicate that complete surprise had been achieved.\nThe film was released in the United States by 20th Century-Fox on September 23, 1970, and in Japan by the Toei Company on September 25. It received mixed reviews from American critics, but was praised for its historical accuracy and attention to detail, its visual effects, and its action sequences. \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" was nominated for five Oscars at the 43rd Academy Awards, including Best Cinematography and Best Film Editing, winning Best Visual Effects (L.B. Abbott and A.D. Flowers). The National Board of Review ranked it in its . A 1994 survey at the USS \"Arizona\" Memorial determined that for Americans the film was the most common source of popular knowledge about the Pearl Harbor attack. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlot.\nIn September 1940, following a severe trade embargo imposed on a belligerent Japan by the United States a year prior, influential Japanese army figures and politicians push through an alliance with Germany and Italy, despite opposition from the Japanese navy, and prepare for war. The newly appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Combined Fleet, Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, reluctantly plans a pre-emptive strike, believing Japan's best hope of controlling the Pacific Ocean is to quickly annihilate the American Pacific fleet anchored at Pearl Harbor. Air Staff Officer Minoru Genda is chosen to mastermind the operation, while his old Naval Academy classmate Mitsuo Fuchida is selected to lead the attack.\nIn Washington, U.S. military intelligence has broken the Japanese \"Purple Code\", allowing them to intercept secret Japanese radio transmissions indicating increased Japanese naval activity. U.S. Army Colonel Rufus S. Bratton and U.S. Navy Lieutenant Commander Alwin Kramer monitor the transmissions. At Pearl Harbor, Admiral Husband E. Kimmel increases defensive naval and air patrols around Hawaii. General Walter Short orders aircraft concentrated on the airfield runways to avoid sabotage by enemy agents, while some planes are dispered to other airfields on Oahu.\nDiplomatic tensions escalate as the Japanese ambassador to Washington continues negotiations to stall for time. Bratton and Kramer learn from intercepts that the Japanese planned 14 radio messages from Tokyo to their embassy in Washington with orders to destroy their code machines after receiving the final message. Deducing the Japanese will launch a surprise attack after the messages are delivered, Bratton tries warning his superiors. However, Chief of Naval Operations Harold R. Stark is indecisive over notifying Hawaii without first alerting President Franklin D. Roosevelt, while Army Chief of Staff General George Marshall's order that Pearl Harbor be alerted of an attack is stymied by poor atmospherics that prevents radio transmission and a warning telegram not marked urgent. The Japanese fleet launches its aircraft at dawn on December 7. Two radar operators detect their approach to Hawaii, but the duty officer Lieutenant Kermit Tyler dismisses their concerns. Similarly, the claim by the destroyer to have sunk a Japanese miniature submarine off the entrance to Pearl Harbor is dismissed as unimportant. The Japanese achieve total surprise, which Commander Fuchida indicates with the code signal \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\"\nThe damage to the naval base is catastrophic and casualties are severe. Several battleships are either sunk or heavily damaged. General Short's anti-sabotage precautions allow Japanese aircraft to easily destroy American planes on the ground. In Washington, a stunned Secretary of State Cordell Hull is asked to receive the Japanese ambassador Kichisabur\u014d Nomura. The 14 part message \u2013 including a declaration that peace negotiations were at an end \u2013 was meant to be forwarded to the Americans thirty minutes before the attack, but the Japanese embassy failed to decode and transcribe it in time. The attack started while the two nations were technically still at peace. The distraught Nomura, helpless to explain the late ultimatum and unaware of the ongoing attack, is rebuffed by Hull.\nThe Japanese fleet commander, Vice-Admiral Ch\u016bichi Nagumo, refuses to launch a scheduled third wave of attack aircraft for fear of exposing his fleet to U.S. submarines. General Short and Admiral Kimmel belatedly receive Marshall's telegram warning of impending danger. Aboard his flagship, Admiral Yamamoto informs his staff that their primary target \u2013 the American aircraft carriers \u2013 were not at Pearl Harbor, having departed days previously. Lamenting that the declaration of war arrived after the attack began, Yamamoto notes that nothing would infuriate the U.S. more and concludes: \"I fear all we have done is to awaken a sleeping giant and fill him with a terrible resolve.\"\nCast.\n\"Note: Characters listed by rank in descending order\"\nAmericans.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJapanese.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCivilians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nVeteran 20th Century-Fox executive Darryl F. Zanuck, who had earlier produced \"The Longest Day\" (1962), wanted to create an epic that depicted what \"really happened on December 7, 1941\", with a \"revisionist's approach\". He believed that the commanders in Hawaii, General Walter Short and Admiral Husband E. Kimmel, though scapegoated for decades, provided adequate defensive measures for the apparent threats, including relocation of the fighter aircraft at Pearl Harbor to the middle of the base, in response to fears of sabotage from local Japanese. Despite a breakthrough in intelligence, they had received limited warning of the increasing risk of aerial attack. Recognizing that a balanced and objective recounting was necessary, Zanuck developed an American-Japanese co-production, allowing for \"a point of view from both nations\". He was helped out by his son, Richard D. Zanuck, who was chief executive at Fox during this time.\nProduction on \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" took three years to plan and prepare for the eight months of principal photography. The film was created in two separate productions, one based in the United States, directed by Richard Fleischer, and one based in Japan. The Japanese side was initially to be directed by Akira Kurosawa, who worked on script development and pre-production for two years. However, after two weeks of shooting, he was replaced by Toshio Masuda and Kinji Fukasaku, who directed the Japanese sections. Toshiro Mifune reportedly had been scheduled to play Isoroku Yamamoto but withdrew when Kurosawa left the project.\nRichard Fleischer said of Akira Kurosawa's role in the project:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Well, I always thought that even though Kurosawa was a genius at film-making and indeed he was, I sincerely believe that he was miscast for this film, this was not his type of film to make, he never made anything like it and it just wasn't his style. I felt he was not only uncomfortable directing this kind of movie but also he wasn't used to having somebody tell him how he should make his film. He always had complete autonomy, and nobody would dare make a suggestion to Kurosawa about the budget, or shooting schedule, or anything like that. And then here he was, with Darryl Zanuck on his back and Richard Zanuck on him and Elmo Williams and the production managers, and it was all stuff that he never had run into before, because he was always untouchable. I think he was getting more and more nervous and more insecure about how he was going to work on this film. And of course, the press got a hold of a lot of this unrest on the set and they made a lot out of that in Japan, and it was more pressure on him, and he wasn't used to that kind of pressure.\nLarry Forrester and frequent Kurosawa collaborators Hideo Oguni and Ry\u016bz\u014d Kikushima wrote the screenplay, based on the books \"The Broken Seal\" by Ladislas Farago and \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" by Gordon Prange of University of Maryland, who served as a technical consultant. Numerous technical advisors on both sides, some of whom had participated in the battle and/or planning, were crucial in maintaining the accuracy of the film. Minoru Genda, the man who largely planned and led the attack on Pearl Harbor, was an uncredited technical advisor for the film.\nFour cinematographers were involved in the main photography: Charles F. Wheeler, Shinsaku Himeda, Masamichi Satoh, and Osamu Furuya. They were jointly nominated for the Academy Award for Best Cinematography. A number of well-known cameramen also worked on the second units without credit, including Thomas Del Ruth and Rexford Metz. The second unit doing miniature photography was directed by Ray Kellogg, while the second unit doing aerial sequences was directed by Robert Enrietto.\nNoted composer Jerry Goldsmith composed the film score and Robert McCall painted several scenes for various posters of the film.\nThe carrier entering Pearl Harbor towards the end of the film was in fact the , returning to port. The \"Japanese\" aircraft carrier was the anti-submarine carrier , fitted with a false bow to disguise the catapults. The Japanese A6M Zero fighters and the somewhat longer \"Kate\" torpedo bombers or \"Val\" dive bombers were heavily modified Royal Canadian Air Force Harvard (T-6 Texan) and BT-13 Valiant pilot training aircraft. The large fleet of Japanese aircraft was created by Lynn Garrison, a well-known aerial action coordinator, who produced a number of conversions. Garrison and Jack Canary coordinated the actual engineering work at facilities in the Los Angeles area. These aircraft still make appearances at air shows.\nFor the parallel filming in Japan, full-scale mock-ups of the Japanese battleship and aircraft carrier were built from the waterline up on shore, with about of their bows extending out over the ocean on stilts. These were used for much of the Japanese scenes on ship's decks. The one error introduced, however, was that the model \"Akagi\"'s bridge was built on the starboard side instead of the port side. Only two Japanese carriers were built in this fashion, with bridges on the port side: \"Akagi\" and . This was done because it was known that for the launching scenes filmed in the US, a US carrier would be used, and the islands of US carriers were always on the starboard side. A few of the modified aircraft were also converted in Japan for the flight scenes filmed there.\nIn preparation for filming, \"Yorktown\" was berthed at NAS North Island in San Diego to load all the aircraft, maintenance, and film crew prior to sailing to Hawaii. The night before filming the \"Japanese\" take-off scenes, she sailed to a spot a few miles west of San Diego, and at dawn the film crew filmed the launches of all the aircraft. Since these \"Japanese\" aircraft were not actual carrier-based aircraft, they did not have arresting gear with which to land back on the carrier and so continued on to land at North Island Naval Air Station. \"Yorktown\" sailed back to North Island and re-loaded the aircraft. She then sailed to Hawaii, where the aircraft were off-loaded and used to film the attack scenes in and around Pearl Harbor. Aircraft Specialties of Mesa, Arizona performed maintenance on the aircraft while in Hawaii.\nThe actual crash landing of a Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress during filming, a result of a jammed landing gear, was used in the final cut. The film crew received word that one of the B-17s could not lower its starboard landing gear, so they quickly set up to film the \"single gear\" landing. The aircraft stayed aloft to use up as much fuel as possible prior to landing, which gave the film crew some time to prepare. After viewing the \"single gear\" landing footage, they decided to include it in the movie. In the sequence depicting the crash, only the final crash was actual footage. For the scenes leading up to the crash, they manually retracted the starboard landing gear on a functioning B-17 and filmed the scenes of its final approach. After touching down on one wheel, the pilot simply applied power and took off again. The B-17 that actually landed with one gear up sustained only minor damage to the starboard wing and propellers and was repaired and returned to service. A total of five Boeing B-17s were obtained for filming. Other U.S. aircraft included the Consolidated PBY Catalina and, especially, the Curtiss P-40 Warhawk (two flyable examples were used). Predominantly, P-40 fighter aircraft were used to depict the U.S. defenders with a full-scale P-40 used as a template for fiberglass replicas (some with working engines and props) that were strafed and blown up during filming. Fleischer also said a scene involving a P-40 model crashing into the middle of a line of P-40s was unintended, as it was supposed to crash at the end of the line. The stuntmen involved in the scene were actually running for their lives. The B-17 crash along with several other scenes were reused in the 1976 film \"Midway\".\nWith over 30 aircraft in the air, the flying scenes were complex to shoot, comparable to the 1969 film \"Battle of Britain\" where large formations of period-specific aircraft were filmed in staged aerial battles. The 2001 film \"Pearl Harbor\" would use some of the same modified aircraft.\nCasting.\nThe film was deliberately cast with actors who were not true box-office stars, including many Japanese amateurs, in order to place the emphasis on the story rather than the actors who were in it.\nSeveral members of the cast had themselves served in World War II.\nSome crew members also served in the war.\nSome cast members served before or after World War II.\nHistorical accuracy.\n\"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" is regarded highly by Pearl Harbor historians and survivors for its accuracy.\nParts of the film showing the takeoff of the Japanese aircraft utilize an , \"Yorktown\", which was commissioned in 1943 and modernized after the war to have a very slightly angled flight deck. The ship was leased by the film producers, who needed an aircraft carrier for the film, and as \"Yorktown\" was scheduled to be decommissioned in 1970, the Navy made her available. She was used largely in the takeoff sequence of the Japanese attack aircraft. The sequence shows interchanging shots of models of the Japanese aircraft carriers and \"Yorktown\". She does not look like any of the Japanese carriers involved in the attack, due to her large bridge island and her angled landing deck. The Japanese carriers had small bridge islands, and it wasn't until after the war that angled flight decks were developed. In addition, during the scene in which Admiral Halsey is watching bombing practice, an aircraft carrier with the hull number 14 is shown. Admiral Halsey was on , not the \"Essex\"-class carrier , which would not be commissioned until 1944. This is understandable, however, as \"Enterprise\" and all six of the Japanese carriers from the attack had been scrapped or sunk.\nIn \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\", an error involves the model of . In the film, \"Akagi\"'s bridge island is positioned on the starboard side of the ship, which is typical on most aircraft carriers. However, \"Akagi\" was an exception; her bridge island was on the port side of the ship. Despite this, the bridge section appeared accurately as a mirrored version of \"Akagi\"'s real port-side bridge. Secondly, all the Japanese aircraft in the footage bear the markings of \"Akagi\"'s aircraft (a single vertical red stripe following the red sun symbol of Japan), even though five other aircraft carriers participated, each having its own markings. In addition, the markings do not display the aircraft's identification numbers as was the case in the actual battle. The white surround on the roundel on the Japanese aircraft was only used from 1942 onwards. Prior to this, the roundel was red only.\n was an old \"4-piper\" destroyer commissioned in 1918; the ship used in the movie, , which portrays \"Ward\", looked far different from the original destroyer. In addition, in the movie, she fired two shots from her #1 gun turret. In reality, \"Ward\" fired the first shot from the #1 un-turreted gunmount and the second shot from the #3 wing mount. The attack on the midget submarine by USS \"Ward\" was previously mentioned in the film \"In Harm's Way\".\nA full-scale set was built representing the stern section of a U.S. Navy Standard-type battleship showing two aft gun turrets each with three gun barrels. It was used to portray both and and other battleships. It was correct for USS \"Arizona\" but incorrect for USS \"Nevada\", which had lower triple and upper twin gun turrets. The &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204415 scale model of USS \"Nevada\" used to portray the whole ship in wide shots displayed the fore and aft turrets accurately in a 3-2-2-3 arrangement. A lattice mast (or cage mast) section representing a or battleship was built on the ground behind the full-scale stern set to give the appearance that the set was on Battleship Row. The USS \"Arizona\"/USS \"Nevada\" stern section set was used for the explosion that destroyed USS \"Arizona\", although the explosion took place in the forward #2 magazine and \"Arizona\"'s stern section remained essentially intact.\nThe film has a Japanese Zero fighter being damaged by U.S. Navy CPO John William Finn at Naval Air Station at K\u0101ne\u02bbohe Bay and then deliberately crashing into a hangar. This is actually a composite of three incidents during the Pearl Harbor attack: in the first wave, a Japanese Zero crashed into Fort Kamehameha's ordnance building; in the second wave, a Japanese Zero deliberately crashed into a hillside after Finn shot and damaged the aircraft; also during the second wave, a damaged Japanese aircraft crashed into the seaplane tender .\nDuring a number of shots of the attack squadrons traversing across Oahu, a white cross can be seen standing on one of the mountainsides. The cross was actually erected after the attack as a memorial to the victims.\nThe film also featured Mitsuo Fuchida (Takahiro Tamura) and Minoru Genda (Tatsuya Mihashi) asking Admiral Ch\u016bichi Nagumo (Eijir\u014d T\u014dno) for a third strike, but like many of Fuchida's post war claims this has been called into question. Genda denied making such a request and he and Admiral Ry\u016bnosuke Kusaka both denied that Fuchida did.\nIn the final scene, Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto (S\u014d Yamamura) says: \"I fear all we have done is to awaken a sleeping giant\". An abridged version of this quotation is featured in the 2001 film \"Pearl Harbor\". The 2019 film \"Midway\" also features Yamamoto (Etsushi Toyokawa) speaking aloud the \"sleeping giant\" quote. Although the quotation may well have encapsulated many of his real feelings about the attack, there is no printed evidence to prove Yamamoto made this statement or wrote it down. Director Richard Fleischer stated that while Yamamoto may never have said those words, the film's producer, Elmo Williams, had found the line written in Yamamoto's diary. Williams, in turn, has stated that Larry Forrester, the screenwriter, found a 1943 letter from Yamamoto to the Admiralty in Tokyo containing the quotation. However, Forrester cannot produce the letter, nor can anyone else, American or Japanese, recall it or find it.\nRelease.\nThe film had its world premiere on September 23, 1970, in New York, Tokyo, Honolulu and Los Angeles.\nReception.\nBox office.\nAt the time of its initial release, \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" was thought to be a box office disappointment in North America, despite its domestic box office of $29,548,291 making it the ninth-highest-grossing film of 1970. It was a major hit in Japan, and over the years, home media releases provided a larger overall profit. The film had earned \u00a5 in Japanese distributor rentals by 1971, becoming the sixth-highest-grossing film of 1971 in Japan.\nAccording to Fox records, the film required $ in rentals to break even, and had done so by December 11, 1970.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a 57% rating based on 30 reviews. The site's consensus states: \"\"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" is scrupulously accurate and lays out of the tragedy of Pearl Harbor with intricate detail, but the film's clinical approach to the sound and fury signifies little feeling.\" On Metacritic it has a score of 46% based on reviews from 8 critics, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\".\nRoger Ebert gave the film one star and felt that \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" was \"one of the deadest, dullest blockbusters ever made\" and suffered from not having \"some characters to identify with.\" In addition, he criticized the film for poor acting and special effects in his 1970 review. Vincent Canby, reviewer for \" The New York Times\", was similarly unimpressed, noting the film was \"nothing less than a $25-million irrelevancy.\" \"Variety\" also found the film to be boring; however, the magazine praised the film's action sequences and production values. Charles Champlin in his review for the \"Los Angeles Times\" on September 23, 1970, considered the movie's chief virtues as a \"spectacular\", and the careful recreation of a historical event.\nDespite the initial negative reviews, the film was critically acclaimed for its vivid action scenes and found favor with aviation aficionados. However, even the team of Jack Hardwick and Ed Schnepf, who had been involved in research on aviation films, relegated \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" to the \"also-ran\" status due to its slow-moving plotline.\nSeveral later films and TV series relating to World War II in the Pacific have used footage from \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\". These productions include the films \"Midway\" (1976; in the \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" DVD commentary, Fleischer expressed anger that Universal used the footage), \"All This and World War II\" (film 1976), \"Pearl\" (TV mini-series 1978), \"From Here to Eternity\" (TV mini-series 1979), \"The Final Countdown\" (1980), and \"Australia\" (2008) as well as the \"Magnum, P. I.\" television series episode titled \"Lest We Forget\" (first airdate February 12, 1981).\nIn 1994, a survey at the USS \"Arizona\" Memorial in Honolulu determined that for Americans the film was the most common source of popular knowledge about the Pearl Harbor attack.\nClark Collis of \"Empire\" gave the film three out of five stars, writing that the film \"is high on historical veracity but low on drama\". In 2016, \"Cinema Retro\" released a special issue dedicated to \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" which detailed the Blu-ray release of the film. Stating that the film \"has only grown in stature over the decades\", it praises the attack sequences, calling them \"quite spectacular\", and commends the portrayal of the Japanese as \"anything but ethnic stereotypes, which adds immensely to the impact of their side of the story\". It also praises the \"innovative, pulse-pounding\" soundtrack. Reviewers called the film as being \"meticulous\" in its approach to dissecting the situation leading up to the attack. A reviewer called \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" a fine documentary-style film about the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. The usage of both American and Japanese filmmakers provides an unbiased film and unique viewing experience, and is uncommon in the genre. A 2018 article described the film as doing \"a most memorable job in portraying the whole Pearl Harbor experience\".\nIn 2025, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" listed \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" as having the best stunts of 1970.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58019", "revid": "30001121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58019", "title": "Harvard architecture", "text": "Computer architecture where code and data each have a separate bus\nThe Harvard architecture is a computer architecture with separate storage and signal pathways for instructions and data. It is often contrasted with the von Neumann architecture, where program instructions and data share the same memory and pathways. The Harvard architecture is often used in real-time processing or low-power applications.\nThe term is often stated as having originated from the Harvard Mark I relay-based computer, which stored instructions on punched tape (24 bits wide) and data in electro-mechanical counters. These early machines had data storage entirely contained within the central processing unit, and provided no access to the instruction storage as data. Programs needed to be loaded by an operator; the processor could not initialize itself.\nThe concept of the Harvard architecture has been questioned by some researchers. According to a peer-reviewed paper on the topic published in 2022, \nModern processors appear to the user to be systems with von Neumann architectures, with the program code stored in the same main memory as the data. For performance reasons, internally and largely invisible to the user, most designs have separate processor caches for the instructions and data, with separate pathways into the processor for each. This is one form of what is known as the modified Harvard architecture.\nHarvard architecture is historically, and traditionally, split into two address spaces, but having three, i.e. two extra (and all accessed in each cycle) is also done, while rare.\nMemory details.\nIn a Harvard architecture, there is no need to make the two memories share characteristics. In particular, the word width, timing, implementation technology, and memory address structure can differ. In some systems, instructions for pre-programmed tasks can be stored in read-only memory while data memory generally requires read-write memory. In some systems, there is much more instruction memory than data memory so instruction addresses are wider than data addresses.\nContrast with von Neumann architectures.\nIn a system with a pure von Neumann architecture, instructions and data are stored in the same memory, so instructions are fetched over the same data path used to fetch data. This means that a CPU cannot simultaneously read an instruction and read or write data from or to the memory. In a computer using the Harvard architecture, the CPU can both read an instruction and perform a data memory access at the same time, even without a cache. A Harvard architecture computer can thus be faster for a given circuit complexity because instruction fetches and data access do not contend for a single memory pathway.\nAlso, a Harvard architecture machine has distinct code and data address spaces: instruction address zero is not the same as data address zero. Instruction address zero might identify a twenty-four-bit value, while data address zero might indicate an eight-bit byte that is not part of that twenty-four-bit value.\nContrast with modified Harvard architecture.\nA modified Harvard architecture machine is very much like a Harvard architecture machine, but it relaxes the strict separation between instruction and data while still letting the CPU concurrently access two (or more) memory buses. The most common modification includes separate instruction and data caches backed by a common address space. While the CPU executes from cache, it acts as a pure Harvard machine. When accessing backing memory, it acts like a von Neumann machine (where code can be moved around like data, which is a powerful technique). This modification is widespread in modern processors, such as the ARM architecture, Power ISA and x86 processors. It is sometimes loosely called a Harvard architecture, overlooking the fact that it is actually \"modified\".\nAnother modification provides a pathway between the instruction memory (such as ROM or flash memory) and the CPU to allow words from the instruction memory to be treated as read-only data. This technique is used in some microcontrollers, including the Atmel AVR. This allows constant data, such as text strings or function tables, to be accessed without first having to be copied into data memory, preserving scarce (and power-hungry) data memory for read/write variables. Special machine language instructions are provided to read data from the instruction memory, or the instruction memory can be accessed using a peripheral interface. (This is distinct from instructions which themselves embed constant data, although for individual constants the two mechanisms can substitute for each other.)\nSpeed.\nIn recent years, the speed of the CPU has grown many times in comparison to the access speed of the main memory. Care needs to be taken to reduce the number of times main memory is accessed in order to maintain performance. If, for instance, every instruction run in the CPU requires an access to memory, the computer gains nothing for increased CPU speed\u2014a problem referred to as being memory bound.\nIt is possible to make extremely fast memory, but this is only practical for small amounts of memory for cost, power and signal routing reasons. The solution is to provide a small amount of very fast memory known as a CPU cache which holds recently accessed data. As long as the data that the CPU needs is in the cache, the performance is much higher than it is when the CPU has to get the data from the main memory. On the other side, however, it may still be limited to storing repetitive programs or data and still has a storage size limitation, and other potential problems associated with it.\nInternal versus external design.\nModern high performance CPU chip designs incorporate aspects of both Harvard and von Neumann architecture. In particular, the \"split cache\" version of the modified Harvard architecture is very common. CPU cache memory is divided into an instruction cache and a data cache. Harvard architecture is used as the CPU accesses the cache. In the case of a cache miss, however, the data is retrieved from the main memory, which is not formally divided into separate instruction and data sections, although it may well have separate memory controllers used for concurrent access to RAM, ROM and (NOR) flash memory.\nThus, while a von Neumann architecture is visible in some contexts, such as when data and code come through the same memory controller, the hardware implementation gains the efficiencies of the Harvard architecture for cache accesses and at least some main memory accesses.\nIn addition, CPUs often have write buffers which let CPUs proceed after writes to non-cached regions. The von Neumann nature of memory is then visible when instructions are written as data by the CPU and software must ensure that the caches (data and instruction) and write buffer are synchronized before trying to execute those just-written instructions.\nModern uses of the Harvard architecture.\nThe principal advantage of the pure Harvard architecture\u2014simultaneous access to more than one memory system\u2014has been reduced by modified Harvard processors using modern CPU cache systems. Relatively pure Harvard architecture machines are used mostly in applications where trade-offs, like the cost and power savings from omitting caches, outweigh the programming penalties from featuring distinct code and data address spaces.\nEven in these cases, it is common to employ special instructions in order to access program memory as though it were data for read-only tables, or for reprogramming; those processors are modified Harvard architecture processors.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58022", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58022", "title": "Lists of wars", "text": "List of wars throughout history\n This article provides a list of articles which contain lists of wars and conflicts. \nThere are various sets of such lists, based upon different criteria for grouping individual wars, as shown below.\nLists based on specific historical criteria.\nLists based on time period.\nBelow is a set of articles which each provide a list of wars within a specific time period, each covering at least several decades or more."}
{"id": "58023", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58023", "title": "Lewis\u2013Clark State College", "text": "Public college in Lewiston, Idaho, US\nLewis-Clark State College is a public college in Lewiston, Idaho, United States. It was founded in 1893 and has an approximate annual enrollment of 3,600. The college offers more than 130 degrees.\nHistory.\nIn 1893, Governor William J. McConnell signed an act on January\u00a027 authorizing the establishment of the Lewiston State Normal School in Lewiston, \"provided the mayor and common council of that city on or before May 1, 1893, donate ten acres, within the city limits and known as part of the city park, and authorizing the said mayor and council to convey to the trustees of said normal school the said tract of land,\" etc.\nThe first Trustees on the school's Board were James W. Reid (who had done the most to shepherd the authorization bill through the Idaho Legislature), Norman B. Willey (who had just stepped down as Idaho governor), Benjamin Wilson (a previous gubernatorial candidate), J. Morris Howe, and C. W. Schaff. Reid was elected President of the Board, a position he held until his death in 1902.\nLewiston residents lost no time in obtaining the required space for the school. However, the legislature acted slowly in providing construction funds, and then construction lagged. George E. Knepper had been hired as first President of the Normal School. Frustrated by the delays in getting his building, Knepper leased space in downtown Lewiston and opened for classes on January 6, 1896. The building itself was not ready until May. Over the next several years, more structures were added to the campus, including dormitories and a gymnasium.\nIn keeping with the normal school philosophy, Lewiston Normal focused on practical, hands-on training for new teachers. That meant the school provided a great deal of \u201cmanual training\u201d\u2014what is now called vocational education. Also, to insure that teachers truly knew how to handle a classroom, the school ran an on-campus training school. In it, real teachers taught real pupils, and student teachers also learned-by-doing under the supervision of experienced teacher-critics.\nUntil the 1920s, one-room schools served well over half of Idaho's primary students. In most, only the teacher knew anything at all about running a school. Thus, \u201cteachers assumed responsibility for shaping a district's entire educational policy.\u201d\nThe First World War certainly impacted the nation's normal schools, but not as much as it did conventional institutions. Generally, male students were in the majority at regular colleges, many of which experienced brutal enrollment losses. Normal schools attracted a predominantly female student body, so the declines were much smaller\u2014about 15% at Lewiston Normal.\nThe school experienced a painful crisis on December 5, 1917, when the Administration Building suffered severe damage in a fire,\n later determined to be arson by a student. Its cupola collapsed into the gutted interior of the main structure and the older east wing was totally destroyed.\nLewiston Normal continued to grow, as the demand for pre-college teachers increased. However, by the late 1920s, the \"normal school\" idea was being supplanted by a \"teachers college\" approach. Such colleges still focused on teacher education, but now students could earn a bachelor's degree\u2014more and more often required for certification. Recognizing this trend, school supporters began a campaign to change Lewiston Normal's status. They also began the process of upgrading the faculty\u2014inciting much ill will.\nSupporters also fought an ongoing battle just to keep the school open; some legislators still wanted to close the Normals to save money. The advent of World War II squelched that notion. Not only did the school continue to turn out desperately needed teachers, it also expanded its nurse-training program, and produced large numbers of fliers in its Navy Air School. In 1943, the Board of Education raised the school to full four-year status and became North Idaho Teachers College (NITC). Now with the ability to grant a Bachelor of Education degree, school leaders took it upon themselves to use the name Northern Idaho College of Education (NICE), and the legislature approved the name change in 1947.\nThe school got another temporary reprieve from the cost-cutters when a deluge of veterans funded by the G.I. Bill hit the campus after the war. However, that wave passed, and in 1951 budget hawks succeeded in closing the school, as well as its counterpart, the Southern Idaho College of Education (SICE), which had previously been called Albion State Normal School, in Albion in southern Idaho. The state's other colleges had assured legislators that they could supply all the teachers needed. That promise proved disastrously wrong: In just three years, the state found itself issuing nearly 40% more provisional teaching certificates than it had in 1951.\nUnder that pressure, the legislature re-opened the school as Lewis-Clark Normal School in 1955 as a two-year school under the administration of the University of Idaho, north in Moscow. The first dean of the school was appointed for the third year in 1957, and enrollment was 319 in the fall of 1961. The arrangement with the university proved difficult and it ended abruptly in 1963 when the affiliation seemed like it might damage the university's academic accreditation.\nThe ongoing need for teachers, a developing shortage of nurses, and a new push for vocational education from the federal government combined to rescue the school from oblivion. The state legislature voted to elevate it to four-year status in 1963 but did not approve funding until two years later. Enrollment of the now-independent, four-year school grew, from 465 in 1964 to 1,033 in the fall of 1968. It continued to grow and in July 1971 the name was officially changed to Lewis-Clark State College, and was the last normal school in the country to make the change.\nIn April 2025 the Idaho State Board of Education approved a request to rebrand the school as Lewis-Clark State University to better reflect the institution\u2019s offerings, which extend beyond two-year degrees. \nAthletics.\nThe Lewis-Clark State athletic teams are called the Warriors and Lady Warriors. The college is a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), primarily competing in the Cascade Collegiate Conference (CCC) since autumn 2020. The Warriors and Lady Warriors previously competed in the Frontier Conference from 1998 to\u00a02000.\nLC State competes in twelve intercollegiate varsity sports: men's sports are baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, tennis, and track &amp; field; women's sports include basketball, cross country, golf, tennis, track &amp; field, and volleyball. The school colors are navy blue, white, and red. The nickname \"Warriors\" was adopted after the school reopened in 1955; earlier nicknames include \"Pioneers\" in the 1930s, \"Loggers\" was adopted through a contest in October 1938, and continued until the 1951 closure.\nBaseball.\nAbsent for a decade (1952\u20131961), baseball returned as an intercollegiate sport in 1962. Since 1984, the team has won nineteen NAIA national championships; sixteen were under head coach Ed Cheff, who retired after 34 years in 2010. LC State has hosted the NAIA World Series at Harris Field since 2000, and also from 1984 through 1991.\nNotable alumni.\nBaseball players.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58026", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58026", "title": "International standard book number", "text": ""}
{"id": "58031", "revid": "12634201", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58031", "title": "Bourgeoisie", "text": "Social class of business owners, merchants, and the wealthy\nThe bourgeoisie are a class of business owners, merchants and wealthy people, in general, which emerged in the Late Middle Ages, originally as a \"middle class\" between the peasantry and aristocracy. They are traditionally contrasted with the proletariat by their wealth, political power, and education, as well as their access to and control of cultural, social, and financial capital.\nThe bourgeoisie in its original sense is intimately linked to the political ideology of liberalism and its existence within cities, recognised as such by their urban charters (e.g., municipal charters, town privileges, German town law), so there was no bourgeoisie apart from the citizenry of the cities. Rural peasants came under a different legal system.\nIn communist philosophy, the bourgeoisie is the social class that came to own the means of production during modern industrialisation and whose societal concerns are the value of private property and the preservation of capital to ensure the perpetuation of their economic dominance in society.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe Modern French word is derived from the Old French or ('town dweller'), which derived from ('market town'), from the Old Frankish ('town'); in other European languages, the etymologic derivations include the Middle English , the Middle Dutch , the German , the Modern English \"burgess\", the Spanish , the Portuguese , and the Polish , which occasionally is synonymous with the intelligentsia.\nIn the 18th century, before the French Revolution (1789\u20131799), in the French , the masculine and feminine terms and identified the relatively rich men and women who were members of the urban and rural Third Estate \u2013 the common people of the French realm, who violently deposed the absolute monarchy of the Bourbon King Louis XVI (r. 1774\u20131791), his clergy, and his aristocrats in the French Revolution of 1789\u20131799. Hence, since the 19th century, the term \"bourgeoisie\" usually is politically and sociologically synonymous with the ruling upper class of a capitalist society. In English, the word \"bourgeoisie\", as a term referring to French history, refers to a social class oriented to economic materialism and hedonism, and to upholding the political and economic interests of the capitalist ruling-class.\nHistorically, the medieval French word denoted the inhabitants of the (walled market-towns), the craftsmen, artisans, merchants, and others, who constituted \"the bourgeoisie\". They were the socio-economic class between the peasants and the landlords, between the workers and the owners of the means of production, the feudal nobility. As the economic managers of the (raw) materials, the goods, and the services, and thus the capital (money) produced by the feudal economy, the term \"bourgeoisie\" evolved to also denote the middle class \u2013 the businessmen who accumulated, administered, and controlled the capital that made possible the development of the bourgs into cities.\nContemporarily, the terms \"bourgeoisie\" and \"bourgeois\" (noun) identify the ruling class in capitalist societies, as a social stratum, while \"bourgeois\" (adjective or noun modifier) describes the (worldview) of men and women whose way of thinking is socially and culturally determined by their economic materialism and philistinism, a social identity famously mocked in Moli\u00e8re's comedy (1670), which satirizes buying the trappings of a noble-birth identity as the means of climbing the social ladder. The 18th century saw a partial rehabilitation of bourgeois values in genres such as the (bourgeois drama) and \"bourgeois tragedy\".\nEmerging in the 1970s, the shortened term \"bougie\" became slang, referring to things or attitudes which are middle class, pretentious and suburban. In 2016, hip-hop group Migos produced a song \"Bad and Boujee\", featuring an intentional misspelling of the word as \"boujee\" \u2013 a term which has particularly been used by African Americans in reference to African Americans. The term refers to a person of lower or middle class doing pretentious activities or virtue signalling as an affectation of the upper-class.\nHistory.\nOrigins and rise.\nThe bourgeoisie emerged as a historical and political phenomenon in the 11th century when the of Central and Western Europe developed into cities dedicated to commerce and crafts. This urban expansion was possible thanks to economic concentration due to the appearance of protective self-organization into guilds. Guilds arose when individual businessmen (such as craftsmen, artisans and merchants) conflicted with their rent-seeking feudal landlords who demanded greater rents than previously agreed.\nIn the event, by the end of the Middle Ages (c.\u2009AD 1500), under regimes of the early national monarchies of Western Europe, the bourgeoisie acted in self-interest, and politically supported the king or queen against legal and financial disorder caused by the greed of the feudal lords. In the late-16th and early 17th centuries, the bourgeoisies of England and the Netherlands had become the financial \u2013 thus political \u2013 forces that deposed the feudal order; economic power had vanquished military power in the realm of politics.\nFrom progress to reaction (Marxist view).\nAccording to the Marxist view of history, during the 17th and 18th centuries, the bourgeoisie were the politically progressive social class who supported the principles of constitutional government and of natural right, against the Law of Privilege and the claims of rule by divine right that the nobles and prelates had autonomously exercised during the feudal order.\nThe English Civil War (1642\u20131651), the American War of Independence (1775\u20131783), and French Revolution (1789\u20131799) were partly motivated by the desire of the bourgeoisie to rid themselves of the feudal and royal encroachments on their personal liberty, commercial prospects, and the ownership of property. In the 19th century, the bourgeoisie propounded liberalism, and gained political rights, religious rights, and civil liberties for themselves and the lower social classes; thus the bourgeoisie was a progressive philosophic and political force in Western societies.\nAfter the Industrial Revolution (1750\u20131850), by the mid-19th century the great expansion of the bourgeoisie social class caused its stratification \u2013 by business activity and by economic function \u2013 into the (bankers and industrialists) and the (tradesmen and white-collar workers). Moreover, by the end of the 19th century, the capitalists (the original bourgeoisie) had ascended to the upper class, while the developments of technology and technical occupations allowed the rise of working-class men and women to the lower strata of the bourgeoisie; yet the social progress was incidental.\nDenotations.\nMarxist theory.\nAccording to Karl Marx, the bourgeois during the Middle Ages usually was a self-employed businessman \u2013 such as a merchant, banker, or entrepreneur \u2013 whose economic role in society was being the financial intermediary to the feudal landlord and the peasant who worked the fief, the land of the lord. Yet, by the 18th century, the time of the Industrial Revolution (1750\u20131850) and of industrial capitalism, the bourgeoisie had become the economic ruling class who owned the means of production (capital and land), and who controlled the means of coercion (armed forces and legal system, police forces and prison system).\nIn such a society, the bourgeoisie's ownership of the means of production allowed them to employ and exploit the wage-earning working class (urban and rural), people whose only economic means is labor; and the bourgeois control of the means of coercion suppressed the sociopolitical challenges by the lower classes, and so preserved the economic status quo; workers remained workers, and employers remained employers.\nIn the 19th century, Marx distinguished two types of bourgeois capitalist:\nIn the course of economic relations, the working class and the bourgeoisie continually engage in class struggle, where the capitalists exploit the workers, while the workers resist their economic exploitation, which occurs because the worker owns no means of production, and, to earn a living, seeks employment from the bourgeois capitalist; the worker produces goods and services that are property of the employer, who sells them for a price.\nBesides describing the social class who owns the means of production, the Marxist use of the term \"bourgeois\" also describes the consumerist style of life derived from the ownership of capital and real property. Marx acknowledged the bourgeois industriousness that created wealth, but criticised the moral hypocrisy of the bourgeoisie when they ignored the alleged origins of their wealth: the exploitation of the proletariat, the urban and rural workers. Further sense denotations of \"bourgeois\" describe ideological concepts such as \"bourgeois freedom\", which is thought to be opposed to substantive forms of freedom; \"bourgeois independence\"; \"bourgeois personal individuality\"; the \"bourgeois family\"; et cetera, all derived from owning capital and property (see \"The Communist Manifesto\", 1848).\nFrance and Francophone countries.\nIn English, the term \"bourgeoisie\" is often used to denote the middle classes. In fact, the French term encompasses both the upper and middle economic classes, a misunderstanding which has occurred in other languages as well. The bourgeoisie in France and many French-speaking countries consists of five evolving social layers: , , , and .\n\"Petite bourgeoisie\".\nThe is the equivalent of the modern-day middle class, or refers to \"a social class between the middle class and the lower class: the lower middle class\".\nNazism.\nNazism rejected the Marxist concept of proletarian internationalism and class struggle, and supported the \"class struggle between nations\", and sought to resolve internal class struggle in the nation while it identified Germany as a proletariat nation fighting against plutocratic nations. The Nazi Party had many working-class supporters and members, and a strong appeal to the middle class. The financial collapse of the white collar middle-class of the 1920s figures much in their strong support of Nazism. In the poor country that was the Weimar Republic of the early 1930s, the Nazi Party realised their social policies with food and shelter for the unemployed and the homeless\u2014who were later recruited into the Brownshirt (SA \u2013 Storm Detachments).\nAdolf Hitler was impressed by the populist antisemitism and the anti-liberal bourgeois agitation of Karl Lueger, who as the mayor of Vienna during Hitler's time in the city, used a rabble-rousing style of oratory that appealed to the wider masses. When asked whether he supported the \"bourgeois right-wing\", Hitler claimed that Nazism was not exclusively for any class, and he also indicated that it favored neither the left nor the right, but preserved \"pure\" elements from both \"camps\", stating: \"From the camp of bourgeois tradition, it takes national resolve, and from the materialism of the Marxist dogma, living, creative Socialism.\"\nHitler distrusted capitalism for being unreliable due to its egotism, and he preferred a state-directed economy that is subordinated to the interests of the \"Volk\". Hitler told a party leader in 1934, \"The economic system of our day is the creation of the Jews.\" Hitler said to Benito Mussolini that capitalism had \"run its course\". Hitler also said that the business bourgeoisie \"know nothing except their profit. 'Fatherland' is only a word for them.\" Hitler was personally disgusted with the ruling bourgeois elites of Germany during the period of the Weimar Republic, whom he referred to as \"cowardly shits\".\nFascist Italy.\nBecause of their ascribed cultural excellence as a social class, the Italian fascist r\u00e9gime (1922\u201345) of Prime Minister Benito Mussolini regarded the bourgeoisie as an obstacle to modernism. Nonetheless, the Fascist state ideologically exploited the Italian bourgeoisie and their materialistic, middle-class spirit, for the more efficient cultural manipulation of the upper (aristocratic) and the lower (working) classes of Italy.\nIn 1938, Prime Minister Mussolini gave a speech wherein he established a clear ideological distinction between capitalism (the social function of the bourgeoisie) and the bourgeoisie (as a social class), whom he dehumanized by reducing them into high-level abstractions: a moral category and a state of mind. Culturally and philosophically, Mussolini isolated the bourgeoisie from Italian society by portraying them as social parasites upon the fascist Italian state and \"The People\"; as a social class who drained the human potential of Italian society, in general, and of the working class, in particular; as exploiters who victimized the Italian nation with an approach to life characterized by hedonism and materialism. Nevertheless, despite the slogan \"The Fascist Man Disdains the \"Comfortable\" Life\", which epitomized the anti-bourgeois principle, in its final years of power, for mutual benefit and profit, the Mussolini fascist r\u00e9gime transcended ideology to merge the political and financial interests of Prime Minister Benito Mussolini with the political and financial interests of the bourgeoisie, the Catholic social circles who constituted the ruling class of Italy.\nPhilosophically, as a materialist creature, the bourgeois man was stereotyped as irreligious; thus, to establish an existential distinction between the supernatural faith of the Roman Catholic Church and the materialist faith of temporal religion; in \"The Autarchy of Culture: Intellectuals and Fascism in the 1930s\", the priest Giuseppe Marino said that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Christianity is essentially anti-bourgeois. ... A Christian, a true Christian, and thus a Catholic, is the opposite of a bourgeois.\nCulturally, the bourgeois man may be considered effeminate, infantile, or acting in a pretentious manner; describing his philistinism in (1939), Roberto Paravese comments on the:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe economic security, financial freedom, and social mobility of the bourgeoisie threatened the philosophic integrity of Italian fascism, the ideological monolith that was the r\u00e9gime of Prime Minister Benito Mussolini. Any assumption of legitimate political power (government and rule) by the bourgeoisie represented a fascist loss of totalitarian state power for social control through political unity\u2014one people, one nation, and one leader. Sociologically, to the fascist man, to become a bourgeois was a character flaw inherent to the masculine mystique; therefore, the ideology of Italian fascism scornfully defined the bourgeois man as \"spiritually castrated\".\nBourgeois culture.\nCultural hegemony.\nKarl Marx said that the culture of a society is dominated by the mores of the ruling-class, wherein their superimposed value system is abided by each social class (the upper, the middle, the lower) regardless of the socio-economic results it yields to them. In that sense, contemporary societies are bourgeois to the degree that they practice the mores of the small-business \"shop culture\" of early modern France; which the writer \u00c9mile Zola (1840\u20131902) naturalistically presented, analyzed, and ridiculed in the twenty-two-novel series (1871\u20131893) about \"Les Rougon-Macquart\" family; the thematic thrust is the necessity for social progress, by subordinating the economic sphere to the social sphere of life.\nConspicuous consumption.\nThe critical analyses of the bourgeois mentality by the German intellectual Walter Benjamin (1892\u20131940) indicated that the shop culture of the petite bourgeoisie established the sitting room as the center of personal and family life; as such, the English bourgeois culture is, he alleges, a sitting-room culture of prestige through conspicuous consumption. The material culture of the bourgeoisie concentrated on mass-produced luxury goods of high quality; between generations, the only variance was the materials with which the goods were manufactured.\nIn the early part of the 19th century, the bourgeois house contained a home that first was stocked and decorated with hand-painted porcelain, machine-printed cotton fabrics, machine-printed wallpaper, and Sheffield steel (crucible and stainless). The utility of these things was inherent in their practical functions. By the latter part of the 19th century, the bourgeois house contained a home that had been remodeled by conspicuous consumption. Here, Benjamin argues, the goods were bought to display wealth (discretionary income), rather than for their practical utility. The bourgeoisie had transposed the wares of the shop window to the sitting room, where the clutter of display signaled bourgeois success (see \"Culture and Anarchy\", 1869).\nTwo spatial constructs manifest the bourgeois mentality: (i) the shop-window display, and (ii) the sitting room. In English, the term \"sitting-room culture\" is synonymous for \"bourgeois mentality\", a \"philistine\" cultural perspective from the Victorian Era (1837\u20131901), especially characterized by the repression of emotion and of sexual desire; and by the construction of a regulated social-space where \"propriety\" is the key personality trait desired in men and women.\nNonetheless, from such a psychologically constricted worldview, regarding the rearing of children, contemporary sociologists claim to have identified \"progressive\" middle-class values, such as respect for non-conformity, self-direction, autonomy, gender equality, and the encouragement of innovation; as in the Victorian Era, the transposition to the US of the bourgeois system of social values has been identified as a requisite for employment success in the professions. \nBourgeois values are dependent on rationalism, which began with the economic sphere and moves into every sphere of life which is formulated by Max Weber. The beginning of rationalism is commonly called the Age of Reason. Much like the Marxist critics of that period, Weber was concerned with the growing ability of large corporations and nations to increase their power and reach throughout the world.\nSatire and criticism in art.\nBeyond the intellectual realms of political economy, history, and political science that discuss, describe, and analyze the \"bourgeoisie\" as a social class, the colloquial usage of the sociological terms \"bourgeois\" and \"bourgeoise\" describe the social stereotypes of the old money and of the , who is a politically timid conformist satisfied with a wealthy, consumerist style of life characterized by conspicuous consumption and the continual striving for prestige. This being the case, the cultures of the world describe the philistinism of the middle-class personality, produced by the excessively rich life of the bourgeoisie, is examined and analyzed in comedic and dramatic plays, novels, and films (see Authenticity).\nThe term bourgeoisie has been used as a pejorative and a term of abuse since the 19th century, particularly by intellectuals and artists.\nTheater.\n (The Would-be Gentleman, 1670) by Moli\u00e8re (Jean-Baptiste Poquelin), is a comedy-ballet that satirises Monsieur Jourdain, the prototypical nouveau riche man who buys his way up the social-class scale, to realise his aspirations of becoming a gentleman, to which end he studies dancing, fencing, and philosophy, the trappings and accomplishments of a gentleman, to be able to pose as a man of noble birth, someone who, in 17th-century France, was a man to the manner born; Jourdain's self-transformation also requires managing the private life of his daughter, so that her marriage can also assist his social ascent.\nLiterature.\n\"Buddenbrooks\" (1901), by Thomas Mann (1875\u20131955), chronicles the moral, intellectual, and physical decay of a rich family through its declines, material and spiritual, in the course of four generations, beginning with the patriarch Johann Buddenbrook Sr. and his son, Johann Buddenbrook Jr., who are typically successful German businessmen; each is a reasonable man of solid character.\nYet, in the children of Buddenbrook Jr., the materially comfortable style of life provided by the dedication to solid, middle-class values elicits decadence: The fickle daughter, Toni, lacks and does not seek a purpose in life; son Christian is honestly decadent, and lives the life of a ne'er-do-well; and the businessman son, Thomas, who assumes command of the Buddenbrook family fortune, occasionally falters from middle-class solidity by being interested in art and philosophy, the impractical life of the mind, which, to the bourgeoisie, is the epitome of social, moral, and material decadence.\n\"Babbitt\" (1922), by Sinclair Lewis (1885\u20131951), satirizes the American bourgeois George Follansbee Babbitt, a middle-aged realtor, booster, and joiner in the Midwestern city of Zenith, who \u2013 despite being unimaginative, self-important, and hopelessly conformist and middle-class \u2013 is aware that there must be more to life than money and the consumption of the best things that money can buy. Nevertheless, he fears being excluded from the mainstream of society more than he does living for himself, by being true to himself \u2013 his heart-felt flirtations with independence (dabbling in liberal politics and a love affair with a pretty widow) come to naught because he is existentially afraid.\nYet, George F. Babbitt sublimates his desire for self-respect, and encourages his son to rebel against the conformity that results from bourgeois prosperity, by recommending that he be true to himself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Don't be scared of the family. No, nor all of Zenith. Nor of yourself, the way I've been.\nFilms.\nMany of the satirical films by the Spanish film director Luis Bu\u00f1uel (1900\u20131983) examine the mental and moral effects of the bourgeois mentality, its culture, and the stylish way of life it provides for its practitioners. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58032", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58032", "title": "Control Data Corporation", "text": "Defunct supercomputer firm\nControl Data Corporation (CDC) was a mainframe and supercomputer company that in the 1960s was one of the nine major U.S. computer companies, which group included IBM, the Burroughs Corporation, and the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), the NCR Corporation (NCR), General Electric, Honeywell, RCA, and UNIVAC. For most of the 1960s, the strength of CDC was the work of the electrical engineer Seymour Cray who developed a series of fast computers, then considered the fastest computing machines in the world; in the 1970s, Cray left the Control Data Corporation and founded Cray Research (CRI) to design and make supercomputers. In 1988, after much financial loss, the Control Data Corporation began withdrawing from making computers and sold the affiliated companies of CDC; in 1992, CDC established Control Data Systems, Inc. The remaining affiliate companies of CDC currently do business as the software company Dayforce.\nBackground: World War II \u2013 1957.\nDuring World War II the U.S. Navy had built up a classified team of engineers to build codebreaking machinery for both Japanese and German electro-mechanical ciphers. A number of these were produced by a team dedicated to the task working in the Washington, D.C., area. With the post-war wind-down of military spending, the Navy grew increasingly worried that this team would break up and scatter into various companies, and it started looking for ways to keep the code-breaking team together.\nEventually they found their solution: John Parker, the owner of a Chase Aircraft affiliate named Northwestern Aeronautical Corporation located in St. Paul, Minnesota, was about to lose all his contracts due to the ending of the war. The Navy never told Parker exactly what the team did, since it would have taken too long to get top secret clearance. Instead they simply said the team was important, and they would be very happy if he hired them all. Parker was obviously wary, but after several meetings with increasingly high-ranking Naval officers it became apparent that whatever it was, they were serious, and he eventually agreed to give this team a home in his military glider factory.\nThe result was Engineering Research Associates (ERA). Formed in 1946, this contract engineering company worked on a number of seemingly unrelated projects in the early 1950s. Among these was the ERA Atlas, an early military stored program computer, the basis of the Univac 1101, which was followed by the 1102, and then the 36-bit ERA 1103 (UNIVAC 1103). The Atlas was built for the Navy, which intended to use it in their non-secret code-breaking centers. In the early 1950s a minor political debate broke out in Congress about the Navy essentially \"owning\" ERA, and the ensuing debates and legal wrangling left the company drained of both capital and spirit. In 1952, Parker sold ERA to Remington Rand.\nAlthough Rand kept the ERA team together and developing new products, it was most interested in ERA's magnetic drum memory systems. Rand soon merged with Sperry Corporation to become Sperry Rand. In the process of merging the companies, the ERA division was folded into Sperry's UNIVAC division. At first this did not cause too many changes at ERA, since the company was used primarily to provide engineering talent to support a variety of projects. However, one major project was moved from UNIVAC to ERA, the UNIVAC II project, which led to lengthy delays and upsets to nearly everyone involved.\nSince the Sperry \"big company\" mentality encroached on the decision-making powers of the ERA employees, a number left Sperry to form the Control Data Corp. in September 1957, setting up shop in an old warehouse across the river from Sperry's St. Paul laboratory, in Minneapolis at 501 Park Avenue. Of the members forming CDC, William Norris was the unanimous choice to become the chief executive officer of the new company. Seymour Cray soon became the chief designer, though at the time of CDC's formation he was still in the process of completing a prototype for the Naval Tactical Data System (NTDS), and he did not leave Sperry to join CDC until it was complete. The M-460 was Seymour's first transistor computer, though the power supply rectifiers were still tubes.\nEarly designs and Cray's big plan.\nCDC started business by selling subsystems, mostly drum memory systems, to other companies. Cray joined the next year, and he immediately built a small transistor-based 6-bit machine known as the \"CDC Little Character\" to test his ideas on large-system design and transistor-based machines. \"Little Character\" was a great success.\nIn 1959, CDC released a 48-bit transistorized version of their re-design of the 1103 re-design under the name CDC 1604; the first machine was delivered to the U.S. Navy in 1960 at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California. Legend has it that the 1604 designation was chosen by adding CDC's first street address (501 Park Avenue) to Cray's former project, the ERA-Univac 1103.\nA 12-bit cut-down version was also released as the CDC 160A in 1960, often considered among the first minicomputers. The 160A was particularly notable as it was built as a standard office desk, which was unusual packaging for that era. New versions of the basic 1604 architecture were rebuilt into the CDC 3000 series, which sold through the early and mid-1960s.\nCray immediately turned to the design of a machine that would be the fastest (or in the terminology of the day, largest) machine in the world, setting the goal at 50 times the speed of the 1604. This required radical changes in design, and as the project \"dragged on\"\u00a0\u2014 it had gone on for about four years by then\u00a0\u2014 the management got increasingly upset and it demanded greater oversight. Cray in turn demanded (in 1962) to have his own remote lab, saying that otherwise, he would quit. Norris agreed, and Cray and his team moved to Cray's home town, Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin. Not even Bill Norris, the founder and president of CDC, could visit Cray's laboratory without an invitation.\nPeripherals business.\nIn the early 1960s, the corporation moved to the Highland Park neighborhood of St. Paul where Norris lived. Through this period, Norris became increasingly worried that CDC had to develop a \"critical mass\" to compete with IBM. To do this, he started an aggressive program of buying up various companies to round out CDC's peripheral lineup. In general, they tried to offer a product to compete with any of IBM's, but running 10% faster and costing 10% less. This was not always easy to achieve.\nOne of its first peripherals was a tape transport, which led to some internal wrangling as the Peripherals Equipment Division attempted to find a reasonable way to charge other divisions of the company for supplying the devices. If the division simply \"gave\" them away at cost as part of a system purchase, they would never have a real budget of their own. Instead, a plan was established in which it would share profits with the divisions selling its peripherals, a plan eventually used throughout the company.\nThe tape transport was followed by the \"405 Card Reader\" and the \"415 Card Punch\", followed by a series of tape drives and drum printers, all of which were designed in-house. The printer business was initially supported by Holley Carburetor in the Rochester, Michigan suburb outside of Detroit. They later formalized this by creating a jointly held company, Holley Computer Products. Holley later sold its stake back to CDC, the remainder becoming the Rochester Division.\nTrain printers and band printers in Rochester were developed in a joint venture with NCR and ICL, with CDC holding controlling interest. This joint venture was known as Computer Peripherals, Inc. (CPI). In the early 80s, it was merged with dot matrix computer printer manufacturer Centronics.\nNorris was particularly interested in breaking out of the punched card\u2013based workflow, where IBM held a stranglehold. He eventually decided to buy Rabinow Engineering, one of the pioneers of optical character recognition (OCR) systems. The idea was to bypass the entire punched card stage by having the operators simply type onto normal paper pages with an OCR-friendly typewriter font, and then submit those pages to the computer. Since a typewritten page contains much more information than a punched card (which has essentially one line of text from a page), this would offer savings all around. This seemingly simple task turned out to be much harder than anyone expected, and while CDC became a major player in the early days of OCR systems, OCR has remained a niche product to this day. Rabinow's plant in Rockville, MD was closed in 1976, and CDC left the business.\nWith the continued delays on the OCR project, it became clear that punched cards were not going to go away any time soon, and CDC had to address this as quickly as possible. Although the 405 remained in production, it was an expensive machine to build. So another purchase was made, Bridge Engineering, which offered a line of lower-cost as well as higher-speed card punches. All card-handling products were moved to what became the Valley Forge Division after Bridge moved to a new factory, with the tape transports to follow. Later, the Valley Forge and Rochester divisions were spun off to form a new joint company with National Cash Register (later NCR Corporation), Computer Peripherals Inc (CPI), to share development and production costs across the two companies. ICL later joined the effort. Eventually the Rochester Division was sold to Centronics in 1982.\nAnother side effect of Norris's attempts to diversify was the creation of a number of service bureaus that ran jobs on behalf of smaller companies that could not afford to buy computers. This was never very profitable, and in 1965, several managers suggested that the unprofitable centers be closed in a cost-cutting measure. Nevertheless, Norris was so convinced of the idea that he refused to accept this, and ordered an across-the-board \"belt tightening\" instead.\nControl Data Institute.\nControl Data created an international technical/computer vocational school from the mid-1960s to the late 1980s. By the late 1970s there were sixty-nine learning centers worldwide, serving 18,000 students.\nCDC 6600: defining supercomputing.\nMeanwhile, at the new Chippewa Falls lab, Seymour Cray, Jim Thornton, and Dean Roush put together a team of 34 engineers, which continued work on the new computer design. One of the ways they hoped to improve the CDC 1604 was to use better transistors, and Cray used the new silicon transistors using the planar process, developed by Fairchild Semiconductor. These were much faster than the germanium transistors in the 1604, without the drawbacks of the older mesa silicon transistors. The speed of light restriction forced a more compact design with refrigeration designed by Dean Roush. In 1964, the resulting computer was released onto the market as the CDC 6600, out-performing everything on the market by roughly ten times. When it sold over 100 units at $8 million ($ million in 2024 dollars) each; it was considered a supercomputer.\nThe 6600 had a 100ns, transistor-based CPU (Central Processing Unit) with multiple asynchronous functional units, using 10 logical, external I/O processors to off-load many common tasks and core memory. That way, the CPU could devote all of its time and circuitry to processing actual data, while the other controllers dealt with the mundane tasks like punching cards and running disk drives. Using late-model compilers, the machine attained a standard mathematical operations rate of 500 kiloFLOPS, but handcrafted assembly managed to deliver approximately 1 megaFLOPS. A simpler, albeit much slower and less expensive version, implemented using a more traditional serial processor design rather than the 6600's parallel functional units, was released as the CDC 6400, and a two-processor version of the 6400 is called the CDC 6500.\nA FORTRAN compiler, known as MNF (Minnesota FORTRAN), was developed by Lawrence A. Liddiard and E. James Mundstock at the University of Minnesota for the 6600.\nAfter the delivery of the 6600 IBM took notice of this new company. In 1965 IBM started an effort to build a machine that would be faster than the 6600, the ACS-1. Two hundred people were gathered on the U.S. West Coast to work on the project, away from corporate prodding, in an attempt to mirror Cray's off-site lab. The project produced interesting computer architecture and technology, but it was not compatible with IBM's hugely successful System/360 line of computers. The engineers were directed to make it 360-compatible, but that compromised its performance. The ACS was canceled in 1969, without ever being produced for customers. Many of the engineers left the company, leading to a brain-drain in IBM's high-performance departments.\nIn the meantime, IBM announced a new System/360 model, the Model 92, which would be just as fast as CDC's 6600. Although this machine did not exist, sales of the 6600 dropped drastically while people waited for the release of the mythical Model 92. Norris did not take this tactic, dubbed as fear, uncertainty and doubt (FUD), lying down, and in an extensive antitrust lawsuit launched against IBM a year later, he eventually won a settlement valued at $80 million. As part of the settlement, he picked up IBM's subsidiary, Service Bureau Corporation (SBC), which ran computer processing for other corporations on its own computers. SBC fitted nicely into CDC's existing service bureau offerings.\nDuring the designing of the 6600, CDC had set up \"Project SPIN\" to supply the system with a high speed hard disk memory system. At the time it was unclear if disks would replace magnetic memory drums, or whether fixed or removable disks would become the more prevalent. SPIN explored all of these approaches, and eventually delivered a 28\" diameter fixed disk and a smaller multi-platter 14\" removable disk-pack system. Over time, the hard disk business pioneered in SPIN became a major product line.\nCDC 7600 and 8600.\nIn the same month it won its lawsuit against IBM, CDC announced its new computer, the CDC 7600 (previously referred to as the 6800 within CDC). This machine's hardware clock speed was almost four times that of the 6600 (36\u00a0MHz vs. 10\u00a0MHz), with a 27.5 ns clock cycle, and it offered considerably more than four times the total throughput, with much of the speed increase coming from extensive use of pipelining.\nThe 7600 did not sell well because it was introduced during the 1969 downturn in the U.S. national economy. Its complexity had led to poor reliability. The machine was not totally compatible with the 6000-series and required a completely different operating system, which like most new OSs, was primitive. The 7600 project paid for itself, but damaged CDC's reputation. The 7600 memory had a split primary- and secondary-memory which required user management but was more than fast enough to make it the fastest uniprocessor from 1969 to 1976. A few dozen 7600s were the computers of choice at supercomputer centers around the world.\nCray then turned to the design of the CDC 8600. This design included four 7600-like processors in a single, smaller case. The smaller size and shorter signal paths allowed the 8600 to run at much higher clock speeds which, together with faster memory, provided most of the performance gains. The 8600, however, belonged to the \"old school\" in terms of its physical construction, and it used individual components soldered to circuit boards. The design was so compact that cooling the CPU modules proved effectively impossible, and access for maintenance difficult. An abundance of hot-running solder joints ensured that the machines did not work reliably; Cray recognized that a re-design was needed.\nThe STAR and the Cyber.\nIn addition to the redesign of the 8600, CDC had another project called the CDC STAR-100 under way, led by Cray's former collaborator on the 6600/7600, Jim Thornton. Unlike the 8600's \"four computers in one box\" solution to the speed problem, the STAR was a new design using a unit that we know today as the vector processor. By highly pipelining mathematical instructions with purpose-built instructions and hardware, mathematical processing is dramatically improved in a machine that was otherwise slower than a 7600. Although the particular set of problems it would be best at solving was limited compared to the general-purpose 7600, it was for solving exactly these problems that customers would buy CDC machines.\nSince these two projects competed for limited funds during the late 1960s, Norris felt that the company could not support simultaneous development of the STAR and a complete redesign of the 8600. Therefore, Cray left CDC to form the Cray Research company in 1972. Norris remained, however, a staunch supporter of Cray, and invested money into Cray's new company. In 1974 CDC released the STAR, designated as the Cyber 203. It turned out to have \"real world\" performance that was considerably worse than expected. STAR's chief designer, Jim Thornton, then left CDC to form the Network Systems Corporation.\nIn 1975, a STAR-100 was placed into service in a Control Data service center which was considered the first supercomputer in a data center. Founder William C. Norris presided at the podium for the press conference announcing the new service. Publicity was a key factor in making the announcement a success by coordinating the event with Guinness; thus, establishing the Star-100 as \"The most powerful and fastest computer\" which was published in the \"Guinness Book of World Records\". The late Duane Andrews, Public Relations, was responsible for coordinating this event. Andrews successfully attracted many influential editors including the research editor at Business Week who chronicled this publicity release \"... as the most exciting public event he attended in 20 years\". Sharing the podium were William C. Norris, Boyd Jones V.P. and S. Steve Adkins, Data Center Manager. It was extremely rare for Bill Norris to take the podium being a very private individual. Also, during the lunch at a local country club, Norris signed a huge stack of certificates attesting to the record which were printed by the Star 100 on printer paper produced in our Lincoln, Nebraska plant. The paper included a half-tone photo of the Star 100. The main customers of the STAR-100 data center were oil companies running oil reservoir simulations. Most notably was the simulation controlled from a terminal in Texas which solved oil extraction simulations for oil fields in Kuwait. A front page \"Wall Street Journal\" news article resulted in acquiring a new user, Allis-Chalmers, for simulation of a damaged hydroelectric turbine in a Norwegian mountain hydropower plant.\nA variety of systems based on the basic 6600/7600 architecture were repackaged in different price/performance categories of the CDC Cyber, which became CDC's main product line in the 1970s. An updated version of the STAR architecture, the Cyber 205, had considerably better performance than the original. By this time, however, Cray's own designs, like the Cray-1, were using the same basic design techniques as the STAR, but were computing much faster. The Star 100 was able to process vectors up to 64K (65536) elements, versus 64 elements for the Cray-1, but the Star 100 took much longer for initiating the operation so the Cray-1 outperformed with short vectors.\nSales of the STAR were weak, but Control Data Corp. produced a successor system, the Cyber 200/205, that gave Cray Research some competition. CDC also embarked on a number of special projects for its clients, who produced an even smaller number of black project computers. The CDC Advanced Flexible Processor (AFP), also known as CYBER PLUS, was one such machine.\nAnother design direction was the \"Cyber 80\" project, which was aimed at release in 1980. This machine could run old 6600-style programs, and also had a completely new 64-bit architecture. The concept behind Cyber 80 was that current 6000-series users would migrate to these machines with relative ease. The design and debugging of these machines went on past 1980, and the machines were eventually released under other names.\nCDC was also attempting to diversify its revenue from hardware into services and this included its promotion of the PLATO computer-aided learning system, which ran on Cyber hardware and incorporated many early computer interface innovations including bit-mapped touchscreen terminals.\nMagnetic Peripherals Inc..\nMeanwhile, several very large Japanese manufacturing firms were entering the market. The supercomputer market was too small to support more than a handful of companies, so CDC started looking for other markets. One of these was the hard disk drive (HDD) market.\nMagnetic Peripherals Inc., later Imprimis Technology, was originally a joint venture with Honeywell formed in 1975 to manufacture HDDs for both companies. CII-Honeywell Bull later purchased a 3 percent interest in MPI from Honeywell. Sperry became a partner in 1983 with 17 percent, making the ownership split CDC (67%) and Honeywell (17%). MPI was a captive supplier to its parents. It sold on an OEM basis only to them, while CDC sold MPI product to third parties under its brand name.\nIt became a major player in the HDD market. It was the worldwide leader in 14-inch disk drive technology in the OEM marketplace in the late 1970s and early 1980s especially with its SMD (Storage Module Device) and CMD (Cartridge Module Drive), with its plant at Brynmawr in the South Wales valleys running 24/7 production. The Magnetic Peripherals division in Brynmawr had produced 1 million disks and 3 million magnetic tapes by October 1979. CDC was an early developer of the eight-inch drive technology with products from its MPI Oklahoma City Operation. Its CDC Wren series drives were particularly popular with high end users, although it was behind the capacity growth and performance curves of numerous startups such as Micropolis, Atasi, Maxtor, and Quantum. CDC also co-developed the now universal Advanced Technology Attachment (ATA) interface with Compaq and Western Digital, which was aimed at lowering the cost of adding low-performance drives.\nCDC founded a separate division called Rigidyne in Simi Valley, California, to develop 3.5-inch drives using technology from the Wren series. These were marketed by CDC as the \"Swift\" series, and were among the first high-performance 3.5-inch drives on the market at their introduction in 1987.\nIn September 1988, CDC merged Rigidyne and MPI into the umbrella subsidiary of Imprimis Technology. The next year, Seagate Technology purchased Imprimis for $250 million in cash, 10.7 million in Seagate stock and a $50 million promissory note.\nInvestments.\nControl Data held interests in other companies including computer research company Arbitron, Commercial Credit Corporation and Ticketron.\nCommercial Credit Corporation.\nIn 1968, Commercial Credit Corporation was the target of a hostile takeover by Loews Inc. Loews had acquired nearly 10% of CCC, which it intended to break up on acquisition. To avoid the takeover, CCC forged a deal with CDC lending them the money to purchase control in CCC instead, and \"That is how a computer company came to own a fleet of fishing boats in the Chesapeake Bay.\" By the 1980s, Control Data entered an unstable period, which resulted in the company liquidating many of their assets. In 1986, Sandy Weill convinced the Control Data management to spin off their Commercial Credit subsidiary to prevent the company's potential liquidation. Over a period of years, Weill used Commercial Credit to build an empire that became Citigroup. In 1999, Commercial Credit was renamed CitiFinancial, and in 2011, the full-service network of US CitiFinancial branches were renamed OneMain Financial.\nTicketron.\nIn 1969, Control Data acquired 51% of Ticketron for $3.9 million from Cemp Investments. In 1970, Ticketron became the sole computerized ticketing provider in the United States. In 1973, Control Data increased the size of its investment.\nTicketron also provided ticketing terminals and back-end infrastructure for parimutuel betting, and provided similar services for a number of US lotteries, including those in New York, Illinois, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Washington and Maryland.\nBy the mid 1980s, Ticketron was CDC's most profitable business with revenue of $120 million and CDC, which was loss-making at the time, considered selling the business. In 1990 the majority of Ticketron's assets and business, with the exception of a small antitrust carve-out for Broadway's \"Telecharge\" business-unit, were bought by The Carlyle Group who sold it the following year to rival Ticketmaster.\nETA Systems, wind-down and sale of assets.\nCDC decided to fight for the high-performance niche, but Norris considered that the company had become moribund and unable to quickly design competitive machines. In 1983 he set up a spinoff company, ETA Systems, whose design goal was a machine processing data at 10 GFLOPs, about 40 times the speed of the Cray-1. The design never fully matured, and it was unable to reach its goals. Nevertheless, the product was one of the fastest computers on the market, and 7 liquid nitrogen-cooled and 27 smaller air cooled versions of the computers were sold during the next few years. They used the new CMOS chips, which produced much less heat. The effort ended after half-hearted attempts to sell ETA Systems. In 1989, most of the employees of ETA Systems were laid off, and the remaining ones were folded into CDC.\nDespite having valuable technology, CDC still suffered huge losses in 1985 ($567 million) and 1986 while attempting to reorganize. As a result, in 1987 it sold its PathLab Laboratory Information System to 3M. While CDC was still making computers, it was decided that hardware manufacturing was no longer as profitable as it used to be, and so in 1988 it was decided to leave the industry, bit by bit. The first division to go was Imprimis. After that, CDC sold other assets such as VTC (a chip maker that specialized in mass-storage circuitry and was closely linked with MPI), and non-computer-related assets like Ticketron. \nIn 1992, the company separated into two independent companies \u2013 the computer businesses were spun out as Control Data Systems, Inc. (CDS), while the information service businesses became the Ceridian Corporation. \nCDS later became owner of ICEM Technologies, makers of ICEM DDN and ICEM Surf software and sold the business to PTC for $40.6m in 1998. In 1999, CDS was bought out by Syntegra, a subsidiary of the BT Group, and merged into BT's Global Services organization.\nCeridian continues as a successful outsourced IT company focusing on human resources. CDC's Energy Management Division, was one of its most successful business units, providing control systems solutions that managed as much as 25% of all electricity on the planet, and went to Ceridian in the split. This division was renamed Empros and was sold to Siemens in 1993. In 1997, General Dynamics acquired the Computing Devices International Division of Ceridian, which was a defense electronics and systems integration business headquartered in Bloomington, Minnesota \u2013 originally Control Data's Government Systems Division. \nIn March 2001, Ceridian separated into two independent companies, with the old Ceridian Corporation renamed itself to Arbitron Inc. and the rest of the company (consisting of human resources services and Comdata business) took the Ceridian Corporation name. Ceridian was later split again in 2013, with formation of Ceridian HCM Holding Inc. (human resources services) and Comdata Inc. (payments business), marking the end of CDC assets split for good.\nTimeline of systems releases.\nNote: The 8xx &amp; 9xx Cyber models, introduced beginning in 1982, formed the 64-bit Cyber 180 series, and their Peripheral Processors (PPs) were 16-bit. The 180 series had virtual memory capability, using CDC's NOS/VE operating system.The more complete nomenclature for these was 180/xxx, although at times the shorter form (e.g. Cyber 990) was used.\nPeripheral Systems Group.\nControl Data Corporation's Peripheral Systems Group was both a hardware and a software development unit that functioned in the 1970s and 1980s.\nTheir services including development and marketing of IBM-oriented (operating) systems software. One of the Peripheral Systems Group's software products was named CUPID, \"Control Data's Program for Unlike Data Set Concatenation.\" Its focus was for customers of IBM's MVS operating system, and the intended audience was systems programmers. The product's General Information and Reference Manual included SysGen-like options and information about internal\nuser-accessible control blocks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58033", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58033", "title": "Transient electromagnetic device", "text": ""}
{"id": "58034", "revid": "16641444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58034", "title": "Chemehuevi", "text": "Indigenous people of the Great Basin\nThe Chemehuevi ( ) are an Indigenous people of the Great Basin. They are the southernmost branch of Southern Paiute. Today, Chemehuevi people are enrolled in the following federally recognized tribes:\nSome Chemehuevi are also part of the Soboba Band of Luise\u00f1o Indians, whose members are mostly \"Sovovatum\" or \"Soboba band\" members of Cahuilla and Luise\u00f1o people.\nName.\n\"Chemehuevi\" has multiple interpretations. It is considered to be either a Mojave term meaning \"those who play with fish\" or a Quechan word meaning \"nose-in-the-air-like-a-roadrunner.\" The Chemehuevi call themselves \"N\u00fcw\u00fcvi\" (\"The People\", singular \"N\u00fcw\u00fc\") or \"Tant\u00e1wats\", meaning \"Southern Men.\" Alternate spellings of Chemehuevi include Chemeguab and Chemegueb.\nLanguage.\nTheir language, Chemehuevi, is a Colorado River Numic language, in the Numic language branch of the Uto-Aztecan language family. First transcribed by John P. Harrington and Carobeth Laird in the early 20th century, it was studied in the 1970s by linguist Margaret L. Press. whose field notes and extensive sound recordings remain available. The language is now near extinction; during the filming of Ironbound Films' 2008 American documentary film \"The Linguists\", linguists Greg Anderson and K. David Harrison interviewed and recorded one of the last 3 remaining speakers.\nIn 2015, the Siwavaats Junior College in Havasu Lake, California, was established to teach children the language. A Chemehuevi dictionary with 2,500 words was expected to become available in 2016.\nHistory and traditional culture.\nThe Chemehuevi were originally a desert tribe among the Southern Paiute group. Post-contact, they lived primarily in the eastern Mojave Desert and later Cottonwood Island in Nevada and the Chemehuevi Valley along the Colorado River in California. They were a nomadic people living in small groups given the sparse resources available in the desert environment. Carobeth Laird indicates their traditional territory spanned the High Desert from the Colorado River on the east to the Tehachapi Mountains on the west and from the Las Vegas area and Death Valley on the north to the San Bernardino and San Gabriel Mountains in the south. They are most closely identified as among the Great Basin Indians. Among others they are cousins of the Kawaiisu.\nThe most comprehensive collection of Chemehuevi history, culture and mythology was gathered by Carobeth Laird (1895\u20131983) and her second husband, George Laird, one of the last Chemehuevi to have been raised in the traditional culture. Carobeth Laird, a linguist and ethnographer, wrote a comprehensive account of the culture and language as George Laird remembered it, and published their collaborative efforts in her 1976 \"The Chemehuevis\", the first \u2013 and, to date, only \u2013 ethnography of the Chemehuevi traditional culture.\nDescribing the Chemehuevi as she knew them, and presenting the texture of traditional life amongst the people, Carobeth Laird writes:\nThe Chemehuevi character is made up of polarities which are complementary rather than contradictory. They are loquacious yet capable of silence; gregarious yet so close to the earth that single families or even men alone might live and travel for long periods away from other human beings; proud, yet capable of a gentle self-ridicule. They are conservative to a degree, yet insatiably curious and ready to inquire into and even to adopt new ways: to visit all tribes, whether friends or enemies; to speak strange tongues, sing strange songs, and marry strange wives.The Chemehuevi made intricately coiled baskets using a three-rod foundation of willow. Traditionally, the majority of weaving was completed with split willow, and darker patterns were made with devil's claw and yucca, among other materials. This traditional style of basketmaking is currently practiced by a small group of weavers.\nPopulation.\nEstimates for the pre-contact populations of most Indigenous peoples of California have varied substantially. Alfred L. Kroeber estimated the combined 1770 population of the Chemehuevi, Koso, and Kawaiisu as 1,500. The combined estimate in 1910 dropped to 500. An Indian agent reported the Chemehuevi population in 1875 to be 350. Kroeber estimated U.S. census data put the Chemehuevi population in 1910 as 355. Population as of 2016 is in the thousands.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58035", "revid": "51006113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58035", "title": "Hopi", "text": "Native American tribe in Arizona\nThe Hopi are Native Americans who primarily live in northeastern Arizona. The majority are enrolled in the Hopi Tribe of Arizona and live on the Hopi Reservation in northeastern Arizona; however, some Hopi people are enrolled in the Colorado River Indian Tribes of the Colorado River Indian Reservation at the border of Arizona and California.\nThe 2010 U.S. census states that about 19,338 US citizens self-identify as being Hopi.\nThe Hopi language belongs to the Uto-Aztecan language family.\nHopi organize themselves into matrilineal clans. Children are born into the clan of their mother. Clans extend across all villages. Children are named by the women of the father's clan. After the child is introduced to the Sun, the women of the paternal clan gather, and name the child in honor of the father's clan. Children can be given over 40 names. The village members decide the common name. Current practice is to use a non-Hopi or English name or the parent's chosen Hopi name. A person may also change the name upon initiation to traditional religious societies, or a major life event.\nThe Hopi understand their land to be sacred and understand their role as caretakers of the land that they inherited from their ancestors. Agriculture is significant to their lifeways and economy. Precontact architecture reflects early Hopi society and perceptions of home and family. Many Hopi homes share traits of neighboring Pueblo tribes. Early communal structures, especially Pueblo Great Houses, include living rooms, storage rooms, and religious sanctuaries, called kivas. Each of these rooms allowed for specific activities.\nThe Hopi encountered Spaniards in the 16th century, and are historically referred to as Pueblo people, because they lived in villages (\"pueblos\" in the Spanish language). The Hopi are thought to be descended from the Ancestral Pueblo people (Hopi: \"Hisatsinom\"), who constructed large apartment-house complexes and had an advanced culture that spanned the present-day Four Corners region of the United States, comprising southeastern Utah, northeastern Arizona, northwestern New Mexico, and southwestern Colorado. It is thought that Hopi people descend from those \nAncestral Puebloan settlements along the Mogollon Rim of northern Arizona.\nHopi villages are now located atop mesas in northern Arizona. The Hopi originally settled near the foot of the mesas but in the course of the 17th century moved to the mesa tops for protection from the Utes, Apaches, and Spanish.\nOn December 16, 1882, President Chester A. Arthur passed an executive order creating an Indian reservation for the Hopi. It was smaller than the surrounding land that was annexed by the Navajo Reservation, which is the largest reservation in the country.\nAs of 2005 the Hopi Reservation is entirely surrounded by the much larger Navajo Reservation. As the result of land disputes from 1940 to 1970 or earlier, the two nations used to share the government designated \"Navajo\u2013Hopi Joint Use Area\", but this continued to be a source of conflict. The partition of this area, commonly known as Big Mountain, by Acts of Congress in 1974 and 1996, but as of 2008 has also resulted in long-term controversy.\nOn October 24, 1936, the Hopi Tribe ratified its constitution, creating a unicameral government where all powers are vested in a Tribal Council. The powers of the executive branch (chairman and vice chairman) and judicial branch, are limited. The traditional powers and authority of the Hopi Villages were preserved in the 1936 Constitution.\nName.\nThe primary meaning of the word \"Hopi\" is \"behaving one, one who is mannered, civilized, peaceable, polite, who adheres to the Hopi Way.\" Some sources contrast this to other warring tribes that subsist on plunder. \"Hopi\" is a concept deeply rooted in the culture's religion, spirituality, and its view of morality and ethics. To be Hopi is to strive toward this concept, which involves a state of total reverence for all things, peace with these things, and life in accordance with the instructions of Maasaw, the Creator or Caretaker of Earth. The Hopi observe their religious ceremonies for the benefit of the entire world.\nEarly history.\nOraibi.\nOld Oraibi is one of four original Hopi villages. It was founded before A.D. 1100 and is one of the oldest continuously inhabited villages within the territory of the United States. In the 1540s the village was recorded as having 1,500 to 3,000 residents.\nEarly European contact, 1540\u20131680.\nThe first recorded European contact with the Hopi was by the Spanish in 1540. Spanish General Francisco V\u00e1squez de Coronado went to North America to explore the land. While at the Zuni villages, he learned of the Hopi tribe. Coronado dispatched Pedro de Tovar and other members of their party to find the Hopi villages. The Spanish wrote that the first Hopi village they visited was Awatovi. They noted that there were about 16,000 Hopi and Zuni people. A few years later, the Spanish explorer Garc\u00eda L\u00f3pez de C\u00e1rdenas investigated the Rio Grande and met the Hopi. They warmly entertained Cardenas and his men and directed him on his journey.\nIn 1582\u20131583 the Hopi were visited by Antonio de Espejo's expedition. He noted that there were five Hopi villages and around 12,000 Hopi people. During that period the Spanish explored and colonized the southwestern region of the New World, but never sent many forces or settlers to the Hopi country. Their visits to the Hopi were random and spread out over many years. Many times the visits were from military explorations.\nThe Spanish colonized near the Rio Grande and, because the Hopi did not live near rivers that gave access to the Rio Grande, the Spanish never left any troops on their land. The Spanish were accompanied by missionaries, Catholic friars. Beginning in 1629, with the arrival of 30 friars in Hopi country, the Franciscan Period started. The Franciscans had missionaries assigned and built a church at Awatovi.\nPueblo Revolt of 1680.\nSpanish Franciscan priests were only marginally successful in converting the Hopi and persecuted them for adhering to Hopi religious practices. The Spanish occupiers enslaved the Hopi populace, forcing them to labor and hand over goods and crops. Spanish oppression and attempts to convert the Hopi caused the Hopi over time to become increasingly intolerant towards their occupiers. The documentary record shows evidence of Spanish abuses. In 1655, a Franciscan priest by the name of Salvador de Guerra beat to death a Hopi man named Juan Cuna. As punishment, Guerra was removed from his post on the Hopi mesas and sent to Mexico City. In 1656, a young Hopi man by the name of Juan Su\u00f1i was sent to Santa Fe as an indentured servant because he impersonated the resident priest Alonso de Posada at Awatovi, an act believed to have been carried out in the spirit of Hopi clowning. During the period of Franciscan missionary presence (1629\u20131680), the only significant conversions took place at the pueblo of Awatovi. In the 1670s, the Rio Grande Pueblo Indians put forward the suggestion to revolt in 1680 and garnered Hopi support. \nThe Pueblo Revolt was the first time that diverse Pueblo groups had worked in unison to drive out the Spanish colonists. In the Burning of Awatovi, Spanish soldiers, local Catholic Church missionaries, friars, and priests were all put to death, and the churches and mission buildings were dismantled stone by stone. It took two decades for the Spanish to reassert their control over the Rio Grande Pueblos but the Catholic Inquisition never made it back to Hopiland. In 1700, the Spanish friars had begun rebuilding a smaller church at Awatovi. During the winter of 1700\u20131701, teams of men from the other Hopi villages sacked Awatovi at the request of the village chief, killed all the men of the village, and removed the women and children to other Hopi villages, then completely destroyed the village and burned it to the ground. Thereafter, despite intermittent attempts during the 18th century, the Spanish never re-established a presence in Hopi country.\nHopi-U.S. relations, 1849\u20131946.\nIn 1849, James S. Calhoun was appointed official Indian agent of Indian Affairs for the Southwest Territory of the U.S. He had headquarters in Santa Fe and was responsible for all of the Indian residents of the area. The first formal meeting between the Hopi and the U.S. government occurred in 1850 when seven Hopi leaders made the trip to Santa Fe to meet with Calhoun. They wanted the government to provide protection against the Navajo, a Southern Athabascan-speaking tribe who were distinct from Apaches. At this time, the Hopi leader was Nakwaiyamtewa.\nThe US established Fort Defiance in 1851 in Arizona, and placed troops in Navajo country to deal with their threats to the Hopi. General James J. Carleton, with the assistance of Kit Carson, was assigned to travel through the area. They \"captured\" the Navajo natives and forced them to the fort. As a result of the Long Walk of the Navajo, the Hopi enjoyed a short period of peace.\nIn 1847, Mormons settled in Utah and tried to convert the Indians to Mormonism. Jacob Hamblin, a Mormon missionary, first made a trip into Hopi country in 1858. He was on good terms with the Hopi Indians, and in 1875 an LDS Church was built on Hopi land.\nEducation.\nIn 1875, the English trader Thomas Keam escorted Hopi leaders to meet President Chester A. Arthur in Washington D.C. \"Loololma,\" village chief of Oraibi at the time, was very impressed with Washington. In 1887, a federal boarding school was established at Keams Canyon for Hopi children.\nThe Oraibi people did not support the school and refused to send their children from their villages. The Keams Canyon School was organized to teach the Hopi youth the ways of European-American civilization. It forced them to use English and give up their traditional ways. The children were made to abandon their tribal identity and completely take on European-American culture. Children were forced to give up their traditional names, clothing and language. Boys, who were also forced to cut their long hair, were taught European farming and carpentry skills. Girls were taught ironing, sewing, and \"civilized\" dining. The school also reinforced European-American religions. The American Baptist Home Mission Society made students attend services every morning and religious teachings during the week. In 1890, Commissioner of Indian Affairs Thomas Jefferson Morgan arrived in Hopi country with other government officials to review the progress of the new school. Seeing that few students were enrolled, they returned with federal troops who threatened to arrest the Hopi parents who refused to send their children to school, with Morgan forcibly taking children to fill the school.\nHopi land.\nAgriculture is an important part of Hopi culture, and their villages are spread out across the northern part of Arizona. The Hopi and the Navajo did not have a conception of land being bounded and divided. The Hopi people had settled in permanent villages, while the nomadic Navajo people moved around the four corners. Both lived on the land that their ancestors did. On December 16, 1882, President Chester A. Arthur issued an executive order creating a reservation for the Hopi. It was smaller than the Navajo Reservation, which was the largest in the country.\nThe Hopi reservation was originally a rectangle 55 by 70 miles (88.5 by 110\u00a0km) in the middle of the Navajo Reservation, with their village lands taking about half of the land. The reservation prevented encroachment by white settlers, but it did not protect the Hopis against the Navajos.\nThe Hopi and the Navajo fought over land, and they had different models of sustainability, as the Navajo were sheepherders. Eventually the Hopi went before the Senate Committee of Interior and Insular Affairs to ask them to help provide a solution to the dispute. The tribes argued over approximately of land in northern Arizona. In 1887 the U.S. government passed the Dawes Allotment Act. The purpose was to divide up communal tribal land into individual allotments by household, to encourage a model of European-American style subsistence farming on individually owned family plots of or less. The Department of Interior would declare remaining land \"surplus\" to the tribe's needs and make it available for purchase by U.S. citizens. For the Hopi, the Act would destroy their ability to farm, their main means of income. The Bureau of Indian Affairs did not set up land allotments in the Southwest.\nOraibi split.\nThe chief of the Oraibi, Lololoma, enthusiastically supported Hopi education, but his people were divided on this issue. Most of the village was conservative and refused to allow their children to attend school. These natives were referred to as \"hostiles\" because they opposed the American government and its attempts to force assimilation. The rest of the Oraibi were called \"friendlies\" because of their acceptance of white people and culture. The \"hostiles\" refused to let their children attend school. In 1893, the Oraibi Day School was opened in the Oraibi village. Although the school was in the village, traditional parents still refused to allow their children to attend. Frustrated with this, the US government often resorted to intimidation and force in the form of imprisonment as a means of punishment.\nIn November 1894, Captain Frank Robinson and a group of soldiers were dispatched to enter the village and arrested 18 of the Hopi resisters. Among those arrested were Habema (Heevi'ima) and Lomahongyoma. In the following days, they realized they had not captured all Hopi resisters and Sergeant Henry Henser was sent back to capture Potopa, a Hopi medicine man, known as \"one of the most dangerous of resisters\". Eager to rid Orayvi of all resisters, government officials sent 19 Hopi men who they saw as troublesome to Alcatraz Prison, where they stayed for a year. The US government thought they undermined the Hopi resistance, however this only intensified ill feelings of bitterness and resistance towards the government. When the Hopi prisoners were sent home, they claimed that government officials told them that they did not have to send their children to school, but when they returned, Indian agents denied that this was promised to them. Another Oraibi leader, \"Lomahongyoma\", competed with \"Lololoma\" for village leadership. In 1906 the village split after a conflict between hostiles and friendlies. The conservative hostiles left and formed a new village, known as \"Hotevilla\".\nFederal recognition.\nAt the dawn of the 20th century, the U.S. government established day schools, missions, farming bureaus, and clinics on every Indian reservation. This policy required that every reservation set up its own police force and tribal courts and appointed a leader who would represent their tribe to the U.S. government. In 1910 in the Census for Indians, the Hopi Tribe had a total of 2,000 members, which was the highest in 20 years. The Navajo at this time had 22,500 members and have consistently increased in population. During the early years of this century, only about three percent of Hopis lived off the reservation. In 1924 Congress officially declared Native Americans to be U.S. citizens with the Indian Citizenship Act.\nUnder the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, the Hopi established a constitution to create their own tribal government, and in 1936 elected a Tribal Council. The Preamble to the Hopi constitution states that they are a self-governing tribe, focused on working together for peace and agreements between villages in order to preserve the \"good things of Hopi life.\" The constitution consists of 13 articles, addressing territory, membership, and organization of their government with legislative, executive and judicial branches.\nHopi\u2013Navajo land disputes.\nFrom the 1940s to the 1970s, the Navajo moved their settlements closer to Hopi land, causing the Hopi to raise the issue with the U.S. government. This resulted in the establishment of \"District 6\" which placed a boundary around the Hopi villages on the first, second, and third mesas, thinning the reservation to . In 1962 the courts issued the \"Opinion, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and Judgment,\" which stated that the U.S. government did not grant the Navajo any type of permission to reside on the Hopi Reservation that was declared in 1882; and that the remaining Hopi land was to be shared with the Navajo, as the \"Navajo\u2013Hopi Joint Use Area\".\nFrom 1961 to 1964, the Hopi tribal council signed leases with the U.S. government that allowed companies to explore and drill for oil, gas, and minerals in Hopi country. This drilling brought over three million dollars to the Hopi Tribe. In 1974, The Navajo-Hopi Land Settlement Act was passed (Public Law 93\u2013531; 25 U.S.C. 640d et seq.), followed by the Navajo-Hopi Land Dispute Settlement Act of 1996, settling some issues not resolved in 1974. The 1974 Act created the Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, which forced the relocation of any Hopi or Navajo living on the other's land. In 1992, the Hopi Reservation was increased to .\nCurrently, the Hopi Reservation is traversed by Arizona State Route 264, a paved road that links the numerous Hopi villages.\nTribal government.\nOn October 24, 1936, the Hopi Tribe of Arizona ratified a constitution. That constitution created a unicameral government where all powers are vested in a Tribal Council. While there is an executive branch (tribal chairman and vice chairman) and judicial branch, their powers are limited under the Hopi Constitution. The traditional powers and authority of the Hopi villages was preserved in the 1936 constitution.\nThe Hopi tribe is federally recognized and headquartered in Kykotsmovi, Arizona.\nTribal officers.\nThe current tribal officers are:\nTribal council.\nRepresentatives to the council are selected either by a community election or by an appointment from the village kikmongwi, or leader. Each representative serves a two-year term. Representation on the Tribal Council as of December 2017 is as follows:\nVillage of Upper Moenkopi: Hubert Lewis Sr., Michael Elmer, Robert Charley, Philton Talahytewa Sr.\nVillage of Bacavi: Dwayne Secakuku, Clifford Quotsaquahu\nVillage of Kykotsmovi: David Talayumptewa, Phillip Quochytewa Sr., Danny Honanie, Herman G. Honanie\nVillage of Sipaulavi: Rosa Honanie,\nVillage of Mishongnovi: Emma Anderson, Craig Andrews, Pansy K. Edmo, Rolanda Yoyletsdewa\nFirst Mesa Consolidated Villages: Albert T. Sinquah, Ivan Sidney Sr., Wallace Youvella Jr., Dale Sinquah\nCurrently, the villages of Shungopavi, Oraibi, Hotevilla, and Lower Moenkopi do not have a representative on council. The Hopi Villages select council representatives, and may decline to send any representative. The declination has been approved by the Hopi Courts.\nTribal courts.\nThe Hopi Tribal Government operates a Trial Court and Appellate Court in Keams Canyon. These courts operate under a Tribal Code, amended August 28, 2012.\nEconomic development.\nThe Hopi tribe earns most of its income from natural resources. The tribe's 2010 operating budget was $21.8 million, and projected mining revenues for 2010 were $12.8 million. On the Navajo Reservation, a significant amount of coal is mined yearly from which the Hopi Tribe shares mineral royalty income. Peabody Western Coal Company is one of the largest coal operations on Hopi land, with long-time permits for continued mining. Consequently, the closure of a large coal mine in 2019 has compounded existing unemployment. Combined with the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the lack of official help for those who have lost access to the coal they need to burn to heat their homes, Hopi have turned to nonprofits for help.\nThe Hopi Tribe Economic Development Corporation (HTEDC) is the tribal enterprise charged with creating diverse, viable economic opportunities. The HEDC oversees the Hopi Cultural Center and Walpi Housing Management. Other HTEDC businesses include the Hopi Three Canyon Ranches, between Flagstaff and Winslow and the 26 Bar Ranch in Eagar; Hopi Travel Plaza in Holbrook; three commercial properties in Flagstaff; and the Days Inn Kokopelli in Sedona. Tourism is a source of income. The Moenkopi Developers Corporation, a non-profit entity owned by the Upper village of Moenkopi, opened the 100-room https:// in Moenkopi, Arizona, near Tuba City, Arizona. It is the second hotel on the reservation. It provides non-Hopi a venue for entertainment, lectures, and educational demonstrations, as well as tours and lodging. The project is expected to support 400 jobs. The village also operates the Tuuvi Travel Center in Moenkopi. The Tribally owned and operated Hopi Cultural Center on Second Mesa includes gift shops, museums, a hotel, and a restaurant that serves Hopi dishes.\nThe Hopi people have repeatedly voted against gambling casinos as an economic opportunity.\nOn November 30, 2017, in his last day as Chairman of the Hopi Tribe, Herman G. Honanie and Governor Doug Ducey signed the Hopi Tribe\u2013State of Arizona Tribal Gaming Compact, a year after the Tribe approved entering into a compact with the State of Arizona. The historic agreement, which gives the Hopi Tribe the opportunity to operate or lease up to 900 Class III gaming machines, makes Hopi the 22nd and last Arizona tribe to sign a gaming compact with the State.\nCulture.\nThe \"Hopi Dictionary\" gives the primary meaning of the word \"Hopi\" as: \"behaving one, one who is mannered, civilized, peaceable, polite, who adheres to the Hopi Way\". Some sources contrast this to other warring tribes that subsist on plunder, considering their autonym, \"Hopisinom\" to mean \"The Peaceful People\" or \"Peaceful Little Ones\". However, Malotki maintains that \"neither the notion 'peaceful' nor the idea 'little' are semantic ingredients of the term\".\nAccording to Barry Pritzker, \"...many Hopi feel an intimate and immediate connection with their past. Indeed, for many Hopi, time does not proceed in a straight line, as most people understand it. Rather, the past may be past and present more or less simultaneously.\". In the present Fourth World, the Hopi worship Masauwu, who admonished them to \"always remember their gods and to live in the correct way\". The village leader, \"kikmongwi\", \"promoted civic virtue and proper behavior\".\nTraditionally, Hopi are organized into matrilineal clans. When a man marries, the children from the relationship are members of his wife's clan. These clan organizations extend across all villages. Children are named by the women of the father's clan. On the 20th day of a baby's life, the women of the paternal clan gather, each woman bringing a name and a gift for the child. In some cases where many relatives would attend, a child could be given over 40 names, for example. The child's parents generally decide the name to be used from these names. Current practice is to either use a non-Hopi or English name or the parent's chosen Hopi name. A person may also change the name upon initiation into one of the religious societies, such as the kachina society, or with a major life event.\nThe Hopi practice a complete cycle of traditional ceremonies although not all villages retain or had the complete ceremonial cycle. These ceremonies take place according to the lunar calendar and are observed in each of the Hopi villages. Like other Native American groups, the Hopi have been influenced by Christianity and the missionary work of several Christian denominations. Few have converted enough to Christianity to drop their traditional religious practices.\nThe most widely publicized of Hopi katsina rites is the \"Snake Dance\", an annual event during which the performers danced while handling live snakes.\nTraditionally the Hopi are micro or subsistence farmers. The Hopi also are part of the wider cash economy; a significant number of Hopi have mainstream jobs; others earn a living by creating Hopi art, notably the carving of katsina dolls, the crafting of earthenware ceramics, and the design and production of fine jewelry, especially sterling silver.\nThe Hopi collect and dry a native perennial plant called \"Thelesperma megapotamicum\", known by the common name Hopi tea, and use it to make an herbal tea, as a medicinal remedy and a yellow dye.\nAlbinism.\nThe Hopi have a high rate of albinism. Primarily in Second Mesa and west villages towards Hotevilla\u2014about 1 in 200 individuals.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58036", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58036", "title": "Lancaster County, Nebraska", "text": "County in Nebraska, United States\nLancaster County is a county located in the U.S. state of Nebraska. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 322,608, making it the second-most populous county in Nebraska. Its county seat is Lincoln, the state capital. The county was created in 1859.\nLancaster County is part of the Lincoln, NE Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nIn the Nebraska license plate system, Lancaster County was represented by the prefix 2 (it had the second-largest number of vehicles registered in the state when the license plate system was established in 1922). In 2002, the state discontinued the 1922 system in Lancaster, Douglas and Sarpy counties.\nGeography.\nAccording to the US Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.0%) is water.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nIn 2004, Lancaster County was named a StormReady county by the National Weather Service.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 Census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 322,608 people in the county. The population density was . The racial makeup of the county was 79.7% White, 4.5% Black or African American, 1.0% Native American, 4.7% Asian American, 0.1% Pacific Islander, and 3.3% from two or more races. 8.1% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\n2000 Census.\nAs of the 2000 United States census, there were 250,291 people, 99,187 households, and 60,702 families in the county. The population density was . There were 104,217 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.07% White, 2.82% Black or African American, 0.64% Native American, 2.86% Asian American, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 1.69% from other races, and 1.87% from two or more races. 3.37% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 39.1% were of German, 7.9% English and 7.8% Irish ancestry.\nThere were 99,187 households, out of which 30.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.80% were married couples living together, 9.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.80% were non-families. 29.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.30% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 3.00.\nThe county population contained 23.50% under the age of 18, 15.40% from 18 to 24, 30.40% from 25 to 44, 20.30% from 45 to 64, and 10.40% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.80 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.50 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $41,850, and the median income for a family was $53,676. Males had a median income of $34,720 versus $25,614 for females. The per capita income for the county was $21,265. About 5.50% of families and 9.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.90% of those under age 18 and 6.10% of those age 65 or over.\nCommunities.\nVillages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus divisions.\nLancaster County is divided into the following census divisions called precincts, defined by the boundaries of the original townships, except for the City of Lincoln.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nLancaster County has historically been somewhat conservative for an urban county. In the last 30 national elections, Lancaster County selected the Republican Party candidate 78% of the time. However, it has become more competitive in recent years, largely due to the influence of Lincoln and the University of Nebraska. Since 1988, the margin in the county has been 10 points or less all but once. In 2008, Barack Obama won a narrow majority in Lancaster County, becoming the first Democrat to carry the county since 1964, and only the second since 1936. Republican Donald Trump never won the county in all three of his runs.\nAs of January 2025, Republicans maintain a relative advantage in party registration in the county.\nEducation.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58038", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58038", "title": "Oliver Goldsmith", "text": "Anglo-Spanish-Irish writer (1728\u20131774)\nOliver Goldsmith (10 November 1728 \u2013 4 April 1774) was an Anglo-Irish poet, novelist, playwright, and hack writer. He produced literary works in a variety of genres and is regarded among the most versatile writers of the Georgian era. His works are known for their realistic depictions of British society, and his comedy plays for the English stage are considered second in importance only to those of playwright William Shakespeare. Credited with introducing sentimentalism in English literature in 18th-century Great Britain, several of Goldsmith's publications are popular classics of the period, including his only novel, \"The Vicar of Wakefield\" (1766), and the comedy play \"She Stoops to Conquer\" (1771).\nHe wrote the play \"The Good-Natur'd Man\" (1768) and is additionally thought by commentators such as Washington Irving to have written the children's novel \"The History of Little Goody Two-Shoes\" (1765), one of the earliest classical works of children's literature. Goldsmith also produced a number of poems during his career, such as \"The Deserted Village\" (1770), and contributed to the flourishing of idyllic poetry during the Georgian era.\nAfter spending his early years in Dublin, he settled in London in 1756 where he met many of the writers who shaped his later career, and the majority of his works were written after this period. His first works were published in his \"The Citizen of the World\" series in 1760, often under the pseudonym James Willington. Beginning in the 1760s, he maintained a close friendship with Samuel Johnson, another prolific English writer who played a significant role in promoting his poems. His personal mentorship and guidance resulted in Goldsmith expanding his literary writings to include political works. This long-term collaboration between the two authors has been described as \"one of the most fruitful intellectual partnerships in 18th-century English letters.\" In 1764, he became one of the earliest members of Johnson's literary intellectual circle, popularly known as \"The Club\". Although Goldsmith wrote extensively to supplement his income, he was constantly in financial debt and regularly suffered from ill health. He died in 1774 in London at the age of 45, and was buried in Temple Church. \nDuring the 19th century, Goldsmith became regarded as a seminal figure of sentimental literature, having influenced later English authors Charles Dickens, Jane Austen, George Eliot, and Mary Shelley, all of whom mentioned his characters in their own novels. He continues to be held in high regard in his native Ireland and Great Britain, with many statues, libraries, schools, and streets named after him. Since his death, his \"magnum opus\" \"The Vicar of Wakefield\" has retained its reputation as one of the best-known novels of 18th-century English literature, and his play \"She Stoops to Conquer\" remains a popular study in theater classes.\nEarly life.\nGoldsmith's birth date and year are not known with certainty. According to the Library of Congress authority file, he told a biographer that he was born on 10 November 1728. The location of his birthplace is also uncertain. He was born either in the townland of Pallas, near Ballymahon, County Longford, Ireland, where his father was the Anglican curate of the parish of Forgney, or at the residence of his maternal grandparents, at the Smith Hill House near Elphin in County Roscommon, where his grandfather Oliver Jones was a clergyman and master of the Elphin diocesan school, and where Oliver studied. When Goldsmith was two years old, his father was appointed the rector of the parish of \"Kilkenny West\" in County Westmeath. The family moved to the parsonage at Lissoy, between Athlone and Ballymahon, and continued to live there until his father's death in 1747.\nIn 1744, Goldsmith went up to Trinity College Dublin. His tutor was Theaker Wilder. Neglecting his studies in theology and law, he fell to the bottom of his class. In 1747, along with four other undergraduates, he was expelled for a riot in which they attempted to storm the Marshalsea Prison. He was graduated in 1749 as a Bachelor of Arts, but without the discipline or distinction that might have gained him entry to a profession in the church or the law. His education seemed to have given him mainly a taste for fine clothes, cards, singing Irish airs, and playing the flute. He lived for a short time with his mother, tried various professions without success, studied medicine desultorily at the University of Edinburgh from 1752 to 1755, and set out on a walking tour of Flanders, France, Switzerland, and Northern Italy, living by his wits (busking with his flute).\nCareer.\nHe settled in London in 1756, where he briefly held various jobs, including an apothecary's assistant and an usher of a school. Perennially in debt and addicted to gambling, Goldsmith produced a massive output as a hack writer on Grub Street for the publishers of London, but his few painstaking works earned him the company of Samuel Johnson, with whom he was a founding member of \"The Club\". There, through fellow Club member Edmund Burke, he made the acquaintance of Sir George Savile, who would later arrange a job for him at Thornhill Grammar School in Yorkshire. The combination of his literary work and his dissolute lifestyle led Horace Walpole to give him the epithet \"inspired idiot\". During this period he used the pseudonym \"James Willington\" (the name of a fellow student at Trinity) to publish his 1758 translation of the autobiography of the Huguenot Jean Marteilhe.\nWorks.\n\"The Present State of Polite Learning in Europe\".\nPublished in 1759, this essay surveys the condition of letters and education in contemporary Europe and critiques the commercial pressures shaping the literary marketplace. Scholars have noted close parallels with James Ralph\u2019s 1758 pamphlet \"The Case of Authors by Profession or Trade, Stated\"\u2014particularly on contempt for paid authorship, theatrical gatekeeping, and writers\u2019 dependence on booksellers\u2014and suggest the two writers may have discussed such matters while both were associated with \"The Monthly Review\".\n\"The Citizen of the World\".\nIn 1760 Goldsmith began to publish a series of letters in the \"Public Ledger\" under the title \"The Citizen of the World\" which brought him fame. Purportedly written by a Chinese traveller in England by the name of Lien Chi, they used this fictional outsider's perspective to comment ironically and at times moralistically on British society and manners. It was inspired by the earlier essay series \"Persian Letters\" by Montesquieu.\n\"The Hermit\".\nGoldsmith wrote this 160-line romantic ballad in 1765. The hero and heroine are Edwin, a youth without wealth or power, and Angelina, the daughter of a lord \"beside the Tyne\". Angelina spurns many wooers, but refuses to make plain her love for young Edwin. \"Quite dejected with my scorn\", Edwin disappears and becomes a hermit. One day, Angelina turns up at his cell in boy's clothes and, not recognising him, tells him her story. Edwin then reveals his true identity, and the lovers never part again. The poem is notable for its interesting portrayal of a hermit, who is fond of the natural world and his wilderness solitude but maintains a gentle, sympathetic demeanour toward other people. In keeping with eremitical tradition, however, Edwin the Hermit claims to \"spurn the [opposite] sex\". This poem appears under the title of \"A Ballad\" sung by the character of Mr. Burchell in Chapter 8 of Goldsmith's novel, \"The Vicar of Wakefield\".\n\"The Vicar of Wakefield\".\nThis classic novel, published in 1766, tells the story of a devout and benevolent vicar, Charles Primrose, and his family who are reduced to poverty and prison. Dr. Primrose serves as the narrator. The novel includes an aristocratic villain, impersonation, abduction, and betrayal while exploring themes of faith, humility, social class, and the importance of family and community.\n\"The Deserted Village\".\nIn the 1760s Goldsmith witnessed the demolition of an ancient village and the destruction of its farms to clear land to become a wealthy man's garden. His poem \"The Deserted Village\", published in 1770, expresses a fear that the destruction of villages and the conversion of land from productive agriculture to ornamental landscape gardens would ruin the peasantry.\n\"She Stoops to Conquer\".\nThe satirical play, \"She Stoops to Conquer\", was first performed in 1773.\nIt is a story of love, mistaken identities, and social etiquette, known for its wit, class-based satire, and enduring characters. It is still regularly performed and has been adapted for film and television.\nOther works.\nGoldsmith has sometimes been credited with writing the classic children's tale \"The History of Little Goody Two-Shoes\", though this cannot be proved.\nPersonal life.\nIn his \"Life\", Washington Irving states that Goldsmith was between 5'4\" and 5'6\" in height, not heavily built but quite muscular and with rather plain features. In character, he had a lively sense of fun, was totally guileless, and never happier than when in the light-hearted company of children. The money that he sporadically earned was often frittered away or happily given away to the next good cause that presented itself so that any financial security tended to be fleeting and short-lived. Goldsmith's talents were unreservedly recognised by Samuel Johnson, whose patronage \u2013 somewhat resented by Boswell \u2013 aided his eventual recognition in the literary world and the world of drama.\nGoldsmith was described by contemporaries as prone to envy, a congenial but impetuous and disorganised personality who once planned to emigrate to America but failed because he missed his ship. At some point around this time, he worked at Thornhill Grammar School, later basing Squire Thornhill (in \"The Vicar of Wakefield\") on his benefactor Sir George Savile and certainly spending time with eminent scientist Rev. John Mitchell, whom he probably knew from London. Mitchell sorely missed good company, which Goldsmith naturally provided in spades. Thomas De Quincey wrote of him \"All the motion of Goldsmith's nature moved in the direction of the true, the natural, the sweet, the gentle\".\nLater researchers have speculated that Goldsmith may have suffered from colour blindness, a condition which was not described until years after Goldsmith's death. Munro MacLennan described several instances from Goldsmith's life which suggest that he had an inability to distinguish between certain colours.\nReligious beliefs.\nGoldsmith was an Anglican, and famously said \"as I take my shoes from the shoemaker, and my coat from the taylor, so I take my religion from the priest\".\nThomas Hurst wrote that Goldsmith \"recognised with joy the existence and perfections of a Deity. For the Christian revelation also, he was always understood to have a profound respect \u2013 knowing that it was the source of our best hopes and noblest expectations.\"\nDeath.\nGoldsmith's premature death in 1774 may have been partly due to his own misdiagnosis of a kidney infection. He was buried in Temple Church in London. The inscription reads; \"HERE LIES/OLIVER GOLDSMITH\". A monument was originally raised for him at the site of his burial, but it was destroyed in an air raid in 1941. A monument to him survives in the centre of Ballymahon, also in Westminster Abbey with an epitaph written by Samuel Johnson.\n\"Oliver Goldsmith: A Poet, Naturalist, and Historian, who left scarcely any style of writing untouched, and touched nothing that he did not adorn. Of all the passions, whether smiles were to move or tears, a powerful yet gentle master. In genius, vivid, versatile, sublime. In style, clear, elevated, elegant.\" Epitaph written by Dr. Johnson, translated from the original Latin. \nLegacy.\nGoldsmith is regarded as one of the most versatile writers of the Georgian era, who contributed to the development of sentimentalism in English literature in 18th-century Great Britain, and his plays are considered second in importance only to those of William Shakespeare. Among his papers was found the prospectus of an encyclopedia, to be called the \"Universal dictionary of the arts and sciences\". He wished this to be the British equivalent of the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" and it was to include comprehensive articles by Samuel Johnson, Edmund Burke, Adam Smith, Edward Gibbon, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Sir William Jones, Fox and Dr. Burney. The project, however, was not realised due to Goldsmith's death. His work influenced several English authors of the 19th century, including Charles Dickens, Jane Austen, and Mary Shelley, who mentioned his fictional characters in their own novels.\nIn popular culture.\nHis life was dramatised in the 1940 Australian radio play \"A Citizen of the World\".\nTwo characters in the 1951 comedy \"The Lavender Hill Mob\" quote the same line from Goldsmith's poem \"The Traveller\" \u2013 a subtle joke, because the film's plot involves the recasting of stolen gold.\nDuring the opening credits of the Sky One adaptation of Sir Terry Pratchett's Christmas-like story \"The Hogfather\", a portrait of Goldsmith is shown as part of a hall of memorials to those \"inhumed\" by the \"Ankh-Morpork Assassins' Guild\".\nIn the 1925 novel \"The Painted Veil\" by W. Somerset Maugham, the last words of the poem \"An Elegy on the Death of a Mad Dog\", \"The dog it was that died\", are the dying words of bacteriologist Walter Fane, one of the primary characters in the novel. And using the title \"Elegy for a Mad Dog\" is an episode of Marcus Welby, M.D. (1971, Season 2, Episode 21).\nThe Tom Stoppard play The Dog It Was That Died takes its title from the same poem.\nIn the Nabokov novel \"Pale Fire\", a central character's house is situated between \"Goldsworth\" (the name of an estate) and \"Wordsmith University\". Crossing these two names yields the names of the poets Wordsworth and Goldsmith; one of the narrators refers to this as the \"witty exchange of syllables invoking the two masters of the heroic couplet.\"\nIn the play \"Marx in Soho\" by Howard Zinn, Marx makes a reference to Goldsmith's poem \"The Deserted Village\".\nIn \"The Waste Land\", T. S. Eliot parodies Goldsmith's song \"When lovely woman stoops to folly\".\nThe characters of 'Edwin' and 'Angelina' in Gilbert and Sullivan's \"Trial by Jury\" were a reference to Goldsmith's poem \"The Hermit\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58039", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58039", "title": "Stuckism", "text": "International art movement\nStuckism () is an international art movement founded in 1999 by Billy Childish and Charles Thomson to promote figurative painting as opposed to conceptual art. By May 2017, the initial group of 13 British artists had expanded to 236 groups in 52 countries.\nChildish and Thomson have issued several manifestos. The first one was \"The Stuckists\", consisting of 20 points starting with \"Stuckism is a quest for authenticity\". \"Remodernism\", the other well-known manifesto of the movement, opposes the deconstruction and irony of postmodernism in favor of what Stuckists refer to as the \"spirituality\" of the artist. In another manifesto they define themselves as \"anti-anti-art\" which is against anti-art and for what they consider conventional art.\nAfter exhibiting in small galleries in Shoreditch, London, the Stuckists' first show in a major public museum was held in 2004 at the Walker Art Gallery, as part of the Liverpool Biennial. The group has demonstrated annually at Tate Britain against the Turner Prize since 2000, sometimes dressed in clown costumes. They have also come out in opposition to the Charles Saatchi-patronised Young British Artists.\nAlthough painting is the dominant artistic form of Stuckism, artists using other media such as photography, sculpture, film and collage have also joined, and share the Stuckist opposition to conceptualism and \"ego-art.\"\nName, founding and origin.\nThe name \"Stuckism\" was coined in January 1999 by Charles Thomson in response to a poem read to him several times by Billy Childish. In it, Childish recites that his former girlfriend, Tracey Emin had said he was \"stuck! stuck! stuck!\" with his art, poetry and music. Later that month, Thomson approached Childish with a view to co-founding an art group called Stuckism, which Childish agreed to, on the basis that Thomson would do the work for the group, as Childish already had a full schedule.\nThere were eleven other founding members: Philip Absolon, Frances Castle, Sheila Clark, Eamon Everall, Ella Guru, Wolf Howard, Bill Lewis, Sanchia Lewis, Joe Machine, Sexton Ming, and Charles Williams. The membership has evolved since its founding through creative collaborations: the group was originally promoted as working in paint, but members have since worked in various other media, including poetry, fiction, performance, photography, film and music.\nIn 1979, Thomson, Childish, Bill Lewis and Ming were members of the Medway Poets performance group, to which Absolon and Sanchia Lewis had earlier contributed. Peter Waite's Rochester Pottery staged a series of solo painting shows. In 1982, TVS broadcast a documentary on the poets. That year, Emin, then a fashion student, and Childish started a relationship; her writing was edited by Bill Lewis, printed by Thomson and published by Childish. Group members published dozens of works. The poetry group dispersed after two years, reconvening in 1987 to record \"The Medway Poets\" LP. Clark, Howard and Machine became involved over the following years. Thomson got to know Williams, who was a local art student and whose girlfriend was a friend of Emin; Thomson also met Everall. During the foundation of the group, Ming brought in his girlfriend, Guru, who in turn invited Castle.\nManifestos.\nIn August 1999, Childish and Thomson wrote \"The Stuckists manifesto\" which stress the value of painting as a medium, its use for communication, and the expression of emotion and experience \u2013 as opposed to what Stuckists see as the superficial novelty, nihilism and irony of conceptual art and postmodernism. The most contentious statement in the manifesto is: \"Artists who don't paint aren't artists\".\nThe second and third manifestos, \"An Open Letter to Sir Nicholas Serota\" and \"Remodernism\" respectively, were sent to the director of the Tate, Nicholas Serota. He sent a brief reply: \"Thank you for your open letter dated 6\u00a0March. You will not be surprised to learn that I have no comment to make on your letter, or your manifesto 'Remodernism'.\"\nIn the \"Remodernism\" manifesto, the Stuckists declared that they aimed to replace postmodernism with remodernism, a period of renewed spiritual (as opposed to religious) values in art, culture and society. Other manifestos have included \"Handy Hints\", \"Anti-anti-art\", \"The Cappuccino writer and the Idiocy of Contemporary Writing\", \"The Turner Prize\", \"The Decreptitude of the Critic\" and \"Stuckist critique of Damien Hirst\".\nIn \"Anti-anti-art\", the Stuckists outlined their opposition to what is known as \"anti-art\". Stuckists claim that conceptual art is justified by the work of Marcel Duchamp, but that Duchamp's work is \"anti-art by intent and effect\". The Stuckists feel that \"Duchamp's work was a protest against the stale, unthinking artistic establishment of his day\", while \"the great (but wholly unintentional) irony of postmodernism is that it is a direct equivalent of the conformist, unoriginal establishment that Duchamp attacked in the first place\".\nManifestos have been written by other Stuckists, including the Students for Stuckism group. An \"Underage Stuckists\" group was founded in 2006 with a manifesto for teenagers written by two 16-year-olds, Liv Soul and Rebekah Maybury, on MySpace. In 2009, a group calling itself the Other Muswell Hill Stuckists published \"The Founding, Manifesto and Rules of the Other Muswell Hill Stuckists\".\nGrowth in the UK.\nIn July 1999, the Stuckists were first mentioned in the media, in an article in \"The Evening Standard\" and soon gained other coverage, helped by press interest in Tracey Emin, who had been nominated for the Turner Prize.\nThe first Stuckist show was \"Stuck! Stuck! Stuck!\" in September 1999 in Joe Crompton's in Shoreditch Gallery 108 (now defunct), followed by \"The Resignation of Sir Nicholas Serota\". In 2000, they staged \"The Real Turner Prize Show\" at the same time as the Tate Gallery's Turner Prize exhibition.\nA \"Students for Stuckism\" group was founded in 2000 by students from Camberwell College of Arts, who staged their own exhibition. S.P. Howarth was expelled from the painting degree course at Camberwell college for his paintings, and had the first solo exhibit at the Stuckism International Gallery in 2002, named \"I Don't Want a Painting Degree if it Means Not Painting\".\nThomson stood as a Stuckist candidate for the 2001 British General Election, in the constituency of Islington South &amp; Finsbury, against Chris Smith, the then Secretary of State for Culture. He picked up 108 votes (0.4%). Childish left the group at this time because he objected to Thomson's leadership.\nFrom 2002 to 2005, Thomson ran the Stuckism International Centre and Gallery in Shoreditch, London. In 2003, under the title \"A Dead Shark Isn't Art\", the gallery exhibited a shark which had first been put on public display in 1989 (two years before Damien Hirst's) by Eddie Saunders in his Shoreditch shop, JD Electrical Supplies. It was suggested that Hirst may have seen this and copied it.\nIn 2003, they reported Charles Saatchi to the UK Office of Fair Trading, complaining that he had an effective monopoly on art. The complaint was not upheld. In 2003, an allied group, Stuckism Photography, was founded by Larry Dunstan and Andy Bullock. In 2005, the Stuckists offered a donation of 175 paintings from the Walker show to the Tate; however, it was rejected by the Tate's trustees.\nIn August 2005, Thomson alerted the press to the fact that the Tate had purchased a work by Chris Ofili, \"The Upper Room\", for \u00a3705,000 while the artist was a serving Tate trustee. Fraser Kee Scott, owner of A Gallery, demonstrated with the Stuckists outside the Tate Gallery against the gallery's purchase of \"The Upper Room\". Scott said in \"The Daily Telegraph\" that the Tate Gallery's chairman, Paul Myners, was hypocritical for refusing to divulge the price paid. Ofili had asked other artists to donate work to the gallery. In July 2006 the Charity Commission censured the gallery for acting outside its legal powers. Sir Nicholas Serota stated that the Stuckists had \"acted in the public interest\".\nIn October 2006, the Stuckists staged their first exhibition, \"Go West\", in a commercial West End gallery, Spectrum London; this signalled their entry as \"major players\" in the art world.\nAn international symposium on Stuckism took place in October 2006 at the Liverpool John Moores University during the Liverpool Biennial. The programme was led by Naive John, founder of the Liverpool Stuckists. There was an accompanying exhibition in the 68\u00a0Hope Gallery at Liverpool School of Art and Design (John Moores University Gallery).\nBy 2006, there were 63 Stuckist groups in the UK. Members include Naive John, Mark D, Elsa Dax, Paul Harvey, Jane Kelly, Udaiyan, Peter McArdle, Peter Murphy, Rachel Jordan, Guy Denning and Abby Jackson. John Bourne opened Stuckism Wales at his home, a permanent exhibition of (mainly Welsh) paintings. Mandy McCartin is a regular guest artist.\nIn 2010, Paul Harvey's painting of Charles Saatchi was banned from the window display of the Artspace Gallery in Maddox Street, London, on the grounds that it was \"too controversial for the area\". It was the centrepiece of the show, \"Stuckist Clowns Doing Their Dirty Work\", the first exhibition of the Stuckists in Mayfair, and depicted Saatchi with a sheep at his feet and a halo made from a cheese wrapper. The Saatchi Gallery said that Saatchi \"would not have any problem\" with the painting's display. The gallery announced they were shutting down the show. Harvey said, \"I did it to make Saatchi look friendly and human. It's a ludicrous decision\".\nThe Stuckists protested with emails to the gallery. Subsequently, the painting was reinstated and the show continued.\nDemonstrations.\nThe Stuckists gained significant media coverage for eight years of protests (2000\u20132006 and 2008) outside Tate Britain against the Turner Prize, sometimes dressed as clowns. In 2001, they demonstrated in Trafalgar Square at the unveiling of Rachel Whiteread's \"Monument\". In 2002, they carried a coffin marked \"The Death of Conceptual Art\" to the White Cube Gallery. Outside the launch of \"The Triumph of Painting\" at the Saatchi Gallery in 2004, they wore tall hats with Charles Saatchi's face emblazoned; they also carried placards claiming that Saatchi had copied their ideas.\nEvents outside Britain have included \"The Clown Trial of President Bush\" held in New Haven in 2003 to protest against the Iraq War. Michael Dickinson has exhibited political and satirical collages in Turkey for which he was arrested, and charged, but acquitted of any crime\u2014an outcome which was seen to have positive implications for Turkey's relationship with the European Union.\nThe Stuckists Punk Victorian.\n\"The Stuckists Punk Victorian\" was the first national gallery exhibition of Stuckist art. It was held at the Walker Art Gallery and Lady Lever Art Gallery and was part of the 2004 Liverpool Biennial. It consisted of over 250 paintings by 37 artists, mostly from the UK but also with a representation of international Stuckist artists from the US, Germany and Australia. There was an accompanying exhibition of Stuckist photographers. A book, \"The Stuckists Punk Victorian\", was published to accompany the exhibition. \"Daily Mail\" journalist Jane Kelly exhibited a painting of Myra Hindley in the show, which may have been the cause of her dismissal from her job.\nA Gallery.\nIn July 2007, the Stuckists held an exhibition at A Gallery, \"I Won't Have Sex with You as long as We're Married\", titled after words apparently said to Thomson by his ex-wife, Stella Vine on their wedding night. The show coincided with the opening of Vine's major show at Modern Art Oxford and was prompted by Thomson's anger that the material promoting her show did not mention her time with the Stuckists. Tate chairman Paul Myners visited both shows.\n\"Sir Nicholas Serota Makes an Acquisitions Decision\".\nAs Charlotte Cripps of \"The Independent\" wrote, Charles Thomson's painting \"Sir Nicholas Serota Makes an Acquisitions Decision\" is one of the best known paintings to come out of the Stuckist movement, and as Jane Morris wrote in \"The Guardian\" it's a likely \"signature piece\" for the movement, standing for its opposition to conceptual art. Painted in 2000, the piece has been exhibited in later Stuckist shows, and featured on placards in Stuckist demonstrations against the Turner Prize. It depicts Sir Nicholas Serota, Director of the Tate Gallery and the usual chairman of the Turner Prize jury, and satirises Young British Artist Tracey Emin's installation, \"My Bed\", consisting of her bed and objects, including knickers, which she exhibited in 1999 as a Turner Prize nominee.\nInternational movement.\nIn 2000, Regan Tamanui started the first Stuckist group outside Britain in Melbourne, Australia, and it was decided that other artists should be free to start their own groups also, named after their locality. Stuckism has since grown into an international art movement of 233 groups in 52 countries, as of July 2012.\nAfrica.\nMafa Bamba founded the Abidgan Stuckists in 2001 in Ivory Coast and Kari Seid founded the Cape Town Stuckists in 2008 in South Africa.\nAmerica.\nIn 2000, Susan Constanse founded the first U.S. group the Pittsburgh Stuckists in Pittsburgh\u2014the second group to be founded outside the UK. This was announced in the \"In Pittsburgh Weekly\", 1 November 2000: \"The new word in art is Stuckism. A Stuckist paints their life, mind and soul with no pretensions and no excuses.\" By 2011, there were 44 U.S. Stuckist groups. There have been Stuckist shows and demonstrations in the U.S., and American Stuckists have also exhibited in international Stuckist shows abroad. U.S. Stuckists include Ron Throop, Jeffrey Scott Holland, Frank Kozik and Terry Marks. There are also 4 Stuckist groups in Canada including the White Rock Stuckists in British Columbia founded by David Wilson.\nAsia.\nAsim Butt founded the first Pakistani Stuckist group, the Karachi Stuckists, in 2005. At the end of 2009 he was thinking of expanding the Karachi Stuckists with new members; however, on 15 January 2010 he committed suicide. In 2011, Sheherbano Husain restarted the group.\nThe Tehran Stuckists is an Iranian Stuckist, Remodernist and anti-anti-art group of painters founded in 2007 in Tehran, which is a major protagonist of Asian Stuckism. In April 2010 they curated the first Stuckist exhibition in Iran, \"Tehran Stuckists: Searching for the Unlimited Potentials of Figurative Painting\", at Iran Artists Forum, Mirmiran Gallery. Their second exhibition, \"International Stuckists: Painters Out of Order\", including paintings by Stuckists from Iran, Britain, USA, Spain, South Africa, Pakistan and Turkey was held at Day Gallery in November 2013. Although one of the main aspects of Stuckism movement is that \"the Stuckist allows him/herself uncensored expression\"; however, the Tehran Stuckists exhibitions in Iran are censored and they are not allowed to exhibit some of their artworks in Iranian galleries. The group has also participated in Stuckist exhibitions in Britain, Lithuania and Spain.\nOther Asian Stuckists are Shelley Li (China), Smeetha Boumik (India), Joko Apridinoto (Indonesia), Elio Yuri Figini (Japan) and Fady Chamaa (Lebanon).\nEurope.\nThe Prague Stuckists were founded in 2005 in the Czech Republic by Robert Jan\u00e1s, Other Stuckist artists in Europe include Peter Klint (Germany), Michael Dickinson (Turkey), Odysseus Yakoumakis (Greece), Artista Eli (Spain), Kloot Per W (Belgium), Jaroslav Vale\u010dka (Czech Republic), Ji\u0159\u00ed Hauschka (Czech Republic), Mark\u00e9ta Kore\u010dkov\u00e1 (Czech Republic), J\u00e1n Macko (Slovakia) and Pavel Lefterov (Bulgaria).\nOceania.\nIn October 2000, Regan Tamanui founded the Melbourne Stuckists in Melbourne, the fourth Stuckist group to be started and the first one outside the UK. On 27 October 2000, he staged the \"Real Turner Prize Show\" at the Dead End Gallery in his home, concurrent with three shows with the same title in England (London, Falmouth and Dartington) and one in Germany in protest against the Tate Gallery's Turner Prize. Other Australian Stuckists include Godfrey Blow, who exhibited in \"The Stuckists Punk Victorian\". In 2005 Mike Mayhew also founded the Christchurch Stuckists in New Zealand.\nEx-Stuckists.\nCo-founder Billy Childish left the group in 2001, but has stated that he remains committed to its principles. Sexton Ming left to concentrate on a solo career with the Aquarium Gallery. Wolf Howard left in 2006, but has exhibited with the group since. Jesse Richards who ran the Stuckism Centre USA in New Haven, left the group in 2006 to focus on Remodernist film.\nIn June 2000, Stella Vine went to a talk given by Childish and Thomson on Stuckism and Remodernism in London. At the end of May 2001, she exhibited some of her paintings publicly for the first time in the \"Vote Stuckist\" show in Brixton, and formed the Westminster Stuckists group. On 4 June, she took part in a Stuckist demonstration in Trafalgar Square. By 10 July, she had renamed her group the Unstuckists. In mid-August, Thomson and Vine married. A work by her was shown in the Stuckist show in Paris, which ended in mid-November, by which time she had rejected the Stuckists, and the marriage had ended.\nIn February 2004, Charles Saatchi bought a painting of Diana, Princess of Wales, by Vine and was credited with \"discovering\" her. Thomson said it was the Stuckists and not Saatchi who had discovered her. At the end of March 2004, Thomson made a formal complaint about Saatchi to the Office of Fair Trading, claiming that Saatchi's leading position was monopolistic \"to the detriment of smaller competitors\", citing Vine as an example of this. On 15 April, the OFT closed the file on the case on the basis that Saatchi was not \"in a dominant position in any relevant market.\"\nResponses and critique.\nA short time after the 1999 exhibition of \"My Bed\" and the Stuckists' response with \"Sir Nicholas Serota Makes an Acquisitions Decision\", a pair of performance artists named Yuan Cai and Jian Jun Xi performed an art intervention titled \"Two Naked Men Jump into Tracey's Bed\" at the Tate Gallery's Turner Prize. Cai had written, among other things, the words \"Anti Stuckism\" on his bare back as the two jumped on the bed and performed a pillow fight. Fiachra Gibbons of \"The Guardian\" wrote (in 1999) that the event \"will go down in art history as the defining moment of the new and previously unheard of Anti-Stuckist Movement.\" Writing in \"The Guardian\" ten years later, Jonathan Jones described the Stuckists as \"enemies of art\", and what they say as \"cheap slogans\" and \"hysterical rants\".\nThe artist Max Podstolski wrote that the art world needed a new manifesto, as confrontational as that of Futurism or Dadaism, \"written with a heart-felt passion capable of inspiring and rallying art world outsiders, dissenters, rebels, the neglected and disaffected\", and suggests that \"Well now we've got it, in the form of Stuckism\".\nNew York art gallery owner Edward Winkleman wrote in 2006 that he had never heard of the Stuckists, so he \"looked them up on Wikipedia\", and stated he was \"turned off by their anti-conceptual stance, not to mention the inanity of their statement about painting, but I'm more than a bit interested in the democratization their movement represents.\" Thomson responded to Winkleman directly.\nAlso in 2006, Colin Gleadell, writing in \"The Telegraph\", noted that the Stuckists' first exhibition in central London had brought \"multiple sales\" for leading artists of the movement, and that this raised the question of how good they were at painting. He observed that \"Whatever the critics may say, buyers from the UK, the US and Japan have already taken a punt. Six of Thomson's paintings have sold for between \u00a34,000 and \u00a35,000 each. Joe Machine, a former prisoner who paints for therapeutic reasons, has also sold six paintings for the same price.\"\nPaul Vallely defended Sir Nicholas Serota from Stuckist campaigns, criticizing the movement's anti-conceptualism for its association with \"forces of social reaction\" such as the \"Daily Mail\" and upholding Serota as the \"greatest single champion of modern art in Britain\". Vallely stated that while \"I did smile\" at \"Acquisitions Decision\", he equally admired Serota's \"cool response to the Stuckist d\u00e9tournement\", visiting the Punk Victorian show and conversing with members before rejecting an offered donation of their work as not of \"sufficient quality in terms of accomplishment, innovation or originality of thought to warrant preservation in perpetuity in the national collection\".\nThe BBC arts correspondent Lawrence Pollard wrote in 2009 that the way was paved for \"cultural agitators\" like the Stuckists, as well as the Vorticists, Surrealists and others, by the \"Futurist Manifesto\" of 20 February 1909.\nGallery.\nSome UK Stuckist artists' work:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58040", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58040", "title": "Bromeliad", "text": ""}
{"id": "58041", "revid": "38759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58041", "title": "Bromeliaceae", "text": "Family of monocot flowering plants\nThe Bromeliaceae (the bromeliads) are a family of monocot flowering plants of about 80 genera and 3700 known species, native mainly to the tropical Americas, with several species found in the American subtropics and one in tropical west Africa, \"Pitcairnia feliciana\".\nIt is among the basal families within the Poales and is the only family within the order that has septal nectaries and inferior ovaries. These inferior ovaries characterize the Bromelioideae, a subfamily of the Bromeliaceae. The family includes both epiphytes, such as Spanish moss (\"Tillandsia usneoides\"), and terrestrial species, such as the pineapple (\"Ananas comosus\"). Many bromeliads, colloquially called \"tank bromeliads\", are able to store water in a structure (a \"tank\") formed by their tightly overlapping leaf bases. However, the family is diverse enough to include the tank bromeliads, grey-leaved epiphyte \"Tillandsia\" species that gather water only from leaf structures called trichomes, and many desert-dwelling succulents.\nThe largest bromeliad is \"Puya raimondii\", which reaches tall in vegetative growth with a flower spike tall, and the smallest are some \"Tillandsia\" species.\nDescription.\nBromeliads are mostly herbaceous perennials, although a few have a more tree-like habit. Many are more or less succulent or have other adaptations to resist drought. They may be terrestrial or epiphytic, rarely climbing (e.g. \"Pitcairnia\" species). Some species of \"Tillandsia\" (e.g. Spanish moss, \"Tillandsia usneoides\") are aerophytes, which have very reduced root systems and absorb water directly from the air. Many terrestrial and epiphytic bromeliads have their leaves in the form of vase-shaped rosettes which accumulate water. These rosettes can hold as much as of water, and be little biotic communities unto themselves. One individual tank was found to contain four harvestmen, a spider, three species of wood lice, a centipede, a millipede, a pseudoscorpion, various metallic beetles, earwigs, a tree seedling, chironomid fly larva, an ant colony, an earthworm, numerous mites, and a small frog. Individual leaves are not divided and have parallel veins without cross connections. The epidermis of the leaf contains silica. Bromeliad flowers are aggregated into inflorescences of various forms. The flowers have bracts, often brightly coloured, and distinct calyces of three sepals and corollas of three petals. The flowers have nectaries. They are pollinated by insects, birds (often hummingbirds) or bats, or more rarely (in \"Navia\") they are wind-pollinated. Fruits are variable, typically taking the form of a capsule or a berry.\nBromeliads are able to live in an array of environmental conditions due to their many adaptations. Trichomes, in the form of scales or hairs, allow bromeliads to capture water in cloud forests and help to reflect sunlight in desert environments. Bromeliads with leaf vases can capture water and nutrients in the absence of a well-developed root system. Many bromeliads also use crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) photosynthesis to create sugars. This adaptation allows bromeliads in hot or dry climates to open their stomata at night rather than during the day, which reduces water loss. Both CAM and epiphytism have evolved multiple times within the family, with some taxa reverting to C3 photosynthesis as they radiated into less arid climates.\nEvolution.\nBromeliads are among the more recent plant groups to have emerged. They are thought to have originated in the tepuis of the Guiana Shield approximately 100 million years ago. The greatest number of extant basal species are found in the Andean highlands of South America. However, the family did not diverge into its extant subfamilies until 19 million years ago. The long period between the origin and diversification of bromeliads, during which no extant species evolved, suggests that there was much speciation and extinction during that time, which would explain the genetic distance of the Bromeliaceae from other families within the Poales.\nBased on molecular phylogenetic studies, the family is divided into eight subfamilies. The relationship among them is shown in the following cladogram.\nThe most basal genus, \"Brocchinia\" (subfamily Brocchinioideae), is endemic to the Guiana Shield, and is placed as the sister group to the remaining genera in the family. The subfamilies Lindmanioideae and Navioideae are endemic to the Guiana Shield as well.\nThe West African species \"Pitcairnia feliciana\" is the only bromeliad not endemic to the Americas, and is thought to have reached Africa via long-distance dispersal about 12 million years ago.\nRadiation of Tillandsioideae and \"Hechtia\".\nThe first groups to leave the Guiana Shield were the subfamily Tillandsioideae, which spread gradually into northern South America, and the genus \"Hechtia\" (Hechtioideae), which spread to Central America via long-distance dispersal. Both of these movements occurred approximately 15.4 million years ago. When it reached the Andes mountains, the speciation of Tillandsioideae occurred quite rapidly, largely due to the Andean uplift, which was also occurring rapidly from 14.2 to 8.7 million years ago. The uplift greatly altered the region's geological and climatic conditions, creating a new mountainous environment for the epiphytic tillandsioids to colonize. These new conditions directly drove the speciation of the Tillandsioideae, and also drove the speciation of their animal pollinators, such as hummingbirds.\nEvolution of the Bromelioideae.\nAround 5.5 million years ago, a clade of epiphytic bromelioids arose in Serra do Mar, a lush mountainous region on the coast of Southeastern Brazil. This is thought to have been caused not only by the uplift of Serra do Mar itself at that time, but also because of the continued uplift of the distant Andes mountains, which impacted the circulation of air and created a cooler, wetter climate in Serra do Mar. These epiphytes thrived in this humid environment, since their trichomes rely on water in the air rather than from the ground like terrestrial plants. Many epiphytic bromeliads with the tank habit also speciated here.\nEven before this, a few other bromelioids had already dispersed to the Brazilian shield while the climate was still arid, likely through a gradual process of short-distance dispersal. These make up the terrestrial members of the Bromelioideae, which have highly xeromorphic characters.\nClassification.\nThe family Bromeliaceae is currently placed in the order Poales.\nSubfamilies.\nThe family Bromeliaceae is organized into eight subfamilies:\nBromeliaceae were originally split into three subfamilies based on morphological seed characters: Bromelioideae (seeds in baccate fruits), Tillandsioideae (plumose seeds), and Pitcairnioideae (seeds with wing-like appendages). However, molecular evidence has revealed that while Bromelioideae and Tillandsioideae are monophyletic, Pitcairnioideae as traditionally defined is paraphyletic and should be split into six subfamilies: Brocchinioideae, Lindmanioideae, Hechtioideae, Navioideae, Pitcairnioideae, and Puyoideae.\nBrocchinioideae is defined as the most basal branch of Bromeliaceae based on both morphological and molecular evidence, namely genes in chloroplast DNA.\nLindmanioideae is the next most basal branch distinguished from the other subfamilies by convolute sepals and chloroplast DNA.\nHechtioideae is also defined based on analyses of chloroplast DNA; similar morphological adaptations to arid environments also found in other groups (namely the genus \"Puya)\" are attributed to convergent evolution.\nNavioideae is split from Pitcairnioideae based on its cochlear sepals and chloroplast DNA.\nPuyoideae has been re-classified multiple times and its monophyly remains controversial according to analyses of chloroplast DNA.\nGenera.\nAs of February\u00a02025[ [update]], Plants of the World Online (PoWO) accepted 76 genera, as listed below. A few more genera were accepted by the Encyclopaedia of Bromeliads, including \"Josemania\" and \"Mezobromelia\", which PoWO sinks into \"Cipuropsis\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHybrid genera.\nIntergeneric hybrid genera accepted by Plants of the World Online include:\nDistribution and habitat.\nPlants in the Bromeliaceae are widely represented in their natural climates across the Americas. One species (\"Pitcairnia feliciana\") can be found in Africa. They can be found at altitudes from sea level to 4,200 meters, from rainforests to deserts. 1,814 species are epiphytes, some are lithophytes, and some are terrestrial. Accordingly, these plants can be found in the Andean highlands, from northern Chile to Colombia, in the Sechura Desert of coastal Peru, in the cloud forests of Central and South America, in southern United States from southern Virginia to Florida to Texas, and in far southern Arizona.\nEcology.\nBromeliads often serve as phytotelmata, accumulating water between their leaves. One study found 175,000 bromeliads per hectare (2.5 acres) in one forest; that many bromeliads can hold of water. The aquatic habitat created as a result is host to a diverse array of invertebrates, especially aquatic insect larvae, including those of mosquitos. These bromeliad invertebrates benefit their hosts by increasing nitrogen uptake into the plant. A study of 209 plants from the Yasun\u00ed Scientific Reserve in Ecuador identified 11,219 animals, representing more than 350 distinct species, many of which are found only on bromeliads. Examples include some species of ostracods, small salamanders about in length, and tree frogs. Jamaican bromeliads are home to \"Metopaulias depressus\", a reddish-brown crab across, which has evolved social behavior to protect its young from predation by \"Diceratobasis macrogaster\", a species of damselfly whose larvae live in bromeliads. Some bromeliads even form homes for other species of bromeliads.\nTrees or branches that have a higher incidence of sunlight tend to have more bromeliads. In contrast, the sectors facing west receive less sunlight and therefore fewer bromeliads. In addition, thicker trees have more bromeliads, possibly because they are older and have greater structural complexity.\nCultivation and uses.\nHumans have been using bromeliads for thousands of years. The Incas, Aztecs, Maya and others used them for food, protection, fiber and ceremony, just as they are still used today. European interest began when Spanish conquistadors returned with pineapple, which became so popular as an exotic food that the image of the pineapple was adapted into European art and sculpture. In 1776, the species \"Guzmania lingulata\" was introduced to Europe, causing a sensation among gardeners unfamiliar with such a plant. In 1828, \"Aechmea fasciata\" was brought to Europe, followed by \"Vriesea splendens\" in 1840. These transplants were so successful, they are still among the most widely grown bromeliad varieties.\nIn the 19th century, breeders in Belgium, France and the Netherlands started hybridizing plants for wholesale trade. Many exotic varieties were produced until World War I, which halted breeding programs and led to the loss of some species. The plants experienced a resurgence of popularity after World War II. Since then, Dutch, Belgian and North American nurseries have greatly expanded bromeliad production.\nOnly one bromeliad, the pineapple (\"Ananas comosus\"), is a commercially important food crop. Bromelain, a common ingredient in meat tenderizer, is extracted from pineapple stems. Many other bromeliads are popular ornamental plants, grown as both garden and houseplants.\nBromeliads are important food plants for many peoples. For example, the Pima of Mexico occasionally consume flowers of \"Tillandsia erubescens\" and \"T. recurvata\" due to their high sugar content; in Argentina and Bolivia, the shoot apices of \"T. rubella\" and \"T. maxima\" are consumed; in Venezuela, indigenous coastal tribes eat a sour-tasting but sweet-smelling berry, known as 'Maya', of \"Bromelia chrysantha\" as a fruit or in fermented beverages; in Chile, the sweet fruit of \"Greigia sphacelata,\" known as 'chupones', is consumed raw.\nCollectors.\n\u00c9douard Andr\u00e9 was a French collector/explorer whose many discoveries of bromeliads in the Cordilleras of South America would be influential on horticulturists to follow. He served as a source of inspiration to 20th-century collectors, in particular Mulford B. Foster and Lyman Smith of the United States and Werner Rauh of Germany and Michelle Jenkins of Australia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58042", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58042", "title": "Chinese Sovereigns", "text": ""}
{"id": "58043", "revid": "1320062332", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58043", "title": "Chinese sovereign", "text": "Ruler of a particular regime in ancient and imperial China\nThe Chinese sovereign was the ruler of a particular monarchical regime in the historical periods of ancient China and imperial China. Sovereigns ruling the same regime, and descended from the same paternal line, constituted a dynasty. Several titles and naming schemes have been used throughout Chinese history.\nSovereign titles.\nEmperor.\nThe characters \"Huang\" (\u7687 hu\u00e1ng \"august (ruler)\") and \"Di\" (\u5e1d d\u00ec \"divine ruler\") had been used separately and never consecutively (see Three August Ones and Five Emperors). The character was reserved for mythological rulers until the first emperor of Qin (Qin Shi Huang), who created a new title \"Huangdi\" (\u7687\u5e1d in pinyin: hu\u00e1ng d\u00ec) for himself in 221\u00a0BCE, which is commonly translated as \"Emperor\" in English. This title continued in use until the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1912.\nFrom the Han dynasty, the title \"Huangdi\" could also be abbreviated to \"huang\" or \"di\". The former nobility titles \"Qing\" (\u537f), \"Daifu\" (\u5927\u592b) and \"Shi\" (\u4ed5) became synonyms for court officials.\nThe power of the emperor varied between emperors and dynasties, with some emperors being absolute rulers and others being figureheads with actual power lying in the hands of court factions, eunuchs, the bureaucracy or noble families. In principle, the title of emperor was transmitted from father to son via primogeniture, as endorsed by Confucianism. However, there are many exceptions to this rule. For example, because the Emperor usually had many concubines, the first born of the empress (i.e. the chief consort) is usually the heir apparent. However, Emperors could elevate another more favoured child or the child of a favourite concubine to the status of Crown Prince. Disputes over succession occurred regularly and have led to a number of civil wars. In the Qing dynasty, primogeniture was abandoned altogether, with the designated heir kept secret until after the Emperor's death.\nOf the San Huang Wu Di, the three first of them were called \u7687 (huang, \"august (ruler)\") and the five last were called \u5e1d (di, \"divine ruler\"), which can translate as either emperor, demigod, divine ancestor, or superhuman. This title may have been used in the Shang and Xia dynasties, though oracle bones were found from the Shang dynasty showing the title \u738b (w\u00e1ng, \"king\").\nKing.\nThe king (\u738b, \"w\u00e1ng\") was the Chinese head of state during the Zhou dynasty. Its use during the Xia and Shang is uncertain but possible: the character has been found upon oracle bones. It was abolished under the Qin and, after that, the same term was used for (and translated as) royal princes. The title was commonly given to members of the Emperor's family and could be inherited. A poem from about 2,500 years ago said \"\u666e\u5929\u4e4b\u4e0b,\u83ab\u975e\u738b\u571f.\u7387\u571f\u4e4b\u8cd3,\u83ab\u975e\u738b\u81e3\" which roughly translates as \"Under the sky, nothing isn't the king's land; the people who lead the lands, no one isn't the king's subjects.\"\nSon of Heaven.\n\"Son of Heaven\" was a title of the Emperor based on the Mandate of Heaven. The Son of Heaven is a universal emperor who rules tianxia comprising \"all under heaven\". The title was not interpreted literally. The monarch is a mortal chosen by Heaven, not its actual descendant. The title comes from the Mandate of Heaven, created by the monarchs of the Zhou dynasty to justify deposing the Shang dynasty. They declared that Heaven had revoked the mandate from the Shang and given it to the Zhou in retaliation for their corruption and misrule. Heaven bestowed the mandate to whoever was best fit to rule. The title held the emperor responsible for the prosperity and security of his people through the threat of losing the mandate.\nUnlike with over sovereigns such as the Emperor of Japan, Chinese political theory allowed for dynastic change, based on the concept of the Mandate of Heaven. The theory behind this was that the Chinese emperor acted as the Son of Heaven. As the only legitimate ruler, his authority extended to \"all under heaven\" and had neighbors only in a geographical sense. He holds a mandate to which he had a valid claim to rule over (or to lead) everyone else in the world as long as he served the people well. If the ruler became immoral, then rebellion is justified and heaven would take away that mandate and give it to another. This single most important concept legitimized the dynastic cycle or the change of dynasties regardless of social or ethnic background. This principle made it possible for dynasties founded by families of non-noble origins such as the Han dynasty and the Ming dynasty or non-ethnic Han dynasties such as the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty and the Manchu-led Qing dynasty. It was moral integrity and benevolent leadership that determined the holder of the Mandate of Heaven. Every dynasty that self-consciously adopted this administrative practice powerfully reinforced this Sinocentric concept throughout the history of imperial China. Historians noted that this was one of the key reasons why imperial China in many ways had the most efficient system of government in ancient times.\nIt was generally not possible for a woman to succeed to the throne and in the history of China; there has only been one reigning Empress, Wu Zetian (624\u2013705), who usurped the throne of the Tang dynasty by establishing her own Wu Zhou dynasty.\nHegemon.\nXiang Yu styled himself (, lit. Hegemon of Western Chu).\nNon-Han titles taken by Chinese rulers.\nEmperor Taizong of Tang was crowned Tian Kehan \u5929\u53ef\u6c57, or \"heavenly Khagan\", after defeating the Gokturks (Tujue).\nMonarchical titles.\nChinese monarchs possessed an elaborate set of monarchical titles, both when they were alive and after their death. Based on Chinese historiographical convention, monarchs of China are typically referred to by one of their many titles, although it is not incorrect per se to reference them using other titles that they held. Even though exceptions exist, Chinese rulers until the end of the Sui dynasty are mainly referred to by their posthumous names, monarchs from the Tang dynasty to the Yuan dynasty are generally known by their temple names, while rulers from the Ming dynasty onwards are typically known by their era names. As some of these titles were used repeatedly throughout history, historians often reference the name of the regime to avoid potential confusion. The same monarchical tradition was adopted throughout the Chinese cultural sphere.\nGeneral format in Mandarin Chinese:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Name of regime + regnal/temple/posthumous name\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;E.g. (), \" being the Northern Zhou dynasty, while \" was the posthumous name of Yuwen Jue\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Era name + monarchical rank\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;E.g. (), \" being the era name of Zhu Jianshen, while \" refers to his rank as an emperor\nRegnal name.\nRegnal names (; ) were monarchical titles adopted during the reign of monarchs or after their abdication. Due to naming taboo, regnal names were the most straightforward method Chinese rulers could be referred to during their regimes.\nEra name.\nEra names (; ) were proclaimed by Chinese sovereigns for the purpose of identifying and numbering years since 140 BC, during the reign of the Emperor Wu of Han. Strictly speaking, era names were not personal titles of Chinese monarchs per se. However, as most rulers of the Ming and Qing dynasties adopted only one era name throughout the entirety of their reigns, era names have come to be closely associated with Ming and Qing monarchs, to the extent that they are frequently referenced using their respective era names by historians.\nAlthough a specific era name could be used by one monarch only, there were also many instances in which an era name was used by multiple monarchs, or a monarch could proclaim numerous era names throughout his/her reign. For this reason, it would be tedious for Chinese monarchs before the Ming dynasty to be referred to by their era names.\nTemple name.\nTemple names (; ) were accorded to Chinese monarchs after their death, for the purpose of ancestor worship. Temple names consisted of two or three Chinese characters, with the last word being either (; \"progenitor\") or (; \"ancestor\").\nPosthumous name.\nPosthumous names (; ) were accorded to Chinese monarchs after their death. These were adjectives originally intended to determine the achievements and moral values, or the lack thereof, of one's life.\nHistoriographical denomination.\nHistorians sometimes refer to certain Chinese rulers using generic terms, mostly due to their lack of regnal name, temple name or posthumous name. These terms describe the circumstances of the monarchs and are not officially accorded by the regimes themselves. The monarchical rank held by the rulers is affixed to the back of these adjectives to form the full historiographical denominations. For example, \" () is formed from the amalgamation of \" (; \"deposed\") and the abbreviated form of \"\" (; \"emperor\"), thus is used to refer to monarchs who were overthrown.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58045", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58045", "title": "LL parser", "text": "Top-down parser that parses input from left to right\nIn computer science, an LL parser (left-to-right, leftmost derivation) is a top-down parser for a restricted context-free language. It parses the input from Left to right, performing Leftmost derivation of the sentence.\nAn LL parser is called an LL(\"k\") parser if it uses \"k\" tokens of lookahead when parsing a sentence. A grammar is called an LL(\"k\") grammar if an LL(\"k\") parser can be constructed from it. A formal language is called an LL(\"k\") language if it has an LL(\"k\") grammar. The set of LL(\"k\") languages is properly contained in that of LL(\"k\"+1) languages, for each \"k\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a00. A corollary of this is that not all context-free languages can be recognized by an LL(\"k\") parser.\nAn LL parser is called LL-regular (LLR) if it parses an LL-regular language. The class of LLR grammars contains every LL(\"k\") grammar for every \"k\". For every LLR grammar there exists an LLR parser that parses the grammar in linear time.\nTwo nomenclative outlier parser types are LL(*) and LL(finite). A parser is called LL(*)/LL(finite) if it uses the LL(*)/LL(finite) parsing strategy. LL(*) and LL(finite) parsers are functionally closer to PEG parsers. An LL(finite) parser can parse an arbitrary LL(\"k\") grammar optimally in the amount of lookahead and lookahead comparisons. The class of grammars parsable by the LL(*) strategy encompasses some context-sensitive languages due to the use of syntactic and semantic predicates and has not been identified. It has been suggested that LL(*) parsers are better thought of as TDPL parsers.\nAgainst the popular misconception, LL(*) parsers are not LLR in general, and are guaranteed by construction to perform worse on average (super-linear against linear time) and far worse in the worst-case (exponential against linear time).\nLL grammars, particularly LL(1) grammars, are of great practical interest, as parsers for these grammars are easy to construct, and many computer languages are designed to be LL(1) for this reason. LL parsers may be table-based, i.e. similar to LR parsers, but LL grammars can also be parsed by recursive descent parsers. According to Waite and Goos (1984), LL(\"k\") grammars were introduced by Stearns and Lewis (1969).\nOverview.\nFor a given context-free grammar, the parser attempts to find the leftmost derivation.\nGiven an example grammar \"G\":\nthe leftmost derivation for formula_4 is:\n formula_5\nGenerally, there are multiple possibilities when selecting a rule to expand the leftmost non-terminal. In step 2 of the previous example, the parser must choose whether to apply rule 2 or rule 3:\n formula_6\nTo be efficient, the parser must be able to make this choice deterministically when possible, without backtracking. For some grammars, it can do this by peeking on the unread input (without reading). In our example, if the parser knows that the next unread symbol is (, the only correct rule that can be used is 2.\nGenerally, an LL(\"k\") parser can look ahead at \"k\" symbols. However, given a grammar, the problem of determining if there exists a LL(\"k\") parser for some \"k\" that recognizes it is undecidable. For each \"k\", there is a language that cannot be recognized by an LL(\"k\") parser, but can be by an LL(\"k\" + 1).\nWe can use the above analysis to give the following formal definition:\nLet \"G\" be a context-free grammar and \"k\" \u2265 1. We say that \"G\" is LL(\"k\"), if for any two leftmost derivations:\nthe following condition holds: the prefix of the string formula_9 of length formula_10 equals the prefix of the string formula_11 of length \"k\" implies formula_12.\nIn this definition, formula_13 is the start symbol and formula_14 any non-terminal. The already derived input formula_15, and yet unread formula_9 and formula_17 are strings of terminals. The Greek letters formula_18, formula_19 and formula_20 represent any string of both terminals and non-terminals (possibly empty). The prefix length corresponds to the lookahead buffer size, and the definition says that this buffer is enough to distinguish between any two derivations of different words.\nParser.\nThe LL(\"k\") parser is a deterministic pushdown automaton with the ability to peek on the next \"k\" input symbols without reading. This peek capability can be emulated by storing the lookahead buffer contents in the finite state space, since both buffer and input alphabet are finite in size. As a result, this does not make the automaton more powerful, but is a convenient abstraction.\nThe stack alphabet is formula_21, where:\nThe parser stack initially contains the starting symbol above the EOI: [ S $ ]. During operation, the parser repeatedly replaces the symbol formula_24 on top of the stack:\nIf the last symbol to be removed from the stack is the EOI, the parsing is successful; the automaton accepts via an empty stack.\nThe states and the transition function are not explicitly given; they are specified (generated) using a more convenient \"parse table\" instead. The table provides the following mapping:\nIf the parser cannot perform a valid transition, the input is rejected (empty cells). To make the table more compact, only the non-terminal rows are commonly displayed, since the action is the same for terminals.\nConcrete example.\nSet up.\nTo explain an LL(1) parser's workings we will consider the following small LL(1) grammar:\nand parse the following input:\n ( a + a )\nAn LL(1) parsing table for a grammar has a row for each of the non-terminals and a column for each terminal (including the special terminal, represented here as $, that is used to indicate the end of the input stream).\nEach cell of the table may point to at most one rule of the grammar (identified by its number). For example, in the parsing table for the above grammar, the cell for the non-terminal 'S' and terminal '(' points to the rule number 2:\nThe algorithm to construct a parsing table is described in a later section, but first let's see how the parser uses the parsing table to process its input.\nParsing procedure.\nIn each step, the parser reads the next-available symbol from the input stream, and the top-most symbol from the stack. If the input symbol and the stack-top symbol match, the parser discards them both by moving to the next input symbol and popping the top-most symbol off the stack. This is repeated until the input symbol and top-most symbol on the stack do not match.\nThus, in its first step, the parser reads the input symbol '(' and the stack-top symbol 'S'. The parsing table instruction comes from the column headed by the input symbol '(' and the row headed by the stack-top symbol 'S'; this cell contains '2', which instructs the parser to apply rule (2). The parser has to rewrite 'S' to '( S + F )' on the stack by removing 'S' from stack and pushing ')', 'F', '+', 'S', '(' onto the stack, and this writes the rule number 2 to the output. The stack then becomes:\n [ (, S, +, F, ), $ ]\nIn the second step, the parser removes the '(' from its input stream and from its stack, since they now match. The stack now becomes:\n [ S, +, F, ), $ ]\nNow the parser has an 'a' on its input stream and an 'S' as its stack top. The parsing table instructs it to apply rule (1) from the grammar and write the rule number 1 to the output stream. The stack becomes:\n [ F, +, F, ), $ ]\nThe parser now has an 'a' on its input stream and an 'F' as its stack top. The parsing table instructs it to apply rule (3) from the grammar and write the rule number 3 to the output stream. The stack becomes:\n [ a, +, F, ), $ ]\nThe parser now has an 'a' on the input stream and an 'a' at its stack top. Because they are the same, it removes it from the input stream and pops it from the top of the stack. The parser then has an '+' on the input stream and '+' is at the top of the stack meaning, like with 'a', it is popped from the stack and removed from the input stream. This results in:\n [ F, ), $ ]\nIn the next three steps the parser will replace 'F' on the stack by 'a', write the rule number 3 to the output stream and remove the 'a' and ')' from both the stack and the input stream. The parser thus ends with '$' on both its stack and its input stream.\nIn this case the parser will report that it has accepted the input string and write the following list of rule numbers to the output stream:\n [ 2, 1, 3, 3 ]\nThis is indeed a list of rules for a leftmost derivation of the input string, which is:\n S \u2192 ( S + F ) \u2192 ( F + F ) \u2192 ( a + F ) \u2192 ( a + a )\nParser implementation in C++.\nBelow follows a C++ implementation of a table-based LL parser for the example language:\nenum Symbols {\n // the symbols:\n // Terminal symbols:\n TS_L_PARENS, // (\n TS_R_PARENS, // )\n TS_A, // a\n TS_PLUS, // +\n TS_EOS, // $, in this case corresponds to '\\0'\n TS_INVALID, // invalid token\n // Non-terminal symbols:\n NTS_S, // S\n NTS_F // F\nConverts a valid token to the corresponding terminal symbol\nSymbols lexer(char c)\n switch (c)\n case '(': return TS_L_PARENS;\n case ')': return TS_R_PARENS;\n case 'a': return TS_A;\n case '+': return TS_PLUS;\n case '\\0': return TS_EOS; // end of stack: the $ terminal symbol\n default: return TS_INVALID;\nint main(int argc, char **argv)\n using namespace std;\n if (argc &lt; 2)\n cout \u00ab \"usage:\\n\\tll '(a+a)'\" \u00ab endl;\n return 0;\n // LL parser table, maps &lt; non-terminal, terminal&gt; pair to action\n map&lt; Symbols, map&lt;Symbols, int&gt; &gt; table;\n stack&lt;Symbols&gt; ss; // symbol stack\n char *p; // input buffer\n // initialize the symbols stack\n ss.push(TS_EOS); // terminal, $\n ss.push(NTS_S); // non-terminal, S\n // initialize the symbol stream cursor\n p = &amp;argv[1][0];\n // set up the parsing table\n table[NTS_S][TS_L_PARENS] = 2;\n table[NTS_S][TS_A] = 1;\n table[NTS_F][TS_A] = 3;\n while (ss.size() &gt; 0)\n if (lexer(*p) == ss.top())\n cout \u00ab \"Matched symbols: \" \u00ab lexer(*p) \u00ab endl;\n p++;\n ss.pop();\n else\n cout \u00ab \"Rule \" \u00ab table[ss.top()][lexer(*p)] \u00ab endl;\n switch (table[ss.top()][lexer(*p)])\n case 1: // 1. S \u2192 F\n ss.pop();\n ss.push(NTS_F); // F\n break;\n case 2: // 2. S \u2192 ( S + F )\n ss.pop();\n ss.push(TS_R_PARENS); // )\n ss.push(NTS_F); // F\n ss.push(TS_PLUS); // +\n ss.push(NTS_S); // S\n ss.push(TS_L_PARENS); // (\n break;\n case 3: // 3. F \u2192 a\n ss.pop();\n ss.push(TS_A); // a\n break;\n default:\n cout \u00ab \"parsing table defaulted\" \u00ab endl;\n return 0;\n cout \u00ab \"finished parsing\" \u00ab endl;\n return 0;\nParser implementation in Python.\nfrom enum import Enum\nfrom collections.abc import Generator\nclass Term(Enum):\n pass\nclass Rule(Enum):\n pass\nclass Terminal(Term):\n LPAR = 0\n RPAR = 1\n A = 2\n PLUS = 3\n END = 4\n INVALID = 5\n def __str__(self):\n return f\"T_{self.name}\"\nclass NonTerminal(Rule):\n S = 0\n F = 1\n def __str__(self):\n return f\"N_{self.name}\"\ntable = 1, -1, 0, -1, -1, -1], [-1, -1, 2, -1, -1, -1\nRULES = [\n [NonTerminal.F],\n Terminal.LPAR,\n NonTerminal.S,\n Terminal.PLUS,\n NonTerminal.F,\n Terminal.RPAR,\n [Terminal.A],\nstack = [Terminal.END, NonTerminal.S]\ndef lexical_analysis(input_string: str) -&gt; Generator[Terminal]:\n print(\"Lexical analysis\")\n for c in input_string:\n match c:\n case \"a\":\n yield Terminal.A\n case \"+\":\n yield Terminal.PLUS\n case \"(\":\n yield Terminal.LPAR\n case \")\":\n yield Terminal.RPAR\n case _:\n yield Terminal.INVALID\n yield Terminal.END\ndef syntactic_analysis(tokens: list[Terminal]) -&gt; None:\n print(\"tokens:\", end=\" \")\n print(*tokens, sep=\", \")\n print(\"Syntactic analysis\")\n position = 0\n while stack:\n svalue = stack.pop()\n token = tokens[position]\n if isinstance(svalue, Term):\n if svalue == token:\n position += 1\n print(\"pop\", svalue)\n if token == Terminal.END:\n print(\"input accepted\")\n else:\n raise ValueError(\"bad term on input:\", str(token))\n elif isinstance(svalue, Rule):\n print(f\"{svalue = !s}, {token = !s}\")\n rule = table[svalue.value][token.value]\n print(f\"{rule = }\")\n for r in reversed(RULES[rule]):\n stack.append(r)\n print(\"stacks:\", end=\" \")\n print(*stack, sep=\", \")\nif __name__ == \"__main__\":\n inputstring = \"(a+a)\"\n syntactic_analysis(list(lexical_analysis(inputstring)))\nOutputs:\nRemarks.\nAs can be seen from the example, the parser performs three types of steps depending on whether the top of the stack is a nonterminal, a terminal or the special symbol $:\nThese steps are repeated until the parser stops, and then it will have either completely parsed the input and written a leftmost derivation to the output stream or it will have reported an error.\nConstructing an LL(1) parsing table.\nIn order to fill the parsing table, we have to establish what grammar rule the parser should choose if it sees a nonterminal \"A\" on the top of its stack and a symbol \"a\" on its input stream.\nIt is easy to see that such a rule should be of the form \"A\" \u2192 \"w\" and that the language corresponding to \"w\" should have at least one string starting with \"a\".\nFor this purpose we define the \"First-set\" of \"w\", written here as Fi(\"w\"), as the set of terminals that can be found at the start of some string in \"w\", plus \u03b5 if the empty string also belongs to \"w\".\nGiven a grammar with the rules \"A\"1 \u2192 \"w\"1, ..., \"A\"\"n\" \u2192 \"w\"\"n\", we can compute the Fi(\"w\"\"i\") and Fi(\"A\"\"i\") for every rule as follows:\nThe result is the least fixed point solution to the following system:\nwhere, for sets of words \"U\" and \"V\", the truncated product is defined by formula_37, and w:1 denotes the initial length-1 prefix of words w of length 2 or more, or \"w\", itself, if w has length 0 or 1.\nUnfortunately, the First-sets are not sufficient to compute the parsing table.\nThis is because a right-hand side \"w\" of a rule might ultimately be rewritten to the empty string.\nSo the parser should also use the rule \"A\" \u2192 \"w\" if \"\u03b5\" is in Fi(\"w\") and it sees on the input stream a symbol that could follow \"A\". Therefore, we also need the \"Follow-set\" of \"A\", written as Fo(\"A\") here, which is defined as the set of terminals \"a\" such that there is a string of symbols \"\u03b1Aa\u03b2\" that can be derived from the start symbol. We use $ as a special terminal indicating end of input stream, and \"S\" as start symbol.\nComputing the Follow-sets for the nonterminals in a grammar can be done as follows:\nThis provides the least fixed point solution to the following system:\nNow we can define exactly which rules will appear where in the parsing table.\nIf \"T\"[\"A\", \"a\"] denotes the entry in the table for nonterminal \"A\" and terminal \"a\", then\n \"T\"[\"A\",\"a\"] contains the rule \"A\" \u2192 \"w\" if and only if\n \"a\" is in Fi(\"w\") or\n \u03b5 is in Fi(\"w\") and \"a\" is in Fo(\"A\").\nEquivalently: \"T\"[\"A\", \"a\"] contains the rule \"A\" \u2192 \"w\" for each \"a\" \u2208 Fi(\"w\")\u00b7Fo(\"A\").\nIf the table contains at most one rule in every one of its cells, then the parser will always know which rule it has to use and can therefore parse strings without backtracking.\nIt is in precisely this case that the grammar is called an \"LL(1) grammar\".\nConstructing an LL(\"k\") parsing table.\nThe construction for LL(1) parsers can be adapted to LL(\"k\") for \"k\" &gt; 1 with the following modifications:\nwhere an input is suffixed by \"k\" end-markers $, to fully account for the \"k\" lookahead context. This approach eliminates special cases for \u03b5, and can be applied equally well in the LL(1) case.\nUntil the mid-1990s, it was widely believed that (for \"k\" &gt; 1) was impractical, since the parser table would have exponential size in \"k\" in the worst case. This perception changed gradually after the release of the Purdue Compiler Construction Tool Set around 1992, when it was demonstrated that many programming languages can be parsed efficiently by an LL(\"k\") parser without triggering the worst-case behavior of the parser. Moreover, in certain cases LL parsing is feasible even with unlimited lookahead. By contrast, traditional parser generators like yacc use LALR(1) parser tables to construct a restricted LR parser with a fixed one-token lookahead.\nConflicts.\nAs described in the introduction, LL(1) parsers recognize languages that have LL(1) grammars, which are a special case of context-free grammars; LL(1) parsers cannot recognize all context-free languages. The LL(1) languages are a proper subset of the LR(1) languages, which in turn are a proper subset of all context-free languages. In order for a context-free grammar to be an LL(1) grammar, certain conflicts must not arise.\nTerminology.\nLet \"A\" be a non-terminal. FIRST(\"A\") is defined as the set of terminals that can appear in the first position of any string derived from \"A\". FOLLOW(\"A\") is the union over:\nLL(1) conflicts.\nThere are two main types of LL(1) conflicts:\nFIRST/FIRST conflict.\nThe FIRST sets of two different grammar rules for the same non-terminal intersect.\nAn example of an LL(1) FIRST/FIRST conflict:\n S -&gt; E | E 'a'\n E -&gt; 'b' | \u03b5\nFIRST(\"E\") = {\"b\", \u03b5} and FIRST(\"E\" \"a\") = {\"b\", \"a\"}, so when the table is drawn, there is conflict under terminal \"b\" of production rule \"S\".\nSpecial case: left recursion.\nLeft recursion will cause a FIRST/FIRST conflict with all alternatives.\n E -&gt; E '+' term | alt1 | alt2\nFIRST/FOLLOW conflict.\nThe FIRST and FOLLOW set of a grammar rule overlap. With an empty string (\u03b5) in the FIRST set, it is unknown which alternative to select.\nAn example of an LL(1) conflict:\n S -&gt; A 'a' 'b'\n A -&gt; 'a' | \u03b5\nThe FIRST set of \"A\" is {\"a\", \u03b5}, and the FOLLOW set is {\"a\"}.\nSolutions to LL(1) conflicts.\nLeft factoring.\nA common left-factor is \"factored out\".\n A -&gt; X | X Y Z\nbecomes\n A -&gt; X B\n B -&gt; Y Z | \u03b5\nCan be applied when two alternatives start with the same symbol like a FIRST/FIRST conflict.\nAnother example (more complex) using above FIRST/FIRST conflict example:\n S -&gt; E | E 'a'\n E -&gt; 'b' | \u03b5\nbecomes (merging into a single non-terminal)\n S -&gt; 'b' | \u03b5 | 'b' 'a' | 'a'\nthen through left-factoring, becomes\n S -&gt; 'b' E | E\n E -&gt; 'a' | \u03b5\nSubstitution.\nSubstituting a rule into another rule to remove indirect or FIRST/FOLLOW conflicts.\nNote that this may cause a FIRST/FIRST conflict.\n \"See \"\nLeft recursion removal.\nFor a general method, see removing left recursion.\nA simple example for left recursion removal:\nThe following production rule has left recursion on E\n E -&gt; E '+' T\n E -&gt; T\nThis rule is nothing but list of Ts separated by '+'. In a regular expression form T ('+' T)*.\nSo the rule could be rewritten as \n E -&gt; T Z\n Z -&gt; '+' T Z\n Z -&gt; \u03b5\nNow there is no left recursion and no conflicts on either of the rules.\nHowever, not all context-free grammars have an equivalent LL(k)-grammar, e.g.:\n S -&gt; A | B\n A -&gt; 'a' A 'b' | \u03b5\n B -&gt; 'a' B 'b' 'b' | \u03b5\nIt can be shown that there does not exist any LL(k)-grammar accepting the language generated by this grammar.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58046", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58046", "title": "Figure-eight knot", "text": "Type of stopper knot used in sailing and climbing\nThe figure-eight knot or figure-of-eight knot is a type of stopper knot. It is very important in sailing, rock climbing and caving as a method of stopping ropes from running out of retaining devices. Like the overhand knot, which will jam under strain, often requiring the rope to be cut, the figure-eight will also jam, but is usually more easily undone than the overhand knot.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The figure-eight or figure-of-eight knot is also called (in books) the Flemish knot. The name figure-of-eight knot appears in Lever's \"Sheet Anchor; or, a Key to Rigging\" (London, 1808). The word \"of\" is nowadays usually omitted. The knot is the sailor's common single-strand stopper knot and is tied in the ends of tackle falls and running rigging, unless the latter is fitted with monkey's tails. It is used about ship wherever a temporary stopper knot is required. The figure-eight is much easier to untie than the overhand, it does not have the same tendency to jam and so injure the fiber, and is larger, stronger, and equally secure.\u2014\u200a\nThe stevedore knot is an extension of simple figure-eight knot with an additional turn before the end is finally tightened.\nDifferent types.\nFigure-eight loop.\nThe figure-eight loop is used like an overhand loop knot. This type of knot can be used in prusik climbing when used in conjunction with a climbing harness, a climbing rope, and locking carabiner designed for climbing, to ascend or descend with minimal equipment and effort.\nFigure-eight bend.\nThe figure-eight bend knot is used to \"splice\" together two ropes, not necessarily of equal diameter. This knot is tied starting with a loose figure-eight knot on one rope (the larger-diameter one if unequal), and threading of the other rope's running end through the first figure eight, starting at the first figure-eight's running end and paralleling the path of the first rope through the figure eight until the second's ropes running end lies parallel against first's standing end. The result is two figure-eight knots, each partly inside the other and tightening its hold on the other when they are pulled in opposite directions. This can be a permanent or temporary splice. While it precludes the ropes' slipping relative to each other, it is a typical knot in having less strength than the straight ropes.\nOffset figure-eight bend.\nThe offset figure-eight bend is a poor knot that has been implicated in the deaths of several rock climbers.\nStein knot.\nThe stein knot (also known as a stone knot) is a variation of the figure-eight knot. It is used to secure a rope that is already passed around a post or through a ring. It is quick and easy to tie and untie. It is a device rigging rather than a true knot. In canyoneering, it is used to isolate rope strands to allow one person to rappel while another is getting on the rappel, or allow rappellers the option of using a single or a double rope. It is also used in basketmaking.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58051", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58051", "title": "Figure-of-eight", "text": ""}
{"id": "58054", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58054", "title": "Kentucky counties", "text": ""}
{"id": "58055", "revid": "49473253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58055", "title": "Bering Sea", "text": "Sea of the northern Pacific Ocean off the coast of Alaska and Russia\nThe Bering Sea ( , ; Russian: , , ) is a marginal sea of the Northern Pacific Ocean. It forms, along with the Bering Strait, the divide between the two largest landmasses on Earth: Eurasia and the Americas. It comprises a deep water basin, which then rises through a narrow slope into the shallower water above the continental shelves. The Bering Sea is named after Vitus Bering, a Danish-born Russian navigator, who, in 1728, was the first European to systematically explore it, sailing from the Pacific Ocean northward to the Arctic Ocean.\nThe Bering Sea is separated from the Gulf of Alaska by the Alaska Peninsula. It covers over and is bordered on the east and northeast by Alaska, on the west by the Russian Far East and the Kamchatka Peninsula, on the south by the Alaska Peninsula and the Aleutian Islands and on the far north by the Bering Strait, which connects the Bering Sea to the Arctic Ocean's Chukchi Sea. Bristol Bay is the portion of the Bering Sea between the Alaska Peninsula and Cape Newenham on mainland Southwest Alaska.\nThe Bering Sea ecosystem includes resources within the jurisdiction of the United States and Russia, as well as international waters in the middle of the sea (known as the \"Donut Hole\"). The interaction between currents, sea ice, and weather makes for a vigorous and productive ecosystem.\nHistory.\nMost scientists think that during the most recent ice age, sea level was low enough to allow humans to migrate east on foot from Asia to North America across what is now the Bering Strait. Other animals including megafauna migrated in both directions. This is commonly referred to as the \"Bering land bridge\" and is accepted by most, though not all scientists, to be the first point of entry of humans into the Americas.\nThere is a small portion of the Kula Plate in the Bering Sea. The Kula Plate is an ancient tectonic plate that used to subduct under Alaska.\nOn 18 December 2018, a large meteor exploded above the Bering Sea. The meteor exploded at an altitude of 25.6km, releasing 49 kilotons of energy.\nGeography.\nExtent.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Bering Sea as follows:\n\"On the North.\" The Southern limit of the Chuckchi Sea [\"sic\"] [The Arctic Circle between Siberia and Alaska]\n\"On the South.\" A line running from Kabuch Point () in the Alaskan Peninsula, through the Aleutian Islands to the South extremes of the Komandorski Islands and on to Cape Kamchatka in such a way that all the narrow waters between Alaska and Kamchatka are included in the Bering Sea.\nIslands.\nIslands of the Bering Sea include:\nRegions.\nRegions of the Bering Sea include:\nThe Bering Sea contains 16 submarine canyons including the largest submarine canyon in the world, Zhemchug Canyon.\nEcosystem.\nThe Bering Sea shelf break is the dominant driver of primary productivity in the Bering Sea. This zone, where the shallower continental shelf drops off into the North Aleutians Basin is also known as the \"Greenbelt\". Nutrient upwelling from the cold waters of the Aleutian basin flowing up the slope and mixing with shallower waters of the shelf provide for constant production of phytoplankton.\nThe second driver of productivity in the Bering Sea is seasonal sea ice that, in part, triggers the spring phytoplankton bloom. Seasonal melting of sea ice causes an influx of lower salinity water into the middle and other shelf areas, causing stratification and hydrographic effects which influence productivity. In addition to the hydrographic and productivity influence of melting sea ice, the ice itself also provides an attachment substrate for the growth of algae as well as interstitial ice algae.\nSome evidence suggests that great changes to the Bering Sea ecosystem have already occurred. Warm water conditions in the summer of 1997 resulted in a massive bloom of low energy coccolithophorid phytoplankton (Stockwell et al. 2001). A long record of carbon isotopes, which is reflective of primary production trends of the Bering Sea, exists from historical samples of bowhead whale baleen. Trends in carbon isotope ratios in whale baleen samples suggest that a 30\u201340% decline in average seasonal primary productivity has occurred over the last 50 years. The implication is that the carrying capacity of the Bering Sea is much lower now than it has been in the past.\nBiodiversity.\nThe sea supports many whale species, including the beluga, humpback whale, bowhead whale, gray whale and blue whale, the vulnerable sperm whale, and the endangered fin whale, sei whale and the rarest in the world, the North Pacific right whale. Other marine mammals include walrus, Steller sea lion, northern fur seal, orca and polar bear.\nThe Bering Sea is very important to the seabirds of the world. Over 30 species of seabirds and approximately 20 million individuals breed in the Bering Sea region. Seabird species include tufted puffins, the endangered short-tailed albatross, spectacled eider, and red-legged kittiwakes. Many of these species are unique to the area, which provides highly productive foraging habitat, particularly along the shelf edge and in other nutrient-rich upwelling regions, such as the Pribilof, Zhemchug, and Pervenets canyons. The Bering Sea is also home to colonies of crested auklets, with upwards of a million individuals.\nTwo Bering Sea species, the Steller's sea cow (\"Hydrodamalis gigas\") and spectacled cormorant (\"Phalacrocorax perspicillatus\"), are extinct because of overexploitation by man. In addition, a small subspecies of Canada goose, the Bering Canada goose (\"Branta canadensis asiatica\") is extinct due to overhunting and the introduction of rats to their breeding islands.\nThe Bering Sea supports many species of fish, some of which support large and valuable commercial fisheries. Commercial fish species include Pacific cod, several species of flatfish, sablefish, Pacific salmon, and Pacific herring. Shellfish include red king crab and snow crab.\nFish biodiversity is high, and at least 419 species of fish have been reported from the Bering Sea.\nFisheries.\nThe Bering Sea is world-renowned for its productive and profitable fisheries, such as king crab, opilio and tanner crabs, Bristol Bay salmon, pollock and other groundfish. These fisheries rely on the productivity of the Bering Sea via a complicated and little understood food web. \nCommercial fishing is lucrative business in the Bering Sea, which is relied upon by the largest seafood companies in the world to produce fish and shellfish. On the U.S. side, commercial fisheries catch approximately $1\u00a0billion worth of seafood annually, while Russian Bering Sea fisheries are worth approximately $600\u00a0million annually.\nThe Bering Sea also serves as the central location of the Alaskan king crab and snow crab seasons, which are chronicled on the Discovery Channel television program \"Deadliest Catch\". Landings from Alaskan waters represents half the U.S. catch of fish and shellfish.\nChange.\nBecause of the changes going on in the Arctic, the future evolution of the Bering Sea climate and ecosystem is uncertain. Between 1979 and 2012, the region experienced small growth in sea ice extent, standing in contrast to the substantial loss of summer sea ice in the Arctic Ocean to the north.\nIn media.\n'The White Seal', one of many chapters on Rudyard Kipling's \"The Jungle Book\", features the Bering Sea as the birthplace and homeland of Kotick, a rare white fur seal.\nThe film \"Harbinger Down\", which was released on August 7, 2015, was about a group of grad students who booked passage on the crabbing boat Harbinger to study the effects of global warming on a pod of beluga whales in the Bering Sea.\nOne of the central characters in the 1949 film \"Down to the Sea in Ships\" has the given name \"Bering\" due to having been born in a ship crossing the Bering Sea.\nThe 2002 supernatural thriller, \"Ghost Ship\", directed by Steve Beck, follows a marine salvage crew in the Bering Sea who discover the lost Italian ocean liner, \"Antonia Graza\" that disappeared in 1962.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58058", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58058", "title": "Equations of state/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "58062", "revid": "12136076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58062", "title": "Marion County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nMarion County is a county located in the North Central region of the U.S. state of Florida. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 375,908. Its county seat is Ocala. Marion County comprises the Ocala, Florida Metropolitan Statistical Area. It includes part of Ocala National Forest, which also extends into three other counties.\nHistory.\nNative Americans.\nEvidence of ancient indigenous cultures has been found in Marion County, as well as of the earliest encounter between European explorers and historic indigenous peoples. In 1976, an archaeological investigation found ancient artifacts in Marion County that appear to be the oldest in mainland United States. Excavations at an ancient stone quarry (on the Container Corporation of America site (8Mf154) in Marion County) yielded \"crude stone implements\". Thousands of pieces of chert were found at the site. These showed signs of extensive wear and were found in deposits below those holding Paleo-Indian artifacts. Thermoluminescence dating and weathering analysis independently gave dates of 26,000 to 28,000 Years Before Present (YBP) for the production of these artifacts, prior to Clovis points. The findings suggested human habitation in this area much earlier than documented by other evidence. Barbara Purdy had bipoint evidence from the CCA site, which also predated Clovis points, which she reported in a 2008 paper.\nThe county seat of Ocala, Florida, is named for a Timucuan village visited and recorded by the Spanish Hernando de Soto expedition in the sixteenth century. During the colonial period, Spain and Great Britain traded control of this area.\nSettlement.\nAfter acquisition of the Florida territory by the United States in the 1820s, Marion County was created in 1844 from portions of Alachua, Mosquito (Orange), and Hillsborough counties. Until 1853, Marion County included most of what are now Lake and Sumter counties. In 1849, Putnam County was created and took the northeast portion of Marion. Levy County's creation took some of the western portion of Marion in 1877, near the end of the Reconstruction era.\nMarion County is named after General Francis Marion of South Carolina, a guerrilla fighter and hero of the American Revolutionary War who was known as the \"Swamp Fox\". Numerous early settlers of this area were natives of South Carolina and likely picked their local hero as the county's namesake. The Act creating the county of Marion of the Territory of Florida was signed on March 14, 1844, by the territorial governor, R. K. Call. The county motto is \"Kingdom of the Sun.\"\nCivil War era.\nMarion County was a hotbed of secessionist activity. Organizers petitioned the state to host the Florida Secession Convention and break away from the United States with other Southern states. The area had many plantations and more than half of the population was enslaved African Americans.\nSeveral Confederate Army units were organized by plantation owners, including the Marion Rifle Guards, organized May 2, 1861, by Captain W.L. Fletcher, county treasurer. It served as part of the Fourth Florida Infantry under Col. Edward Hopkins. Other company's included the Hammock Guards, commanded by Captain J.S. Hopkins; Marion Dragoons, a cavalry unit organized and financed by William A. Owens, Marion Hornets, commanded by Captain Wade Eichelberger, and the Marion Light Artillery, commanded at one time by John Marshall Martin. The Civil War and its aftermath disrupted local society and strained the economy. The population declined in its wake as many African Americans moved to towns or cities for better opportunities.\nPost-Reconstruction era to mid-20th century.\nDuring the post-Reconstruction period, there was considerable racial violence in Marion County. Locals lynched between 19 and 26 African Americans in the county from the 1880s to 1935.\nMid-20th century to present.\nSince the mid-20th century, thoroughbred horse farms have been established in the county. Such thoroughbred farms have become known for such race champions as Needles, bred at Bonnie Heath Farm, and in 1956, becoming the first Florida-bred horse to win the Kentucky Derby. In 1978 Affirmed from Harbor View Farm won the Triple Crown.\nCarl G. Rose, who had come to Florida in 1916 from Indiana to oversee construction of the first asphalt road in the state, is credited with developing the first thoroughbred horse farm in 1943. As an engineer, he had become familiar with the area's limestone, which he realized supported good pasture for raising strong horses. (Limestone also nurtures central Kentucky's noted Bluegrass Region.) In 1943, Rose bought land along State Highway 200, at $10 per acre, establishing Rosemere Farm. The next year one of his horses, Gornil, won at Miami's Tropical Park, becoming the first Florida-raised thoroughbred to win a Florida race. This raised the profile of Marion County in the racing world.\nClose on Rose's heels, entrepreneur Bonnie Heath set up his own thoroughbred farm, producing Needles. In 1956 the horse was the state's first native-bred winner of the Kentucky Derby. (see further below). Bonnie Heath Farm is owned and operated by Bonnie Heath III and his wife Kim.\nIn 1978, Marion County-bred-and-raised Affirmed won the Triple Crown. Today, Marion County is a major world thoroughbred center with more than 1,200 horse farms. There are about 900 thoroughbred farms, totaling some . Ocala is well known as a \"horse capital of the world.\"\nTourism.\nThe nearby community of Silver Springs developed around the Silver Springs, a group of artesian springs on the Silver River. In the 19th century, this site became Florida's first tourist destination.\nToday, well known for glass-bottom boat tours of the area, Silver Springs is owned by the State of Florida; it was incorporated into Silver Springs State Park in 2013. Other nearby natural attractions include the Ocala National Forest and the Florida Trail. Several prominent man-made attractions in the Ocala area existed in the past, such as the Western-themed Six Gun Territory theme park (operated from 1963 to 1984) and the Wild Waters water park (operated from 1978 to 2016).\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, Marion is the fifth largest county in the state, with a total area of , of which is land and (4.7%) is water.\nMarion County is generally composed of rolling hills. The highest elevation is about . The majority of its trees consist of live oaks, pines, and palm trees.\nIt is about a two-hour drive from Marion County to many of Florida's major cities; Orlando is 75 minutes to the southeast, while Daytona Beach is about 90 minutes to the east. Tampa is about 75 minutes to the southwest, Jacksonville is roughly a two-hour drive northeast, and Miami is about six hours to the southeast.\nThere are several significant lakes within or bordering Marion County. Orange Lake is in the far northern part of Marion County, near the border with Alachua County. Lake Kerr is in the northeastern part of the county, near the town of Salt Springs, which is near the border with Putnam County. Lake Weir, the largest of the three, is in the far southern region, near the border with Lake County. Part of Lake George is also in Marion County.\nMarion County is inland, centered between the Atlantic Ocean to the east and the Gulf of Mexico to the west. Because of this, the area is generally not affected as much by hurricanes as the more coastal counties to its east and west. The largest threats from natural disasters are high winds and flooding; tornadoes are also of concern.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nThe 2020 United States census counted 375,908 people, 156,906 households, and 102,412 families in Marion County, Florida. The population density was 236.7 per square mile (91.4/km2). There were 177,380 housing units at an average density of 111.7 per square mile (43.1/km2). The racial makeup was 71.44% (268,563) white or European American (67.53% non-Hispanic white), 11.81% (44,411) black or African-American, 0.41% (1,527) Native American or Alaska Native, 1.62% (6,072) Asian, 0.05% (171) Pacific Islander or Native Hawaiian, 4.75% (17,865) from other races, and 9.92% (37,299) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race was 14.87% (55,910) of the population.\nOf the 156,906 households, 22.6% had children under the age of 18; 47.5% were married couples living together; 28.3% had a female householder with no spouse or partner present. 28.4% of households consisted of individuals and 16.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.4 and the average family size was 2.9. The percent of those with a bachelor's degree or higher was estimated to be 15.0% of the population.\n18.0% of the population was under the age of 18, 6.4% from 18 to 24, 19.9% from 25 to 44, 25.8% from 45 to 64, and 29.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 50.3 years. For every 100 females, there were 108.9 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older, there were 112.4 males.\nThe 2016-2020 5-year American Community Survey estimates show that the median household income was $46,587 (with a margin of error of +/- $1,434). The median family income was $56,181 (+/- $1,758). Males had a median income of $32,045 (+/- $865) versus $25,585 (+/- $601) for females. The median income for those above 16 years old was $28,739 (+/- $827). Approximately, 10.7% of families and 15.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.1% of those under the age of 18 and 8.4% of those ages 65 or over.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 258,916 people, 106,755 households, and 74,621 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 122,663 dwelling units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 84.16% White, 11.55% Black or African American, 0.45% Native American, 0.70% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.69% from other races, and 1.44% from two or more races. 6.03% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. According to the 2000 Census the largest European ancestry groups in Marion County were English (18.7%), German (16.7%) and Irish (14.0%).\nThere were 106,755 households, out of which 24.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.60% were married couples living together, 10.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.10% were non-families. 25.00% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 2.79.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 21.40% under the age of 18, 6.40% from 18 to 24, 23.80% from 25 to 44, 23.90% from 45 to 64, and 24.50% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 44 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.30 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.90 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $31,944, and the median income for a family was $37,473. Males had a median income of $28,836 versus $21,855 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,848. About 9.20% of families and 13.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.20% of those under age 18 and 7.40% of those age 65 or over.\nPolitics.\nThe county is governed by the Marion County Board of County Commissioners. The five-person board currently consists of Craig Curry, Kathy Bryant, Matt McClain, Carl Zalak and Michelle Stone. https://\nThe Florida Department of Corrections operates facilities in unincorporated areas in the county, including the Lowell Correctional Institution, and the Lowell Annex which houses Florida's female death row.\nMarion County has been a stronghold for the Republican Party since 1980. In 2016, 2020 and 2024, Donald Trump each time broke the record for the best performance by a Republican in the county since 1988.\nLaw enforcement.\nMarion County's Sheriff's Office was in the news in August 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic in Florida after Sheriff Billy Woods forbade the wearing of masks by deputies unless in high risk areas, such as the hospital. Visitors to the Sheriff's Office are also required to not cover their face.\nEducation.\nCounty public education is supervised under the Marion County School District.\nElementary schools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMiddle schools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHigh schools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrivate schools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*Ambleside School Of Ocala, grades K\u20138\n*Belleview Christian Academy, grades PK\u20139\n*Blessed Trinity School, grades K\u20138\n*Children's Palace East &amp; Academy, grades K\u20132\n*The Cornerstone School, grades PK\u20138\n*Crossroads Academy, grades 3\u201312\n*Dr. D. D. Brown Christian Academy of Hope PK-12\n*Grace Building Blocks School, grades K\u20132\n*Grace Christian School, grades PK\u20138\n*Meadowbrook Academy, grades K\u201312\n*Montessori Preparatory School, grades K\u20135\n*New Generation School, grades K\u201312\n*Ocala Christian Academy, grades PK\u201312\n*Ocean's High School, grades PK\u201312\n*Promiseland Academy, grades K\u20137\n*First Assembly Christian School, grades PK\u201312\n*The Reading Clinic, grades 2\u20136\n*Redeemer Christian School, grades K\u201312\n*The Rock Academy, grades PK\u20139\n*The School of the Kingdom, grades 1\u201312\n*Shiloh SDA Church School\n*St John Lutheran School, grades PK\u201312\n*Trinity Catholic, grades 9\u201312\nLibraries.\nThe Marion County Public Library System operates eight branch libraries.\nTransportation.\nRailroads.\nCSX operates one rail line within the county. Amtrak formerly provided passenger rail service to Ocala Union Station, but the stop was terminated in late 2004. The line is a former Seaboard Airline Railroad line known as the Wildwood Subdivision, and is part of the CSX-S Line.\nNearby that line within Ocala is a former line owned by the Florida Northern Railroad, which was previously owned by the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad. It begins in Candler running northwest along Marion County Road 464 towards Ocala Union Station then continues northwest along Marion County 25A to Lowell.\nAnother FNOR rail line includes a freight line to the Crystal River Energy Complex in northern Citrus County, which was previously owned by the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad. It runs primarily along US 41 between the Citrus and Levy County Lines. Other lines that used to run through Marion County were either converted into rail trails or abandoned.\nPublic surface transportation.\nLocal bus service is provided by SunTran.\nCommunities.\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58064", "revid": "11801436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58064", "title": "Mast", "text": "Mast, MAST or MASt may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58067", "revid": "12136076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58067", "title": "W. C. Handy", "text": "American blues composer and musician (1873\u20131958)\nWilliam Christopher Handy (November 16, 1873 \u2013 March 28, 1958) was an American composer and musician who referred to himself as the Father of the Blues. He was one of the most influential songwriters in the United States. One of many musicians who played the distinctively American blues music, Handy did not create the blues genre but was one of the first to publish music in the blues form, thereby taking the blues from a regional music style (Delta blues) with a limited audience to a new level of popularity.\nHandy used elements of folk music in his compositions. He was scrupulous in documenting the sources of his works, which frequently combined stylistic influences from various performers.\nEarly life.\nHandy was born on November 16, 1873, in Florence, Alabama, the son of Elizabeth Brewer and Charles Barnard Handy. His father was the pastor of a small church in Guntersville, a town in northern Alabama's Marshall County. Handy wrote in his 1941 autobiography \"Father of the Blues\" that he was born in a log cabin built by his grandfather William Wise Handy, who became an African Methodist Episcopal minister after the Emancipation Proclamation. The log cabin of Handy's birth has been preserved near downtown Florence.\nHandy's father believed that musical instruments were tools of the devil. Without his parents' permission, Handy bought his first guitar, which he had seen in a local shop window and secretly saved for by picking berries and nuts and making lye soap. Upon seeing the guitar, his father asked him, \"What possessed you to bring a sinful thing like that into our Christian home?\" and ordered him to \"take it back where it came from\", but he also arranged for his son to take organ lessons. The organ lessons did not last long, but Handy moved on to learn to play the cornet. He joined a local band as a teenager, but he kept this fact a secret from his parents. He purchased a cornet from a fellow band member and spent every free minute practicing it.\nWhile growing up, he apprenticed in carpentry, shoemaking, and plastering. He was deeply religious. His musical style was influenced by the church music he sang and played in his youth and by the sounds of nature. He cited as inspiration the \"whippoorwills, bats and hoot owls and their outlandish noises\", Cypress Creek washing on the fringes of the woodland, and \"the music of every songbird and all the symphonies of their unpremeditated art\".\nHe worked on a \"shovel brigade\" at the McNabb furnace, where he learned to use his shovel to make music with the other workers to pass the time. The workers would beat their shovels against hard surfaces in complex rhythms that Handy said were \"better to us than the music of a martial drum corps.\" Handy would later recall this improvisational spirit as being a formative experience for him, musically: \"Southern Negroes sang about everything...They accompany themselves on anything from which they can extract a musical sound or rhythmical effect.\" He reflected, \"In this way, and from these materials, they set the mood for what we now call Blues.\"\nCareer.\nEarly years.\nIn September 1892, Handy traveled to Birmingham, Alabama, to take a teaching exam. He passed it easily and gained a teaching job at the Teachers Agriculture and Mechanical College (the current-day Alabama A&amp;M University) in Normal, then an independent community near Huntsville. Learning that it paid poorly, he quit the position and found employment at a pipe works plant in nearby Bessemer.\nIn his time off from his job, he organized a small string orchestra and taught musicians how to read music. He later organized the Lauzetta Quartet. When the group read about the upcoming World's Fair in Chicago, they decided to attend. To pay their way, they performed odd jobs along the way. They arrived in Chicago and then learned that the World's Fair had been postponed for a year. Next they headed to St. Louis, Missouri, but found no work.\nAfter the quartet disbanded, Handy went to Evansville, Indiana. He played the cornet in the Chicago World's Fair in 1893. In Evansville, he joined a successful band that performed throughout neighboring cities and states. His musical endeavors were varied: he sang first tenor in a minstrel show, worked as a band director, choral director, cornetist, and trumpeter. At the age of 23, he became the bandmaster of Mahara's Colored Minstrels.\nIn a three-year tour they traveled to Chicago, throughout Texas and Oklahoma to Tennessee, Georgia, and Florida, and on to Cuba, Mexico and Canada. Handy was paid a salary of $6 per week. Returning from Cuba the band traveled north through Alabama, where they stopped to perform in Huntsville. \nIn 1896, while performing at a barbecue in Henderson, Kentucky, Handy met Elizabeth Price. They married on July 19, 1896. She gave birth to Lucille, the first of their six children, on June 29, 1900. Weary of life on the road, he and his wife, Elizabeth, stayed with relatives after they had settled in Florence.\nAround that time, William Hooper Councill, the president of State Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes in Huntsville (which became Alabama A&amp;M University), the same college Handy had refused to teach at in 1892 due to low pay, hired Handy to teach music. He became a faculty member in September 1900 and taught through much of 1902. He was disheartened to discover that the college emphasized teaching European \"classical\" music. He felt he was underpaid and could make more money touring with a minstrel group.\nDevelopment of the blues style.\nIn 1902, Handy traveled throughout Mississippi, listening to various styles of popular black music. The state was mostly rural and music was part of the culture, especially in cotton plantations in the Mississippi Delta. Musicians usually played guitar or banjo or, to a much lesser extent, piano. Handy's remarkable memory enabled him to recall and transcribe the music he heard in his travels.\nAfter a dispute with AAMC President Councill, Handy resigned his teaching position to return to the Mahara Minstrels and tour the Midwest and Pacific Northwest. In 1903, he became the director of a black band organized by the Knights of Pythias of North America, South America, Europe, Asia, Africa and Australia in Clarksdale, Mississippi. Handy and his family lived there for six years. During this time, he had several formative experiences that he later recalled as influential in his developing musical style. In 1903, while waiting for a train in Tutwiler, Mississippi in the Mississippi Delta, Handy overheard a black man playing a steel guitar using a knife as a slide.\nAbout 1905, while playing a dance in Cleveland, Mississippi, Handy was given a note asking for \"our native music\". He played an old-time Southern melody but was asked if a local colored band could play a few numbers. Handy assented, and three young men with well-worn instruments began to play. Research by Elliott Hurwitt for the Mississippi Blues Trail identified the leader of the band in Cleveland as Prince McCoy. In his autobiography, Handy described the music they played:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHandy also took influence from the square dances held by Mississippi blacks, which typically had music in the G major key. In particular, he picked the same key for his 1914 hit, \"Saint Louis Blues\".\nFirst hit: \"The Memphis Blues\".\nIn 1909 Handy and his band moved to Memphis, Tennessee, where they played in clubs on Beale Street. \"The Memphis Blues\" was a campaign song written for Edward Crump, the successful Democratic Memphis mayoral candidate in the 1909 election and political boss. The other candidates also employed Black musicians for their campaigns. Handy later rewrote the tune and changed its name from \"Mr. Crump\" to \"Memphis Blues.\" The 1912 publication of the sheet music of \"The Memphis Blues\" introduced his style of 12-bar blues; it was credited as the inspiration for the foxtrot by Vernon and Irene Castle, a New York dance team. Handy sold the rights to the song for $100. By 1914, when he was 40, he had established his musical style, his popularity had greatly increased, and he was a prolific composer.\nIn his autobiography, Handy described how he incorporated elements of black folk music into his musical style. The basic three-chord harmonic structure of blues music and the use of flat third and seventh chords in songs played in the major key all originated in vernacular music created for and by impoverished southern blacks. Those notes are now referred to in jazz and blues as blue notes. His customary three-line lyrical structure came from a song he heard Phil Jones perform. Finding the structure too repetitive, he adapted it: \"Consequently I adopted the style of making a statement, repeating the statement in the second line, and then telling in the third line why the statement was made.\" He also made sure to leave gaps in the lyrics for the singer to provide improvisational filler, which was common in folk blues.\nWriting about the first time \"Saint Louis Blues\" was played, in 1914, Handy said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The one-step and other dances had been done to the tempo of Memphis Blues.\u00a0... When St Louis Blues was written the tango was in vogue. I tricked the dancers by arranging a tango introduction, breaking abruptly into a low-down blues. My eyes swept the floor anxiously, then suddenly I saw lightning strike. The dancers seemed electrified. Something within them came suddenly to life. An instinct that wanted so much to live, to fling its arms to spread joy, took them by the heels.\nHis published musical works were groundbreaking because of his race. In 1912, he met Harry Pace at the Solvent Savings Bank in Memphis. Pace was the valedictorian of his graduating class at Atlanta University and a student of W. E. B. Du Bois. By the time of their meeting, Pace had demonstrated a strong understanding of business. He earned his reputation by saving failing businesses. Handy liked him, and Pace later became the manager of Pace and Handy Sheet Music.\nIn 1916, American composer William Grant Still, early in his career, worked in Memphis for W.C. Handy's band. In 1918, Still joined the United States Navy to serve in World War I. After the war, he went to Harlem, where he continued to work for Handy.\nMove to New York.\nIn 1917, Handy and his publishing business moved to New York City, where he had offices in the Gaiety Theatre office building in Times Square. By the end of that year, his most successful songs had been published: \"Memphis Blues\", \"Beale Street Blues\", and \"Saint Louis Blues\". That year, the Original Dixieland Jazz Band, a white New Orleans jazz ensemble, had recorded the first jazz record, introducing the style to a wide segment of the American public. Handy had little fondness for jazz, but bands dove into his repertoire with enthusiasm, making many of these songs jazz standards.\nHandy encouraged performers such as Al Bernard, a soft-spoken white man who nonetheless was a powerful blues singer. He sent Bernard to Thomas Edison to be recorded, which resulted in a series of successful recordings. Handy also published music written by other writers, such as Bernard's \"Shake Rattle and Roll\" and \"Saxophone Blues\", and \"Pickaninny Rose\" and \"O Saroo\", two black traditional tunes contributed by a pair of white women from Selma, Alabama. Publication of these hits, along with Handy's blues songs, gave his business a reputation as a publisher of black music.\nIn 1919, Handy signed a contract with Victor Talking Machine Company for a third recording of his unsuccessful 1915 song \"Yellow Dog Blues\". The resulting Joe Smith recording of the song was a strong seller, with orders numbering in the hundreds of thousands of copies.\nHandy tried to interest black singers in his music but was unsuccessful; many musicians chose to play only the current hits, and did not want to take risks with new music. According to Handy, he had better luck with white bandleaders, who \"were on the alert for novelties. They were therefore the ones most ready to introduce our numbers.\" Handy also had little success selling his songs to black women singers, but in 1920, Perry Bradford convinced Mamie Smith to record two non-blues songs (\"That Thing Called Love\" and \"You Can't Keep a Good Man Down\") that were published by Handy and accompanied by a white band. When Bradford's \"Crazy Blues\" became a hit as recorded by Smith, black blues singers became popular. Handy's business began to decrease because of the competition.\nIn 1920, Pace amicably dissolved his partnership with Handy, with whom he also collaborated as lyricist. Pace formed Pace Phonograph Company and Black Swan Records, and many of the employees went with him. Handy continued to operate the publishing company as a family-owned business. He published works of other black composers as well as his own, which included more than 150 sacred compositions and folk song arrangements and about 60 blues compositions. In the 1920s, he founded the Handy Record Company in New York City; while this label released no records, Handy organized recording sessions with it, and some of those recordings were eventually released on Paramount Records and Black Swan Records. So successful was \"Saint Louis Blues\" that, in 1929, he and director Dudley Murphy collaborated on a RCA motion picture of the same name, which was to be shown before the main attraction. Handy suggested blues singer Bessie Smith for the starring role because the song had made her popular. The movie was filmed in June and was shown in movie houses throughout the United States from 1929 to 1932.\nThe importance of Handy's work as a musician and musicologist crossed the boundaries of genre, coming to influence European composers such as Maurice Ravel, who was inspired during a stay in Paris of Handy and his orchestra for the composition of the famous sonata nr 2 for violin and piano known not by chance as the Blues sonata.\nIn 1926 Handy wrote \"Blues: An Anthology\u2014Complete Words and Music of 53 Great Songs\". It is an early attempt to record, analyze, and describe the blues as an integral part of the South and the history of the United States. To celebrate the publication of the book and to honor Handy, Small's Paradise in Harlem hosted a party, \"Handy Night\", on Tuesday October 5, which contained the best of jazz and blues selections provided by Adelaide Hall, Lottie Gee, Maude White, and Chic Collins.\nLater career and death.\nIn a 1938 radio episode of Ripley's \"Believe It or Not!\" Handy was described as \"the father of jazz as well as the blues.\" Fellow blues performer Jelly Roll Morton wrote an open letter to \"Downbeat\" magazine fuming that he had invented jazz.\nAfter the publication of his autobiography, Handy published a book on African-American musicians, titled \"Unsung Americans Sung\" (1944). He wrote three other books: \"Blues: An Anthology: Complete Words and Music of 53 Great Songs\", \"Book of Negro Spirituals\", and \"Negro Authors and Composers of the United States\". He lived on Strivers' Row in Harlem. He became blind after an accidental fall from a subway platform in 1943.\nFrom 1943 until his death, he lived in Yonkers. His grandson is the physicist Carlos Handy (born 1950), who now leads the Handy Brothers Music Company. After the death of his first wife, he remarried in 1954 when he was 80. His bride was his secretary Irma Louise Logan, who he frequently said had become his eyes. In 1955, he had a stroke, and he began to use a wheelchair. More than 800 people attended his 84th birthday party at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.\nOn March 28, 1958, Handy died of bronchial pneumonia at Sydenham Hospital in New York City. Over 25,000 people attended his funeral in Harlem's Abyssinian Baptist Church. Over 150,000 people gathered in the streets near the church to pay their respects. He was buried in Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx.\nCompositions.\nHandy's music does not always follow the classic 12-bar pattern, often having 8- or 16-bar bridges between 12-bar verses.\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58068", "revid": "668752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58068", "title": "Fluidic logic", "text": ""}
{"id": "58070", "revid": "1306457319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58070", "title": "House of Este", "text": "European dynasty of North Italian origin\nThe House of Este ( , , ) is a European dynasty of North Italian origin whose members ruled parts of Italy and Germany for many centuries.\nThe original House of Este's elder branch, which is known as the House of Welf, included dukes of Bavaria and of Brunswick. This branch produced Britain's Hanoverian monarchs, as well as one Emperor of Russia (Ivan VI) and one Holy Roman Emperor (Otto IV).\nThe original House of Este's younger branch, which is simply called the House of Este, included rulers of Ferrara (1240\u20131597), and of Modena (900\u20131859) and Reggio (1288\u20131796). This branch's male line became extinct with the death of Ercole III in 1803.\nOrigins.\nAccording to Edward Gibbon, the family originated from the Roman Attii family, which migrated from Rome to Este to defend Italy against the Ostrogoths. However, there is little evidence to support this hypothesis. The names of the early members of the family indicate that a Frankish origin is much more likely. The Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica regards this family as a branch of the Obertenghi.\nThe first known member of the house was Margrave Adalbert of Mainz, known only as the father of Oberto I, Count palatine of Italy, who died around 975. Oberto's grandson, Albert Azzo II, Margrave of Milan (996\u20131097) built a castle at Este, near Padua, and named himself after the location. He had three sons from two marriages, two of whom became the ancestors of the two branches of the family:\nThe two surviving branches, with Duke Henry the Lion of Saxony and Bavaria on the German (Welf dynasty) side, concluded an agreement in 1154 which allocated the family's Italian possessions to the younger line, the Fulc-Este, who in the course of time acquired Ferrara, Modena and Reggio. Este itself was taken over in 1275 by Padua, and in 1405 (together with Padua) by Venice.\nElder branch \u2013 Younger House of Welf.\nThe elder branch of the original House of Este, known as the House of Welf (were also called Guelfs \"Guelf\" or \"Guelph\" which derives from the Italianized name for original \u201cWelf\u201d), produced dukes of Bavaria (1070\u20131139, 1156\u20131180), dukes of Saxony (1138\u20131139, 1142\u20131180), a Holy Roman Emperor, Otto IV (1198\u20131218), dukes of Brunswick and L\u00fcneburg (1208\u20131806), later also dukes of Saxe-Lauenburg (1689\u20131803), styled the \"Electors of Hanover\" in 1705, and princes of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel (1269\u20131807). The House of Welf gave Great Britain and the United Kingdom the \"Hanoverian monarchs\" (1714\u20131901) as well as gave Russia an emperor Ivan VI.\nAfter the peace ending the Napoleonic Wars reshaped Europe, ushering in the modern era, the Electorate of Hanover (duchy of Brunswick and L\u00fcneburg, held in personal union by the king of Great Britain, George III) was dissolved by treaty. Its lands were enlarged and the state was promoted to a kingdom. The new kingdom existed from 1815 to 1866, but upon the accession of Queen Victoria (who could not inherit Hanover under Salic law) in 1837, it passed to her uncle, Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover, and thus ceased to be in personal union with the British Crown.\nThe senior branch of the House of Welf continued to be ruled by the princes of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel, as undisputed until the death of the ruling duke of Brunswick Prince William VIII, in 1884. Prior to his death, his brother Charles II from Geneva, as exiled de jure ruler of the house, had declared the Prussian annexation of the crown and the earlier Hanoverian usurpation absolutely illegal acts of usurpation inside of the German House. At his death, his grandson continued internationally recognized appeals. Hanover formed the Guelph Party (or German Party) to continue political appeals against the Prussian and German annexations of the crown.\nYounger branch \u2013 Margraves of Este.\nAll later generations of the Italian branch are descendants of Fulco d'Este. From 1171 on, his descendants were titled Margraves of Este.\nObizzo I (d. 1193), the first margrave, battled against Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa. His nephew Azzo d'Este VI (1170\u20131212) became podest\u00e0 of Mantua and Verona. As the dowry of his niece \"the Marchesella\", Ferrara passed to Azzo VI d'Este In 1146, with the last of the Adelardi. In 1242 Azzo VII \"Novello\" was nominated podest\u00e0 for his lifetime.\nThe lordship of Ferrara was made hereditary by Obizzo II (d. 1293), who was proclaimed Lord of Ferrara in 1264, Lord of Modena in 1288, and Lord of Reggio in 1289. Ferrara was a papal fief and the Este family were given the position of hereditary papal vicars in 1332.\nFerrara became a significant center of culture under Niccol\u00f2 d'Este III (1384\u20131441), who received several popes with great magnificence, especially Eugene IV. He held a Council in Ferrara in 1438, later known as the Council of Florence.\nHis successors were his illegitimate sons Leonello (1407\u20131450) and Borso (1413\u20131471), who was elevated to Duke of Modena and Reggio by Emperor Frederick III in 1452, receiving these duchies as imperial fiefs. In 1471, he received the duchy of Ferrara as papal fief from Pope Paul II, for which occasion splendid frescoes were executed at Palazzo Schifanoia.\nBorso was succeeded by a half-brother, Ercole (1431\u20131505), who was one of the most significant patrons of the arts in late 15th and early 16th century Italy. Ferrara grew into a cultural center renowned especially for music; Josquin des Prez worked for Duke Ercole, Jacob Obrecht came to Ferrara twice, and Antoine Brumel served as principal musician from 1505. Ercole's daughter Beatrice (1475\u20131497) married Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan; another daughter, Isabella (1474\u20131539), married Francesco Gonzaga, Marquess of Mantua.\nErcole I's successor was his son Alfonso I (1476\u20131534), third husband of Lucrezia Borgia, daughter of Pope Alexander VI, sister to Cesare Borgia. Alfonso I was a patron of Ariosto.\nThe son of Alfonso and Lucrezia Borgia, Ercole d'Este II (1508\u20131559), married Ren\u00e9e of France, daughter of Louis XII of France. His son Alfonso II first married Lucrezia, daughter of grand-duke Cosimo I of Tuscany. After she died, he married Barbara, the sister of Maximilian II, Holy Roman Emperor (1527\u20131576). His third wife, Margherita Gonzaga, was daughter of the duke of Mantua.\nAlfonso II raised the glory of Ferrara to its highest point, continuing the patron of Torquato Tasso and Giovanni Battista Guarini and in general favoring the arts and sciences, as the princes of his house had always done. The legitimate line ended in 1597 with him; as his heir, Emperor Rudolph II recognized his first cousin Cesare d'Este (1533\u20131628), member of a cadet branch born out of wedlock, who continued to rule in the imperial duchies and carried on the family name. Ferrara, on the other hand, was annexed by force of arms in 1598 by Pope Clement VIII on grounds of the heir's illegitimacy and incorporated into the Papal States.\nDuring the 18th century, the unhappy marriage between the last male heir of the Este family, the future Duke Ercole III, and the sovereign Duchess of Massa and Carrara, Maria Teresa Cybo-Malaspina, produced only one surviving child, Maria Beatrice. However, the Salic law excluded her, as a woman, from the succession to her father, while she was entitled to succeed her mother since the Salic law was derogated in the Duchy of Massa and Carrara by virtue of a 1529 decree of the Emperor Charles V.\nWhen it became obvious that the princely couple would not produce a large offspring, the reigning Duke, Francesco III, set out to prevent Modena from suffering the same fate as Ferrara almost two centuries earlier. Thus, in 1753, two simultaneous treaties (one public and one secret) were concluded between the House of Este and the House of Austria, by which the Archduke Leopold, Empress Maria Theresa's ninth-born child and third son, and Maria Beatrice were engaged, and the former was designated by Francesco III as heir for the imperial investiture as Duke of Modena and Reggio in the event of extinction of the Este male line. In the meantime, Francesco would cover the office of governor of Milan ad interim, which was destined for the archduke.\nIn 1761, however, following the death of an older brother, Leopold became heir to the throne of the Grand Duchy of Tuscany as provided for the second male heir of the imperial couple, and the treaties had to be revised. In 1763, in spite of the harsh opposition of Maria Beatrice's father, the two families agreed to simply replace the name of Leopold with that of Maria Theresa's fourteenth child, Archduke Ferdinand Karl of Austria, who was four years younger than his betrothed. In January 1771 the Perpetual Diet of Regensburg ratified Ferdinand's future investiture and, in October, Maria Beatrice and he finally got married in Milan, thus giving rise to the new House of Austria-Este.\nErcole III finally ascended the throne in 1780 upon the death of Francesco III, but was deposed in 1796 by the French. His States were transformed into the Cispadane Republic, which one year later was merged into the Cisalpine Republic and then into the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy. Ercole was compensated with the small principality of Breisgau in southwestern Germany, and when he died in 1803, it passed to his son-in-law, who in 1806 lost it to the enlarged and elevated Grand Duchy of Baden during the Napoleonic reorganization of the western territories of the defunct Holy Roman Empire. In December of that same year, Ferdinand died without ever having had the opportunity to exercise his prerogatives as heir to the Este States.\nMaria Beatrice had succeeded her mother as Duchess of Massa and Carrara in 1790, but she too had been deposed by the French invasion in 1796.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58072", "revid": "612852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58072", "title": "John Mathieson (computer scientist)", "text": "British computer chip designer\nJohn Mathieson is a British computer chip designer who initially worked for Sinclair Research on the cancelled Loki computer project before co-founding Flare with ex-Sinclair colleagues Martin Brennan and Ben Cheese.\nAfter working at Flare on the \"Flare 1\" and its development into the Konix Multisystem, he worked for Atari Corporation developing the Atari Panther video game console. It was abandoned in favor of its successor, the Atari Jaguar. The Jaguar was commercially released in the United States on November 23, 1993. Mathieson has been called \"the father of the Jaguar.\"\nAfter leaving Atari, Mathieson worked on the development of the ill-fated NUON media processor at VM Labs. He moved to work for Nvidia at the end of 2001. As Director of Mobile Systems Architecture at Nvidia Corp. he led the system architecture team for three generations of the Tegra applications processor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58074", "revid": "8372814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58074", "title": "Battle of Cape St. Vincent (1797)", "text": "Naval battle of the French Revolutionary Wars\nThe Battle of Cape St. Vincent was a fleet action fought on 14 February 1797 between the British and Spanish navies off Cape St. Vincent as part of the War of the First Coalition. In one of the opening battles of the recently declared war between Britain and Spain, a British fleet under Admiral Sir John Jervis defeated a larger Spanish fleet under Admiral Jos\u00e9 de C\u00f3rdoba y Ramos. The British victory helped to secure Britain's access to the Mediterranean; Jervis and his officers were rewarded for their actions, while C\u00f3rdoba was dismissed from the Spanish navy and forbidden from appearing at court.\nBackground.\nAfter the signing of the Treaty of San Ildefonso in 1796 allying Spanish and French forces against Great Britain, the Royal Navy blockaded Spain in 1797, impairing communications with its empire. The Spanish declaration of war on Britain and Portugal in October 1796 made the British position in the Mediterranean untenable. The combined Franco-Spanish fleet of 38 ships of the line heavily outnumbered the British Mediterranean Fleet of fifteen ships of the line, forcing the British to evacuate their positions in first Corsica and then Elba. Early in 1797, the Spanish fleet of 27 ships of the line lay at Cartagena on the Mediterranean Sea. The Spanish planned to join the French fleet at Brest and escort a large merchant convoy, carrying mainly mercury for gold and silver production, from C\u00e1diz. The convoy entered C\u00e1diz harbour along with warships , \"Terrible\" and , prior to running into the British force.\nDon Jos\u00e9 de C\u00f3rdoba and the Spanish fleet left Cartagena on 1 February and might have reached C\u00e1diz safely but for a fierce Levanter, the easterly wind, blowing between Gibraltar and C\u00e1diz, which pushed the Spanish fleet further out into the Atlantic than intended. As the winds died down, the fleet began working its way back to C\u00e1diz. In the meantime, the British Mediterranean Fleet, under Admiral Sir John Jervis, had sailed from the Tagus with ten ships of the line to try to intercept the Spanish fleet. On 6 February, Jervis was joined off Cape St. Vincent by a reinforcement of five ships of the line from the Channel Fleet under Rear-Admiral William Parker. On 11 February, the British frigate HMS \"Minerve\", under the command of Commodore Horatio Nelson, passed through the Spanish fleet unseen due to heavy fog. Nelson reached the British fleet of fifteen ships off Spain on 13 February, and told the location of the Spanish fleet to Jervis, commanding the fleet from his flagship . In the fog, Nelson had not been able to count the Spanish ships, but Jervis's squadron immediately sailed to intercept them as they continued toward C\u00e1diz. Early on the 14th, Jervis learnt that the Spanish fleet was 35 miles to windward.\nBattle.\n Though Admiral Jervis still had no idea of the size of the fleet he was up against, during the night came the sounds for which he had been waiting: Spanish signal guns in the fog. At 2:50\u00a0a.m. came the report that the Spanish fleet was some fifteen miles distant. By 5:30\u00a0a.m., reported them closer still, as a cold and foggy February dawn rose on the British fleet, formed in two lines of battle. Jervis turned to his officers on the quarterdeck of \"Victory\" and said, \"A victory to England is very essential at this moment.\" Jervis put Captain Thomas Troubridge in in the lead. At 6:30\u00a0a.m., \"Culloden\" signalled that she could see five enemy sail to the south east, and along with and turned toward the Spanish ships. As they loomed up out of the fog, a signal lieutenant in described them as \"thumpers, looming like Beachy Head in a fog.\" On the quarterdeck of \"Victory\", Jervis, Captain Robert Calder and Captain Benjamin Hallowell counted the enemy ships: the British were outnumbered nearly two-to-one.\nIt would be difficult to disengage, and the situation would only get worse were the Spanish fleet to join up with the French: Jervis decided to continue. Hearing this, the Canadian Captain Hallowell became so excited he thumped the Admiral on the back, \"That's right Sir John, and, by God, we'll give them a damn good licking!\" The Spanish were formed in two loose columns, one of about 18 ships to windward and the other, of about nine ships, somewhat closer to the British. At about 10:30\u00a0a.m., the Spanish ships in the weather column were seen to wear ship and turn to port. This gave the impression that they might form a line and pass along the weather column of the British fleet, exposing the smaller British column to the fire of the larger Spanish division. At 11:00\u00a0a.m., Jervis ordered: \"Form in a line of battle ahead and astern of \"Victory\" as most convenient.\" When this was completed the British fleet had formed a single line of battle, sailing south to pass between the two Spanish columns. At 11:12\u00a0a.m., Jervis made his next signal: \"Engage the enemy\" and then at 11:30\u00a0a.m.: \"Admiral intends to pass through enemy lines\". The Battle of Cape St. Vincent had begun.\nTo the British advantage, the Spanish fleet was formed into two groups and was unprepared for battle, while the British were already in line. Jervis passed between the two Spanish groups, minimising the fire they could put into him, while letting him fire in both directions.\n\"Culloden\" tacked to reverse her course and take after the Spanish column, followed by \"Blenheim\", then \"Prince George\". The Spanish lee division now put about to the port tack to break the British line at the point where the ships were tacking in succession. came round untouched, but was going about when her foreyard and foretop yard were shot away. She was forced to wear ship instead of tack and the leading Spanish vessel came close enough to threaten her with a broadside. Saumarez in \"Orion\" saw the danger to \"Colossus\" and backed his sails to give covering fire. As \"Victory\" came to the tacking point, another attempt was made to break the British line, but \"Victory\" was too fast and received two raking broadsides as she tacked close to her. \"We gave them their Valentine in style,\" later wrote a gunner in . As the last ship in the British line passed the Spanish, the British line had formed a U shape with \"Culloden\" in the lead and on the reverse course but chasing the rear of the Spanish. At this point the Spanish lee division bore up to make an effort to join their compatriots to windward. Had they managed this, the battle would have ended indecisively with the Spanish running for C\u00e1diz and the British harrying their sterns in the manner of the Armada in 1588.\nAt 1:05\u00a0p.m., Jervis hoisted a signal:\nTake suitable stations for mutual support and engage the enemy as coming up in succession\nNelson had returned to his ship (a seventy-four) and was now towards the rear of the British line, much closer to the larger group. He saw that Jervis's manoeuvre could not be completed before the Spanish escaped, relatively unharmed. Taking the battle into his own hands, Nelson ordered Captain Ralph Willett Miller to wear ship and take \"Captain\" out of line to engage the smaller group.\nAs soon as the seventy-four was around, Nelson directed her to pass between and and ran across the bows of the Spanish ships forming the central group of the weather division. This group included the \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\", the largest ship afloat at the time and mounting 130 guns; the \"San Jos\u00e9\", 112; , 112; \"San Nicol\u00e1s\", 84; \"San Ysidro,\" 74; and , 112.\nAs a junior commander, Nelson was acting against Admiral Jervis's order to \"form line ahead and astern of \"Victory\"\", and using his own wide interpretation of \"take suitable stations\" in the later signal. Had his action failed, Nelson would have been subject to court-martial for disobeying orders in the face of the enemy, with subsequent demotion and disgrace.\nAt about 1:30\u00a0p.m., \"Culloden\" was gradually overhauling the Spanish rear and began a renewed but not very close engagement of the same group of ships. Jervis signalled his rearmost ship, \"Excellent\", to come to the wind on the larboard tack and following this order, Collingwood brought his ship round to a position ahead of \"Culloden\". After a few more minutes, \"Blenheim\" and \"Prince George\" came up behind and the group of British ships prevented the Spanish from grouping together.\nThe \"Captain\" was now under fire from as many as six Spanish ships, of which three were 112-gun three-deckers and a fourth C\u00f3rdoba's 130-gun flagship \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\". At about 2:00\u00a0p.m., \"Culloden\" had stretched so far ahead as to cover the \"Captain\" from the heavy fire poured into her by the Spanish four-decker and her companions, as they hauled up and brought their broadsides to bear. Of the respite thus afforded to her, the \"Captain\" took immediate advantage, replenishing her lockers with shot and splicing and repairing her running rigging.\nAt about 2:30, \"Excellent\", having been directed by signal to bear up, edged away and at 2:35, arriving abreast of the disabled Spanish three-decker \"Salvator del Mundo\", engaged the latter on her weather bow for a few minutes; then passing on to the next Spanish ship, \"San Ysidro\", whose three topmasts had already been shot away. This ship Captain Collingwood engaged closely until 2:50 when, after a gallant defence in her crippled state, \"San Ysidro\" hauled down the Spanish flag.\nMoments later, \"Excellent\" and \"Diadem\" commenced an attack on \"Salvador del Mundo\", with \"Excellent\" stationing herself on the weather bow and \"Diadem\" on the lee quarter of the Spanish three-decker. \"Salvador del Mundo\", more or less disabled, saw \"Victory\" was about to pass close astern firing her bow guns and judiciously hauled down her flag.\nBy about 3:00, \"Excellent\" was already in close action with \"San Nicol\u00e1s\" which, with foretop mast shot away, had encountered \"Captain\". \"Excellent\" fired broadsides into \"San Nicol\u00e1s\" and then made sail to clear ahead. To avoid \"Excellent\", \"San Nicol\u00e1s\" luffed up and ran foul of \"San Jos\u00e9\", which had suffered the loss of mizzen mast and other damage.\n\"Captain\" was by now almost uncontrollable with her wheel shot away. At this point, her foretop mast fell over the side leaving her unmanageable, with little option but to board the Spanish vessels. \"Captain\" opened fire with her larboard broadside, and then put the helm over and hooked her larboard cat-head with the starboard quarter of \"San Nicol\u00e1s\".\nAt 3:20, with a cry of \"Westminster Abbey or Glorious Victory!\", Nelson ordered his boarders to cross the first Spanish ship onto the second. He later wrote,\nThe soldiers of the 69th, with an alacrity which will ever do them credit, and Lieutenant Pearson of the same regiment, were almost the foremost on this service \u2013 the first man who jumped into the enemy's mizen chains was Commander Berry, late my First Lieutenant (Captain Miller was in the very act of going also, but I directed him to remain); he was supported from our sprit sail yard, which hooked in the mizen rigging. A soldier of the 69th Regiment having broken the upper quarter-gallery window, I jumped in myself, and was followed by others as fast as possible. I found the cabin doors fastened, and some Spanish officers fired their pistols: but having broke open the doors the soldiers fired, and the Spanish Brigadier fell, as retreating to the quarter-deck. I pushed immediately onwards for the quarter-deck, where I found Commander Berry in possession of the poop, and the Spanish ensign hauling down. I passed with my people, and Lieutenant Pearson, on the larboard gangway, to the forecastle, where I met two or three Spanish officers, prisoners to my seamen: they delivered me their swords. A fire of pistols, or muskets, opening from the stern gallery of the , I directed the soldiers to fire into her stern; and calling to Captain Miller, ordered him to send more men into the \"San Nicolas\"; and directed my people to board the first-rate, which was done in an instant, Commander Berry assisting me into the main chains. At this moment a Spanish officer looked over the quarter deck rail, and said they surrendered. From this most welcome intelligence, it was not long before I was on the quarter deck, where the captain, with a bow, presented me his sword, and said the admiral was dying of his wounds. I asked him on his honour if the ship was surrendered. He declared she was: on which I gave him my hand, and desired him to call on his officers and ship's company and tell them of it: which he did \u2013 and on the quarter deck of a Spanish first-rate, extravagant as the story may seem, did I receive the swords of vanquished Spaniards: which as I received, I gave to William Fearney, one of my bargemen, who put them, with the greatest sang-froid, under his arm.\nBoth Spanish vessels were successfully captured. This manoeuvre was so unusual and so widely admired in the Royal Navy that using one enemy ship to cross to another became known facetiously as \"Nelson's patent bridge for boarding enemy vessels.\"\n\"Infante Don Pelayo\" and \"San Pablo\", which had been dispatched from de C\u00f3rdoba's group at 8.00 a.m. to investigate guns heard to the north, now sailed in and bore down on \"Diadem\" and \"Excellent\". By this time \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\" had struck her colours to surrender, but \"Infante Don Pelayo\"'s captain Cayetano Vald\u00e9s warned \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\" to fly her flag again under threat she would be deemed an enemy ship and raked. The Spanish four-decker raised her flag and was saved from capture.\nBy 4:00 p.m., \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\" was relieved by two of her escorts and made away. Lieutenant-general Juan Joaqu\u00edn Moreno de Mondrag\u00f3n's squadron put together the survivors of de C\u00f3rdoba's group and turned to assist the harassed Spanish sails. Jervis signalled his fleet to cover the prizes and disabled vessels and at 4:15 the frigates were directed to take the prizes in tow. At 4:39 the fleet was ordered to take station in line astern of \"Victory\". The battle was by now almost over with only some remaining skirmishing between \"Britannia\", \"Orion\" and the departing Spanish covering \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\" (which was to later be captured at the Battle of Trafalgar).\nNelson remained on board the captured Spanish ships while they were secured \u2013 and was cheered by the British ships as they passed. He returned to the \"Captain\" to thank Captain Miller and presented him with the sword of the captain of the \"San Nicol\u00e1s\".\nAt 5:00, Nelson shifted his pennant from the disabled \"Captain\" to . Still black with smoke and with his uniform in shreds, Nelson went on board \"Victory\" where he was received on the quarter-deck by Admiral Jervis \u2013 \"the Admiral embraced me, said he could not sufficiently thank me, and used every kind expression which could not fail to make me happy.\"\nThe Battle of Cape St. Vincent had cost the lives of 73 men of the Royal Navy and seriously wounded a further 227, and lightly wounded 100. Spanish casualties were far higher, suffering 430 killed and 856 wounded; aboard \"San Nicol\u00e1s\" alone 144 were killed.\nIt was a great and welcome victory for the Royal Navy \u2013 15 British ships of the line had defeated a Spanish fleet of 27 with far more guns and men. Admiral Jervis's highly disciplined force had been pitted against an inexperienced Spanish fleet under Don Jos\u00e9 C\u00f3rdoba, the Spaniards fighting fiercely but without direction. After the \"San Jos\u00e9\" was captured it was found that some of her guns still had tampions plugging their muzzles. The confusion amongst the Spanish was so great that they were unable to use their guns without causing more damage to their own ships than to the British.\nAftermath.\nJervis had given orders to destroy the four prizes had the action restarted. Several days later, the frigate (32) spotted the damaged \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\" making her way back to Spain. The captain, Orozco, now commissioned by de Cordoba, had flown his flag in frigate \"Diana\". \"Terpsichore\" engaged but kept dodging out of range from the \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\"'s stern guns. \"Terpsichore\" nonetheless was hit twice in a sudden move, resulting in damage in her rigging, masts and sails as well as some impacts on her hull. Captain Richard Bowen then ordered to keep the pursuit from a longer distance, but the frigate vanished away.\nWhile the British fleet lay at Lagos Bay in Portugal, approximately 3,000 Spanish prisoners from the four prizes were landed. Jervis resumed his blockade of the Spanish fleet in Cadiz. The continuation of the blockade for most of the following three years largely curtailed the Spanish fleet until the Peace of Amiens in 1802. The containment of the Spanish threat and the further reinforcement of his fleet enabled Jervis to send a squadron under Nelson back into the Mediterranean the following year. That squadron, including Saumarez's , Troubridge's \"Culloden\", and \"Goliath\", now under Foley, re-established British command of the Mediterranean at the Battle of the Nile.\nJervis was made Baron Jervis of Meaford and Earl St. Vincent, and granted a life pension of \u00a33,000 per year. Nelson was knighted as a member of the Order of the Bath. Nelson's promotion to Rear-Admiral was not a reward for his services, but simply a happy coincidence: promotion to flag rank in the Navy of the time was based on seniority on the Captain's list and not on achievement. The City of London presented Jervis, now Earl St. Vincent, with the Freedom of the City in a gold box valued at 100 guineas, and awarded both him and Nelson a ceremonial sword. The presentation box and sword are both currently held at the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich. The swords awarded Jervis and Nelson were the first of their kind to be issued by the City of London. St. Vincent was awarded the thanks of both Houses of Parliament and given a gold medal by the King. \"The London Gazette\" published an advertisement in 1798 regarding the prize money due to the commander, officers, and men in the battle, a sum of \u00a3140,000.\nIn a March issue of \"The Evening Mail\", an article entitled \"Nelson's New Art of Cookery\" featured a purported recipe from Nelson for the Spanish stew \"olla podrida\":\nCommodore Nelson's Receipt to make an Olla Podrida.\nTake a Spanish first-rate, and an 80-gun ship, and after well battering and basting them for an hour, keep throwing in your force balls, and be sure to let them be well seasoned. Your fire must never slacken for a single moment, but must be kept up as brisk as possible during the whole time. So soon, as you perceive your Spaniards to be well stewed and blended together, you must then throw your own ship on board of the two-decker. Lash your sprit sail yard to her mizzen-mast; then jump into her quarter's gallery, sword in hand, and let the rest of your boarders follow as they can. The moment you appear on the 80 gun ship's quarter deck, the Spaniards will all throw down their arms and fly; you will then have only to take a hop, step, and a jump, from your stepping-stone, and you will find yourself in the middle of the first-rate's quarter deck, with all the Spaniards at your feet. Your Olla Podrida may now be considered as completely dished, and fit to be set before his MAJESTY.\nThough the Spanish navy was defeated, it was not a decisive defeat, such as the Royal Navy would inflict on the French in the Battle of the Nile two years later. Looking to reform for future engagements against the British, de Cord\u00f3ba was blamed for the loss, dismissed from the Spanish Navy and forbidden from appearing at court. In 1847, the Admiralty authorized the issuance of the Naval General Service Medal with clasp \"St. Vincent\" to all surviving claimants from the battle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58075", "revid": "29201297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58075", "title": "Herv\u00e9 Villechaize", "text": "French actor (1943\u20131993)\nHerv\u00e9 Jean-Pierre Villechaize (; April 23, 1943 \u2013 September 4, 1993) was a French actor. He is best known for his roles as the evil henchman Nick Nack in the 1974 James Bond film \"The Man with the Golden Gun\" and as Mr. Roarke's assistant, Tattoo, on the American television series \"Fantasy Island\" that he played from 1977 to 1983. On \"Fantasy Island\", his shout of \"De plane! De plane!\" became one of the show's signature phrases. He died by suicide in 1993.\nEarly life.\nVillechaize was born in Nazi-occupied Paris on April 23, 1943, to Evelyn Recchionni, an Anglo-Italian socialite who was an ambulance driver during World War II and Andr\u00e9 Villechaize, a surgeon in Toulon. Villechaize also had German ancestry. The youngest of four sons, Villechaize was born with dwarfism, likely due to an endocrine disorder, which his surgeon father tried unsuccessfully to cure in several institutions. In later years, he insisted on being called a \"midget\" rather than a \"dwarf\", which annoyed his acting contemporary with a similar condition, Billy Barty, who was an activist who found that term derogatory. Villechaize was bullied at school for his condition and found solace in painting. In 1959, at age 16, he entered the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts to study art. In 1961, he became the youngest artist ever to have his work displayed in the Museum of Paris.\nIn 1964, Villechaize left France for the United States. He settled in a Bohemian section of New York City, and taught himself English by watching television.\nCareer.\nVillechaize initially worked as an artist, painter, and photographer. He began acting in off-Broadway productions, including Werner Liepolt's \"The Young Master Dante\" and a play by Sam Shepard, and he also modelled for photos for \"National Lampoon\" before moving on to film.\nHis first film appearance was in \"Chappaqua\" (1966). His second film was Edward Summer's \"Item 72-D: The Adventures of Spa and Fon\", filmed in 1969. This was followed by several films, including \"The Gang That Couldn't Shoot Straight\" (1971); Christopher Speeth and Werner Liepolt's \"Malatesta's Carnival of Blood\" (1973); \"Crazy Joe\" (1974); and Oliver Stone's first film, \"Seizure\" (1974). He was asked to play a role in Alejandro Jodorowsky's film \"Dune\", which had originally begun pre-production in 1971, but was later cancelled.\nVillechaize's big break was being cast in \"The Man with the Golden Gun\" (1974), by which time he had become so poor that he was living in his car in Los Angeles. Prior to being signed by Bond producer Albert R. Broccoli, he made ends meet by working as a rat catcher's assistant near his South Central home. From what his co-star Christopher Lee saw, \"The Man with the Golden Gun\" filming was possibly the happiest time of Villechaize's life; Lee likened it to honey in the sandwich between an insecure past and an uncertain future.\nIn the 1970s, Villechaize performed Oscar the Grouch on \"Sesame Street\" as a pair of legs peeping out from Oscar's trash can, for scenes that required Oscar to be mobile. These appearances began in the third season, and included the 1978 Hawaii episodes.\nIn 1980, Cleveland International Records released a single by the Children of the World, featuring Villechaize as vocalist: \"Why\", with B-side \"When a Child Is Born\".\nThough popular with the public, Villechaize proved a difficult actor on \"Fantasy Island\", where he continually propositioned women and quarreled with the producers. He was eventually fired after demanding a salary on par with that of his co-star Ricardo Montalb\u00e1n. For its final season from '83-'84, Villechaize was replaced by Christopher Hewett, best known for his lead role in the sitcom \"Mr. Belvedere\".\nVillechaize also starred in the movie \"Forbidden Zone\" (1982), and appeared in \"\" (1982), and episodes of \"Diff'rent Strokes\" and \"Taxi\". He later played the title role in the \"Rumpelstiltskin\" episode of Shelley Duvall's \"Faerie Tale Theatre\". In the 1980s, he became popular in Spain due to his impersonations of Prime Minister Felipe Gonz\u00e1lez on the television show \"Viaje con nosotros\" (\"Travel with Us\"), with showman Javier Gurruchaga. His final appearance was a cameo as himself in an episode of \"The Ben Stiller Show\".\nPersonal life and death.\nIn the mid-1970s, Villechaize met actress Susan Tyrrell. According to Tyrrell, they had a two-year relationship and shared a home in Laurel Canyon, Los Angeles.\nVillechaize married twice. He married his first wife, artist Anne Sadowski, in 1970. After Villechaize's serial infidelities, as well as ridicule over their height difference, they divorced in 1978 or 1979 (sources differ). He met his second wife, Camille Hagen, an actress and stand-in double, in 1977 on the set of the pilot for \"Fantasy Island\". They married in 1980 and Hagen filed for divorce 15 months later. During their marriage, they lived at a San Fernando Valley ranch, which also was home to a menagerie of farm animals and pets. \nIn the early afternoon of September 4, 1993, at his North Hollywood home, Villechaize, aged 50, is believed to have first fired a shot through the sliding-glass patio door to awaken his longtime girlfriend, Kathy Self, before shooting himself. Self found Villechaize in his backyard, and he was pronounced dead at the Medical Center of North Hollywood. He was cremated and his ashes were scattered into the Pacific Ocean off Point Fermin in San Pedro, Los Angeles.\nVillechaize left a suicide note saying he was despondent over longtime health problems. He was suffering from chronic pain due to having oversized internal organs putting increasing pressure on his body. According to Self, Villechaize often slept in a kneeling position so he could breathe more easily. He also left an audio recording of the suicide that included his last words.\nAt the time of his death, Cartoon Network was in negotiations for him to co-star in \"Space Ghost Coast to Coast\", which was then in pre-production. Villechaize would have voiced Space Ghost's sidekick on the show.\nDepictions in media.\nSacha Gervasi spent several years writing a script about Villechaize. Gervasi conducted a lengthy interview with Villechaize just prior to his death. The film \"My Dinner with Herv\u00e9\", which is based on the last few days of Villechaize's life, stars Peter Dinklage in the title role, and premiered on HBO on October 20, 2018.\nPublications.\nChris Distin: \"James Bond \u2013 Golden Gun on Location : behind the scenes with Herv\u00e9 Villechaize on the sets of The Man with the Golden Gun 1974\", Braunschweig : DAMOKLES, 2024, ISBN 978-3-9824063-7-4https://\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58078", "revid": "6643015", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58078", "title": "Period of Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms", "text": ""}
{"id": "58079", "revid": "50815063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58079", "title": "Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period", "text": "Period of Chinese history (907\u2013979)\nThe Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period () was an era of political upheaval and division in Imperial China from 907 to 979 AD. Five dynastic states quickly succeeded one another in the Central Plain, and more than a dozen concurrent dynastic states, collectively known as the Ten Kingdoms, were established elsewhere, mainly in South China. It was a prolonged period of multiple political divisions in Chinese imperial history.\nTraditionally, the era is seen as beginning with the fall of the Tang dynasty in 907 and reaching its climax with the founding of the Song dynasty in 960. In the following 19 years, Song gradually subdued the remaining states in South China, but the Liao dynasty still remained in China's north (eventually succeeded by the Jin dynasty), and the Western Xia was eventually established in China's northwest.\nMany states had been \"de facto\" independent long before 907 as the late Tang dynasty's control over its numerous \"fanzhen\" officials waned, but the key event was their recognition as sovereign by foreign powers. After the Tang collapsed, several warlords of the Central Plain crowned themselves emperor. During the 70-year period, there was near-constant warfare between the emerging kingdoms and the alliances they formed. All had the ultimate goal of controlling the Central Plain and establishing themselves as the Tang's successor.\nThe last of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms regimes was Northern Han, which held out until Song conquered it in 979. For the next several centuries, although the Song controlled much of South China, they coexisted alongside the Liao dynasty, Jin dynasty, and various other regimes in China's north, until finally all of them were conquered by the Yuan dynasty.\nBackground.\nTowards the end of the Tang dynasty, the imperial government granted increased powers to the \"jiedushi\" (), the regional military governors. The An Lushan (755\u2013763 AD) and Huang Chao rebellions weakened the imperial government, and by the early 10th century the \"jiedushi\" commanded \"de facto\" independence from its authority. In the last decades of the Tang dynasty, they were not even appointed by the central court anymore, but developed hereditary systems, from father to son or from patron to prot\u00e9g\u00e9. They had their own armies rivaling the \"palace armies\" and amassed huge wealth, as testified by their sumptuous tombs. Due to the decline of Tang central authority after the An Lushan Rebellion, there was a growing tendency to superimpose large regional administrations over the old districts and prefectures that had been used since the Qin dynasty (221\u2013206 BC). These administrations, known as circuit commissions, would become the boundaries of the later Southern regimes; many circuit commissioners became the emperors or kings of these states.\nThe historian Hugh Clark proposed a three-stage model of broad political trends during this time period. The first stage (880\u2013910) consists of the period between the Huang Chao Rebellion and the formal end of the Tang dynasty, which saw chaotic fighting between warlords who controlled approximately one or two prefectures each. The second stage (910\u2013950) saw the various warlords stabilize and gain enough legitimacy to proclaim new dynasties. The third stage (950\u2013979) saw the forceful reunification of China by the Later Zhou dynasty and its successor the Song dynasty, and the demilitarisation of the provinces. Southern China, divided into several independent dynastic kingdoms, was more stable than the North which saw constant regime change. Consequently, the Southern kingdoms were able to embark on trade, land reclamation, and infrastructure projects, laying the groundwork for the Song Dynasty economic boom. This economic shift to the south also led to a vast southward migration.\nNorth.\nAccording to Nicholas Tackett, the three provinces of Hebei (Chengde, Youzhou, Weibo) were able to maintain much greater autonomy from the central government in the aftermath of the An Lushan rebellion. With their administration under local military control, these provinces never submitted tax revenues, and governorships lapsed into hereditary succession. They engaged in occasional war with the central government, or against each other, and Youzhou seemed to conduct its own foreign policy. This meant that the culture of these northeastern provinces started diverging from the capital. Many of the elites in post-Tang China, including the future emperors of the Song dynasty, came from this region.\nThe administrations of the Five Dynasties and the early Song Dynasty shared a pattern of being disproportionately drawn from the families of military governors in northern and northwestern China (Hebei, Shanxi, Shaanxi), their personal staff, and the bureaucrats who served in the capitals of the Five dynasties. These families had risen to prominence due to the unraveling of central authority after the An Lushan Rebellion, despite lacking esteemed ancestry. The historian Deng Xiaonan argued that many of these military families, including the Song imperial family, were of mixed Han Chinese-Turkic-Kumo Xi ancestry.\nThe term \"Five Dynasties\" was coined by Song dynasty historians and reflects the view that the successive regimes based in Kaifeng, controlled the Central Plain and possessed the Mandate of Heaven. The first of the Five Dynasties was founded by Zhu Wen, the rebel defector turned warlord who ultimately ended the Tang dynasty. The rest of the Five Dynasties as well as the Song dynasty all emerged from a military organization originally led by Shatuo Turks whose commanders replaced each other in frequent coup d'\u00e9tat. The Later Tang was founded by Li Cunxu, the son of Shatuo leader Li Keyong, who was the main military rival to Zhu Wen in the late Tang. The Later Jin founder Shi Jingtang was the son of a Shatuo commander in Li Keyong's army and became the son-in-law of the Later Tang general and emperor Li Siyuan, who was himself an adopted son of Li Keyong. The Later Han founder Liu Zhiyuan was a Shatuo officer under Li Siyuan and Shi Jintang. The father of the Later Zhou founder Guo Wei fought in Li Keyong's army and Guo served under Liu Zhiyuan. The father of Song founder Zhao Kuangyin served in the armies of Later Tang, Later Han, and Later Zhou. Zhao, also a professional soldier, rose through the ranks of the Later Zhou before seizing the throne in the Chenqiao Mutiny in 960, which ended the era of the Five Dynasties.\nThe Qing historian Wang Fuzhi (1619\u20131692) wrote that this period could be compared to the earlier Warring States period of ancient China, remarking that none of the rulers could be described as \"Son of Heaven\". The Five Dynasties' rulers, despite claiming the status of emperor, sometimes dealt with each other on terms of diplomatic equality out of pragmatic concern. This concept of \"sharing the Mandate of Heaven\" as \"sibling states\" was the result of the brief balance of power. After the reunification of China by the Song dynasty, the Song embarked on a special effort to denounce such arrangements.\nSouth.\nThe Southern regimes generally had more stable and effective government during this period. Even the rulers of the Southern states were almost all military leaders from the North with their key officers and elite forces also hailing from the North since the bulk of the Tang army was based in the North. The founders of Wu and Former Shu were 'rogues' from Huainan and Xuchang respectively, the founder of Min was a minor government staffer from Huainan, the founder of Wuyue was a 'rogue' from Hangzhou, the founder of Chu was (according to one source) a carpenter from Xuchang, the founder of Jingnan was a slave from Shanzhou and the founder of Southern Han was a southern tribal chief. The Southern kingdoms were founded by men of low social status who rose up through superior military ability, who were later scorned as \"bandits\" by future scholars. However, once established, these rulers took great pains to portray themselves as promoters of culture and economic development so as to legitimize their rule; many wooed former Tang courtiers to help administer their states.\nThe economies of each of the southern regions had prospered in the late Tang. Guangdong and Fujian were the sites of important port cities trading exotic goods, the middle Yangtze and Sichuan were centers of tea and porcelain production, and the Yangtze delta was a center of extremely high agricultural production and an entrepot for the other regions. The regions were economically interdependent. Sui and Tang's policies, while paying little attention to developing the South, gave the South room to innovate free of tight administrative controls. The dominant northern officials had been unwilling to serve in the South during the Tang, and so southerners were recruited by the Tang to serve in a local capacity under the \"Southern Selection\" supplemental system. These southern officials became the administrative core of the Ten Kingdoms and later dominated the bureaucracy by the mid-Song.\nSignificant \"jiedushi\".\nNorth China\nSouth China\nFive Dynasties.\nLater Liang (907\u2013923).\nDuring the Tang dynasty, the warlord Zhu Wen was originally a member of Huang Chao's rebel army, he took on a crucial role in suppressing the Huang Chao Rebellion. For this function, he was awarded the Xuanwu Jiedushi title. Within a few years, he had consolidated his power by destroying neighbours and forcing the move of the imperial capital to Luoyang, which was within his region of influence. In 904, he executed Emperor Zhaozong of Tang and made Zhaozong's 13-year-old son Emperor Ai of Tang a subordinate ruler. Three years later, he induced the boy emperor to abdicate in his favour. He then proclaimed himself emperor, thus beginning the Later Liang.\nLater Tang (923\u2013936).\nIn the final years of the Tang dynasty, rival warlords declared independence in the provinces they governed\u2014not all of which recognized the emperor's authority. Li Keyong was the jiedushi for the Hedong circuit in present Shanxi, forming a polity called Jin (\u6649). His son Li Cunxu and Liu Shouguang fiercely fought the regime forces to conquer northern China; Li Cunxu succeeded. He defeated Liu Shouguang (who had proclaimed a Yan Empire in 911) in 915, and declared himself emperor in 923; within a few months, he brought down the Later Liang regime. Thus began the Shatuo Later Tang\u2014the first in a long line of conquest dynasties. After reuniting much of northern China, in 924 Cunxu received the submission of Shaanxi's Qi kingdom, and in 925 Cunxu conquered the Former Shu, a regime that had been set up in Sichuan.\nLater Jin (937\u2013947).\nThe Later Tang had a few years of relative calm, followed by unrest. In 934, Sichuan again asserted independence. In 936, Shi Jingtang rebelled against Li Congke, the fourth emperor of the Later Tang. Shi Jingtang, a Shatuo jiedushi from Taiyuan, was aided by the Khitan-led Liao dynasty in his rebellion. In return for their aid, Shi Jingtang promised annual tribute and the Sixteen Prefectures (modern northern Hebei and Beijing) to the Khitans. The rebellion succeeded, and Shi Jingtang became emperor in this same year.\nNot long after the founding of Later Jin, the Liao came to regard the emperor as a proxy ruler for China. In 943, the Khitans declared war and within three years seized the capital, Kaifeng, marking the end of Later Jin. But while they had conquered vast regions of China, the Khitans were unable or unwilling to control those regions and retreated from them early in the next year.\nLater Han (947\u2013951).\nTo fill the power vacuum, the jiedushi Liu Zhiyuan entered the imperial capital in 947 and proclaimed the advent of the Later Han, establishing a third successive Shatuo reign. This was the shortest of the five dynasties. Following a coup in 951, General Guo Wei, a Han Chinese, was enthroned, thus beginning the Later Zhou. However, Liu Chong, a member of the Later Han imperial family, established a rival Northern Han regime in Taiyuan and requested Khitan aid to defeat the Later Zhou.\nLater Zhou (951\u2013960).\nAfter the death of Guo Wei in 954, his adopted son Chai Rong succeeded the throne and began a policy of expansion and reunification. One month after Chai Rong took the throne, Liu Chong, Emperor of Northern Han, allied with Liao dynasty to launch an assault on Later Zhou. Against the advice of Minister Feng Dao, Chai Rong decided to lead his army against the incursion. When Chai Rong engaged Liu Chong at Gao Ping (in modern Jincheng), two of Chai's generals, Fan Aineng and He Hui, fled from the battlefield along with their troops. At this critical moment, Chai Rong risked his life to break through the defense and crushed Liu's forces. After this campaign, Chai Rong consolidated his power. Between 956 and 958, forces of Later Zhou conquered much of Southern Tang, the most powerful regime in southern China, which ceded all the territory north of the Yangtze in defeat. In 959, Chai Rong attacked the Liao in an attempt to recover territories ceded during the Later Jin. After many victories, he succumbed to illness.\nIn 960, the general Zhao Kuangyin staged a coup and took the throne for himself, founding the Northern Song dynasty. This is the official end of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period. During the next two decades, Zhao Kuangyin and his successor Zhao Kuangyi defeated the other remaining regimes in South China, conquering Northern Han in 979, starting the Song dynasty era in 982.\nTen Kingdoms.\nUnlike the dynasties of northern China, which succeeded one another in rapid succession, the regimes of South China were generally concurrent, each controlling a specific geographical area. These were known as \"The Ten Kingdoms\" (in fact, some claimed the title of Emperor, such as Former Shu and Later Shu). Each court was a center of artistic excellence. The period is noted for the vitality of its poetry and for its economic prosperity. Commerce grew so quickly that there was a shortage of metallic currency. This was partly addressed by the creation of bank drafts, or \"flying money\" (\"feiqian\"), as well as by certificates of deposit. Wood block printing became common during this period, 500 years before Johannes Gutenberg's press.\nThe Ten Kingdoms were:\nOnly ten are traditionally listed, hence the era's name. Some historians, such as Bo Yang, count eleven, including Yan and Qi but not the Northern Han, viewing it as simply a continuation of Later Han. This era also coincided with the founding of the Liao dynasty in the north, and the Dali Kingdom in the southwest.\nOther regimes during this period include Zhao, Yiwu Circuit, Dingnan Circuit, Wuping Circuit, Qingyuan Circuit, Yin, Ganzhou Uyghur Kingdom, Guiyi Circuit and Xiliangfu.\nYang Wu.\nThe Yang Wu (902\u2013937) was established in modern-day Jiangsu, Anhui, and Jiangxi. It was founded by Yang Xingmi, who became a Tang dynasty military governor in 892. The capital was initially at Guangling (present-day Yangzhou) and later moved to Jinling (present-day Nanjing). The kingdom fell in 937 when it was taken from within by the founder of the Southern Tang.\nWuyue.\nThe Wuyue was the longest-lived (907\u2013978) and among the most powerful of the southern states. Wuyue was known for its learning and culture. It was founded by Qian Liu, who set up his capital at Xifu (modern-day Hangzhou). It was based mostly in modern Zhejiang province but also held parts of southern Jiangsu. Qian Liu was named the Prince of Yue by the Tang emperor in 902; the Prince of Wu was added in 904. After the fall of the Tang dynasty in 907, he declared himself king of Wuyue. Wuyue survived until the eighteenth year of the Song dynasty, when Qian Shu surrendered to the expanding dynasty.\nMin.\nThe Min (909\u2013945) was founded by Wang Shenzhi, who named himself the Prince of Min with its capital at Changle (present-day Fuzhou). One of Shenzhi's sons proclaimed the independent state of Yin in the northeast of Min territory. The Southern Tang took that territory after the Min asked for help. Despite declaring loyalty to the neighboring Wuyue, the Southern Tang finished its conquest of Min in 945.\nSouthern Han.\nThe Southern Han (917\u2013971) was founded in Guangzhou by Liu Yan. His brother, Liu Yin, was named regional governor by the Tang court. The kingdom included Guangdong, Guangxi, and Hainan. It was finally conquered by the Song dynasty.\nMa Chu.\nThe Ma Chu (927\u2013951) was founded by Ma Yin with the capital at Changsha. The kingdom held Hunan and northeastern Guangxi. Ma was named regional military governor by the Tang court in 896, and named himself the Prince of Chu with the fall of the Tang in 907. This status as the Prince of Chu was confirmed by the Southern Tang in 927. The Southern Tang absorbed the state in 951 and moved the royal family to its capital in Nanjing, although Southern Tang rule of the region was temporary, as the next year former Chu military officers under the leadership of Liu Yan seized the territory. In the waning years of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, the region was ruled by Zhou Xingfeng. In 963, the region was annexed by Song dynasty.\nNorthern Han.\nThough considered one of the ten kingdoms, the Northern Han was based in the traditional Shatuo stronghold of Shanxi. It was founded by Liu Min (), formerly known as Liu Chong (), after the Later Han fell to the Han Chinese-led Later Zhou in 951. With the protection of the powerful Liao dynasty, the Northern Han maintained nominal independence until the Song dynasty wrested it from the Khitans in 979.\nJingnan (also known as Nanping).\nThe smallest of the southern states, Jingnan (924\u2013963), was founded by Gao Jichang, a former general of Liang. It was based in Jiangling and held two other districts southwest of present-day Wuhan in Hubei. Gao was in the service of the Later Liang (the successor of the Tang in North China). Gao's successors claimed the title of King of Nanping after the fall of the Later Liang in 924. It was a small and weak kingdom, and thus tried to maintain good relations with each of the Five Dynasties. The kingdom fell to advancing armies of the Song in 963.\nFormer Shu.\nFormer Shu (907\u2013925) was founded after the fall of the Tang dynasty by Wang Jian, who held his court in Chengdu. The kingdom held most of present-day Sichuan, western Hubei, and parts of southern Gansu and Shaanxi. Wang was named military governor of western Sichuan by the Tang court in 891. The kingdom fell when his son surrendered in the face of an advance by the Later Tang in 925.\nLater Shu.\nThe Later Shu (935\u2013965) is essentially a resurrection of the previous Shu state that had fallen a decade earlier to the Later Tang. Because the Later Tang was in decline and Li Cunxu was killed in a revolt, Meng Zhixiang found the opportunity to reassert Shu's independence. Like the Former Shu, the capital was at Chengdu and it basically controlled the same territory as its predecessor. The kingdom was ruled well until forced to succumb to Song armies in 965.\nSouthern Tang.\nThe Southern Tang (937\u2013975) was the successor state of Wu as Li Bian (Emperor Liezu) took the state over from within in 937. Expanding from the original domains of Wu, it eventually took over Yin, Min, and Chu, holding present-day southern Anhui, southern Jiangsu, much of Jiangxi, Hunan, and eastern Hubei at its height. The kingdom became nominally subordinate to the expanding Song in 961 and was invaded outright in 975, when it was formally absorbed into the Song dynasty.\nTransitions between the Ten Kingdoms.\nAlthough more stable than northern China as a whole, southern China was also torn apart by warfare. Wu quarreled with its neighbours, a trend that continued as Wu was replaced with Southern Tang. In the 940s Min and Chu underwent internal crises which Southern Tang handily took advantage of, destroying Min in 945 and Chu in 951. Remnants of Min and Chu, however, survived in the form of Qingyuan Jiedushi and Wuping Jiedushi for many years after. With this, Southern Tang became the undisputedly most powerful regime in southern China. However, it was unable to defeat incursions by the Later Zhou between 956 and 958, and ceded all of its land north of the Yangtze River.\nThe Song dynasty, established in 960, was determined to reunify China. Jingnan and Wuping Jiedushi were swept away in 963, Later Shu in 965, Southern Han in 971, and Southern Tang in 975. Finally, Wuyue and Qingyuan Jiedushi gave up their land to Northern Song in 978, bringing all of southern China under the control of the central government.\nIn common with other periods of fragmentation, the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period resulted in a division between northern and southern China. The greater stability of the Ten Kingdoms, especially the longevity of Wuyue and Southern Han, would contribute to the development of distinct regional identities within China. The distinction was reinforced by the \"Old History\" and the \"New History\". Written from the northern viewpoint, these chronicles organized the history around the Five Dynasties (the north), presenting the Ten Kingdoms (the south) as illegitimate, self-absorbed and indulgent.\nCulture.\nThe Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period turned away from the international cultural mood of the Tang dynasty and appears as a transition towards the solidified national culture of the Song dynasty. Throughout the period, there was marked cultural and economic growth, rather than decline.\nSeveral Northern dynasties originated in the northeast, and centralisation of the north led to a migration of provincial elites into the capital, particularly northeasterners, creating a new metropolitan culture. After the unification of China by the Song dynasty, the culture, arts and literature of the Southern states were incorporated into the new regime. The Song dynasty adopted a distinctively Southern Chinese cultural outlook. The preserved cultural traditions of Southern Tang, Wu Yue and Later Shu were used to rebuild the cultural landscape of the north. Southern libraries were transported north, Southeastern architecture was promoted in the new capital, and Southeastern Buddhist icons, clergy and relics were concentrated in the new capital so as to reintegrate these traditions into the imperial culture. This was distinct from the five Northern dynasties, who never supported extended monastic lineage networks but instead typically sought to restrict them and draw on their economic and military resources.\nAlthough short, the period saw cultural innovations in different areas. Pottery saw the appearance of \"white ceramics\"/ In painting, the \"varied landscape\" of China was inspired by Taoism. It emphasized the sacredness of mountains as places between heaven and earth and depicted the natural world as a source of harmony.\nLaw.\nIn later tradition, the Five Dynasties is viewed as a period of judicial abuse and excessive punishment. This view reflects both actual problems with the administration of justice and the bias of Confucian historians, who disapproved of the decentralization and militarization that characterized this period. While Tang procedure called for delaying executions until appeals were exhausted, this was not generally the case in the Five Dynasties.\nOther abuses included the use of severe torture. The Later Han was the most notorious dynasty in this regard. Suspects could be tortured to death with long knives and nails. The military officer in charge of security of the capital is said to have executed suspects without inquiry.\nThe Tang code of 737 was the basic statutory law for this period, together supplemental edicts and collections. The Later Liang promulgated a code in 909. This code was blamed for delays in the administration of justice and said to be excessively harsh with respect to economic crimes. The Later Tang, Later Jin, and Later Zhou also produced recompilations. The Later Han was in power too briefly to make a mark on the legal system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58082", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58082", "title": "Famous football player", "text": ""}
{"id": "58084", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58084", "title": "Vladimir Atlasov", "text": "Russian Cossack explorer of the Kamchatka Peninsula (c. 1663 \u2013 1711)\nVladimir Vasilyevich Atlasov or Otlasov ( or \u041e\u0442\u043b\u0430\u0301\u0441\u043e\u0432; c.\u20091663 \u2013 1711) was a Siberian Cossack who was the first Russian to organize systematic exploration of the Kamchatka Peninsula. Atlasov Island, an uninhabited volcanic island off the southern tip of Kamchatka, and the Atlasova volcano are named after him.\nBiography.\nAtlasov was born in Veliky Ustyug. The first mention of him in the historical records comes from around 1682, when he was collecting the \"yasak\" on the Aldan River and one of the Uda rivers. In 1695, the voyevoda of Yakutsk appointed Atlasov as the \"prikazshchik\" of Anadyrsk. The Russians here had heard reports of a 'Kamchatka River' to the south and were already collecting yasak on the headwaters of the rivers that flow south toward Kamchatka. At least one of them had followed the Penzhina River to the Sea of Okhotsk. In 1696, he sent Luka Morozko south to explore. Morozko got as far south as the Tegil river on the west side of the peninsula and returned with some 'mysterious writings', apparently from a wrecked Japanese ship.\nIn 1697, Atlasov set off south with 65\u00a0serving-men and 60\u00a0Yukaghirs. Travelling on reindeer, they reached the mouth of the Penzhina River. He went down the west coast for two weeks and then crossed to the east coast. (Lantzeff has this as February 1697 on the Olyutor Gulf, but the Russian wiki has him leaving in the spring of 1697 and the Olyutor Gulf is rather far to the northeast). He left Morzoko to explore the east side and returned to the west side, but Morozko had to be recalled to deal with a Yukaghir mutiny (at the Palana River). Going south to the Tegil river, he heard reports of the Kamchatka river and recrossed the Central Range to the Kamchatka where he met the Itelmens for the first time. He made an alliance with one clan and went downriver and burned a village of their enemies. Returning, he learned that some Koryaks had stolen his reindeer. He chased them, killed about 150 and retrieved his reindeer. Continuing down the west side he reached the Icha River where he rescued or captured a Japanese sailor who had been shipwrecked. Further south he reached the Golygina River area, from which he was able to see Atlasov Island. Here he met the first Ainu and managed to kill fifty of them. Returning north to the Icha, he sent a party of men over the mountains to build an \"ostrog\" at Verkhnekamchatsk on the upper Kamchatka. Here he decided to return to Anadyrsk, either under pressure of his men or because he was running short of gunpowder and lead.\nHe reached Anadyrsk in July 1699 and wrote a report. He reached Yakutsk in June 1700 and in February 1701 reached Moscow where he presented his report. He was promoted to Golova and sent back to administer Kamchatka. On the Angara River in 1701 he met and plundered a merchant's boat loaded with Chinese goods. For this he and his men were thrown in jail. Kamchatka became increasingly disorderly and in 1707 Atlasov was released and sent to Kamchatka to restore order. On the journey his methods were so rough that most of his men sent a letter of protest to Yakutsk. He pacified the natives to some degree, but in December 1707 his own cossacks revolted and imprisoned him. He escaped (from Verkhnekamchatsk) and went downriver to Nizhnekamchatsk, but the local commander refused to step aside and give him command. \nIn January 1711, he was murdered in his sleep by another band of mutineers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58086", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58086", "title": "Vector (biology)", "text": ""}
{"id": "58087", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58087", "title": "I'm Sorry, I Haven't a Clue", "text": ""}
{"id": "58088", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58088", "title": "Sakhalin", "text": "Island in the Sea of Okhotsk\nSakhalin (, ) is an island in Northeast Asia. Its north coast lies off the southeastern coast of Khabarovsk Krai in Russia, while its southern tip lies north of the Japanese island of Hokkaido. An island of the West Pacific, Sakhalin divides the Sea of Okhotsk to its east from the Sea of Japan to its southwest. It is administered as part of Sakhalin Oblast and is the largest island of Russia, with an area of . The island has a population of roughly 500,000, the majority of whom are Russians. The indigenous peoples of the island are the Ainu, Oroks, and Nivkhs, who are now present in very small numbers.\nThe island's name is derived from the Manchu word \"Sahaliyan\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:MongolUnicode/fonts.css\" /&gt;\u1830\u1820\u1865\u1820\u182f\u1873\u1836\u1820\u1828), which was the name of the Qing dynasty city of Aigun. The Ainu people of Sakhalin paid tribute to the Yuan, Ming, and Qing dynasties and accepted official appointments from them. Sometimes the relationship was forced but control from dynasties in China was loose for the most part.\nThe ownership of the island has been contested during the past millienium, with China, Russia, and Japan all making claims on the territory at different times. Over the course of the 19th and 20th centuries it was Russia and Japan, and the disputes sometimes involved military conflicts and divisions of the island between the two powers. In 1875, Japan ceded its claims to Russia in exchange for the northern Kuril Islands. In 1897 more than half of the population were Russians and other European and Asian minorities. In 1905, following the Russo-Japanese War, the island was divided, with Southern Sakhalin going to Japan. After the Siberian intervention, Japan invaded the northern parts of Sakhalin, and ruled the entire island from 1918 to 1925. Russia has held all of the island since seizing the Japanese portion in the final days of World War II in 1945, as well as all of the Kurils. Japan no longer claims any of Sakhalin, although it does still claim the southern Kuril Islands. Most Ainu on Sakhalin moved to Hokkaido, to the south across the La P\u00e9rouse Strait, when Japanese civilians were displaced from the island in 1949.\nEtymology.\nSakhalin, derived from the Manchu name , has several names including ( ), (), (), (), (Nivkh: ).\nThe Manchus called it 'Island at the Mouth of the Black River'. , the word that has been borrowed in the form of \"Sakhalin\", means \"black\" in Manchu, means \"river\" and \u1830\u1820\u1865\u1820\u182f\u1873\u1836\u1820\u1828\u1860\u182f\u1820 'Black River' is the proper Manchu name of the Amur River.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Qing dynasty called Sakhalin \u2018Kuyedao\u2019 (\u2018the island of Ainu\u2019) and the indigenous people paid tribute to the Chinese empire. However, there was no formalized border around the island. The Qing dynasty was a pre- modern or \u2018world empire\u2019 which did not place emphasis on demarcating borders in the manner of the modern \u2018national empires\u2019 of the nineteenth and early twentieth century (Yamamuro 2003: 90\u201397).\u2014\u200a\nThe island was also called \"Kuye Fiyaka\". The word \"Kuye\" used by the Qing is \"most probably related to \"kuyi\", the name given to the Sakhalin Ainu by their Nivkh and Nanai neighbors.\" When the Ainu migrated onto the mainland, the Chinese described a \"strong Kui (or Kuwei, Kuwu, Kuye, Kugi, \"i.e.\" Ainu) presence in the area otherwise dominated by the Gilemi or Jilimi (Nivkh and other Amur peoples).\" Related names were in widespread use in the region, for example the Kuril Ainu called themselves .\nThe origins of the traditional Japanese name, (), are unclear and multiple competing explanations have been proposed. These include:\nThe Japanese form \u6a3a\u592a equates to \"Hwangt'ae\", an earlier name for the island now superseded by the transcription \uc0ac\ud560\ub9b0 \"Sahallin\".\nThe island was also historically referred to as \"Tschoka\" by European travelers in the late 18th century, such as Lap\u00e9rouse and Langsdorff. This name is believed to derive from an obsolete endonym used by Sakhalin Ainu, possibly based on the word \"\" (, \"we\") in Sakhalin Ainu language.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nHumans lived on Sakhalin in the Neolithic Stone Age. Flint implements such as those found in Siberia have been found at Dui and Kusunai in great numbers, as well as polished stone hatchets similar to European examples, primitive pottery with decorations like those of the Olonets, and stone weights used with fishing nets. A later population familiar with bronze left traces in earthen walls and kitchen-middens on Aniva Bay.\nIndigenous people of Sakhalin include the Ainu in the southern half, the Oroks in the central region, and the Nivkhs in the north.\nYuan and Ming tributaries.\nAfter the Mongols conquered the Jin dynasty (1234), they suffered raids by the Nivkh and Udege peoples. In response, the Mongols established an administration post at Nurgan (present-day Tyr, Russia) at the junction of the Amur and Amgun rivers in 1263, and forced the submission of the two peoples.\nFrom the Nivkh perspective, their surrender to the Mongols essentially established a military alliance against the Ainu who had invaded their lands. According to the \"History of Yuan\", a group of people known as the \"Guwei\" (, the Nivkh name for Ainu) from Sakhalin invaded and fought with the Jilimi (Nivkh people) every year. On 30 November 1264, the Mongols attacked the Ainu. The Ainu resisted the Mongol invasions but by 1308 had been subdued. They paid tribute to the Mongol Yuan dynasty at posts in Wuliehe, Nanghar, and Boluohe.\nThe Chinese Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644) placed Sakhalin under its \"system for subjugated peoples\" (\"ximin tizhi\"). From 1409 to 1411 the Ming established an outpost called the Nurgan Regional Military Commission near the ruins of Tyr on the Siberian mainland, which continued operating until the mid-1430s. There is some evidence that the Ming eunuch Admiral Yishiha reached Sakhalin in 1413 during one of his expeditions to the lower Amur, and granted Ming titles to a local chieftain.\nThe Ming recruited headmen from Sakhalin for administrative posts such as commander (), assistant commander (), and \"official charged with subjugation\" (). In 1431, one such assistant commander, Alige, brought marten pelts as tribute to the Wuliehe post. In 1437, four other assistant commanders (Zhaluha, Sanchiha, Tuolingha, and Alingge) also presented tribute. According to the \"Ming Veritable Records\", these posts, like the position of headman, were hereditary and passed down the patrilineal line. During these tributary missions, the headmen would bring their sons, who later inherited their titles. In return for tribute, the Ming awarded them with silk uniforms.\nNivkh women in Sakhalin married Han Chinese Ming officials when the Ming took tribute from Sakhalin and the Amur river region.\nQing tributary.\nThe Manchu Qing dynasty, which came to power in China in 1644, called Sakhalin \"Kuyedao\" () or \"Kuye Fiyaka\" (\u1874\u1860\u1836\u185d\u1876\u1873\u1836\u1820\u1874\u1820). The Manchus called it \"Sagaliyan ula angga hada\" (Island at the Mouth of the Black River). The Qing first asserted influence over Sakhalin after the 1689 Treaty of Nerchinsk, which defined the Stanovoy Mountains as the border between the Qing and the Russian Empires. In the following year the Qing sent forces to the Amur estuary and demanded that the residents, including the Sakhalin Ainu, pay tribute. This was followed by several further visits to the island as part of the Qing effort to map the area. To enforce its influence, the Qing sent soldiers and mandarins across Sakhalin, reaching most parts of the island except the southern tip. The Qing imposed a fur-tribute system on the region's inhabitants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Qing dynasty ruled these regions by imposing upon them a fur tribute system, just as had the Yuan and Ming dynasties. Residents who were required to pay tributes had to register according to their \"hala\" (\u1865\u1820\u182f\u1820, the clan of the father's side) and \"gashan\" (\u1864\u1820\u1867\u1820\u1828, village), and a designated chief of each unit was put in charge of district security as well as the annual collection and delivery of fur. By 1750, fifty-six \"hala\" and 2,398 households were registered as fur tribute payers, \u2013 those who paid with fur were rewarded mainly with Nishiki silk brocade, and every year the dynasty supplied the chief of each clan and village with official silk clothes (\"mangpao\", \"duanpao\"), which were the gowns of the mandarin. Those who offered especially large fur tributes were granted the right to create a familial relationship with officials of the Manchu Eight Banners (at the time equivalent to Chinese aristocrats) by marrying an official's adopted daughter. Further, the tribute payers were allowed to engage in trade with officials and merchants at the tribute location. By these policies, the Qing dynasty brought political stability to the region and established the basis for commerce and economic development.\u2014\u200a\nThe Qing dynasty established an office in Ningguta, situated midway along the Mudan River, to handle fur from the lower Amur and Sakhalin. Tribute was supposed to be brought to regional offices, but the lower Amur and Sakhalin were considered too remote, so the Qing sent officials directly to these regions every year to collect tribute and to present awards. By the 1730s, the Qing had appointed senior figures among the indigenous communities as \"clan chief\" (\"hala-i-da\") or \"village chief\" (\"gasan-da\" or \"mokun-da\"). In 1732, 6 \"hala\", 18 \"gasban\", and 148 households were registered as tribute bearers in Sakhalin. Manchu officials gave tribute missions rice, salt, other necessities, and gifts during the duration of their mission. Tribute missions occurred during the summer months. During the reign of the Qianlong Emperor (r. 1735\u201395), a trade post existed at Delen, upstream of Kiji (Kizi) Lake, according to Rinzo Mamiya. There were 500\u2013600 people at the market during Mamiya's stay there.\nLocal native Sakhalin chiefs had their daughters taken as wives by Manchu officials as sanctioned by the Qing dynasty when the Qing exercised jurisdiction in Sakhalin and took tribute from them.\nJapanese exploration and colonization.\nIn 1635, Matsumae Kinhiro, the second daimy\u014d of Matsumae Domain in Hokkaid\u014d, sent Sat\u014d Kamoemon and Kakizaki Kuroudo on an expedition to Sakhalin. One of the Matsumae explorers, Kod\u014d Sh\u014dzaemon, stayed on the island in the winter of 1636 and sailed along the east coast to Taraika (now Poronaysk) in the spring of 1637.\nIn an early colonization attempt, a Japanese settlement was established at \u014ctomari on Sakhalin's southern end in 1679. Cartographers of the Matsumae clan drew a map of the island and called it \"Kita-Ezo\" (Northern Ezo, Ezo being the old Japanese name for the islands north of Honshu).\nIn the 1780s, the influence of the Japanese Tokugawa Shogunate on the Ainu of southern Sakhalin increased significantly. By the beginning of the 19th century, the Japanese economic zone extended midway up the east coast, to Taraika. With the exception of the Nayoro Ainu located on the west coast in close proximity to China, most Ainu stopped paying tribute to the Qing dynasty. The Matsumae clan was nominally in charge of Sakhalin, but they neither protected nor governed the Ainu there. Instead they extorted the Ainu for Chinese silk, which they sold in Honshu as Matsumae's special product. To obtain Chinese silk, the Ainu fell into debt, owing much fur to the Santan (Ulch people), who lived near the Qing office. The Ainu also sold the silk uniforms (\"mangpao\", \"bufu\", and \"chaofu\") given to them by the Qing, which made up the majority of what the Japanese knew as \"nishiki\" and \"jittoku\". As dynastic uniforms, the silk was of considerably higher quality than that traded at Nagasaki, and enhanced Matsumae prestige as exotic items. Eventually the Tokugawa government, realizing that they could not depend on the Matsumae, took control of Sakhalin in 1807.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mogami's interest in the Sakhalin trade intensified when he learned that Yaenkoroaino, the above-mentioned elder from Nayoro, possessed a memorandum written in Manchurian, which stated that the Ainu elder was an official of the Qing state. Later surveys on Sakhalin by shogunal officials such as Takahashi Jiday\u00fa and Nakamura Koichir\u00f3 only confirmed earlier observations: Sakhalin and S\u00f3ya Ainu traded foreign goods at trading posts, and because of the pressure to meet quotas, they fell into debt. These goods, the officials confirmed, originated at Qing posts, where continental traders acquired them during tributary ceremonies. The information contained in these types of reports turned out to be a serious blow to the future of Matsumae's trade monopoly in Ezo.\u2014\u200a\nJapan proclaimed sovereignty over Sakhalin in 1807; in 1809, Mamiya Rinz\u014d claimed that it was an island.\nEuropean exploration.\nThe first European known to visit Sakhalin was Martin Gerritz de Vries, who mapped Cape Patience and Cape Aniva on the island's east coast in 1643. The Dutch captain, however, was unaware that it was an island, and 17th-century maps usually showed these points (and often Hokkaido as well) as part of the mainland. As part of a nationwide Sino-French cartographic program, Jesuits Jean-Baptiste R\u00e9gis, Pierre Jartoux, and Xavier Ehrenbert Fridelli joined a Chinese team visiting the lower Amur (known to them under its Manchu name, Sahaliyan Ula, \"the Black River\") in 1709, and learned of the existence of the nearby offshore island from the Nanai natives of the lower Amur.\nThe Jesuits did not have a chance to visit the island, and the geographical information provided by the Nanai people and Manchus who had been to the island was insufficient to allow them to identify it as the land visited by de Vries in 1643. As a result, many 17th-century maps showed a rather strangely shaped Sakhalin, which included only the northern half of the island (with Cape Patience), while Cape Aniva, discovered by de Vries, and the \"Black Cape\" (Cape Crillon) were thought to form part of the mainland.\nOnly with the 1787 expedition of Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de La P\u00e9rouse did the island began to resemble something of its true shape on European maps. Though unable to pass through its northern \"bottleneck\" due to contrary winds, La Perouse charted most of the Strait of Tartary, and islanders he encountered near today's Nevelskoy Strait told him that the island was called \"Tchoka\" (or at least that is how he recorded the name in French), and \"Tchoka\" appears on some maps thereafter.\n19th century.\nRusso-Japanese rivalry.\nOn the basis of its belief that it was an extension of Hokkaido, both geographically and culturally, Japan again proclaimed sovereignty over the whole island (as well as the Kuril Islands chain) in 1845, in the face of competing claims from Russia. In 1849, however, the Russian navigator Gennady Nevelskoy recorded the existence and navigability of the strait later given his name, and Russian settlers began establishing coal mines, administration facilities, schools, and churches on the island. In 1853\u201354, Nikolay Rudanovsky surveyed and mapped the island.\nIn 1855, Russia and Japan signed the Treaty of Shimoda, which declared that nationals of both countries could inhabit the island: Russians in the north, and Japanese in the south, without a clearly defined boundary between. Russia also agreed to dismantle its military base at Ootomari. Following the Second Opium War, Russia forced China to sign the Treaty of Aigun (1858) and the Convention of Peking (1860), under which China lost to Russia all claims to territories north of Heilongjiang (Amur) and east of Ussuri.\nIn 1857, the Russians established a penal colony, or \"katorga\", on Sakhalin. The island remained under shared sovereignty until the signing of the 1875 Treaty of Saint Petersburg, in which Japan surrendered its claims in Sakhalin to Russia. In 1890, the author Anton Chekhov visited the penal colony on Sakhalin. He spent three months there interviewing thousands of convicts and settlers for a census and published his memoir \"Sakhalin Island\" () of his .\nDivision along 50th parallel.\nJapanese forces invaded and occupied Sakhalin in the closing stages of the Russo-Japanese War. In accordance with the Treaty of Portsmouth of 1905, the southern part of the island below the 50th parallel north reverted to Japan, while Russia retained the northern three-fifths.\nSouth Sakhalin was administered by Japan as Karafuto Prefecture (), with the capital at Toyohara (today's Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk). A large number of migrants were brought in from Korea.\nThe northern, Russian, half of the island formed Sakhalin Oblast, with the capital at Aleksandrovsk-Sakhalinsky. In response to the United States opening of Japan by Commodore Matthew C. Perry in 1853 and, later, the subsequent signing of the Convention of Kanagawa on March 31, 1854, Tsar Nicholas I, who was personally involved in the \"Sakhalin issue\", in April 1853 ordered the (RAC) to immediately occupy the Sakhalin Island and begin colonization by constructing two redoubts armed with cannons on the western and southern coasts of the island. On September 20, 1853, the RAC ship \"\" () under the command of skipper () and under the general guidance of Captain Nevelskoy arrived at Tomari-Aniva on Aniva Bay, not far from the main Japanese settlement on the island, and put ashore men and materials to form a military outpost.\nAt the oldest stettlement on Sakhlin Island, Sakhalin Oblast had a Czarist era penal colony named Due () on which had the 1853 established Makaryevka () coal mine, which was supported by both the (), now known as Korsakov (), at Aniva Bay (), which was named after Nikolay Muravyov-Amursky who had sponsored commanded by Gennady Nevelskoy that explored the coast of Sakhalin Island from 1849 to 1853, and the , and hosted its first prisoner beginning in 1876. On April 18, 1869, Tsar Alexander II approved the \"Regulations of the Committee on the Arrangement of Hard Labor\" () which formed the legal basis for Sakhalin Island to be a penal colony.\nIn 1920, during the Siberian Intervention, Japan again , returning it to the Soviet Union in 1925 after the Treaty of Beijing was signed on January 20, 1925. However, Japan formed the state owned firm () which extracted oil from the () near Okha on North Sakhalin from 1926 to 1944.\nWhaling.\nBetween 1848 and 1902, American whaleships hunted whales off Sakhalin. They cruised for bowhead and gray whales to the north and right whales to the east and south.\nOn June 7, 1855, the ship \"Jefferson\" (396 tons), of New London, was wrecked on Cape Levenshtern, on the northeastern side of the island, during a fog. All hands were saved as well as 300 barrels of whale oil.\nSecond World War.\nIn August 1945, after repudiating the Soviet\u2013Japanese Neutrality Pact, the Soviet Union invaded southern Sakhalin, an action planned secretly at the Yalta Conference. The Soviet attack started on August 11, 1945, a few days before the surrender of Japan. The Soviet 56th Rifle Corps, part of the 16th Army, consisting of the 79th Rifle Division, the 2nd Rifle Brigade, the 5th Rifle Brigade and the 214 Armored Brigade, attacked the Japanese 88th Infantry Division. Although the Soviet Red Army outnumbered the Japanese by three to one, they advanced only slowly due to strong Japanese resistance. It was not until the 113th Rifle Brigade and the 365th Independent Naval Infantry Rifle Battalion from Sovetskaya Gavan landed on T\u014dro, a seashore village of western Karafuto, on August 16 that the Soviets broke the Japanese defense line. Japanese resistance grew weaker after this landing. Actual fighting continued until August 21. From August 22 to August 23, most remaining Japanese units agreed to a ceasefire. The Soviets completed the conquest of Karafuto on August 25, 1945, by occupying the capital of Toyohara.\nOf the approximately 400,000 people \u2013 mostly Japanese and Korean \u2013 who lived on South Sakhalin in 1944, about 100,000 were evacuated to Japan during the last days of the war. The remaining 300,000 stayed behind, some for several more years.\nWhile the vast majority of Sakhalin Japanese and Koreans were gradually repatriated between 1946 and 1950, tens of thousands of Sakhalin Koreans (and a number of their Japanese spouses) remained in the Soviet Union.\nNo final peace treaty has been signed and the status of four neighboring islands remains disputed. Japan renounced its claims of sovereignty over southern Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands in the Treaty of San Francisco (1951), but maintains that the four offshore islands of Hokkaido currently administered by Russia were not subject to this renunciation. Japan granted mutual exchange visas for Japanese and Ainu families divided by the change in status. Recently, economic and political cooperation has gradually improved between the two nations despite disagreements.\nRecent history.\nOn 1 September 1983, Korean Air Flight 007, a South Korean civilian airliner, flew over Sakhalin and was shot down by the Soviet Union, just west of Sakhalin Island, near the smaller Moneron Island. The Soviet Union claimed it was a spy plane; however, commanders on the ground realized it was a commercial aircraft. All 269 passengers and crew died, including a U.S. Congressman, Larry McDonald.\nOn 27 May 1995, the 7.0 Neftegorsk earthquake shook the former Russian settlement of Neftegorsk with a maximum Mercalli intensity of IX (\"Violent\"). Total damage was $64.1\u2013300 million, with 1,989 deaths and 750 injured. The settlement was not rebuilt.\nGeography.\nSakhalin is separated from the mainland by the narrow and shallow Strait of Tartary, which often freezes in winter in its narrower part, and from Hokkaido, Japan, by the Soya Strait or La P\u00e9rouse Strait. Sakhalin is the largest island in Russia, being long, and wide, with an area of . It lies at similar latitudes to England, Wales and Ireland.\nIts orography and geological structure are imperfectly known. One theory is that Sakhalin arose from the Sakhalin Island Arc. Nearly two-thirds of Sakhalin is mountainous. Two parallel ranges of mountains traverse it from north to south, reaching . The Western Sakhalin Mountains peak in Mount Ichara, , while the Eastern Sakhalin Mountains's highest peak, Mount Lopatin , is also the island's highest mountain. Tym-Poronaiskaya Valley separates the two ranges. Susuanaisky and Tonino-Anivsky ranges traverse the island in the south, while the swampy Northern-Sakhalin plain occupies most of its north.\nCrystalline rocks crop out at several capes; Cretaceous limestones, containing an abundant and specific fauna of gigantic ammonites, occur at Dui on the west coast; and Tertiary conglomerates, sandstones, marls, and clays, folded by subsequent upheavals, are found in many parts of the island. The clays, which contain layers of good coal and abundant fossilized vegetation, show that during the Miocene period, Sakhalin formed part of a continent which comprised north Asia, Alaska, and Japan, and enjoyed a comparatively warm climate. The Pliocene deposits contain a mollusc fauna more Arctic than that which exists at the present time, indicating that the connection between the Pacific and Arctic Oceans was probably broader than it is now.\nMain rivers: The Tym, long and navigable by rafts and light boats for , flows north and northeast with numerous rapids and shallows, and enters the Sea of Okhotsk. The Poronay flows south-southeast to the Gulf of Patience or Shichiro Bay, on the southeastern coast. Three other small streams enter the wide semicircular Aniva Bay or Higashifushimi Bay at the southern extremity of the island.\nThe northernmost point of Sakhalin is Cape Elizabeth on the Schmidt Peninsula, while Cape Crillon is the southernmost point of the island. The Khalpili Islands are off Cape Khalpili.\nSakhalin has two smaller islands associated with it, Moneron Island and Ush Island. Moneron, the only land mass in the Tatar strait, long and wide, is about west from the nearest coast of Sakhalin and from the port city of Nevelsk. Ush Island is an island off of the northern coast of Sakhalin.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 1897 census, Sakhalin had a population of 28,113, of which 56.2% were Russians, 8.4% Ukrainians, 7.0% Nivkh, 5.8% Poles, 5.4% Tatars, 5.1% Ainu, 2.82% Oroks, 0.95% Germans, 0.81% Japanese, with the non-indigenous people living mainly from agriculture, or being convicts or exiles. The majority of Nivkh, Ainu and Japanese lived from fishing or hunting, whereas the Oroks lived mainly by livestock (reindeer) breeding. The Ainu, Japanese and Koreans lived almost exclusively in the southern part of the island. Since 1925, many Poles fled Soviet Russian persecution in the north to the then Japanese south.\nThe 400,000 Japanese inhabitants of Sakhalin (including the Japanized indigenous Ainu) who had not already been evacuated during the war were deported following the invasion of the southern portion of the island by the Soviet Union in 1945 at the end of World War II.\nIn 2010, the island's population was recorded at 497,973, 83% of whom were ethnic Russians, followed by about 30,000 Koreans (5.5%). Smaller minorities were the Ainu, Ukrainians, Tatars, Sakhas and Evenks. The native inhabitants currently consist of some 2,000 Nivkhs and 750 Oroks. The Nivkhs in the north support themselves by fishing and hunting.\nThe administrative center of the oblast, Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, a city of about 175,000, has a large Korean minority, typically referred to as Sakhalin Koreans, who were forcibly brought by the Japanese during World War II to work in the coal mines. Most of the population lives in the southern half of the island, centered mainly around Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk and two ports, Kholmsk and Korsakov (population about 40,000 each). In 2008 there were 6,416 births and 7,572 deaths.\nClimate.\nThe Sea of Okhotsk ensures that Sakhalin has a cold and humid climate, ranging from humid continental (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\") in the south to subarctic (\"Dfc\") in the centre and north. The maritime influence makes summers much cooler than in similar-latitude inland cities such as Harbin or Irkutsk, but makes the winters much snowier and a few degrees warmer than in interior East Asian cities at the same latitude. Summers are foggy with little sunshine.\nPrecipitation is heavy, owing to the strong onshore winds in summer and the high frequency of North Pacific storms affecting the island in the autumn. It ranges from around on the northwest coast to over in southern mountainous regions. In contrast to interior east Asia with its pronounced summer maximum, onshore winds ensure Sakhalin has year-round precipitation with a peak in the autumn.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe whole of the island is covered with dense forests, mostly coniferous. The Yezo (or Yeddo) spruce (\"Picea jezoensis\"), the Sakhalin fir (\"Abies sachalinensis\"), the Dahurian larch (\"Larix gmelinii\"), and \"Picea glehnii\" are the chief trees; on the upper parts of the mountains are the Siberian dwarf pine (\"Pinus pumila\") and the Kurile bamboo (\"Sasa kurilensis\"). Birches, both Siberian silver birch (\"Betula platyphylla\") and Erman's birch (\"B. ermanii\"), poplar, elm (\"Ulmus laciniata\"), bird cherry (\"Prunus padus\"), Japanese yew (\"Taxus cuspidata\"), and several willows are mixed with the conifers; while farther south the maple, rowan and oak, as also the Japanese \"Kalopanax septemlobus\", the Amur cork tree (\"Phellodendron amurense\"), the spindle (\"Euonymus macropterus\") and the vine (\"Vitis thunbergii\") make their appearance. The underwoods abound in berry-bearing plants (e.g. cloudberry, cranberry, crowberry, red whortleberry), red-berried elder (\"Sambucus racemosa\"), wild raspberry, and Spiraea.\nBrown bear, Eurasian river otter, red fox, eurasian lynx, leopard cat and sable are fairly numerous (as are reindeer in the north); rarely seen, but still present, is the elusive Sakhalin musk deer, a subspecies of Siberian musk deer. Smaller mammals include hare, squirrels, and various rodents (including rats and mice) nearly everywhere. The bird population is made-up of mostly the common eastern Siberian forms, but there are some endemic or near-endemic breeding species, notably the endangered Nordmann's greenshank (\"Tringa guttifer\") and the Sakhalin leaf warbler (\"Phylloscopus borealoides\"). The rivers swarm with fish, especially species of salmon (\"Oncorhynchus\"). Numerous cetaceans visit the sea coast, including the endangered Western Pacific gray whale, for which the waters off of Sakhalin are their only known feeding ground, thus being a vitally important region for their population's longevity. Other cetaceans known to occur in this area are the North Pacific right whale, the bowhead whale, and the beluga whale, the latter two generally preferring icy waters and colder conditions to the north. All are potential prey species for the highly social killer whale, or orca. The once-common Japanese sea lion and Japanese sea otter, both hunted to extinction, formerly ranged from Japan's coastline to Sakhalin, Korea, Kamchatka, and the Yellow Sea; however, over-harvesting depleted their numbers in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Today, ringed seals and the giant Steller sea lion can be spotted around Sakhalin Island.\nTransport.\nSea.\nTransport, especially by sea, is an important segment of the economy. Nearly all the cargo arriving for Sakhalin (and the Kuril Islands) is delivered by cargo boats, or by ferries, in railway wagons, through the Vanino-Kholmsk train ferry from the mainland port of Vanino to Kholmsk. The ports of Korsakov and Kholmsk are the largest and handle all kinds of goods, while coal and timber shipments often go through other ports. In 1999, a ferry service was opened between the ports of Korsakov and Wakkanai, Japan, and operated through the autumn of 2015, when service was suspended.\nFor the 2016 summer season, this route will be served by a highspeed catamaran ferry from Singapore named Penguin 33. The ferry is owned by Penguin International Limited and operated by Sakhalin Shipping Company.\nSakhalin's main shipping company is Sakhalin Shipping Company, headquartered in Kholmsk on the island's west coast.\nRail.\nAbout 30% of all inland transport volume is carried by the island's railways, most of which are organized as the Sakhalin Railway (), which is one of the 17 territorial divisions of the Russian Railways.\nThe Sakhalin Railway network extends from Nogliki in the north to Korsakov in the south. Sakhalin's railway has a connection with the rest of Russia via a train ferry operating between Vanino and Kholmsk.\nThe process of converting the railways from the Japanese gauge to the Russian gauge began in 2004 and\nwas completed in 2019.\nThe original Japanese D51 steam locomotives were used by the Soviet Railways until 1979.\nBesides the main network run by the Russian Railways, until December 2006 the local oil company (Sakhalinmorneftegaz) operated a corporate narrow-gauge line extending for from Nogliki further north to Okha (). During the last years of its service, it gradually deteriorated; the service was terminated in December 2006, and the line was dismantled in 2007\u20132008.\nAir.\nSakhalin is connected by regular flights to Moscow, Khabarovsk, Vladivostok and other cities of Russia. Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk Airport has regularly scheduled international flights to Hakodate, Japan, and Seoul and Busan, South Korea. There are also charter flights to the Japanese cities of Tokyo, Niigata, and Sapporo and to the Chinese cities of Shanghai, Dalian and Harbin. The island was formerly served by Alaska Airlines from Anchorage, Petropavlovsk, and Magadan.\nFixed links.\nThe idea of building a fixed link between Sakhalin and the Russian mainland was first put forward in the 1930s. In the 1940s, an abortive attempt was made to link the island via a undersea tunnel. The project was abandoned under Premier Nikita Khrushchev. In 2000, the Russian government revived the idea, adding a suggestion that a 40-km (25 mile) long bridge could be constructed between Sakhalin and the Japanese island of Hokkaid\u014d, providing Japan with a direct connection to the Eurasian railway network. It was claimed that construction work could begin as early as 2001. The idea was received skeptically by the Japanese government and appears to have been shelved, probably permanently, after the cost was estimated at as much as $50 billion.\nIn November 2008, Russian president Dmitry Medvedev announced government support for the construction of the Sakhalin Tunnel, along with the required regauging of the island's railways to Russian standard gauge, at an estimated cost of 300\u2013330 billion roubles.\nIn July 2013, Russian Far East development minister Viktor Ishayev proposed a railway bridge to link Sakhalin with the Russian mainland. He also again suggested a bridge between Sakhalin and Hokkaid\u014d, which could potentially create a continuous rail corridor between Europe and Japan. In 2018, president Vladimir Putin ordered a feasibility study for a mainland bridge project.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Sakhalin relies primarily on oil and gas exports, coal mining, forestry, and fishing. Limited quantities of rye, wheat, oats, barley and vegetables grow there, although the growing season averages less than 100 days.\nFollowing the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the subsequent economic liberalization, Sakhalin has experienced an oil boom with extensive petroleum-exploration and mining by most large oil multinational corporations. The oil and natural- gas reserves contain an estimated 14 billion barrels (2.2\u00a0km3) of oil and 2,700\u00a0km3 (96 trillion cubic feet) of gas and are being developed under production-sharing agreement contracts involving international oil- companies like ExxonMobil and Shell.\nIn 1996, two large consortia, Sakhalin-I and Sakhalin-II, signed contracts to explore for oil and gas off the northeast coast of the island. The two consortia's pre-project estimate of costs were a combined US$21 billion on the two projects; costs had almost doubled to $37 billion as of September 2006, triggering Russian governmental opposition. The cost will include an estimated US$1 billion to upgrade the island's infrastructure: roads, bridges, waste management sites, airports, railways, communications systems, and ports. In addition, Sakhalin-III-through-VI are in various early stages of development.\nThe Sakhalin I project, managed by Exxon Neftegas, completed a production-sharing agreement (PSA) between the Sakhalin I consortium, the Russian Federation, and the Sakhalin government. Russia is in the process of building a pipeline across the Tatar Strait from Sakhalin Island to De-Kastri terminal on the Russian mainland. From De-Kastri, the resource will be loaded onto tankers for transport to East Asian markets, namely Japan, South Korea and China.\nA second consortium, Sakhalin Energy Investment Company Ltd (Sakhalin Energy), is managing the Sakhalin II project. It has completed the first production-sharing agreement (PSA) with the Russian Federation. Sakhalin Energy will build two 800-km pipelines running from the northeast of the island to Prigorodnoye (Prigorodnoe) in Aniva Bay at the southern end. The consortium will also build, at Prigorodnoye, the first liquefied natural gas (LNG) plant to be built in Russia. The oil and gas are also bound for East Asian markets.\nSakhalin II has come under fire from environmental groups, namely Sakhalin Environment Watch, for dumping dredging material in Aniva Bay. These groups were also worried about the offshore pipelines interfering with the migration of whales off the island. The consortium has (as of January\u00a02006[ [update]]) rerouted the pipeline to avoid the whale migration. After a doubling in the projected cost, the Russian government threatened to halt the project for environmental reasons. There have been suggestions that the Russian government is using the environmental issues as a pretext for obtaining a greater share of revenues from the project and/or forcing involvement by the state-controlled Gazprom. The cost overruns (at least partly due to Shell's response to environmental concerns), are reducing the share of profits flowing to the Russian treasury.\nIn 2000, the oil-and-gas industry accounted for 57.5% of Sakhalin's industrial output. By 2006 it is expected to account for 80% of the island's industrial output. Sakhalin's economy is growing rapidly thanks to its oil-and-gas industry.\nAs of 2007[ [update]], Gazprom had taken a 50% plus one share interest in Sakhalin II by purchasing 50% of Shell, Mitsui and Mitsubishi's shares.\nIn June 2021, it was announced that Russia aims to make Sakhalin Island carbon neutral by 2025.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58089", "revid": "565799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58089", "title": "ITV (TV network)", "text": "TV network in the United Kingdom\nITV, legally known as Channel 3, is a British free-to-air public broadcast television network. It is branded as ITV1 in most of the UK except for central and northern Scotland, where it is branded as STV. It was launched in 1955 as Independent Television to provide competition to BBC Television (established in 1936). ITV is the oldest commercial network in the UK. Since the passing of the Broadcasting Act 1990, it has been legally known as Channel 3 to distinguish it from the other analogue channels at the time: BBC1, BBC2 and Channel\u00a04.\nITV was, for decades, a network of separate companies that provided regional television services and also shared programmes among themselves to be shown on the entire network. Each franchise was originally owned by a different company. After several mergers, the fifteen regional franchises are now held by two companies: ITV plc, which runs the ITV1 channel, and STV Group, which runs the STV channel.\nThe ITV network is a separate entity from ITV plc, the company that resulted from the merger of Granada plc and Carlton Communications in 2004. ITV plc holds the Channel 3 broadcasting licences for every region except for central and northern Scotland, which are held by STV Group.\nToday, ITV plc simply commissions the network schedule centrally; programmes are made by its own subsidiary ITV Studios and independent production companies. Regional programming remains in news and some current affairs series.\nAlthough the ITV network's history goes back to 1955, many regional franchisees changed over the years. Some of the most important names in the network's past\u2014notably Thames, ABC and ATV\u2014have no connection with the modern network.\nHistory.\nThe origins of ITV lie in the passing of the Television Act 1954, designed to break the monopoly on television held by the BBC Television Service. The act created the Independent Television Authority (ITA, then IBA after the Sound Broadcasting Act) to heavily regulate the industry and to award franchises. The first six franchises were awarded in 1954 for London, the Midlands and the North of England, with separate franchises for Weekdays and Weekends. The first ITV service to launch was London's Associated-Rediffusion on 22 September 1955, with the Midlands and North services launching in February 1956 and May 1956 respectively. Following these launches, the ITA awarded more franchises until the whole country was covered by fourteen regional stations, all launched by 1962.\nThe network has been modified several times through franchise reviews that have taken place in 1963, 1967, 1974, 1980 and 1991, during which broadcast regions have changed and service operators have been replaced. Only one service operator has ever been declared bankrupt, WWN in 1963, with all other operators leaving the network as a result of a franchise review. Separate weekend franchises were removed in 1968 (with the exception of London) and over the years more services were added; these included a national breakfast franchise from 1983 onward\u2014operating between 6:00 am and 9:25 am\u2014and a teletext service. The Broadcasting Act 1990 changed the nature of ITV; the then regulator the IBA was replaced with a light-touch regulator, the ITC; companies became able to purchase other ITV regional companies and franchises were now being awarded based upon a highest-bidder auction, with few safeguards in place. This heavily criticised part of the review saw four operators replaced, and the operators facing different annual payments to the Treasury: Central Independent Television, for example, paid only \u00a32,000\u2014despite holding a lucrative and large region\u2014because it was unopposed, while Yorkshire Television paid \u00a337.7\u00a0million for a region of the same size and status, owing to heavy competition.\nFollowing the 1993 changes, ITV as a network began to consolidate with several companies doing so to save money by ceasing the duplication of services present when they were all separate companies. By 2004, the ITV network was owned by five companies, of which two, Carlton and Granada, had become major players by owning between them all the franchises in England, Wales, the Scottish borders and the Isle of Man. That same year, the two merged to form ITV plc with the only subsequent acquisitions being the takeover of Channel Television, the Channel Islands franchise, in 2011; and UTV, the franchise for ITV in Northern Ireland, in 2015.\nOrganisation (other networks).\nThe ITV network is not owned or operated by one company, but by a number of licensees, which provide regional services while also broadcasting programmes across the network. Since 2016, the fifteen licences are held by two companies, with the majority held by ITV Broadcasting Limited, part of ITV plc.\nThe network is regulated by the media regulator Ofcom which is responsible for awarding the broadcast licences. The last major review of the Channel 3 franchises was in 1991, with all operators' licences having been renewed between 1999 and 2002 and again from 2014 without a further contest. While this has been the longest period that the ITV network has gone without a major review of its licence holders, Ofcom announced (following consultation) that it would split the Wales and West licence from 1 January 2014, creating a national licence for Wales and joining the newly separated West region to Westcountry Television, to form a new licence for the enlarged South West of England region.\nAll companies holding a licence were part of the non-profit body ITV Network Limited, which commissioned and scheduled network programming, with compliance previously handled by ITV plc and Channel Television. However, due to amalgamation of several of these companies since the creation of ITV Network Limited (and given Channel Television is now owned by ITV plc), it has been replaced by an affiliation system. Approved by Ofcom, this results in ITV plc commissioning and funding the network schedule, with STV and UTV paying a fee to broadcast it. All licensees have the right to opt out of network programming (except for the national news bulletins), but, unlike the previous system, will receive no fee refund for doing so. Therefore many do not opt out due to pressures from the parent company or because of limited resources. Prior to the affiliate system being introduced, STV would frequently (and sometimes controversially) opt out of several popular network programmes \u2013 such as the original run of the first series of \"Downton Abbey\" \u2013 citing the need to provide more Scottish content to its viewers.\nAs a public service broadcaster, the ITV network is obliged to broadcast programming of public importance, including news, current affairs, children's and religious programming as well as party election broadcasts on behalf of the major political parties and political events, such as the Budget. The network also needs to produce accessible output containing subtitles, signing and audio description. In exchange for this programming, the ITV network is available on all platforms free to air and can be found at the top of the EPG of all providers.\nSince the launch of the platform in 1998, all of the ITV licensees have received gifted capacity on the digital terrestrial television platform. At present, the companies are able to broadcast additional channels and all choose to broadcast the ITV plc owned ITV2, ITV3, ITV4 and ITV Quiz in their region. UTV and STV (formerly Scottish Television and Grampian Television) previously broadcast their own services \u2013 UTV2 in Northern Ireland and S2 in central and northern Scotland \u2013 until 2002, when they adopted the ITV plc channels. Despite this, STV was given a broadcasting licence for what would become the STV2 channel in 2013, however this was short-lived and the channel closed in 2018. The broadcasters all make use of the Digital 3&amp;4 multiplex, shared with Channel 4. CITV launched in March 2006 (closed September 2023). ITV Encore launched in June 2014 (closed May 2018) and ITVBe launched in October 2014. ITV Box Office launched in February 2017 (closed January 2020).\nOn 13 September 2022, ITV confirmed that during the day of Monday 19 September, the day of the state funeral for Queen Elizabeth II, all programming schedules on ITV's digital channels would be scrapped, with the main ITV News coverage being shown live and uninterrupted on every channel. This was the first time ITV decided to do this, with the company keeping their digital channels' schedules mostly as advertised in the run up to the funeral (with a few amendments for cancelled sporting events on ITV4) and all royal coverage being on their main channel.\nIn November 2025, ITV said it was in \"preliminary\" discussions to sell its broadcasting business to Sky for \u00a31.6bn.\nITV plc.\nITV plc owns thirteen of the fifteen franchises and broadcasts to England, Wales, southern Scotland, the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands and Northern Ireland through its subsidiary company ITV Broadcasting Limited. The company also owns the breakfast television licence, which as of January 2020, broadcasts across the network between 6:00 and 10:00am each morning using the \"Good Morning Britain\" (previously \"Daybreak\") and \"Lorraine\" names. The company broadcasts a centralised service under the ITV1 brand. In Northern Ireland, ITV used the UTV brand name as the name of the channel until April 2020.\nThe group also owns ITV Studios, the production arm of the company and formed from an amalgamation of all the production departments of the regional licences they own. The company produces a large proportion of ITV's networked programming (around 47%, but previously as high as 66% according to some reports), with the rest coming primarily from independent suppliers (under the Broadcasting Act 1990, at least 25% of ITV's total output must be from independent companies). ITV plc hopes to increase the amount of in-house programming to as close to the 75% limit as possible.\nThe group cut the number of regional news programmes offered from 17 in 2007 to 9 by 2009, resulting several regions being merged to form one programme, including the Border and Tyne Tees regions, the Westcountry and West regions and the removal of sub regional programming, with some regions only represented by pre-recorded segments. Sub-regions were restored in 2013.\nSTV Group.\nSTV Group plc owns two franchises, covering central and northern Scotland, through subsidiary companies STV Central and STV North, broadcasting a central service under the STV brand.\nThe company had several disputes with ITV plc in the late 2000s and early 2010s over network programming. STV aimed to broadcast more Scottish programmes at peak times and so removed several key ITV plc programmes from their schedule in July 2009 including \"The Bill\", \"Midsomer Murders\" and \"Lewis\". Despite STV's explanation of expense, ITV plc were angered by the decision, as a recent schedule change had made \"The Bill\" central to their programming, and broadcast the programmes on ITV3 as well to ensure Scottish viewers could see the programmes. On 23 September ITV plc was reported to be in the process of suing STV for \u00a320\u00a0million, as ITV felt dropping the shows constituted a breach of network agreements; STV subsequently counter-sued ITV plc for \u00a335\u00a0million.\nThe dispute was ended in 2011 with STV agreeing to pay ITV plc \u00a318\u00a0million. The signing of the new affiliation deal has resulted in STV paying a flat fee for all networked programming, and so to drop any programmes is unlikely due to the large costs involved.\nCurrent licensees.\nThere are fifteen regional licences, covering fourteen regions (there are separate weekday and weekend licences for the London region), and one national licence for the breakfast service. All licences listed here were renewed until the end of 2024. Licences in England and Wales were held by the individual regional ITV plc owned companies prior to November 2008.\nThe appointment to provide national news for Channel 3 is also subject to approval by Ofcom. This appointment has been held by ITN since the channel's inception, and has also been approved through the end of 2024.\nProgramming.\nFor over 60 years of ITV, its homegrown programmes have become among the best remembered as well as being extremely successful. Before the 1990s, nearly all of the content for the channel was produced by the fifteen franchise licensees: the regional companies.\nHowever, following legislation in the Broadcasting Act 1990 imposing a 25% quota for commissioning of independent productions, the number of programmes from independent production companies not connected to the traditional ITV network has increased rapidly. Notable examples include Talkback Thames (one half of which, Thames Television, was itself a former ITV franchisee), producers of \"The Bill\" and co-producers of \"The X Factor\", and 2waytraffic, producers of \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\".\nFrom the late 1990s, ITV's long-standing commitment to strong current affairs and documentary programming began to diminish with the ending of productions such as \"World in Action\" (Granada Television), \"This Week\" (Rediffusion London/Thames Television), \"First Tuesday\" (Yorkshire Television), \"Network First\", \"Survival\" (Anglia Television), and \"Weekend World\" (LWT) and their replacement with populist shows such as \"Tonight\". \"News at Ten\" was also axed in 1999, although it was reinstated in 2001. In December 2009, the final edition of ITV's long-running arts programme, \"The South Bank Show\" was broadcast.\nITV's primetime schedules are dominated by its soap operas, such as the flagship \"Coronation Street\" and \"Emmerdale\". At the start of the 21st century, ITV faced criticism for including a large amount of \"reality TV\" programmes in the schedule, such as \"Celebrity Fit Club\", \"Celebrity Wrestling\" and \"Celebrity Love Island\". In its defence, ITV does continue to show its major strengths in the fields of sports coverage and drama productions, and it continues to schedule national news in primetime.\nBreakfast.\nBreakfast television programmes have been broadcast on ITV since 1 February 1983. It was initially run by an independent contractor - TV-am, and later GMTV - until GMTV Limited became a wholly owned subsidiary of ITV plc in November 2009.\nHistorically, ITV aired breakfast programmes from 6am until 9.25am but ITV extended this to 10am on weekdays on 6 January 2020. and now broadcasts two breakfast programmes on weekdays - \"Good Morning Britain\" and \"Lorraine\". \"Good Morning Britain\" keeps viewers up to date with all the latest news, sports, features and weather, whilst \"Lorraine\" predominantly focuses on celebrity interviews, recipes, fashion and showbiz. Until 27th August 2023, the service would show a simulcast of the CITV channel, but since that service has closed, a mix of repeated programming is shown whilst the CITV service that still exist broadcasts at breakfast time on ITV2 (which has the CITV block), ITV3, ITV4 and ITVBe from 7am show other repeats some of which provide a sign language service within the broadcast as part of its quota and licence requirements.\nDaytime programming.\nITV's strong daytime line-up helped by programmes such as \"This Morning\", \"Loose Women\", \"Dickinson's Real Deal\" and game shows \"Tipping Point\" and \"The Chase\" are very popular, achieving the highest audience share during the daytime slot.\nEntertainment.\nIn recent years the network has tried to use formats that ITV Studios own outright (whether they have originated in the UK with their Lifted Entertainment company or have come from production companies they own abroad), though some popular programme formats like \"The Masked Singer\" have still been acquired from other companies abroad. Currently ITV are behind the formats for \"Dancing on Ice\", \"The Voice UK\" (the format originally coming from their Dutch production company) and \"I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!\", while forthcoming music game show \"Walk The Line\" has been co-developed by Simon Cowell's Syco Entertainment and ITV.\nNational and international news.\nSince the network started, Independent Television News Limited (ITN) has held the contract to produce news for the ITV network, with 30-minute national news bulletins currently broadcast at 1:30 pm, and 10:00 pm, and an hour-long bulletin at 6.30pm. These bulletins were broadcast under the ITN brand from 1955 until 1999, when a new network identity reinforced the ITV brand, resulting in the new bulletins being broadcast under the ITV News brand.\nITN has long been respected in the news industry as a source of reliable information and news, and as a result the service has won many awards for their programmes, the latest being in May 2011 when \"News at Ten\" was named best news programme by the Royal Television Society and BAFTA.\nWeather.\nThe ITV National Weather forecast was first broadcast in 1989, using data supplied by the Met Office, and was presented by a number of weather forecasters. The forecasts are sponsored with the sponsor's message appearing before and after the forecast. The forecasts are made immediately after the main national news bulletins.\nPrior to the creation of the national forecast, each regional company provided its own regional forecast. The regional forecasts today are incorporated into the main regional news bulletins, and in the summer months, includes a pollen count.\nLate-night programming.\nCurrently only new episodes of long-form news and current affairs programmes like \"Exposure\", \"Peston\" and \"On Assignment\" are being scheduled after \"News at Ten\". The channel broadcasts a partnership teleshopping service overnight, replacing gambling broadcasts: the time between the news and the shopping is usually kept for re-runs, with ITV repeating its primetime entertainment shows, films, or sports programming from ITV4.\nAlso aired overnight are repeats, many of which have on-screen BSL signing for the deaf community. Replacing the information-based \"ITV Nightscreen\" slot in 2021 was \"Unwind With ITV\", programming produced in association with the Campaign Against Living Miserably. This mindfulness programme shows calming shots of natural landscapes and relaxing animations, with versions of the footage also seen on ITV2, ITV3 and ITV4.\nOn some occasions the schedule is varied, for example a live event overnight, such as the Super Bowl or the Oscars.\nThis overnight programme service is very different to what used to be shown on the network in the years after 24-hour broadcasting was introduced - this included new entertainment, imports, sports and other information programmes, and, in some regions, a job finder service.\nRegional programming.\nThe regional ITV companies are required to provide local news as part of their franchise agreement together with local weather forecasts, with the main local bulletin at 6pm and regional bulletins located after each national news programme. In addition to this, traditionally ITV companies would provide other regional programming based on current affairs, entertainment or drama. However, apart from a monthly political programme, most non-news regional programming in the English regions was dropped by ITV plc in 2009, although it continues in Wales and the Channel Islands, as well as on STV and UTV and ITV Border in Scotland from 2014 to cover mainly Scottish politics whilst ITV Border in England broadcast network programming . On 14 January 2013, ITV plc regional news programmes titles were discontinued in favour of more generic branding under the \"ITV News\" title with the region listed as the subheading. However some \"heritage\" brand names were retained including \"Calendar\", \"Granada Reports\" and \"Lookaround\". On 28 June 2014, \"ITV News Cymru Wales\" returned to its historic name of \"Wales at Six\".\nChildren's programming.\nThe network broadcasts children's programming under the CITV (Children's ITV) strand. Children's programming was originally provided during weekday afternoons and weekend mornings, however following the launch of the CITV channel in 2006, all children's programming, with the exception of the weekend ITV Breakfast slot, were relocated from the ITV line-up to the CITV channel in 2007, a move which was challenged by Ofcom in April 2007. In 2023, ITV announced that CITV would cease broadcasting as a linear channel, and would be replaced by ITVX Kids, a streaming media service which launched in July 2023. The CITV channel closed on 1 September 2023, with a dedicated CITV programming block now broadcasting on ITV2 every morning, from 2 September 2023.\nSchools programming.\nSchools programming on the network began in 1957 in some regions and expanded as more regions began broadcasting. It was a contractual obligation for some ITV companies to broadcast schools programming, and this was initially broadcast as part of the normal scheduling. The programmes were moved into a segment for broadcast during the day in the 1960s, under the banner \"Independent Television for Schools and Colleges\" and from 1987 were broadcast on Channel 4 in the \"ITV Schools on Channel 4\" segment. In 1993, this segment became \"Channel 4 Schools\" and later in 2000 \"4Learning\". These strands of programming consisted of schools programming from all the ITV companies or from independent sources. The schools strand itself is now defunct, with no particular branding segment used.\nAcquired programming.\nITV was originally very reliant on broadcasting American series, with westerns such as \"Gunsmoke\" and \"Rawhide\" in particular being considerable successes for the network during its earlier years. Action drama \"The Fugitive\" and sci-fi anthology \"The Twilight Zone\" were also broadcast by various regions in the early 1960s, with \"Batman\" and \"I Dream of Jeannie\" shown later on in the decade. Due to the varying schedules of many ITV regions, acquired content was not broadcast by some franchises.\nBy the 1970s, most ITV regions were airing the likes of \"Hawaii Five-O\", \"Happy Days\", and \"The Brady Bunch\". 1972 also saw the beginning of ITV's daytime programmes at lunchtime, a slot that would become associated with the many Australian soap operas that were broadcast in the newly expanded schedule, including \"The Sullivans\" and \"The Young Doctors\". By the 1980s, more were added to the schedule, such as \"Sons and Daughters\" and \"A Country Practice\".\nIn primetime by the 1980s, ITV was broadcasting the likes of \"Hill Street Blues\" (which ITV began showing just one week after its debut on NBC in the United States) and \"L.A. Law\". It was also early in the decade when Australian evening soap opera \"Prisoner: Cell Block H\" was bought by ITV, and was broadcast after \"News at Ten\".\nBy 1982, Channel 4 had launched, and despite originally being related to ITV, it competed against its parent network to screen popular American programmes such as \"St. Elsewhere\" and \"Cheers\", although the latter did receive a single ITV broadcast as part of a night showcasing Channel 4 programmes. Both \"Hill Street Blues\" and \"L.A. Law\" had moved from ITV to Channel 4 by the end of their runs.\nA heavy emphasis on action, fantasy and science fiction series was also placed by ITV during the 1980s, with \"The A-Team\", \"Buck Rogers in the 25th Century\", and \"Airwolf\" being broadcast by the network, as well as the likes of \"Baywatch\" and \"SeaQuest DSV\" by the 1990s. ITV also picked up a glut of older-skewing CBS dramas through that period, including \"Murder, She Wrote\" and \"Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman\". \nIn February 1989, in tandem with the network launching its national weather forecast, and as part of a new early evening lineup which involved the shortening of Children's ITV, Australian soap \"Home and Away\" was acquired by ITV, particularly to compete with the success of rival Australian soap opera \"Neighbours\" on BBC One. ITV also broadcast \"Beverly Hills, 90210\" beginning in early 1991, in the same Saturday teatime slot that \"Baywatch\" had occupied, although some episodes were broadcast in later time slots. It moved to Sky One beginning with the third season. \nITV reshuffled its daytime schedules in the autumn of 1993, and just a few months prior, Central began broadcasting the New Zealand soap opera \"Shortland Street\". The revamp saw more ITV companies pick it up, with Scottish Television the only region to reject the series outright. Central also broadcast the Australian soap opera \"Echo Point\" around the same time, although no other franchises picked it up. ITV also aired a considerable amount of syndicated unscripted US programmes in daytime during the 90s, such as \"Judge Judy\" and \"The Jerry Springer Show\".\nBy 1996, ITV had been quiet with US series in primetime, particularly as Channel 4 and Sky One increased the competition for securing the most popular US dramas and sitcoms. However, that summer, ITV debuted the primetime soap \"Savannah\", in a 9pm Friday slot. It was a considerable success for ITV's standards, and it became the highest rated new American series of that year. Despite this success, ITV moved the show for its second season, no longer networking the series and moving to late night slots.\nITV tried again at broadcasting an American drama series in September 1997, with the ABC legal drama \"The Practice\", which ran in the same slot that \"Savannah\" had the year prior. It saw nowhere near the same levels of success, and was dropped by the network after just three episodes. It later resurfaced in late night before moving to BBC One in 2000.\nITV attempted launching a Monday night block for American sitcoms in the post-\"News at Ten\" slot in the autumn of 1998, with \"Veronica's Closet\" (which ITV beat Channel 4 for the rights to) followed by \"Dharma &amp; Greg\". After this failed to catch much steam, ITV all but pulled out from showing American programmes on the main network by the end of the decade, and it would prove to be the final time ITV aired US comedy on the main network.\nITV made attempts during the mid 2000s to poach proven popular US shows such as the mystery comedy-drama \"Desperate Housewives\" and medical drama \"House\" from Channel 4 and Five, respectively, but both shows ended up remaining on their incumbent rights holders. ITV were reportedly also interested in 2004 about acquiring the \"Friends\" spin-off \"Joey\" but later denied such interest, and in 2007 were close to picking up \"Neighbours\" after the BBC declined to continue broadcasting it, although Five eventually won the rights to both programmes.\nITV returned to US programming in 2006, acquiring \"Six Degrees\". Initially it had been planned to air in a primetime slot in 2007, but ended up being shown in late nights in 2008. This could be due to the show being cancelled after its first season by original network ABC due to low ratings, despite high expectations and its slot following top-10 hit \"Grey's Anatomy\". It was also around this time that \"Supernatural\" and \"Dexter\", which ITV2 &amp; ITV4 aired respectively, were given late night repeats on ITV1.\nThe following year, ITV acquired another US programme, fellow ABC series \"Pushing Daisies\". It debuted in 2008 in a Saturday evening slot and initially did well garnering 5.7 million viewers, although there were fan complaints when ITV chose to skip broadcasting the second episode, blaming football coverage, eventually releasing it on their website. The last attempt so far by ITV to broadcast acquired output in primetime was the TV adaption of \"Lethal Weapon\" in 2017, where it remained for all three seasons.\nAs of 2024, most US acquired programming that ITV owns the UK rights to, such as \"Family Guy\", \"Bob's Burgers\", \"The O.C.\", \"Dawson's Creek\", \"Gilmore Girls\" and \"Superstore\" air on ITV2, as opposed to the main ITV network.\nNotable programming.\nDaytime programming.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrimetime programming.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWeekend programming.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTeletext provider.\nThe Public Teletext Licence allows the holder to broadcast a text-based information service around the clock on Channel 3 (as well as Channel 4 and S4C) frequencies. Teletext on ITV was provided by ORACLE from 1974 until 1993 and from 1993 to 2010 by Teletext Ltd., whose news, sport and TV listings pages rivalled the BBC's offering, Ceefax on terrestrial and BBC Red Button on digital. Teletext Ltd. also provided digital teletext for the Channel 3 services, as well as the text output for both Channel 4 and S4C under the same licence and Channel 5. However, the licence was revoked by Ofcom on 29 January 2010 for failing to provide news and local non-news information on ITV and there is currently no teletext licence holder for ITV.\nAvailability outside the UK.\nITV (as UTV) is widely available in Ireland, where it is received directly in areas bordering Northern Ireland, or in coastal areas from Wales (as ITV Cymru Wales). Until 2015, it was also carried on cable, when it was replaced by UTV Ireland, which was itself replaced by be3, now Virgin Media Three. ITV programming is also available to Irish viewers on Virgin Media One (including soap operas \"Emmerdale\" and \"Coronation Street\"). ITV is also available on cable and IPTV in Switzerland and Liechtenstein. Since 27 March 2013, it has been offered by the British Forces Broadcasting Service (BFBS) to members of HM Forces and their families around the world, replacing the BFBS3 TV channel, which already carried a selection of ITV programmes.\nCriticism.\nSince the launch of ITV, there have been concerns from politicians and the press that ITV faced a conflict concerning programme audiences and advertisers. As advertisers are reluctant to buy advertising space around low viewing programmes, there is a pressure on ITV to broadcast more popular programmes in peak times. This became more profound in the early 21st century, following a relaxation in regulation and significantly more competition in the advertising market following the huge increase in commercial channels. In the 2000s, programmes from the reality television genre including the celebrity and talent show subgenres became a dominant presence on the channel. This led to accusations of ITV 'dumbing down' their programmes and appealing to the 'lowest common denominator', accusations that are at odds with the network's status as a public service broadcaster. ITV was/is also heavily criticized for scaling back its regional programmes, including regional news.\nVisual identity.\nThere has never been an identity for ITV as a whole that was adopted uniformly by all broadcasters within the ITV network. Before 1989, each regional company used its own name for identification and the name \"ITV\" was rarely seen on screen, except for some sub-brands such as ITV Schools or ITV Sport. In September 1989, a national ITV corporate identity was established, which saw regional brands combined with the national ITV brand, although the balance between regional and national brands varied from company to company, and some companies never used the ITV brand at all. It was not until October 2002 that national ITV-branded continuity was adopted across all the regions in England and Wales (see ITV1), although regional continuity before local programmes continued until November 2006.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58090", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58090", "title": "Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse", "text": "French Navy officer and explorer (1741\u20131788)\n\"Chef d'escadre\" Jean Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse (; 23 August 1741 \u2013 c.\u20091788) was a French Navy officer and explorer. Having enlisted in the Navy at the age of 15, he had a successful career and in 1785 was appointed to lead a scientific expedition around the world. His ships stopped in Chile, Hawaii, Alaska, California, Macau, the Philippines, Korea, Russia, Japan, Samoa, Tonga, and Australia before wrecking on the reefs of Vanikoro in the Solomon Islands.\nEarly career.\nJean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup was born on 23 August 1741 near Albi, France. His family had been ennobled in 1558.\nLap\u00e9rouse studied in a Jesuit college and joined the Navy as a Garde-Marine in Brest on 19 November 1756. In 1757 he was appointed to the French ship \"C\u00e9l\u00e8bre\" and participated in a supply expedition to the fort of Louisbourg in New France. Lap\u00e9rouse also took part in a second supply expedition in 1758 to Louisbourg, but as it was in the early years of the Seven Years' War the fort was under siege and the expedition was forced to make a circuitous route around Newfoundland to avoid British patrols.\nIn 1759 Lap\u00e9rouse was wounded in the Battle of Quiberon Bay, where he was serving aboard \"Formidable\". He was captured by the British and briefly imprisoned before being paroled back to France; he was formally exchanged in December 1760. He participated in a 1762 attempt by the French to gain control of Newfoundland, escaping with the fleet when the British arrived in force to drive them out.\nAt the outbreak of the Anglo-French War in 1778, Lap\u00e9rouse was given command of the 32-gun frigate \"Amazone\". On 7 October 1779, he captured the 20-gun HMS \"Ariel\". Lap\u00e9rouse was promoted to Captain on 4 April 1780, and was part of the Exp\u00e9dition Particuli\u00e8re under Admiral Ternay, departing Brest on 2 May 1780. From October to November 1780, \"Amazone\" sailed from Rhode Island to Lorient, and from there to the Caribbean.\nLap\u00e9rouse then transferred to \"Astr\u00e9e\". In the summer of 1781, he was offered command of the 50-gun \"Sagittaire\", but as his crew was sick with scurvy, he requested permission to keep command of \"Astr\u00e9e\", and was appointed to lead a frigate division, along with \"Hermione\", under Latouche-Tr\u00e9ville.\nLap\u00e9rouse escorted a convoy to the West Indies in December 1781, participated in the attack on St. Kitts in February 1782 and then fought in the defeat at the Battle of the Saintes against the squadron of Admiral Rodney. In August 1782, he captured two British trading posts (the Prince of Wales Fort and York Fort) on the coast of Hudson Bay, but allowed his prisoners, including Governor Samuel Hearne of Prince of Wales Fort, to sail off to England in exchange for a promise to release French POWS held in Britain. The next year, his family finally consented to his marriage to Louise-El\u00e9onore Broudou, a young creole of modest origins whom he had met on \u00cele de France (present-day Mauritius) eight years earlier.\nScientific expedition around the world.\nObjectives.\nLap\u00e9rouse was appointed in 1785 by Louis XVI and by the Secretary of State of the Navy, the Marquis de Castries, to lead an expedition around the world. Many countries were initiating voyages of scientific explorations at that time.\nLouis XVI and his court had been stimulated by a proposal from the Dutch-born merchant adventurer William Bolts, who had earlier tried unsuccessfully to interest Louis's brother-in-law, the Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II (brother of Queen Marie Antoinette), in a similar voyage. The French court adopted the concept (though not its author, Bolts), leading to the dispatch of the Lap\u00e9rouse expedition. Charles Pierre Claret de Fleurieu, Director of Ports and Arsenals, stated in the draft memorandum on the expedition that he submitted to the Louis XVI: \"the utility which may result from a voyage of discovery ... has made me receptive to the views put to me by Mr. Bolts relative to this enterprise\". But Fleurieu explained to the King: \"I am not proposing at all, however, the plan for this voyage as it was conceived by Mr. Bolts\".\nThe expedition's aims were to complete the Pacific discoveries of James Cook (whom Lap\u00e9rouse greatly admired), correct and complete maps of the area, establish trade contacts, open new maritime routes and enrich French science and scientific collections. His ships were \"L'Astrolabe\" (under Fleuriot de Langle) and \"La Boussole\", both 500 tons. They were storeships reclassified as frigates for the occasion. Their objectives were geographic, scientific, ethnological, economic (looking for opportunities for whaling or fur trading), and political (the eventual establishment of French bases or colonial cooperation with their Spanish allies in the Philippines). They were to explore both the north and south Pacific, including the coasts of the Far East and of Australia, and send back reports through existing European outposts in the Pacific.\nPreparations.\nAs early as March 1785, Lap\u00e9rouse proposed that Paul M\u00e9rault Monneron, who had been chosen as the expedition's chief engineer, go to London to find out about the anti-scurvy measures recommended by Cook and the exchange items used by Cook in his dealings with native peoples, and to buy scientific instruments of English manufacture.\nThe best-known figure from Cook's missions, Joseph Banks, intervened at the Royal Society to obtain for Monneron two inclining compasses that had belonged to Cook. Furnished with a list produced by Charles Pierre Claret de Fleurieu, Monneron also bought scientific instruments from some of the largest English firms, particularly Ramsden. He even surpassed Fleurieu's directives by acquiring two sextants of a new type.\nThe Montgolfier brothers gave to Laperouse two prototypes of the newly invented hot air balloons to carry on board the \"Astrolabe\". There is no evidence that they were used during the voyage.\nCrew.\nLap\u00e9rouse was well liked by his men. Among his crew there were ten scientists: Joseph Lepaute Dagelet (1751\u20131788), an astronomer and mathematician; Robert de Lamanon, a geologist; La Martini\u00e8re, a botanist; a physicist; three naturalists; and three illustrators, Gaspard Duch\u00e9 de Vancy and an uncle and nephew named Pr\u00e9vost. Another of the scientists was Jean-Andr\u00e9 Mongez. Even both chaplains were scientifically schooled.\nOne of the young men who applied for the voyage was a 16-year-old Corsican named Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte. Bonaparte, a second lieutenant from Paris' military academy at the time, made the preliminary list but he was ultimately not chosen for the voyage list and remained behind in France. At the time, Bonaparte was interested in serving in the navy rather than army because of his proficiency in mathematics and artillery, both valued skills on warships.\nCopying the work methods of Cook's scientists, the scientists on this voyage would base their calculations of longitude on precision chronometers and the distance between the Moon and the Sun followed by theodolite triangulations or bearings taken from the ship, the same as those taken by Cook to produce his maps of the Pacific islands. As regards geography, Lap\u00e9rouse decisively showed the rigour and safety of the methods proven by Cook. From his voyage, the resolution of the problem of longitude was evident and mapping attained a scientific precision. Impeded (as Cook had been) by the continual mists enveloping the northwestern coast of America, he did not succeed any better in producing complete maps, though he managed to fill in some of the gaps.\nChile and Hawaii.\nLap\u00e9rouse and his 220 men left Brest on 1 August 1785, rounded Cape Horn, and investigated the Spanish colonial government in the Captaincy General of Chile. He arrived on 9 April 1786 at Easter Island. He then sailed to the Sandwich Islands, the present-day Hawaiian Islands, where he became the first European to set foot on the island of Maui.\nAlaska.\nLap\u00e9rouse sailed on to Alaska, where he landed near Mount Saint Elias in late June 1786 and explored the environs. On 13 July 1786 a barge and two longboats, carrying 21 men, were lost in the heavy currents of the bay called \"Port des Fran\u00e7ais\" by Lap\u00e9rouse, but now known as Lituya Bay. The men visited the Tlingit people. This encounter was dramatized briefly in episode 13 of Carl Sagan's \"\". Next, he headed south, exploring the northwest coast, including the outer islands of present-day British Columbia.\nCalifornia.\nLap\u00e9rouse sailed between 10 and 30 August all the way south to the Spanish Las Californias Province, present-day California. He reportedly observed the only historical eruption of Mount Shasta on 7 September 1786, although this account is now discredited. He stopped at the Presidio of San Francisco long enough to create an outline map of the Bay Area, \"Plan du port de St. Fran\u00e7ois, situ\u00e9 sur la c\u00f4te de la Californie septentrionale\" (\"Map of the port of San Francisco, situated on the coast of Northern California\"), which was reproduced as Map 33 in L. Aubert's 1797 \"Atlas du voyage de La P\u00e9rouse\". He arrived in Monterey Bay and at the Presidio of Monterey on 14 September 1786. He examined the Spanish settlements, ranchos, and missions. He reported, \"The country of the Ecclemachs extends above 20 leagues to the [south-]eastward of Monterey.\" He made critical notes on the missionary treatment of the California indigenous peoples with the Indian Reductions at the Franciscan run missions. Lap\u00e9rouse likened conditions at a mission to a slave plantation. France and Spain were on friendly terms at this time. Lap\u00e9rouse was the first non-Spanish visitor to California since Drake in 1579, and the first to come to California after the founding of Spanish missions and \"presidios\" (military forts).\nEast Asia.\nLap\u00e9rouse again crossed the Pacific Ocean in 100 days, arriving at Macau, where he sold the furs acquired in Alaska, dividing the profits among his men. The next year, on 9 April 1787, after a visit to Manila, he set out for the northeast Asian coasts. He saw the island of Quelpart, in the Korean Peninsula (present-day Cheju in South Korea), which had been visited by Europeans only once before when a group of Dutchmen shipwrecked there in 1635. He visited the Asian mainland coasts of Korea.\nJapan and Russia.\nLap\u00e9rouse then sailed northward to Northeast Asia and \"Oku-Yeso\" Island, present day Sakhalin Island, Russia. The Ainu people, \"Oku-Yeso\" Island residents, drew him a map showing: their second domain of Yezo Island, present day Hokkaid\u014d Island, Japan; and the coasts of Tartary, Russia on mainland Asia. Lap\u00e9rouse wanted to sail north through the narrow Strait of Tartary between \"Oku-Yeso\" Island and mainland Asia, but failed. Instead, he turned south, and then sailed east through La P\u00e9rouse Strait, between \"Oku-Yeso\" Island (Sakhalin) and \"Yezo\" (Hokkaid\u014d), where he met more Ainu in their third domain of the Kuril Islands, and explored.\nLap\u00e9rouse then sailed north and reached Petropavlovsk on the Russian Kamchatka peninsula on 7 September 1787. Here they rested from their trip, and enjoyed the hospitality of the Russians and Kamchatkans. In letters received from Paris, Lap\u00e9rouse was ordered to investigate the settlement the British were establishing in New South Wales, Australia. Barth\u00e9lemy de Lesseps, son of the French vice consul at Kronstadt, Russia, who had joined the expedition as an interpreter, disembarked in Petropavlovsk to bring the expedition's ships' logs, charts, and letters to France, which he reached after a year-long, epic journey across Siberia and Russia.\nSouth Pacific.\nLap\u00e9rouse next stopped in the Navigator Islands (Samoa), on 6 December 1787. Just before he left, the Samoans attacked a group of his men at Massacre Bay, killing twelve, among whom were Lamanon and de Langle, commander of \"L'Astrolabe\". Twenty men were wounded. The expedition drifted to Tonga, for resupply and help, and later recognized the \"\u00eele Plistard\" and Norfolk Island.\nAustralia.\nThe expedition continued to Australia, arriving off Botany Bay on 24 January 1788. There Lap\u00e9rouse encountered a British convoy (known later as the \"First Fleet\") led by Captain Arthur Phillip\u00a0RN, who was to establish the penal colony of New South Wales. While it had been intended that the colony would be located at Botany Bay, Phillip had quickly decided that the site was unsuitable and the colony would instead be established at Sydney Cove in Port Jackson. High winds\u2014which had hindered Lap\u00e9rouse's ships in entering Botany Bay\u2014delayed the relocation until 26 January (later commemorated as Australia Day).\nThe French were received courteously and spent six weeks at the British colony (this would be their last recorded landfall). While Lap\u00e9rouse and Phillip did not meet, French and British officers visited each other formally on at least 11 occasions, and offered each other assistance and supplies. The senior French officer to visit Sydney Cove and wait upon Governor Phillip was Robert Sutton de Clonard, Captain of the \"Astrolabe\", who took despatches to him for forwarding to the French ambassador in London by the returning \"Alexander\" transport. Clonard was an Irishman (from Wexford) in the French service, \"esteemed for his bravery, and beloved for his humanity\". After de Langle had been killed during the expedition's visit to Tutuila, he had succeeded him as commander of the \"Astrolabe\".\nDuring their stay, the French established an observatory and a garden, held masses, and made geological observations. Lap\u00e9rouse also took the opportunity to send journals, charts and letters back to Europe, with the British merchant ship , which had come to Sydney as part of the First Fleet. The chaplain from \"L'Astrolabe\", Father Louis Receveur, never recovered from injuries he had sustained in a clash with indigenous people in the Samoan Islands and died at Botany Bay on 17 February; Receveur was buried on shore at Frenchman's\u00a0Cove.\nOn 10 March, after taking on sufficient wood and fresh water, the French expedition left New South Wales\u2014bound for New Caledonia, Santa Cruz, the Solomons, the Louisiades, and the western and southern coasts of Australia. While Lap\u00e9rouse had reported in a letter from Port Jackson that he expected to be back in France by June 1789, neither he nor any members of his expedition were seen again by Europeans. Louis XVI is recorded as having asked, on the morning of his execution in January 1793, \"Any news of La P\u00e9rouse?\"\nDocuments that had been relayed to France from Lap\u00e9rouse's expedition were published in Paris in 1797, under the title \"Voyage de La\u00a0P\u00e9rouse autour du monde\" (\"The voyage of La\u00a0P\u00e9rouse around the world\"). In 1825, another French naval officer, Captain Hyacinthe de Bougainville, founded the Lap\u00e9rouse Monument at Frenchman's Bay, near Receveur's grave. The bay later became part of the suburb of La\u00a0Perouse. The anniversary of Receveur's death, Lap\u00e9rouse Day (on varying dates in February/March) and Bastille Day (14 July) have long been marked at the monument (along with Bougainville).\nEpilogue.\nRescue mission of d'Entrecasteaux.\nOn 25 September 1791, Rear Admiral Antoine Bruni d'Entrecasteaux departed Brest in search of Lap\u00e9rouse. His expedition followed Lap\u00e9rouse's proposed path through the islands northwest of Australia while at the same time making scientific and geographic discoveries. The expedition consisted of two ships, \"Recherche\" and \"Esp\u00e9rance\".\nIn May 1793, Entrecasteaux sighted Santa Cruz, now part of the Solomon Islands, and another, uncharted, island to the southeast; this island was Vanikoro. The French did not approach Vanikoro, only recording it on their charts before sailing away to explore the Solomon Islands further. Two months later, Entrecasteaux died of scurvy. The botanist Jacques Labillardi\u00e8re, attached to the expedition, eventually returned to France and published his account, \"Relation du voyage \u00e0 la recherche de La P\u00e9rouse\", in 1800.\nFranco-British relations deteriorated during the French Revolution, and unfounded rumours spread in France blaming the British for the tragedy which had occurred in the vicinity of the new colony. Before the mystery was solved, the French government had published the records of the voyage as far as Kamchatka: \"Voyage de La P\u00e9rouse autour du monde\", 1\u20134 (Paris, 1797). These volumes are still used for cartographic and scientific information about the Pacific. Three English translations were published in 1798\u201399.\nDiscovery of the expedition.\nIn 1825 Royal Navy Captain Thomas Manby brought a report, supported by presumptive evidence, that the spot where Lap\u00e9rouse and his crew had perished was now ascertained. An English whaler discovered a long and low island, surrounded by innumerable breakers, situated between New Caledonia and New Guinea, at nearly an equal distance from each island. The inhabitants came on board the whaler, and one of the chiefs had a cross of St. Louis hanging as an ornament from one of his ears. Other natives had swords, on which the word 'Paris' was engraved, and some were observed to have medals of Louis XVI. One of the chiefs, aged about fifty, said that when he was young, a large ship was wrecked on a coral reef during a violent gale. During his voyage, Manby had seen several medals of the same kind, which Lap\u00e9rouse had distributed among the natives of California; and Lap\u00e9rouse, on his departure from Botany Bay, intimated that he intended to steer from the northern part of New Holland (Australia), and explore that archipelago.\n1826 expedition.\nIt was not until 1826 that an Irish sea captain, Peter Dillon, found enough evidence to piece together the events of the tragedy. In Tikopia (one of the islands of Santa Cruz), he bought some swords that he had reason to believe had belonged to Lap\u00e9rouse or his officers. He made enquiries and found that they came from nearby Vanikoro, where two big ships had broken up years earlier. Dillon managed to obtain a ship in Bengal and sailed for Vanikoro, where he found cannonballs, anchors and other evidence of the remains of ships in water between coral reefs. A Tikopin by the name of Pu Ratia showed Dillon and his crew the direction to sail to Vanikoro. He was on board as well with a European by the name of Bushat who lived in Tikopia before the third trip of Dillon to Tikopia.\nDillon brought several of these artifacts back to Europe, as did Dumont d'Urville in 1828. Lesseps, the only member of the original expedition still alive at the time, identified them as all belonging to \"Astrolabe\". From the information Vanikoro inhabitants gave Dillon, a rough reconstruction could be made of the disaster that struck Lap\u00e9rouse. Dillon's reconstruction was later confirmed by the discovery and subsequent examination, in 1964, of what was believed to be the shipwreck of \"Boussole\".\n2005 expedition.\nIn May 2005, the shipwreck examined in 1964 was formally identified as that of \"Boussole\". The 2005 expedition had embarked aboard \"Jacques Cartier\", a ship of the French Navy. The ship supported a multi-discipline scientific team assembled to investigate the \"Mystery of Lap\u00e9rouse\". The mission was named \"Op\u00e9ration Vanikoro\u2014Sur les traces des \u00e9paves de Lap\u00e9rouse 2005\" (Operation Vanikoro\u2014Tracing the Lap\u00e9rouse wrecks 2005).\n2008 expedition.\nA further similar mission was mounted in 2008.\nThe 2008 expedition showed the commitment of France, in conjunction with the New Caledonian \"Association Salomon\", to seek further answers about Lap\u00e9rouse's mysterious fate. It received the patronage of the President of the French Republic as well as the support and co-operation of the French Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Higher Education and Research, and the Ministry of Culture and Communication.\nPreparation for this, the eighth expedition sent to Vanikoro, took 24 months. It brought together more technological resources than previously and involved two ships, 52 crew members and almost 30 scientists and researchers. On 16 September 2008, two French Navy ships set out for Vanikoro from Noum\u00e9a (New Caledonia), and arrived on 15 October, thus recreating a section of the final voyage of discovery undertaken more than 200 years earlier by Lap\u00e9rouse.\nFate.\nBoth ships had been wrecked on Vanikoro's reefs, \"Boussole\" first. \"Astrolabe\" was unloaded and taken apart. A group of men, probably the survivors of \"Boussole\", were massacred by the local inhabitants. According to the islanders, some surviving sailors built a two-masted craft from the wreckage of \"Astrolabe\" and left in a westward direction about nine months later, but what happened to them is unknown. Also, two men, one a \"chief\" and the other his servant, had remained behind, but had left Vanikoro a few years before Dillon arrived.\nSven Wahlroos, in his 1989 book, \"Mutiny and Romance in the South Seas\", suggests that there was a narrowly missed chance to rescue one or more of the survivors in 1791. In November 1790, Captain Edward Edwards\u2014in command of HMS \"Pandora\"\u2014had sailed from England with orders to comb the Pacific for the mutineers of HMS \"Bounty\". In March of the following year, \"Pandora\" arrived at Tahiti and picked up 14 \"Bounty\" crewmen who had stayed on that island. Although some of the 14 had not joined the mutiny, all were imprisoned and shackled in a cramped \"cage\" built on the deck, which the men grimly nicknamed \"Pandora's Box\". \"Pandora\" then left Tahiti in search of \"Bounty\" and the leader of the mutiny, Fletcher Christian.\nCaptain Edwards' search for the remaining mutineers ultimately proved fruitless. However, when passing Vanikoro on 13 August 1791, he observed smoke signals rising from the island. Edwards, single-minded in his search for \"Bounty\" and convinced that mutineers fearful of discovery would not be advertising their whereabouts, ignored the smoke signals and sailed on.\nWahlroos argues that the smoke signals were almost certainly a distress message sent by survivors of the Lap\u00e9rouse expedition, which later evidence indicated were still alive on Vanikoro at that time\u2014three years after \"Boussole\" and \"Astrolabe\" had foundered. Wahlroos is \"virtually certain\" that Captain Edwards, whom he characterizes as one of England's most \"ruthless\", \"inhuman\", \"callous\", and \"incompetent\" naval captains, missed his chance to become \"one of the heroes of maritime history\" by solving the mystery of the lost Lap\u00e9rouse expedition.\nLegacy.\nMuseum collections.\nObjects relating to the life and voyages of Lap\u00e9rouse are held at The Lap\u00e9rouse Museum in Albi in southern France, and the Maritime Museum of New Caledonia. Both museums contain objects recovered from the ships \"Astrolabe\" and \"Boussole\". There is also the Lap\u00e9rouse Museum in La Perouse, which records his time in Australia.\nPlaces named after Lap\u00e9rouse.\nPlaces later named in honour of Lap\u00e9rouse include:\nLap\u00e9rouse in literature and film.\nThe fate of Lap\u00e9rouse, his ships and his men are the subjects of a chapter in the 1870 novel \"Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas\" by Jules Verne. Lap\u00e9rouse was also mentioned in episode \"The Quest\" of the series \"Northern Exposure\", wherein the character Joel (Rob Morrow) finds an old chart of the French explorer that will lead to a legendary \"jewelled city of the North\" (New York City).\nThe novel \"Landfalls\" by Naomi J. Williams explores the Lap\u00e9rouse expedition in depth.\nHenry David Thoreau mentions him (as \"La Perouse\") in his book \"Walden\". In the first chapter, \"Economy\", when writing about how indispensable it is to cultivate the habits of a businessman in anything one does, Thoreau describes these habits in a very long list, including\n... taking advantage of the results of all exploring expeditions, using new passages and all improvements in navigation;\u2014charts to be studied, the position of reefs and new lights and buoys to be ascertained, and ever, and ever, the logarithmic tables to be corrected, for by the error of some calculator the vessel often splits upon a rock that should have reached a friendly pier\u2014there is the untold fate of La Perouse.\nJon Appleton composed a full-length opera based on the final voyage of Lap\u00e9rouse, \"Le Dernier Voyage de Jean-Gallup de la Perouse\".\nMonuments.\nIn 1989, the Government of Australia commissioned from artist Ante Dabro (working in Australia) a monumental bronze statue of de Galaup, for the French Bicentenary. It was installed at the Promenade d'Australie in Paris.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58091", "revid": "239268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58091", "title": "Yezo", "text": ""}
{"id": "58092", "revid": "49856493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58092", "title": "Hokkaido", "text": "Island, prefecture, and region of Japan\n is the second-largest and northernmost of Japan's four main islands. Together with its surrounding islands, it comprises the largest and northernmost prefecture, making up its own region. The Tsugaru Strait separates Hokkaido from Honshu. The two islands are connected by railway via the Seikan Tunnel.\nThe largest city on Hokkaido is its capital, Sapporo, which is also its only ordinance-designated city. Sakhalin lies about to the north of Hokkaido. To the east and northeast are the Kuril Islands, which are administered by Russia. The four most southerly are claimed by Japan. Hokkaido's position on the northern end of the Japanese archipelago results in a colder climate, with the island seeing significant snowfall each winter. Despite the harsher climate, it serves as an agricultural breadbasket for many crops.\nHokkaido was formerly known as \"Ezo\", \"Ezochi\", or \"Ezogashima\". Although Japanese settlers ruled the southern tip of the island since the 16th century, Hokkaido was primarily inhabited by the Ainu people. In 1869, following the Meiji Restoration, the entire island was annexed, colonized, and renamed Hokkaido by Japan. Japanese settlers dispossessed the Ainu of their land and forced them to assimilate. In the 21st century, the Ainu are almost totally assimilated into Japanese society. As a result, the majority of Japanese people of Ainu descent have no knowledge of their heritage or culture.\nNames.\nWhen establishing the Development Commission, the Meiji government decided to change the name of Ezochi. Matsuura Takeshir\u014d submitted six proposals, including names such as and , to the government. The government eventually decided to use the name Hokkaido, but decided to write it as , as a compromise between and because of the similarity with names such as . According to Matsuura, the name was thought up because the Ainu called the region \"Kai\". The \"kai\" element also strongly resembles the On'yomi, or Sino-Japanese, reading of the characters (\"on'yomi\" as [, \u30ab\u30a4], \"kun'yomi\" as [, \u3048\u307f\u3057]), which have been used for over a thousand years in China and Japan as the standard orthographic form to be used when referring to Ainu and related peoples. It is possible that Matsuura's \"kai\" was actually an alteration, influenced by the Sino-Japanese reading of \"Ka-i\", of the Nivkh exonym for the Ainu, namely \"Qoy\" ().\nIn 1947, Hokkaido became a full-fledged prefecture. The historical suffix \u9053 (\"-d\u014d\") translates to \"prefecture\" in English, ambiguously the same as \u5e9c (\"-fu\") for Osaka and Kyoto, and \u770c (\"-ken\") for the rest of the prefectures. \"D\u014d\", as shorthand, can be used to uniquely identify Hokkaido, for example as in \u9053\u9053 (\"d\u014dd\u014d\", \"Hokkaido road\") or \u9053\u8b70\u4f1a (\"D\u014dgikai\", \"Hokkaido Assembly\"), the same way \u90fd (\"-to\") is used for Tokyo. The prefecture's government calls itself the \"Hokkaido Government\" rather than the \"Hokkaido Prefectural Government\".\nWith the rise of indigenous rights movements, there emerged a notion that Hokkaido should have an Ainu-language name. If a decision to change the name is made, however, whichever Ainu phrase is chosen, its original referent is critically different from the large geographical entity. The phrase ' () has been a preferred choice among Japanese activists. Its primary meaning is the \"land of humans\", as opposed to the \"land of gods\" ('). When contrasted with ' (\"land of the neighbors\", often pointing to Honshu or Japanese settlements on the southern tip of Hokkaido), it means the land of the Ainu people, which, depending on context, can refer to Hokkaido, although from a modern ethnolinguistic point of view, the Ainu people have extended their domain to a large part of Sakhalin and the entire Kuril Islands. Another phrase, ' (\u30e4\u30a6\u30f3\u30e2\u30b7\u31fc), has gained prominence; it literally means the \"onshore land\", as opposed to the \"offshore land\" (), which, depending on context, can refer to the Kuril Islands, Honshu, or any foreign country. If the speaker is a resident of Hokkaido, ' can refer to Hokkaido. Yet another phrase, ' (\u30a2\u30b3\u31ff\u30e2\u30b7\u31fc) means \"our (inclusive) land\", and when used by Hokkaido Ainus, it can refer to Hokkaido or Japan as a whole.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nDuring the Jomon period, the local culture and the associated hunter-gatherer lifestyle flourished in Hokkaido, beginning over 15,000 years ago. In contrast to the island of Honshu, Hokkaido saw an absence of conflict during this time period. Jomon beliefs in natural spirits are theorized to be the origins of Ainu spirituality. About 2,000 years ago, the island was colonized by Yayoi people, and much of the island's population shifted away from hunting and gathering towards agriculture.\nThe Ebetsu Kofun Cluster is a group of mounds dating from the latter half of the 8th century to the middle of the 9th century, and were surveyed by Juichi Goto in 1931. Along with the kofun, warabidetoh (\u8568\u624b\u5200), iron sword, magatama, and sueki were discovered. Ebetsu Kofun is known to be evidence for the existence of Wajin (\u548c\u4eba) and trade between Hokkaido and Honshu before Feudal Japan. \nThe , finished in 720 AD, is often said to be the first mention of Hokkaido in recorded history. According to the text, Abe no Hirafu led a large navy and army to the northern areas from 658 to 660 and came into contact with the Mishihase and Emishi. One of the places Hirafu went to was called , which is often believed to be present-day Hokkaido. However, many theories exist concerning the details of this event, including the location of Watarishima and the common belief that the Emishi in Watarishima were the ancestors of the present-day Ainu people.\nDuring the Nara and Heian periods (710\u20131185), people in Hokkaido conducted trade with Dewa Province, an outpost of the Japanese central government. From the feudal period, the people in Hokkaido began to be called Ezo. Hokkaido subsequently became known as or . The people of Ezo mainly relied upon hunting and fishing and obtained rice and iron through trade with the Japanese.\nFeudal Japan.\nDuring the Muromachi period (1336\u20131573), the Japanese established a settlement at the south of the Oshima Peninsula, with a series of fortified residences such as that of Shinoridate. As more people moved to the settlement to avoid battles, disputes arose between the Japanese and the Ainu. The disputes eventually developed into a war. In 1457, Takeda Nobuhiro (1431\u20131494) killed the Ainu leader, Koshamain, and defeated the opposition. Nobuhiro's descendants became the rulers of the Matsumae-han, which was granted exclusive trading rights with the Ainu in the Azuchi-Momoyama and Edo periods (1568\u20131868). The Matsumae family's economy relied upon trade with the Ainu, who had extensive trading networks. The Matsumae held authority over the south of Ezochi until the end of the Edo period.\nThe Matsumae clan's rule over the Ainu must be understood in the context of the expansion of the Japanese feudal state. Medieval military leaders in northern Honshu (e.g. Northern Fujiwara, Akita clan) maintained only tenuous political and cultural ties to the imperial court and its proxies, the Kamakura shogunate and Ashikaga shogunate. Feudal strongmen sometimes defined their own roles within the medieval institutional order, taking shogunate titles, while in other times they assumed titles that seemed to give them a non-Japanese identity. Many of the feudal strongmen were descended from Emishi military leaders who had been assimilated into Japanese society. \nThe Matsumae clan were of Yamato descent like other ethnic Japanese people, whereas the Emishi of northern Honshu were a distinctive group related to the Ainu. The Emishi were conquered and integrated into the Japanese state dating as far back as the 8th century and as a result began to lose their distinctive culture and ethnicity as they became minorities. By the time the Matsumae clan ruled over the Ainu, most of the Emishi were ethnically mixed and physically closer to Japanese than they were to Ainu. From this, the \"transformation\" theory postulates that native Jomon peoples changed gradually with the infusion of Yayoi immigrants into the T\u014dhoku region of northern Honshu, in contrast to the \"replacement\" theory that posits the Jomon were replaced by the Yayoi.\nThere were numerous revolts by the Ainu against feudal rule. The last large-scale resistance was Shakushain's revolt in 1669\u20131672. In 1789, a smaller movement known as the Menashi\u2013Kunashir rebellion was crushed, after which the terms \"Japanese\" and \"Ainu\" referred to clearly distinguished groups, and the Matsumae were unequivocally Japanese.\nAccording to American professor of Japanese history John A. Harrison, prior to 1868 Japan used proximity as its claim to Hokkaido, Sakhalin, and the Kuril Islands. However, Japan had never thoroughly explored, governed, or exploited the areas, and this claim was invalidated by the movement of Russia into the Northeast Pacific area and by Russian settlements on Kamchatka (from 1699), Sakhalin (1850s) and the Sea of Okhotsk Coast (1640s onwards).\nPrior to the Meiji Restoration of 1868, Hokkaido was seen as a frontier land and the Tokugawa shogunate realized the need to prepare northern defenses against a possible Russian invasion and took over control of most of Ezochi in 1855\u20131858. Many Japanese settlers regarded the Ainu as \"inhuman and the inferior descendants of dogs\". The Tokugawa irregularly imposed various assimilation programs on the Ainu due to the Tokugawa's perception of them as a threat from Russia. For example, assimilation programs were implemented in response to perceived threats from Russia, which included the Laxman expedition of 1793 and the Golovnin Incident of 1804. Once the respective Russian threats appeared to subside, the assimilation programs were halted until 1855. However, in 1855, once the Treaty of Shimoda was signed, which defined the borders between Russian Empire and Tokugawa Japan, the Tokugawa again viewed Russia as a threat to Japanese sovereignty over Hokkaido and reinstated assimilation programs on the Ainu.\nMeiji era.\nColonization of Hokkaido.\nPrior to the Meiji era, the island was called Ezochi, which can be translated as \"land of the barbarians\" or \"the land for people who did not obey the government.\" Shortly after the Boshin War in 1868, a group of Tokugawa loyalists led by Enomoto Takeaki temporarily occupied the island (the polity is commonly but mistakenly known as the Republic of Ezo), but the rebellion was defeated in May 1869. Through colonial practices, Ezochi was annexed into Japanese territory. Ezochi was subsequently put under control of Hakodate Prefectural Government. When establishing the , the Meiji government introduced a new name. After 1869, the northern Japanese island was known as Hokkaido, which can be translated to \"northern sea route\", and regional subdivisions were established, including the provinces of Oshima, Shiribeshi, Iburi, Ishikari, Teshio, Kitami, Hidaka, Tokachi, Kushiro, Nemuro and Chishima.\nThe initiative to colonize Ezo, which later became Hokkaido, traces back to 1869, where Japanese proponents argued that the colonization of Ezo would serve as a strategic move to enhance Japan's standing and influence on the global stage, particularly in negotiations with Western powers, specifically Russia. The Meiji government invested heavily in colonizing Hokkaido for several reasons. Firstly, they aimed to assert their control over the region as a buffer against potential Russian advances. Secondly, they were attracted to Hokkaido's rich natural resources, including coal, timber, fish, and fertile land. Lastly, since Western powers viewed colonial expansion as a symbol of prestige, Japan viewed the colonization of Hokkaido as an opportunity to present itself as a modern and respected nation to Western powers.\nThe primary purpose of the Development Commission was to secure Hokkaido before the Russians extended their control of the Far East beyond Vladivostok. The Japanese failed to settle in the interior lowlands of the island because of aboriginal resistance. The resistance was eventually destroyed, and the lowlands were under the control of the commission. The most important goal of the Japanese was to increase the farm population and to create a conducive environment for emigration and settlement. However, the Japanese did not have expertise in modern agricultural techniques, and only possessed primitive mining and lumbering methods. Kuroda Kiyotaka was put in charge of the project, and turned to the United States for help.\nHis first step was to journey to the United States and recruit Horace Capron, President Ulysses S. Grant's commissioner of agriculture. From 1871 to 1873 Capron bent his efforts to expounding Western agriculture and mining, with mixed results. Frustrated with obstacles to his efforts, Capron returned home in 1875. In 1876, William S. Clark arrived to found an agricultural college in Sapporo. Although he only remained a year, Clark left a lasting impression on Hokkaido, inspiring the Japanese with his teachings on agriculture as well as Christianity. His parting words, \"Boys, be ambitious!\", can be found on public buildings in Hokkaido to this day. The population of Hokkaido increased from 58,000 to 240,000 during that decade. \nKuroda hired Capron for $10,000 per year and paid for all expenses related to the mission. Kuroda and his government were likely intrigued by Capron's previous colonial experience, particularly his involvement in the forced removal of Native Americans from Texas to new territories after the Mexican\u2013American War. Capron introduced capital-intensive farming techniques by adopting American methods and tools, importing seeds for Western crops, and bringing in European livestock breeds, which included his favorite North Devon cattle. He founded experimental farms in Hokkaido, conducted surveys to assess mineral deposits and agricultural potential, and advocated for improvements in water access, mills, and roads.\nThe settler colonization of Hokkaido by the Japanese was organized and supported through collaboration between the Japanese state and American experts and technology. From the 1870s to the 1880s, Japanese leaders placed their efforts on settling Hokkaido by systematically migrating former samurai lords, samurai retainers, and common citizens, which included farmers and peasants, providing them with \"free\" land and financial assistance. This transformation was facilitated with the expertise of American advisors who introduced various colonization technologies, transforming Hokkaido into land suitable for Japan's capitalist aspirations. \nJapanese leaders drew inspiration from American settler colonialism during their diplomatic visits to the United States. Japanese colonial officials learned settler colonial techniques from Western imperial powers, particularly the United States. This included declaring large portions of Hokkaido as ownerless land, providing a pretext for the dispossession of the Ainu people. Japan established the Hokkaido Colonization Board in 1869, a year after the start of the Meiji era, with the goal of encouraging Japanese settlers to Hokkaido. Mainland Japanese settlers began migrating to Hokkaido, leading to Japan's colonization of the island. Motivated by capitalist and industrial goals, the Meiji government forcefully appropriated fertile land and mineral-rich regions throughout Hokkaido, without consideration for their historical Ainu inhabitancy. The Meiji government implemented land seizures and enacted land ownership laws that favored Japanese settlers, effectively stripping Ainu people of their customary land rights and traditional means of subsistence. The 1899 Hokkaido Former Aborigines Protection Act further marginalized and impoverished the Ainu people by forcing them to leave their traditional lands and relocating them to the rugged, mountainous regions in the center of the island. The act prohibited the Ainu from fishing and hunting, which were their main source of subsistence. The Ainu were valued primarily as a source of inexpensive manual labor, and discriminatory assimilation policies further entrenched their sense of inferiority as well as worsened poverty and disease within Ainu communities. These policies exacerbated diasporic trends among the Ainu population, as many sought employment with the government or private enterprises, often earning meager wages that barely sustained their families. \nThe Meiji government embarked on assimilation campaigns aimed not only at assimilating the Ainu but also eradicating their language and culture entirely. They were forced to take on Japanese names and language, and gradually saw their culture and traditions eroded. The Ainu were forbidden to speak their own language and taught only Japanese at school. Facing pervasive stigma, many Ainu concealed their heritage. UNESCO has recognized the Ainu language as critically endangered. Given the Meiji state's full political control over the island, the subsequent subjugation of its indigenous inhabitants, aggressive economic exploitation, and ambitious permanent settlement endeavors, Hokkaido emerged as the sole successful settler colony of Japan. \nAfter the Meiji colonization of Hokkaido, Meiji Japan depended on prison labour to accelerate the colonization process. The Japanese built three prisons and rendered Hokkaido a prison island, where political prisoners were incarcerated and used as prison labour. During the opening ceremony of the first prison, the Ainu name \"Shibetsuputo\" was replaced with the Japanese name \"Tsukigata\", as an attempt to \"Japanize\" Hokkaido's geography. The second prison opened near the Hokutan Horonai coal mine, where Ainu people were forced to work. Cheap prison labour played an important role in coal and sulphur mining, as well as road construction in Hokkaido. Eventually, several types of indentured labour, Korean labour, child labour and women labour replaced convict labour in Hokkaido. Working conditions were difficult and dangerous. Japan's transition to capitalism depended heavily on the growth of the coal mining sector in Hokkaido. The importance of coal from Hokkaido increased throughout the First World War, and the mines required a large amount of labourers.\nWorld War II.\nIn mid-July 1945, various shipping ports, cities, and military facilities in Hokkaido were attacked by the United States Navy's Task Force 38. On 14\u201315 July, aircraft operating from the task force's aircraft carriers sank and damaged a large number of ships in ports along Hokkaido's southern coastline as well as in northern Honshu. In addition, on 15 July a force of three battleships and two light cruisers bombarded the city of Muroran. Before the Japanese surrender was formalized, the Soviet Union made preparations for an invasion of Hokkaido, but U.S. President Harry Truman made it clear that the surrender of all of the Japanese home islands would be accepted by General Douglas MacArthur per the 1943 Cairo Declaration.\nPresent.\nHokkaido became equal with other prefectures in 1947, when the revised Local Autonomy Act became effective. The Japanese central government established the as an agency of the Prime Minister's Office in 1949 to maintain its executive power in Hokkaido. The agency was absorbed by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport in 2001. and the of the ministry still have a strong influence on public construction projects in Hokkaido.\nGeography.\nThe island of Hokkaido is located in the north of Japan, near Russia (Sakhalin Oblast). It has coastlines on the Sea of Japan (to the west of the island), the Sea of Okhotsk (to the north), and the Pacific Ocean (to the east). The center of the island is mountainous, with volcanic plateaux. Hokkaido has multiple plains such as the Ishikari Plain , Tokachi Plain , the Kushiro Plain (the largest wetland in Japan) and Sarobetsu Plain . Hokkaido is which make it the second-largest island of Japan.\nThe Tsugaru Strait separates Hokkaido from Honshu (Aomori Prefecture); La P\u00e9rouse Strait separates Hokkaido from the island of Sakhalin in Russia; Nemuro Strait separates Hokkaido from Kunashir Island in the Russian Kuril Islands.\nThe governmental jurisdiction of Hokkaido incorporates several smaller islands, including Rishiri, Okushiri Island, and Rebun. (By Japanese reckoning, Hokkaido also incorporates several of the Kuril Islands.) Hokkaido Prefecture is the largest and northernmost Japanese prefecture. The island ranks 21st in the world by area.\nFlora and fauna.\nThere are three populations of the Ussuri brown bear found on the island. There are more brown bears in Hokkaido than anywhere else in Asia besides Russia. The Hokkaido brown bear is separated into three distinct lineages. There are only eight lineages in the world. Those on Honshu died out long ago.\nHokkaido is also the historical and current range of Japan's sea otter population, which is increasingly becoming a major tourism draw as sea otters disappear from Japanese aquaria.\nThe native conifer species in northern Hokkaido is the Sakhalin fir (\"Abies sachalinensis\"). The flowering plant \"Hydrangea hirta\" is also found on the island.\nGeologic activity.\nLike many areas of Japan, Hokkaido is seismically active. Aside from numerous earthquakes, the following volcanoes are considered still active (at least one eruption since 1850):\nIn 1993, an earthquake of magnitude 7.7 generated a tsunami which devastated Okushiri, killing 202 inhabitants. An earthquake of magnitude 8.3 struck near the island on September 26, 2003. On September 6, 2018, an earthquake of magnitude 6.6 struck with its epicenter near the city of Tomakomai, causing a blackout across the whole island.\nOn May 16, 2021, an earthquake measuring 6.1 on the Richter scale struck off Japan's Hokkaido prefecture.\nClimate.\nAs Japan's coldest region, Hokkaido has relatively cool summers and icy/snowy winters. Most of the island falls in the humid continental climate zone with K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfb\" (hemiboreal) in most areas but \"Dfa\" (hot summer humid continental) in some inland lowlands. The average August temperature ranges from , while the average January temperature ranges from , in both cases depending on elevation and distance from the ocean, though temperatures on the western side of the island tend to be a little warmer than on the eastern. The highest temperature ever recorded is on 26 May 2019.\nThe northern portion of Hokkaido falls into the taiga biome with significant snowfall. Snowfall varies widely from as much as on the mountains adjacent to the Sea of Japan down to around on the Pacific coast. The island tends to have isolated snowstorms that develop long-lasting snowbanks. Total precipitation varies from on the mountains of the Sea of Japan coast to around (the lowest in Japan) on the Sea of Okhotsk coast and interior lowlands and up to around on the Pacific side. The generally high quality of powder snow and numerous mountains in Hokkaido make it a popular region for snow sports. The snowfall usually commences in earnest in November and ski resorts (such as those at Niseko, Furano, Teine and Rusutsu) usually operate between December and April. Hokkaido celebrates its winter weather at the Sapporo Snow Festival.\nHokkaido\u2019s winter snowfall is driven by a seasonal atmospheric pattern between Siberia and the North Pacific. During winter, the Eurasian continent receives limited solar energy and cools rapidly, forming a strong and persistent high-pressure system over Siberia known as the Siberian High. At the same time, the North Pacific retains heat longer and forms a persistent low-pressure system called the Aleutian Low. The resulting pressure difference generates steady northwesterly winds that carry very cold, dry air toward Japan. As this air crosses the Sea of Japan, it passes over the Tsushima Warm Current, which keeps coastal waters relatively warm and enables significant moisture uptake. When the moisture-laden air reaches Hokkaido\u2019s mountainous coastline, it is forced upward, condenses, and produces significant snowfall. This is an effect often referred to as ocean-effect snowfall. Despite the common assumption that La Ni\u00f1a brings heavier snow, long-term observations show no consistent correlation between La Ni\u00f1a phases and increased snowfall in Hokkaido.\nDuring the winter, passage through the Sea of Okhotsk is often complicated by large floes of drift ice. Combined with high winds that occur during winter, this frequently brings air travel and maritime activity to a halt beyond the northern coast of Hokkaido. Ports on the open Pacific Ocean and Sea of Japan are generally ice-free year round, though most rivers freeze during the winter.\nUnlike the other major islands of Japan, Hokkaido is normally not affected by the June\u2013July rainy season and the relative lack of humidity and typically warm, rather than hot, summer weather makes its climate an attraction for tourists from other parts of Japan.\nTemperature comparison.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdministrative divisions.\nSubprefectures.\nAs of April\u00a02010[ [update]], Hokkaido has nine General Subprefectural Bureaus (\u7dcf\u5408\u632f\u8208\u5c40) and five Subprefectural Bureaus (\u632f\u8208\u5c40). Hokkaido is one of eight prefectures in Japan that have subprefectures (\u652f\u5e81 \"shich\u014d\"). Hokkaido is the only one of the eight to have such offices covering the whole of its territory outside the main cities, rather than having them just for outlying islands or remote areas. \nThis is mostly because of its great size. Many parts of the prefecture are simply too far away to be effectively administered by Sapporo. Subprefectural offices in Hokkaido carry out many of the duties that prefectural offices fulfill elsewhere in Japan.\nMunicipalities.\nHokkaido is divided into 179 municipalities.\nCities.\nThere are 35 cities in Hokkaido:\nTowns and villages.\nThese are the towns and villages in Hokkaido Prefecture:\nMajor cities and towns.\nHokkaido's largest city is the capital, Sapporo, which is a designated city. The island has two core cities: Hakodate in the south and Asahikawa in the central region. Other important population centers include Tomakomai, Iwamizawa, Kushiro, Obihiro, Kitami, Abashiri, Wakkanai, and Nemuro.\nPopulation.\nHokkaido has the third-largest population of Japan's five main islands, with 5,111,691 people as of 2023[ [update]]. It has the lowest population density in Japan, with just . Hokkaido ranks 21st in population among the world's islands. Major cities include Sapporo and Asahikawa in the central region, and the port of Hakodate facing Honshu in the south. Sapporo is Hokkaido's largest city and the fifth-largest in Japan. It had a population of 1,959,750 as of 2023[ [update]] and a population density of .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nAlthough there is some light industry (most notably paper milling and beer brewing) most of the population is employed by the service sector. In 2001, the service sector and other tertiary industries generated more than three-quarters of the gross domestic product.\nAgriculture and other primary industries play a large role in Hokkaido's economy. Hokkaido has nearly one fourth of Japan's total arable land. It ranks first in the nation in the production of a host of agricultural products, including wheat, soybeans, potatoes, sugar beets, onions, pumpkins, corn, raw milk, and beef. Hokkaido also accounts for 22% of Japan's forests with a sizable timber industry. The prefecture is first in the nation in production of marine products and aquaculture. The average farm size in Hokkaido is 26 hectares per farmer in 2013, which is almost 11 times bigger than the national average of 2.4 hectares.\nTourism is an important industry, especially during the cool summertime when visitors are attracted to Hokkaido's open spaces from hotter and more humid parts of Japan and other Asian countries. During the winter, skiing and other winter sports bring other tourists, and increasingly international ones, to the island.\nCoal mining played an important role in the industrial development of Hokkaido, with the Ishikari coalfield. Cities such as Muroran were primarily developed to supply the rest of the archipelago with coal.\nIn 2023, Rapidus Corporation announced Hokkaido's largest business investment with a 5 trillion yen plan to build a semiconductor manufacturing factory in Chitose. The site is expected to eventually employ over 1,000 employees.\nTransportation.\nHokkaido's only land link to the rest of Japan is the Seikan Tunnel. Most travellers travel to the island by air: the main airport is New Chitose Airport at Chitose, just south of Sapporo. One of the airlines, Air Do was named after Hokkaido.\nHokkaido can be reached by ferry from Sendai, Niigata and some other cities, with the ferries from Tokyo dealing only in cargo. The Hokkaido Shinkansen takes passengers from Tokyo to near Hakodate in slightly over four hours. There is a fairly well-developed railway network, but many cities can be accessed only by road. The coal railways were constructed around Sapporo and Horonai during the late 19th century, as advised by American engineer Joseph Crawford.\nHokkaido is home to one of Japan's Melody Roads, which is made from grooves cut into the ground, which when driven over causes a tactile vibration and audible rumbling transmitted through the wheels into the car body.\nEducation.\nThe Hokkaido Prefectural Board of Education oversees public schools (except colleges and universities) in Hokkaido. Public elementary and junior high schools are operated by municipalities, except Hokkaido Noboribetsu Akebi Secondary School and schools attached to the Hokkaido University of Education. Public high schools are operated by either the prefectural board or municipalities.\nSenior high schools.\nAs of 2016[ [update]], there are 291 high schools in Hokkaido: 4 national schools, 55 private schools, 233 public schools, and 2 integrated junior-senior schools.\nColleges and universities.\nHokkaido has 34 universities (7 national, 6 local public, and 21 private universities), 15 junior colleges, and 6 colleges of technology (3 national, 1 local public, and 2 private colleges).\nSports.\nThe 1972 Winter Olympics were held in Sapporo.\nThe sports teams listed below are based in Hokkaido.\nSumo.\nHokkaido Prefecture enjoys a special status in professional sumo as the prefecture that has produced the most in Japan. A total of eight wrestlers have achieved the highest rank in the professional hierarchy: Chiyonoyama, Yoshibayama, Taih\u014d, Kitanofuji, Kitanoumi, Chiyonofuji, Hokutoumi, and \u014cnokuni. Historically, the prefecture only experienced a boom in sporting success after the Meiji era, because during this period of economic development and high birth rates, it was common to send young boys to sumo stables in order to limit the number of mouths to feed. The prefecture's golden age came during the Sh\u014dwa and Heisei periods, with Chiyonofuji, Hokutoumi, and \u014cnokuni all reaching the rank of and Hokuten'y\u016b reaching the rank of at the same time. Since then, the prefecture has slowed down considerably, with the last title won by a native of the prefecture taking place in 1991. On the amateur scene, only five high school clubs participating in national tournaments have more than 16 members, according to a 2020 study.\nPolitics.\nGovernor.\nThe current governor of Hokkaido is Naomichi Suzuki. He won the governorship in the gubernatorial election in 2019 as an independent. In 1999, Hori was supported by all major non-Communist parties and It\u014d ran without party support. Before 1983, the governorship had been held by Liberal Democrats Naohiro D\u014dgakinai and Kingo Machimura for 24 years. In the 1971 election when Machimura retired, the Socialist candidate Sh\u014dhei Tsukada lost to D\u014dgakinai by only 13,000 votes; Tsukada was also supported by the Communist Party \u2013 the leftist cooperation in opposition to the US-Japanese security treaty had brought joint Socialist-Communist candidates to victory in many other prefectural and local elections in the 1960s and 1970s. In 1959, Machimura had defeated Yokomichi's father Setsuo in the race to succeed Hokkaido's first elected governor, Socialist Toshibumi Tanaka who retired after three terms. Tanaka had only won the governorship in 1947 in a run-off election against Democrat Eiji Arima because no candidate had received the necessary vote share to win in the first round as required by law at the time.\nAssembly.\nThe Hokkaido Legislative Assembly has 100 members from 47 electoral districts. As of April 2015, the LDP caucus holds a majority with 51 seats, the DPJ-led group has 26 members. Other groups are the \"Hokkaido Y\u016bshikai\" of New Party Daichi and independents with twelve seats, K\u014dmeit\u014d with eight, and the Japanese Communist Party with four members. General elections for the Hokkaido assembly are currently held together with gubernatorial elections in the unified local elections (last round: April 2015).\nNational representation.\nFor the lower house of the National Diet, Hokkaido is divided into twelve single-member electoral districts. In the 2017 election, candidates from the governing coalition of Liberal Democrats and K\u014dmeit\u014d won seven districts and the main opposition Constitutional Democrats five. For the proportional election segment, Hokkaido and Tokyo are the only two prefectures that form a regional \"block\" district of their own. The Hokkaido proportional representation block elects eight Representatives. \nIn 2017, the Liberal Democratic Party received 28.8% of the proportional vote and won three seats, the Constitutional Democratic Party won three (26.4% of the vote), one seat each went to Kib\u014d no T\u014d (12.3%) and K\u014dmeit\u014d (11.0%). The Japanese Communist Party, who won a seat in 2014, lost their seat in 2017 while receiving 8.5% of the votes.\nIn the upper house of the National Diet, a major reapportionment in the 1990s halved the number of Councillors from Hokkaido per election from four to two. After the elections of 2010 and 2013, the Hokkaido electoral district \u2013 like most two-member districts for the upper house \u2013 is represented by two Liberal Democrats and two Democrats. In the 2016 upper house election, the district magnitude will be raised to three, Hokkaido will then temporarily be represented by five members and six after the 2019 election.\nInternational relations.\nHokkaido has relationships with several provinces, states, and other entities worldwide.\nAs of January\u00a02014[ [update]], 74 individual municipalities in Hokkaido have sister city agreements with 114 cities in 21 countries worldwide.\nNotes.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^[note 1] Source: English edition of Sightseeing in Hokkaido, Winter Festival and Events"}
{"id": "58094", "revid": "1008067212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58094", "title": "Yeso", "text": "Yeso may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58095", "revid": "6056090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58095", "title": "La Perouse", "text": "La Perouse, La P\u00e9rouse, or Lap\u00e9rouse may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShips.\nNamed for the comte de Lap\u00e9rouse:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58096", "revid": "38674116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58096", "title": "La P\u00e9rouse Strait", "text": "Strait between Hokkaido, Japan and Sakhalin, Russia\nLa P\u00e9rouse Strait (), or , is a strait dividing the southern part of the Russian island of Sakhalin from the northern part of the Japanese island of Hokkaid\u014d, and connecting the Sea of Japan on the west with the Sea of Okhotsk on the east.\nThe strait is wide and deep. The narrowest part of the strait is in the west between Cape Krillion in Sakhalin and Cape S\u014dya in Hokkaid\u014d, which is also the shallowest at only deep. A small rocky island, appropriately named Kamen Opasnosti (Russian for \"Rock of Danger\") is located in the Russian waters in the northeastern part of the strait, southeast of Cape Krillion. Another small island, Bentenjima, lies near the Japanese shore of the strait.\nThe strait is named after Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse, a French naval officer who explored it in 1787 as part of a round-the-world voyage.\nJapan's territorial waters extend to three nautical miles into La P\u00e9rouse Strait instead of the usual twelve, reportedly to allow nuclear-armed United States Navy warships and submarines to transit the strait without violating Japan's prohibition against nuclear weapons in its territory.\nHistory.\nBetween 1848 and 1892, American whaleships passed through the strait in the spring and summer as they made their way from the right whale grounds in the Sea of Japan to the Sea of Okhotsk to hunt right and bowhead whales. The ship \"David Paddack\" (352 tons), Captain Swain, of Nantucket, was bound home with a full cargo when it wrecked in the strait in 1848.\nThe submarine \"USS Wahoo\", skippered by Dudley W. \"Mush\" Morton, was sunk in the strait on her seventh war patrol in October 1943. The submarine's hull was found and identified as \"Wahoo\" on Oct. 31, 2006.\nProposed rail crossing.\nThe Sakhalin\u2013Hokkaido Tunnel has been proposed to connect Japan and Russia under the Strait, further connecting to the Trans-Siberian Railroad. A bridge has also been proposed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58097", "revid": "68411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58097", "title": "Strait of La P\u00e9rouse", "text": ""}
{"id": "58098", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58098", "title": "Magadan", "text": "City in Magadan Oblast, Russia\nMagadan (Russian: , ) is a port town and the administrative centre of Magadan Oblast, Russia. The city is located on the isthmus of the Staritsky Peninsula by the Nagaev Bay; it serves as a gateway to the Kolyma region.\nMagadan, founded in 1929, was a major transit centre for political prisoners during the Stalin era and the administrative centre of the Dalstroy forced-labor gold mining operation. The town later served as a port for exporting gold and other metals. Magadan plays a significant role in transportation with the Port of Magadan and Sokol Airport.\nThe local economy relies on gold mining and fisheries, although gold production has declined. The town has various cultural institutions and religious establishments, such as the Orthodox Holy Trinity Cathedral and the Roman Catholic Church of the Nativity. The Mask of Sorrow memorial commemorates Stalin's victims. Magadan experiences a subarctic climate with prolonged and cold winters, causing the soil to remain permanently frozen.\nHistory.\nThe settlement of Magadan was founded in 1929 in the Ola river valley, near the settlement of Nagayevo. During the Stalin era, Magadan was a major transit centre for inmates sent to Gulag forced labour camps. From 1932 to 1953, it was the administrative centre of the Dalstroy organisation\u2014a vast forced-labour gold-mining operation and forced-labour camp system. The first director of Dalstroy was Eduard Berzin, who between 1932 and 1937 established the infrastructure of the forced labour camps in Magadan. Berzin was executed in 1938 by Stalin, towards the end of the Great Purge.\nThe town later served as a port for exporting gold and other metals mined in the Kolyma region. Its size and population grew quickly as facilities were rapidly developed for the expanding mining activities in the area. City status was granted to it on July\u00a014, 1939.\nMagadan was visited by U.S. Vice President Henry Wallace in May 1944. He took an instant liking to his NKVD host, admired handiwork done by the enslaved political prisoners, and later glowingly called the town a combination of Tennessee Valley Authority and Hudson's Bay Company.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nMagadan is the administrative centre of the Magadan Oblast. Within the framework of administrative divisions, it is, together with the urban-type settlements of Sokol and Uptar, incorporated as the \"town of oblast significance of Magadan\"\u2014an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the town of oblast significance of Magadan is incorporated as Magadan Urban Okrug.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nThe Port of Magadan is the second largest seaport in the North-East of Russia after Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky located on Nagaev Bay and Sea of Okhotsk. It operates all year round with the help of icebreakers. There is currently no operating railway in Magadan. However, the Magadan-Palatka line was operational between 1941 and 1956. Russian Railways are considering the possibility of building a railway from the Nizhny Bestyakh of the Amur-Yakutsk railway to Magadan by 2035, which will contribute to the development of an area with huge mineral deposits. Magadan is the final destination of the federal highway R504 Kolyma Highway, which connects the region with Yakutia and other parts of Russia. Anadyr Highway, currently under construction, will provide access to Chukotka Autonomous Okrug. Sokol Airport and Magadan-13 airport provide access to air transport for numerous destinations in Russia with the former being for big aircraft and the latter is mainly for small aircraft.\nMagadan is also the home of the Magadan/Sokol Flight Information Region (FIR) and Magadan Oceanic FIR, which controls the Northeastern part of the Russia and its Arctic airspace. Most of the westbound transpacific flights from North America to Asia will use those FIRs.\nEconomy.\nThe principal sources of income for the local economy are gold mining and fisheries. By 2007, gold production had declined. Fishing production declined and was well below the allocated quotas, apparently as a result of an aging fishing fleet. Other local industries include pasta and sausage plants, and a distillery. Although farming is difficult owing to the harsh climate, there are many public and private farming enterprises.\nOther.\nThe Central Intelligence Agency wrote a report on Ship Repair Yard No. 2 near Magadan in June 1965. Magadan was repeatedly reported as a base for the Soviet Navy during the Cold War.\nCulture and religion.\nCulture.\nIt has a number of cultural institutions, including the Regional Museum of Anthropology, a geological museum, a regional library and a university. \"Magadanskaya Pravda\" is the main newspaper.\nThe town figures prominently in the gulag literature of Varlam Shalamov and in the eponymous song by Mikhail Krug. Actor of film and stage Georgiy Zhzhonov worked at Magadan Theatre for two years after being released from a gulag in May 1945.\nMagadan was home to Eastern Syndrome a Soviet and Russian rock group founded there in 1986.\nThe town was a focal point of the \"Long Way Round\" TV series of a motorcycle journey made by Ewan McGregor, Charley Boorman and their team in 2004.\nReligion.\nThe town features the recent Orthodox (completed in 2008), and the Roman Catholic Church of the Nativity (completed in 2002), among others.\nMemorials.\nThe Mask of Sorrow memorial, a large sculpture in memory of Stalin's victims, was designed by Ernst Neizvestny. The Church of the Nativity ministers to survivors of the labor camps. It is staffed by several priests and nuns.\nGeography.\nThe Magadanka River, a 192\u00a0km long river flowing to the Sea of Okhotsk, passes the city. The city is located on the isthmus of the Staritsky Peninsula by the Nagaev Bay.\nEcologically situated in the Northeast Siberian taiga, the town's arboreal flora is made up of conifer trees, such as firs and larches, and silver birches. The city is surrounded by mountains to the west and northeast. Permafrost and tundra cover most of the region. The growing season is only one hundred days long.\nThe city of Magadan is on the same longitude as the suburbs of Greater Western Sydney, Australia, which lie on the eastern end of the 150th meridian east line, bordering the 151st meridian and is on the same latitude as Southern Scandinavia, and the far north of Scotland.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Magadan is subarctic (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfc\"). Winters are prolonged and very cold, with up to six months of sub-zero high temperatures, so that the soil remains permanently frozen; although they are still much milder than those of interior eastern Siberia. Average temperatures on the coast of the Sea of Okhotsk range from in January to in July. Average temperatures in the interior range from in January to in July. Due to the wet nature of October and November, a snowpack is built up early, which then lasts throughout the winter even while the influence from the Siberian High lowers precipitation throughout those months.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nMagadan is twinned with:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58099", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58099", "title": "Curtly Ambrose", "text": "Antiguan cricketer\nSir Curtly Elconn Lynwall Ambrose KCN (born 21 September 1963) is an Antiguan former cricketer who played 98 Test matches for the West Indies. Widely acknowledged as one of the greatest fast bowlers of all time, he took 405 Test wickets at an average of 20.99 and topped the ICC Player Rankings for much of his career to be rated the best bowler in the world. His great height\u2014he is tall\u2014allowed him to make the ball bounce unusually high after he delivered it; allied to his pace and accuracy, it made him a very difficult bowler for batsmen to face. A man of few words during his career, he was notoriously reluctant to speak to journalists. He was chosen as one of the \"Wisden\" Cricketers of the Year in 1992; after he retired he was entered into the International Cricket Council Hall of Fame and selected as one of West Indies all-time XI by a panel of experts.\nBorn in Swetes, Antigua, Ambrose came to cricket at a relatively late age, having preferred basketball in his youth, but quickly made an impression as a fast bowler. Progressing through regional and national teams, he was first chosen for the West Indies in 1988. He was almost immediately successful and remained in the team until his retirement in 2000. On many occasions, his bowling spells were responsible for winning matches for West Indies which seemed lost, in association with Courtney Walsh. Against Australia in 1993, he bowled one of the greatest bowling spells of all time, when he took seven wickets while conceding a single run, hence taking figures of 7/1 for the first spell of the match. Similarly, in 1994 he was largely responsible for bowling England out for 46 runs, taking six wickets for 24 runs. He is regarded as one of the greatest match-winning bowlers of all time.\nAmbrose's bowling method relied on accuracy and conceding few runs; several of his best performances came when he took wickets in quick succession to devastate the opposition. He was particularly successful against leading batsmen. From 1995, Ambrose was increasingly affected by injury, and several times critics claimed that he was no longer effective. However, he continued to take wickets regularly up until his retirement, although he was sometimes less effective in the early matches of a series. In his final years, the West Indies team was in decline and often relied heavily on Ambrose and Walsh; both men often bowled with little support from the other bowlers. Following his retirement, Ambrose has pursued a career in music as the bass guitarist in a reggae band.\nEarly life and career.\nAmbrose was born in Swetes, Antigua on 21 September 1963, the fourth of seven children. His father was a carpenter from a village. The family had no background in cricket, but his mother was a fan, and Ambrose played in his youth, primarily as a batsman. At school, he performed well academically, particularly in mathematics and French, and became an apprentice carpenter upon leaving at the age of 17. He briefly considered emigrating to America. At the time, his favourite sport was basketball, although he occasionally umpired cricket matches. Ambrose was not particularly tall until he reached his late teens, when he grew several inches to reach a height of . Around this time, his mother encouraged him to become more involved in cricket. Success as a fast bowler in a softball cricket match persuaded Ambrose to play in some club matches at the age of 20. He quickly attracted the attention of coaches and progressed to the St John's cricket team. Selected in the Leeward Islands competition, he took seven for 67 (seven wickets for 67 runs) for Antigua against St Kitts. He made his first-class debut for the Leeward Islands in 1985\u201386 and took four wickets in the game, but failed to retain his place the following year.\nA Viv Richards scholarship provided funding for him to play club cricket in England for Chester Boughton Hall Cricket Club in the highly rated Liverpool Competition during 1986 where he took 84 wickets at an average of 9.80. The following year, he returned to England to play for Heywood Cricket Club in the Central Lancashire League, for whom he took 115 wickets in the season; these experiences helped to improve his bowling technique.\nUpon his return to Antigua, Ambrose practised intensely, regained his place in the Leeward Islands team and, in the absence of leading bowlers Winston Benjamin and Eldine Baptiste with the West Indies team, became the main attacking bowler in the side. He was no-balled for throwing in the first match, which \"Wisden Cricketers' Almanack\" later attributed to confusion caused by his attribute of flicking his wrist prior to releasing the ball to impart extra pace, and there were no subsequent doubts about the legality of his bowling action. Retaining his place when the international bowlers returned, he took 35 wickets\u2014including 12 in a match against Guyana, of which nine were bowled\u2014in five matches in the competition. \"Wisden's\" report on the West Indian season said his performance was \"dominant\", although few had heard of him previously. Identifying his yorker as his most effective delivery, it noted that he \"never lost his pace, his accuracy, or his thirst for wickets\".\nInternational bowler.\nDebut and first years.\nWhen Pakistan toured the West Indies in 1988, Ambrose played in the One Day International (ODI) series, taking the place of the recently retired Joel Garner. He made his debut during the first match, on 12 March 1988 in Kingston, Jamaica, taking wickets with his third and ninth deliveries; he ended the innings with four for 39 from 10 overs. In the second match, he took four for 35 and followed with another two wickets in the third. West Indies won those first three matches to take the series, and Ambrose did not play in the fourth or fifth game. In the Test series which followed, Ambrose was less effective. In the first Test, he took two for 121 as West Indies lost at home for the first time in 10 years. \"Wisden\" noted that his debut was \"unimpressive\", but that he improved in the subsequent matches. He finished the series with seven wickets at an average of over 50 runs per wicket. Later that year, Ambrose was chosen to tour England. After appearing in early tour games, he was chosen for the first two ODIs, taking three wickets in total, but was omitted from the third. In the Test series, he played in all five matches to take 22 wickets at an average of 20.22; his best figures of four for 58 came in the fourth Test, in which he took seven wickets and was named man of the match. Writing in \"Wisden\", commentator Tony Cozier described Ambrose as \"a ready-made replacement for Garner\"; the amount of bounce he generated after the ball pitched \"made him a constant menace\".\nIn 1988\u201389, West Indies took part in an ODI tournament in Sharjah. Ambrose took 8 wickets, and was man of the match with four for 29 when West Indies defeated Pakistan in the final. From there, West Indies travelled to Australia for a series in which Ambrose was a dominant figure. The West Indies won the Test series 3\u20131, using controversial short-pitched bowling tactics. Ambrose's height made him difficult to play as he made the ball bounce more than other bowlers. Writing in \"Wisden\", John Woodcock noted: \"As in England, earlier in 1988, Ambrose's bowling was a telling factor\u00a0... [His] advance compensated for something of a decline in [Malcolm] Marshall's effectiveness\". In the first Test, he took seven wickets; in the second, he took five wickets in a Test innings for the first time with five for 72, and finished with eight in the game; and in the third, he took six wickets. His performances earned him man of the match award in the first and third games, and he ended the series with 26 wickets at an average of 21.46. He was West Indies' leading wicket-taker and headed the team bowling averages. In the ODI tournament that took place during the tour, West Indies defeated Australia in the final; Ambrose took 21 wickets in the series and twice took five wickets in an innings.\nSuffering from fatigue and illness, Ambrose was less successful later in 1989 when India toured the West Indies: he took just five wickets in the four-Test series at an average of 54.60.\nCounty cricketer and success against England.\nAmbrose made his debut in the English County Championship for Northamptonshire County Cricket Club in 1989\u2014the club signed him for the 1988 season but as he was playing in the West Indies touring team, he was unavailable that year. He took a wicket with his first delivery for the club, but was not particularly successful in the first part of the season; he settled down later and took 28 first-class wickets at 28.39 for Northamptonshire in nine games.\nEarly in 1990, England toured the West Indies and played four Tests\u2014a fifth was abandoned owing to rain. The visiting team dominated the first part of the series but West Indies eventually won 2\u20131. Ambrose was unfit for the first Test, which West Indies lost, and the first four ODIs, but returned to take four for 18 in an ODI organised to replace the rained-off second Test. After a drawn third Test, West Indies won the fourth game. The home captain, Viv Richards, set England 356 to win, but after losing early wickets, the English batsmen entered the last hour of the game with five wickets still to fall. Ambrose took the new ball and removed the last five batsmen for 18 runs in 46 deliveries, four of them leg before wicket. He finished with figures of eight for 45, ten wickets in the match, and West Indies levelled the series with a 164-run win. Ambrose was man of the match. He took six wickets in the final match, to finish the series with 20 wickets at 15.35, finishing top of the West Indies' averages. Ambrose, along with the other home bowlers, was described by Alan Lee in \"Wisden\" as an \"awesome handful in the latter part of the series\", and described his match-winning spell in the fourth Test as \"unforgettable\". Ambrose's other appearances for West Indies in 1989\u201390 were all in ODIs, although he did not take more than two wickets in any innings except in the match against England. He also took 22 first-class wickets for the Leeward Islands, and when he returned to England to play for Northamptonshire in 1990, took 58 first-class wickets to top the club's bowling averages. In one-day cricket for the county, he took 13 wickets while conceding an average of just 2.53 runs per over.\nLeading bowler in the world.\nSeries against Australia and England.\nWest Indies toured Pakistan in late 1990, and Ambrose topped the team's bowling averages in a three-match series which was drawn 1\u20131. He took 14 wickets at 17.07, but was overshadowed slightly by the performances of Ian Bishop. He played the first two ODIs, but missed the third after Pakistan had already won the series, and his best figures in the Tests came in the final match when he took five for 35. Then, when Australia toured West Indies from February 1991, Ambrose took 18 wickets in the five Tests at an average of 27.38. West Indies won the series 2\u20131, and Ambrose was fourth in the averages, but Tony Cozier observed in \"Wisden\" that the whole West Indies attack was dependable. Ambrose made an impression batting as part of a West Indian lower batting order which repeatedly added crucial runs during the series. He took part in two important partnerships to help his team recover from a difficult situation, and in the third match, he scored his only half-century in Tests. He also took 20 first-class wickets for Leeward Islands.\nWest Indies' next matches were in England. The Test series was drawn 2\u20132 and Ambrose was the team's leading wicket-taker with 28 (averaging 20.00); he also came top of the bowling averages. He had a particular impact on Graeme Hick, who was appearing in Test cricket for the first time, dismissing him six times in seven innings with short-pitched bowling. Accurate bowling was important in the series, played on a series of slow-paced pitches; according to Scyld Berry, writing in \"Wisden\", \"Since the 1988 tour, Ambrose had improved his control to the point where a batsman had to play almost every ball\u2014and not with a scoring stroke, either\". Berry suggests that West Indies may have won the series had Viv Richards used a different tactical approach with Ambrose's bowling. The bowler was not fully fit in the final Test, which may have affected the outcome. Berry describes \"Ambrose's rise to the status of a giant\u2014with the mannerism of celebrating each wicket by whirling his arms upwards, like a flock of doves taking to the air.\" Ambrose twice took five wickets in an innings\u2014his best figures were six for 52 in the first Test, when he twice took wickets with consecutive deliveries. Ambrose was named man-of the-match in the third Test and adjudged West Indies man-of-the-series. For his performances, Ambrose was named one of \"Wisden's\" Cricketers of the Year. The citation remarked on his consistency and stated: \"Ambrose has the ability to exert a debilitating psychological influence which so often precipitates a cluster of wickets after the initial breach has been made\u00a0... Moreover, he was arguably the essential difference between the two sides in what proved to be a zestful series.\" The West Indies wicket-keeper, Jeff Dujon, said: \"He is mature beyond his years, has pace, accuracy, heart and determination, plus, importantly, real pride in economical figures.\"\nVictory against South Africa.\nDuring the 1991\u201392 season, West Indies played mainly one-day cricket, taking part in tournaments in Sharjah\u2014where Ambrose took seven wickets, including an analysis of five for 53\u2014and Australia, and took part in the World Cup in Australia and New Zealand. In this tournament, Ambrose took seven wickets in seven games at an average of 33.57 and was the seventh most economical bowler among those who played more than one game. West Indies finished sixth in the qualifying table and failed to reach the semi-finals. Ambrose returned home to play twice for the Leeward Islands in January 1992.\nIn April 1992, South Africa toured West Indies for the first time, and played their first Test match for 22 years. Ambrose played in all three ODIs, all of which were won by West Indies. The Test match was the first time West Indies bowled under a new playing regulation which permitted only one bouncer per over; this seemed to affect the home bowlers, but Ambrose took two for 47 from 36 overs. South Africa began the final day of the match requiring 79 runs to win with just two batsmen out, but Ambrose and Courtney Walsh took the last eight wickets for 26 runs to bowl West Indies to a 52-run win. On a difficult pitch for batting, the ball bounced unevenly, and both bowlers concentrated on accuracy. Ambrose took six for 34 in the second innings, and was named joint man of the match; in just over 60 overs, he took eight for 81 in the match.\nReturning to play for Northamptonshire, he was less effective. Hampered by a knee injury, which necessitated surgery after the English season, and suffering from many dropped catches, he took 50 first-class wickets at an average of 26.14, but his performance compared unfavourably with other bowlers on the team. He was more effective in the NatWest Trophy, a one-day competition that Northamptonshire won that season, in which he conceded fewer than two runs per over across five games.\nSecond tour of Australia.\nThe West Indies toured Australia in 1992\u201393, recovering from losing the second Test to win the final two matches and take the series 2\u20131. The team also won the annual World Series Cup. In the first three Tests, Ambrose was hampered by pitches which did not suit his bowling and, according to Tony Cozier writing in \"Wisden\", was often unlucky when he bowled, although he took five for 66 in the first Test. In the final two Tests, he took 19 wickets. In the fourth he took ten wickets, including six for 74 in the first innings; in the second innings, he took three wickets in 19 deliveries and the West Indies won the match by one run. According to Cozier, the captains of both teams, Richie Richardson and Allan Border, \"paid tribute to the man who made the result possible: Ambrose consolidated his reputation as the world's leading bowler\". On the first day of the decisive final Test, Ambrose took seven wickets at the cost of one run from 32 deliveries and finished with figures of seven for 25. Cozier described it as \"one of Test cricket's most devastating spells\". West Indies won by an innings and Ambrose was named man of the series, having taken 33 wickets to equal the record in an Australia-West Indies Test series. He topped the West Indian bowling averages with an average of 16.42. Cozier described Ambrose's performance as \"instrumental in winning [the series]\" and his bowling as \"flawless\".\nIn the one-day tournament, Ambrose took 18 wickets at 13.38. He took eight wickets in the two-match final\u2014both games were won by the West Indies. In the first final, he took five for 32, driven to bowl with more hostility when the Australian batsman Dean Jones asked him to remove his white wristbands while bowling. He followed up with three for 26 in the second match to be named player of the finals.\nAfter a one-day tournament in South Africa, West Indies returned home for Test and ODI series against Pakistan. The ODI series was drawn, but the West Indies defeated Pakistan 2\u20130 in the Tests. Ambrose took nine wickets at 23.11 to be fifth in the team bowling averages. The \"Wisden\" report suggested that he was suffering from fatigue after his team's busy schedule, but although not at his best, he continued to take important wickets. For Northamptonshire in 1993, Ambrose was second in the team first-class bowling averages with 59 wickets at 20.45.\nHaving developed a slower ball, and using the yorker more sparingly, Ambrose took five wickets in three games as West Indies won an ODI tournament in Sharjah in late October and November 1993. The team competed in another tournament, this time in India, later that November. They finished as runners-up, and Ambrose took four wickets in five matches. Immediately following this, West Indies toured Sri Lanka to play three ODIs and a Test, a rain-ruined match in which Ambrose took three wickets.\nMore success against England.\nWhen he returned to the West Indies, Ambrose took 19 first-class wickets for the Leeward Islands at an average of 11.68, in his first appearances for the islands in two years, but as England arrived to tour West Indies, he complained of fatigue and there were rumours he planned to retire. He played in three times in the five-match ODI series, taking two wickets, and took a further two wickets in the first Test, which West Indies won. In \"Wisden\", Alan Lee described his performances at this time as \"lethargic\", and in the \"Guardian\", Paul Allott wrote that he bowled \"like a shadow\" owing to the effects of continuous cricket. Ambrose was ineffective at the start of the second Test, but recovered, ending the match with eight wickets; according to Lee, he \"struck the critical blows of the match\" in the first innings. In the third Test, played in Trinidad, he took five for 60 in England's first innings, but after the visiting team built a substantial lead, West Indies were bowled out to leave England needing 194 to win and an hour to bat on the fourth evening. Ambrose took six wickets to leave England 40 for eight at the close of play; the next morning, they were bowled out for 46 and Ambrose had figures of six for 24 in the innings and match figures of 11 for 84; he was named man of the match. Lee described the collapse as \"staggering\", and judged Ambrose bowling to be \"of the highest calibre\". He continued: \"He delivered one of the most devastating spells of even his career.\" Allott called it \"the definitive spell of fast bowling\".\nAmbrose took four wickets in the fourth Test, but West Indies lost the match, their first defeat in Barbados for 59 years, and Ambrose was fined \u00a31,000 by the match referee for knocking down his stumps in frustration when he was the last man out. He took one more wicket in the drawn final Test to finish the series with 26 wickets and top the West Indian bowling averages. Writing in \"Wisden\", Lee summarised Ambrose's performances: \"Ambrose was magnificent. He was deservedly named man of the series, not only for taking 26 wickets at an average of 19.96 apiece and winning the Trinidad Test single-handed, but for the more profound truth that West Indies now look to him whenever they need wickets\u00a0... [He] carried the attack alone\".\nAmbrose returned to play for Northamptonshire in 1994, but arrived later than scheduled. Claiming to need a rest, he missed his scheduled flight and arrived four days late. His absence may have contributed to Northamptonshire's elimination in the preliminary stages of the Benson and Hedges Cup. At the time, members of the county were unhappy with Ambrose's performances for the team; the committee fined him, and he expressed contrition. During the remainder of the season, he bowled extremely effectively to take 77 first-class wickets, the most for the club in 18 years, at an average of 14.45 to top the national bowling averages. According to Andrew Radd in \"Wisden\", the club were mollified by his success, but he wrote: \"Rarely in Northamptonshire's history have the performances and the personality of one cricketer dominated a season to the extent that Curtly Ambrose did in 1994.\" Ambrose missed the final match of the season with a shoulder problem.\nApparent decline.\nShoulder injury.\nAmbrose's shoulder injury, caused by his bowling workload, caused him to miss the West Indies' tour of India in the last three months of 1994. Although he returned to join the tour of New Zealand in early 1995, he did not reach his full bowling pace; he took one wicket in the ODI series and five in the two Test matches. He remained in the team when Australia toured the Caribbean later in 1995; the West Indies lost the Test series 2\u20131, their first defeat in a Test series since 1980. After taking two wickets in four ODIs, Ambrose took 13 wickets at 19.84 in the four-Test series to lead the West Indian averages. He took nine of these wickets in Trinidad during the third Test, when West Indies levelled the series having lost the first Test (the second was drawn). Bowling on a pitch that was extremely difficult for batting, and which both teams considered to be unsatisfactory, Ambrose took nine for 65 in the match and was named man of the match. During the game, Ambrose had to be pulled away from a verbal confrontation with Steve Waugh by the captain, Richardson. But outside of this match, the Australian team judged his bowling to have declined in pace following his shoulder injury, and that he lacked the variety to adapt to a different role. The West Indies' cricket manager, former Test bowler Andy Roberts, publicly claimed during the series that several of his team possessed \"attitude problems\", and complained that the fast bowlers would not follow his advice.\nDuring the tour of England which followed, Ambrose did not take a wicket in the three-match ODI series; according to journalist Simon Barnes, both Ambrose and the team lacked confidence following their defeat by Australia; he lacked rhythm and displayed signs of frustration and unhappiness. He was more effective in the Test series, and according to Tony Cozier in \"Wisden\", \"was always captable of a spell of incisive, quality bowling\". But he was affected by injury throughout the six-match series; he withdrew injured from the third Test having bowled fewer than eight overs and missed the fifth Test completely. Other bowlers in the team overshadowed Ambrose, and it was not until the final Test that he reached his most effective form in taking five for 96 in the first innings and seven wickets in the match. Waving to the crowd as he left the field on the final day with an injury, Ambrose seemed to indicate that he would not tour England again. He ended the series third in the bowling averages with 21 wickets at 24.09. But according to Cozier, the senior players in the team caused problems for the management, and when the players returned home, Ambrose and three other members of the team were fined 10 per cent of their tour fee\u2014in Ambrose's case, the fine was for \"general failings of behaviour and attitude\", and setting a bad example to younger team-mates.\nAlong with other senior players, Ambrose was rested from West Indies' next tour, an ODI tournament in October 1995, but he returned to play in a three-team ODI tournament in Australia in December and January. However, affected by the refusal of Brian Lara to tour following after being fined for his behaviour during the tour of England, the team failed to qualify for the final. Ambrose took ten wickets in the tournament, and took three wickets in consecutive innings; in the latter game, he was man of the match. West Indies were more successful in the World Cup in India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka which began in February. They reached the semi-finals, losing to Australia. Ambrose was man of the match with three for 28 in his team's opening match, and took ten wickets at 17.00 in the competition. He conceded an average of just three runs per over for the tournament, the second best among those who played in more than two games. In March, Ambrose played in a home series against New Zealand. In the five match ODI series, 10 wickets at 17.60, including four for 36 in the opening game. He took eight wickets in the two-Test series at an average of 20.50, leading the team averages, and took five for 68 in the second match. During the English cricket season, he returned to Northamptonshire and took 43 wickets in nine games to lead the national bowling averages, but he missed several matches with recurring injuries and his contract was not renewed for the following year. He was replaced by the much younger Mohammad Akram as overseas player.\nTeam in decline.\nFollowing Australia's victory in 1994\u201395, when West Indies toured Australia in 1996\u201397 the series was heavily publicised as a re-match. However, the visiting team were often ineffective, continuing a trend of decline, and depended heavily on their senior players, one of whom was Ambrose. He began the series poorly, continuing a pattern established in several preceding series, and critics suggested that he was no longer effective. After taking only three wickets in the first two Tests, both of which were lost by West Indies, Ambrose told his team-mates that he would take ten wickets in the third. On a difficult pitch for batting, he managed to take nine in the match, including three in the first hour of the game, despite struggling with a hamstring injury. West Indies won, and Ambrose was named man of the match, but he missed the fourth Test with an injury. Writing in \"Wisden\", Greg Baum suggested that Ambrose absence possibly affected the outcome of the series; Australia won easily to ensure they won the series. Ambrose returned for the final match, and on another difficult batting pitch, took five for 43 on the first day. West Indies won and Ambrose was again man of the match. He led the West Indies bowling averages with 19 wickets at 23.36, but had been the driving factor in West Indies' two wins. Ambrose also played in an ODI tournament during the tour of Australia, taking nine wickets at 27.33. Later in the season, between March and May 1997, India toured West Indies; Ambrose took ten wickets at 30.10 in the Test series, including five for 87 in the second Test, but was no longer the home team's most effective bowler. Then in June, Sri Lanka played a two-Test series, won 1\u20130 by West Indies. In the first, Ambrose took five for 37 in the first innings, and eight wickets in the game, to be named man of the match. This included his 300th wicket in Test matches; he was the 12th bowler, and fourth West Indian, to reach this landmark. Ambrose also played five ODIs during the West Indies home season, taking nine wickets.\nWest Indies' loss of form continued in late 1997 when they lost every international match during their tour of Pakistan. Ambrose played in two out of West Indies' three matches in an ODI tournament, taking one wicket, but his performance in taking one wicket in the two Test matches he played\u2014he missed the third match with injury\u2014prompted Fazeer Mohammed, writing in \"Wisden\", to describe Ambrose as \"a shadow of his former self\". Any danger that Ambrose might have retired after this series was forestalled when Brian Lara was appointed West Indies captain and immediately spoke to Ambrose and Walsh to ask them to continue in the team. When England toured the West Indies between January and April 1998, he took 30 wickets at 14.26 to top the bowling averages for the series. Many of the pitches during the tour were poor for batting, but Ambrose was very effective, particularly in the second, third and fourth Tests. In addition, he dismissed Mike Atherton, the England captain, six times in the series. Scyld Berry wrote in \"Wisden\" that Ambrose was \"back to something near his peak form\u00a0... [He] defied every prediction that he was finished after his tour of Pakistan.\" In the second Test, Ambrose took eight wickets; he conceded only 23 runs from 26 overs in the first innings and bowled a spell of five wickets for 16 runs from 47 deliveries in the second to complete figures of five for 52. Having won the second match, West Indies lost the third, but according to Matthew Engel, \"Ambrose's abiding power was the most constant feature of a fluctuating match\". His eight wickets in the game, including five for 25 in the first innings, took him past fifty Test wickets in Trinidad. He followed up with six wickets in West Indies victory in the fourth Test, taking four for 38 in the final innings. Tony Cozier wrote that Ambrose \"thundered in, arms and knees pumping like pistons, to generate all of his old pace.\" Following the Test series, which West Indies won 3\u20131, Ambrose played in the first three matches of the ODI series, and took three wickets.\nFinal years of career.\nAmbrose and Walsh missed the Mini World Cup ODI tournament in October 1998, in Ambrose's case following damage to his house caused by Hurricane Georges. They returned to the team for West Indies' first ever tour of South Africa, and Ambrose took 13 wickets in the series at an average of 23.76, but West Indies lost every game of the five-match series. In the first Test match, Ambrose and Walsh bowled effectively but lacked support from the other members of the attack. In the second Test, the pair again lacked support, but bowled well. The visiting team generally bowled too many bouncers to be effective, but Ambrose took eight wickets in the game, including six for 51 in the second innings. He was ineffective in the third Test, and despite bowling what Geoffrey Dean in \"Wisden\" called a \"superb opening spell\", could not prevent South Africa building up a large total against an attack lacking two other main bowlers. Ambrose pulled out of the attack himself later in the innings with a back injury, and did not bowl in the second innings. He missed the final Test with a hamstring injury. He was fit to play in the first six games of a seven-match ODI series, won 6\u20131 by South Africa, and took six wickets. In March 1999, West Indies then faced Australia in a home series, and contrary to expectations, West Indies drew the series 2\u20132. The outcome of the series was decided by a small group of players, including Ambrose, whom Mike Coward described in \"Wisden\" as \"five of the most distinguished cricketers of all time\". Ambrose took 19 wickets at 22.26, second to Walsh in the averages. His best figures came in the fourth and final Test, when he took five for 94 in the first innings and eight wickets in the match, but in the third match, although he only took four wickets in total, Coward described Ambrose as \"rampant\" and wrote that Steve Waugh, who scored 199, had to survive \"some extraordinary pace bowling from Ambrose\". He played four of the ODIs which followed in April, taking three wickets. The following month, Ambrose took part in the 1999 World Cup in England, and he was the second most economical bowler in the tournament in conceding an average 2.35 runs per over while taking seven wickets at 13.42. West Indies went out in the group stages, and Matthew Engel suggested that the bowlers were tired and judged the team \"outright failures\".\nFollowing the World Cup, the West Indian selectors chose to rest Ambrose, along with Walsh, from alternate ODI tournaments. Ambrose consequently missed two ODI series, but in October 1999 he played two ODIs in a series against Bangladesh in Dhaka and three in a tournament in Sharjah. In the latter competition, Ambrose conceded five runs from ten overs against Sri Lanka, the second most economical bowling figures from a full allocation of 10 overs in all ODIs. However, in all five matches, he took just one wicket, and he injured his elbow in Sharjah which forced him to miss West Indies' tour of New Zealand which began in December. Ambrose recovered in time to play for the Leeward Island in domestic cricket, taking 31 wickets at 12.03 in seven first-class games. When Zimbabwe toured the West Indies, he returned to the West Indies team to be named man of the match in the first Test\u2014Zimbabwe were bowled out for 63 when chasing 99 runs to win. He took a wicket in the second and final Test, and four wickets in six matches during a three-way ODI series also involving Zimbabwe and Pakistan. These were his final ODIs; in 176 matches, he took 225 wickets at an average of 24.12 and conceding 3.48 runs per over. Pakistan subsequently played a three-Test series against West Indies; in his last home series, Ambrose took 11 wickets at 19.90 to head the West Indian bowling averages.\nBefore his next series, a five-match series in England, Ambrose announced that he would retire after the final Test, although the president of the West Indies Cricket Board unavailingly tried to persuade him to continue for a little longer. West Indies lost the series 3\u20131, Tony Cozier, reviewing the series, suggested that only Ambrose and Walsh of the West Indian team emerged from the series with any credit. The other bowlers were ineffective, and Ambrose publicly commented during the series on the lack of support that he and Walsh received. He was second in the averages to Walsh with 17 wickets at 18.64. After taking just one wicket in the first Test, although Martin Johnson, in \"Wisden\", suggested he bowled very well, Ambrose took five wickets in the second Test but was again unlucky as the batsmen were beaten by many deliveries that he bowled. After this match, Ambrose returned to the West Indies having been rested from an ODI tournament involving England and Zimbabwe. He took four wickets in the first innings of both the third and fourth Tests, passing 400 wickets in the latter match. After he took three wickets in his final Test match, the crowd gave him a standing ovation and the England players formed a guard-of-honour when he came out to bat. In 98 Test matches, he took 405 wickets at an average of 20.99; according to Mike Selvey, in Swetes, his mother rang a bell each time he took a Test wicket.\nHaving retired from cricket, Ambrose has concentrated on music, playing with several bands. He played bass guitar with the reggae band Big Bad Dread and the Baldhead; one fellow band member was his former team-mate Richie Richardson. Ambrose was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Nation (KCN) by the Antiguan Barbudan government on 28 February 2014, alongside Richardson and Andy Roberts.\nStyle and technique.\nMike Selvey wrote in \"The Guardian\" in 1991 that Ambrose had \"the sort of easy, repetitive, no-sweat action which is the key to unyielding accuracy. There is no respite and all his other qualities are byproducts.\" At his peak, Ambrose did not rely on pronounced swing or seam movement of the ball. Instead, he repeatedly bowled into the same areas of the pitch and the height from which he delivered the ball made him extremely difficult to face. The ball bounced sharply after pitching, sometimes deviating slightly from a straight line after pitching on the seam, and frequently took the edge of the batsman's bat to be caught behind the wicket. His 1992 citation as \"Wisden\" Cricketer of the Year states that he had \"outright pace and he generates a disconcerting, steepling bounce from fuller-length deliveries\u00a0... His height and a slender, sinewy wrist contribute greatly to the final velocity [of the ball], the wrist snapping forward at the instant of release to impart extra thrust\". Writing in 2001 following Ambrose's retirement, Michael Atherton, whom Ambrose dismissed more often than any other batsman, said: \"At his best, there is no doubt that [Ambrose] moved beyond the fine line that separates the great from the very good. Quality bowlers essentially need two of three things: pace, movement and accuracy. Ambrose had all three.\"\nAmbrose's height, and the accuracy with which he bowled, made it difficult for batsmen to play forward to the ball; instead they were forced to play with their weight going back. His accuracy meant that he was effective if the pitch favoured batsmen. He bowled an effective yorker, and unlike other fast bowlers, used short-pitched deliveries sparingly, although he could bowl a hostile bouncer, and concentrated on bowling a full-length aimed at the wickets. Ambrose rarely engaged in verbal sparring with batsmen, although in later years he occasionally inspected the pitch in an area close to the batsman before an innings began and rubbed his hands to suggest that he would enjoy bowling there. He always aimed to concede as few runs as possible when bowling, and frequently berated himself when he offered an easy delivery from which to score. Following his dismissal of a batsman, Ambrose often celebrated by pumping the air with his fists. With Courtney Walsh, Ambrose developed a reputation for performing at his best when his team seemed likely to lose, and he often took wickets in clusters which devastated the opposition. In addition, he was often most effective against the leading batsmen on a team; he was also capable of exploiting vulnerabilities in the techniques of other batsmen.\nAs of 2024, Ambrose's 405 Test wickets place him 17th on the list of leading Test wicket-takers. Of those who have taken over 200 Test wickets, Ambrose has the third best bowling average behind Malcolm Marshall and Joel Garner, and has the eighth best economy rate; he rises to third if only those who have taken over 250 wickets are included. For much of his career, Ambrose was rated the world's best bowler in the ICC player rankings, first reaching the top in 1991; he rarely dropped below second and was ranked in the top 10 from 1989 until the end of his career. His highest rating of 912 in the rankings, which he achieved in 1994, is the equal sixth best rating of all time. In 2010, Ambrose was chosen by a panel of writers and experts as a member of ESPNcricinfo's \"All-Time XI\" for West Indies. The following year, he was inducted into the International Cricket Council Hall of Fame. During his playing days, Ambrose had a reputation for reticence, and rarely spoke to journalists or the opposition. His response to a request for an interview in 1991\u2014\"Curtly talks to no-one\"\u2014 became associated with him throughout his career, but he was more willing to talk to journalists after he retired.\nCoaching career.\nIn January 2022, Ambrose was appointed as bowling coach of Jamaica Tallawahs for CPL 2022 edition.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58100", "revid": "43660803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58100", "title": "Bard the Bowman", "text": "Tolkien character\nBard the Bowman is a character in J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Hobbit\". A man of Lake-town and a descendant of the ancient Lords of Dale, Bard manages to kill Smaug the dragon, after which he becomes king of Dale. Tolkien created the character specifically to kill Smaug, since none of the other protagonists of the story were able to fulfill this role. Bard the Bowman may have been inspired by the warrior Wiglaf in the Old English poem \"Beowulf\".\nFictional history.\nBard is a descendant of Girion, the last lord of the city of Dale, which had been destroyed by the dragon Smaug 171 years before the events of \"The Hobbit\", which takes place in year 2941 of the Third Age. He is the captain of a company of archers in Esgaroth (also known as Lake-town). His friends accused him of prophesying floods and poisoned fish, but they knew his worth and courage. He is described as tall and grim with black hair. When Smaug attacks Lake-town, Bard is the last of the archers to stand his post, but the dragon is immune to arrows. However, a thrush speaks to Bard, showing him the weak spot in the dragon's armour in the hollow under Smaug's left breast, which Bilbo had discovered in his conversation with Smaug. He fires his favourite shaft, the family heirloom \"Black Arrow\", and kills Smaug, who falls onto Lake-town, destroying it.\nAfter the dragon's death, Bard joins the survivors of the attack on Lake-town and discovers that they had thought him dead. The survivors receive assistance from the elves of Mirkwood, and together Thranduil and the able-bodied men of Lake-town travel to the Lonely Mountain to claim a share of the dragon hoard. In the absence of Thorin Oakenshield and his company, all believed to have been killed by the dragon, Bard has a rightful claim to the treasure as the heir of Girion, and also a charitable claim to alleviate the suffering of the people of Lake-town.\nHowever, at the Lonely Mountain, Bard discovers that Thorin Oakenshield, King under the Mountain, is very much alive, along with all his companions. Their response to Bard's claim is to barricade themselves inside the mountain, refusing to surrender any of the treasure under threat of war. To break the stalemate, Bilbo Baggins slips out of the mountain at night and offers the Arkenstone to Bard in order to put pressure on Thorin to make peace with the Elves and Men. However, Thorin is unwilling to share any of Smaug's treasure with an armed host at his gates, which causes the elves and men to prepare to besiege the mountain. To make matters worse, Thorin's cousin Dain Ironfoot arrives to reinforce Thorin's claim to their family home under the mountain. However, a large army of Goblins and Wargs arrives on the scene, forcing the three armies to unite to fight against them. Bard leads the men into battle, reinforced by the arrival of Beorn and the Eagles.\nAfter the death of Thorin in the Battle of Five Armies, Dain becomes King under the Mountain. He redeems the Arkenstone from Bard with a fourteenth of the treasure, which is used to re-establish Dale. Over the next three years, Bard rebuilds the city of Dale and becomes its ruler. The city begins to prosper again. Bard's reign lasts for thirty-three years. He is succeeded by his son Bain. His grandson, Brand, fought alongside Dain in the Battle of Dale against a horde of Sauron's Easterling invaders during the War of the Ring.\nCreation.\nDuring the drafting of \"The Hobbit\", Tolkien considered how Smaug should die and who would kill him. Tolkien's notes for chapter nine show him considering the option of Bilbo killing the dragon in his sleep, piercing his weak point with a lance, similar to the events in Jack the Giant Killer. This idea remained in his notes after the writing of chapter eleven, but once chapter twelve was complete, Tolkien penned \"Dragon killed in the Battle of the Lake\" in the margin of his notes.\nBard appears during the drafting for chapter thirteen, when it is said that he kills the dragon with his ancestor Girion's favourite Black Arrow. Tolkien's keeping Bard alive for the rest of the story significantly complicates it since, as the heir of Girion, Bard gives the inhabitants of Lake-town a legitimate claim to Smaug's treasure.\nAnalysis.\nAccording to John D. Rateliff, Bard may have been inspired by Wiglaf in the Old English poem \"Beowulf\", which inspired Tolkien with many elements in the final chapters of \"The Hobbit\". Like Bard, Wiglaf is introduced late into the story, is not named until late in the story, is the only one with enough courage to face a dragon and is of royal lineage. Rateliff believes that Bard is the first human character in Tolkien's work to experience a happy fate, unlike Beren, H\u00farin and T\u00farin Turambar. Rateliff sees Bard as a precursor and foreshadower of Aragorn: both restore their ancestor's kingdoms in all their glory.\nMarjorie Burns believes that Bard is a humble hero like Aragorn, Faramir and Gandalf, all brought into Tolkien's legendarium to replace the powerful unworthy, such as the mayor of Lake-town, Denethor, Boromir and Saruman. In his initial appearance, Bard is shown as a negative character who always sees the worst side of situations, but Sumner G. Hunnewell believes that Bard shows happiness and generosity after the destruction of Lake-town.\nAdaptations.\nFilm.\nIn the 1977 Rankin/Bass animated television musical, Bard was voiced by John Stephenson. \nIn Peter Jackson's \"The Hobbit\" film series, Welsh actor Luke Evans portrays Bard, appearing in the latter two films of the trilogy, ' (2013) and ' (2014). Evans was cast in June 2011. Bob Strauss of \"Los Angeles Daily News\" felt that Evans' portrayal managed to expand on the character, while Erik Kain of \"Forbes\" felt that his portrayal was \"solid\", but was \"never given quite enough breathing room\".\nOther.\nIn the 1968 BBC Radio adaptation, Bard was voiced by Peter Williams.\nBard is one of the cards in Iron Crown Enterprises's 1995 Middle-earth Collectible Card Game, which is illustrated by Angelo Montanini. \nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58101", "revid": "49887303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58101", "title": "Smaug", "text": "Dragon in J. R. R. Tolkien's 'The Hobbit'\nSmaug () is a dragon and the main antagonist in J. R. R. Tolkien's 1937 novel \"The Hobbit\", his treasure and the mountain he lives in being the goal of the quest. Powerful and fearsome, he invaded the Dwarf kingdom of Erebor 171 years prior to the events described in the novel. A group of thirteen dwarves mounted a quest to take the kingdom back, aided by the wizard Gandalf and the hobbit Bilbo Baggins. In \"The Hobbit\", Thorin describes Smaug as \"a most specially greedy, strong and wicked worm\".\nCritics have identified close parallels with what they presume are sources of Tolkien's inspiration, including the dragon in \"Beowulf\", who is provoked by the stealing of a precious cup, and the speaking dragon Fafnir, who proposes a betrayal to Sigurd. A further source may be Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's 1855 poem \"The Song of Hiawatha\", where Megissogwon, the spirit of wealth, is protected by an armoured shirt, but whose one weak spot is revealed by a talking bird. Commentators have noted Smaug's devious, vain, and proud character, and his aggressively polite way of speaking, like the British upper class.\nSmaug was voiced and interpreted with performance capture by Benedict Cumberbatch in Peter Jackson's film adaptations of \"The Hobbit\".\nDescription.\nDragons lived in the Withered Heath beyond the Grey Mountains. Smaug was \"the greatest of the dragons of his day\", already centuries old at the time he was first recorded. He heard rumours of the great wealth of the Dwarf-kingdom of Erebor, which had a prosperous trade with the Northmen of Dale. Smaug \"arose and without warning came against King Thr\u00f3r and descended on the mountain in flames\". After driving the Dwarves out of their stronghold, Smaug occupied the interior of the mountain for the next 150 years, guarding a vast hoard of treasure. He destroyed the town of Dale; the Men retreated to the Long Lake, where they built Lake-town of houses on stilts, surrounded by water to guard against the dragon.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n'The King under the Mountain is dead and where are his kin that dare seek revenge? Girion Lord of Dale is dead, and I have eaten his people like a wolf among sheep, and where are his sons' sons that dare approach me? I kill where I wish and none dare resist. I laid low the warriors of old and their like is not in the world today. Then I was but young and tender. Now I am old and strong, strong, strong, Thief in the Shadows!' he gloated. 'My armour is like tenfold shields, my teeth are swords, my claws spears, the shock of my tail a thunderbolt, my wings a hurricane, and my breath death!'\n\u2014J. R. R. Tolkien, \"The Hobbit\"\nGandalf realized that Smaug could pose a serious threat if used by Sauron. He therefore agreed to assist a party of Dwarves, led by Thr\u00f3r's grandson Thorin Oakenshield, who set out to recapture the mountain and kill the dragon. Assuming that Smaug would not recognize the scent of a Hobbit, Gandalf recruited Bilbo Baggins to join the quest.\nUpon reaching Erebor, the Dwarves sent Bilbo into Smaug's lair, and he was initially successful in stealing a beautiful golden cup as Smaug slept. Knowing the contents of the treasure hoard to the ounce, Smaug quickly realized the cup's absence upon awakening and searched for the thief on the Mountain. Unsuccessful, he returned to his hoard to lie in wait. The Dwarves sent Bilbo down the secret tunnel a second time. Smaug sensed Bilbo's presence immediately, even though Bilbo had rendered himself invisible with the One Ring, and accused the Hobbit (correctly) of trying to steal from him. During his discourse with the dragon, Bilbo noticed a small bare patch on Smaug's jewel-encrusted underbelly, and narrowly escaped. A thrush overheard Bilbo's account of the meeting, and learnt of the bare patch on Smaug's underside.\nStill enraged, Smaug flew south to Lake-town and set about destroying it. The townsmen's arrows and spears proved useless against the dragon's armoured body. The thrush told Bard the Bowman of Smaug's one weak spot, a bare patch on the dragon's belly. With his last arrow, Bard killed Smaug by shooting into this place.\nAnalysis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe dragon stopped short in his boasting. 'Your information is antiquated', he snapped. 'I am armoured above and below with iron scales and hard gems. No blade can pierce me.'\n'I might have guessed it', said Bilbo. 'Truly there can nowhere be found the equal of Lord Smaug the Impenetrable. What magnificence to possess a waistcoat of fine diamonds!'\n'Yes, it is rare and wonderful, indeed', said Smaug absurdly pleased. He did not know that the hobbit had already caught a glimpse of his peculiar under-covering on his previous visit, and was itching for a closer view for reasons of his own. The dragon rolled over. 'Look!' he said. 'What do you say to that?'\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0'Dazzlingly marvellous! Perfect! Flawless! Staggering!' exclaimed Bilbo aloud, but what he thought inside was: 'Old fool! Why, there is a large patch in the hollow of his left breast as bare as a snail out of its shell!'\n\u2014J.R.R. Tolkien, \"The Hobbit\"\nCharacter.\nTolkien made Smaug \"more villain than monster\", writes the author and biographer Lynnette Porter; he is \"devious and clever, vain and greedy, overly confident and proud.\" The fantasy author Sandra Unerman called Smaug \"one of the most individual dragons in fiction\". The Tolkien scholar Anne Petty said that \"it was love at first sight\", describing Smaug as \"frightening, but surprisingly knowable\".\nThe Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey notes the \"bewilderment\" that Smaug spreads: he is enchanted by gold and treasure, and those who come into contact with his powerful presence, what Tolkien describes as \"the effect that dragon-talk has on the inexperienced\", similarly become bewildered by greed. In Shippey's view, however, the most surprising aspect of Smaug's character is \"his oddly circumlocutory mode of speech. He speaks in fact with the characteristic aggressive politeness of the British upper class, in which irritation and authority are in direct proportion to apparent deference or uncertainty.\" In sharp contrast to this is his vanity in response to flattery, rolling over \"absurdly pleased\" as Tolkien narrates, to reveal his marvellously armoured belly. Shippey comments that such paradoxes, \"the oscillations between animal and intelligent behaviour, the contrast between creaking politeness and plain gloating over murder\" join to create Smaug's principal attribute, \"wiliness\".\nThe Christian commentator Joseph Pearce describes Smaug's weak spot as his Achilles heel, noting his boastful over-confidence in his own indestructibility, and seeing in the fact that the vulnerability is over his heart a sign that \"it is the wickedness of his heart which will lead to his downfall\". Pearce likens Smaug's pride to that of Achilles, whose pride leads to the death of his best friend, and of many Greeks; and to the cockerel Chauntecleer in Geoffrey Chaucer's \"The Nun's Priest's Tale\", where a boastful reply to the flattering fox causes the cockerel's fall.\nThe \"Beowulf\" dragon.\nFrom 1925 to 1945, Tolkien was a professor of English Literature at Oxford University. He was a prominent scholar of the Old English poem \"Beowulf\", on which he gave a lecture at the British Academy in 1936. He described the poem as one of his \"most valued sources\" for \"The Hobbit\". Many of Smaug's attributes and behaviour in \"The Hobbit\" derive directly from the unnamed \"old night-ravager\" in \"Beowulf\": great age; winged, fiery, and reptilian form; a stolen barrow within which he lies on his hoard; disturbance by a theft; and violent revenge on the lands all about, flying and attacking at night.\nThe scholars of English literature Stuart D. Lee and Elizabeth Solopova analyse the parallels between Smaug and the unnamed \"Beowulf\" dragon.\nFafnir.\nSmaug's ability to speak, the use of riddles, the element of betrayal, his enemy's communication via birds, and his weak spot could all have been inspired by the talking dragon Fafnir of the \"V\u00f6lsunga saga\". Shippey identified several points of similarity between Smaug and Fafnir.\nOld English spell.\nTolkien noted, in a joking letter that he was surprised to see published in \"The Observer\" in 1938, that \"the dragon bears as name\u2014a pseudonym\u2014the past tense of the primitive Germanic verb \"sm\u00fagan\", to squeeze through a hole: a low philological jest.\" Critics have explored what that jest might have been; an 11th-century medical text \"Lacnunga\" (\"Remedies\") contains the Old English phrase \"wid smeogan wyrme\", \"against a penetrating worm\" in a spell, which could also be translated \"against a crafty dragon\". The Old English verb meant \"to examine, to think out, to scrutinise\", implying \"subtle, crafty\". Shippey comments that it is \"appropriate\" that Smaug has \"the most sophisticated intelligence\" in the book. All the same, Shippey notes, Tolkien has chosen the Old Norse verb \"smj\u00faga\", past tense \"smaug\", rather than the Old English \"sm\u00e9ogan\", past tense \"smeah\"\u2014possibly, he suggests, because his enemies were Norse dwarves.\n\"The Song of Hiawatha\".\nTolkien's biographer John Garth notes the similarity between Smaug's death from Bard's last arrow and the death of Megissogwon in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's 1855 poem \"The Song of Hiawatha\". Megissogwon was the spirit of wealth, protected by an armoured shirt of wampum beads. Hiawatha shoots in vain, until he has only three arrows left. Mama the woodpecker sings to Hiawatha where Megissogwon's only weak point is, the tuft of hair on his head, just as Tolkien's thrush tells Bard where to shoot at Smaug.\nIllustrations.\nTolkien created numerous pencil sketches and two pieces of more detailed artwork portraying Smaug. The latter were a detailed ink and watercolour labelled \"Conversation with Smaug\" and a rough coloured pencil and ink sketch entitled \"Death of Smaug\". While neither of these appeared in the original printing of \"The Hobbit\" due to cost constraints, both have been included in subsequent editions, particularly \"Conversation with Smaug\". \"Death of Smaug\" was used for the cover of a UK paperback edition of \"The Hobbit\".\nAdaptations.\nRadio.\nFrancis de Wolff voiced the red dragon in the long-lost 1968 BBC radio dramatization. \nAnimated films.\nA dragon named 'Slag' features in Gene Deitch's brief 1967 animated film. \nRichard Boone voiced Smaug in the 1977 animated film by Rankin/Bass. Austin Gilkeson calls the film's depiction of Smaug \"distinctly feline\" as he has cat-like eyes and whiskers \"and a lush mane\". Gilkeson comments that the result does not resemble Western dragons, but that it works well, not least because Smaug's nature as an \"intelligent, deadly, greedy\" and lazy predator is in his view \"very cat-like\".\n\"The Hobbit\" (film series).\nSmaug was voiced and interpreted with performance capture by Benedict Cumberbatch in Peter Jackson's three-part adaptation of \"The Hobbit\". From the motion capture, Smaug's design was created with key frame animation. Weta Digital employed its proprietary \"Tissue\" software, which was honoured in 2013 with a \"Scientific and Engineering Award\" from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to make the dragon as realistic as possible. In addition, Weta Digital supervisor Joe Letteri said in an interview for \"USA Today\" that they used classic European and Asian dragons as inspirations to create Smaug. \"The Telegraph\" stated that Cumberbatch had \"the authority to make of Smaug a cunning nemesis\".\nIn the first film, \"\", the audience sees only his legs, wings, and tail, and his eye; the eye is showcased in the final scene of the film. Smaug is a topic of discussion among the White Council as Gandalf's reason to support Thorin Oakenshield's quest. \nSmaug appears in the second film, \". In an interview with Joe Letteri, Smaug's design was changed to the wyvern-like form shown in the film after the crew saw how Benedict Cumberbatch performed Smaug while moving around on all four limbs.\nIn \", Smaug attacks Lake-town. He is killed by Bard with a black arrow and his body falls on the boat carrying the fleeing Master of Lake-town. It is later revealed that Smaug's attack on Erebor was all part of Sauron's design, meaning that Smaug and Sauron were in league with each other.\nSmaug was considered one of the highlights of the second film of the series; several critics hailed him as cinema's greatest dragon. Critics also praised the visual effects company Weta Digital and Cumberbatch's vocal and motion-capture performance for giving Smaug a fully realized personality, \"hiss[ing] out his words with cold-blooded vitriol\".\nVideo games.\nIn the 2014 video game \"Lego The Hobbit\", the portrayal departs more from the book; rather than ever more closely simulating the book's characters, the scholar Carol L. Robinson notes, the technology has allowed new fiction to be created.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 2012, Smaug's wealth was estimated at $61 billion, placing him in the Forbes Fictional 15.\nIn 2014, Wellington International Airport installed a W\u0113t\u0101 Workshop statue of Smaug in their check-in hall to promote \"The Hobbit\" film series.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58102", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58102", "title": "Beorn", "text": "Fictional character created by J.R.R. Tolkien\nBeorn is a character created by J. R. R. Tolkien, and part of his Middle-earth legendarium. He appears in \"The Hobbit\" as a \"skin-changer\", a man who could assume the form of a great black bear. His descendants or kinsmen, a group of Men known as the Beornings, dwell in the upper Vales of Anduin, between Mirkwood and the Misty Mountains, and are counted among the Free Peoples of Middle-earth who oppose Sauron's forces during the War of the Ring. Like the powerful medieval heroes Beowulf and B\u00f6dvar Bjarki, whose names both mean \"bear\", he exemplifies the Northern courage that Tolkien made a central virtue in \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nAppearances.\nBeorn lives in a wooden house on his pasture-lands between the Misty Mountains and Mirkwood, to the east of the Anduin. His household includes an animal retinue (with horses, dogs, sheep, and cows); according to Gandalf, Beorn does not eat his cattle, nor hunt wild animals. He grows large areas of clover for his bees. Gandalf believes that Beorn is either a descendant of the bears who had lived in the Misty Mountains before the arrival of the giants, or a descendant of the men who had lived in the region before the arrival of the dragons or Orcs from the north.\nHe is of immense size and strength for a man and retains these attributes in bear-form. He has black hair (in either form) and a thick black beard and broad shoulders. While not a \"giant\" outright, Beorn's human form is of such great size that the three and a half foot tall Bilbo judges that he could have easily walked between Beorn's legs without touching his body. When Bilbo meets him, Beorn has \"great bare arms and legs with knotted muscles\", and wears \"a tunic of wool down to his knees.\" Beorn names the large rock by the River Anduin the Carrock; he had created the steps that led from its base to its flat top.\nBeorn receives Gandalf, Bilbo Baggins and thirteen Dwarves and aids them in their quest to reclaim their kingdom beneath the Lonely Mountain. He is convinced of their trustworthiness after going out and confirming their tale of encountering the Goblins of the Misty Mountains and Gandalf's slaying of their leader, the Great Goblin. As well as giving the group much-needed supplies and lodging, Beorn provides them with vital information about what path to take while crossing Mirkwood.\nLater, hearing of a vast host of Goblins on the move, Beorn arrives at the Lonely Mountain in time to strike the decisive blow in the Battle of Five Armies. In his bear form he kills the Goblin leader, Bolg, and his bodyguards. Without direction, the Goblin army is scattered, forming easy pickings for the other armies of Men, Elves, Dwarves, and Eagles. Beorn often leaves his home for hours or days at a time, for purposes not completely explained. It is said that \"Beorn indeed became a great chief afterwards in those regions and ruled a wide land between the mountains and the wood; and it is said that for many generations the men of his line had the power of taking bear's shape and some were grim men and bad, but most were in heart like Beorn, if less in size and strength.\"\nIn the years between the Battle of Five Armies and the War of the Ring, Beorn emerges to become a leader of the woodmen living between the Anduin river and the fringes of Mirkwood. As stated by Gl\u00f3in in \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", the Beornings \"keep open the High Pass and the Ford of Carrock.\" In the events leading up to the War of the Ring, the Beornings assist Aragorn, who was taking Gollum to Mirkwood so that Gandalf could find out what Gollum knew about the One Ring, to cross the Anduin.\nAnalysis.\nBear-like warrior.\nIn naming his character, Tolkien used \"beorn\", an Old English word for \"man\" and \"warrior\" (with implications of \"freeman\" and \"nobleman\" in Anglo-Saxon society). The name is cognate with the Scandinavian \"Bj\u00f6rn\" or Bj\u00f8rn, meaning \"bear\"; and the figure of Beorn can be related to the traditional Northern heroes B\u00f6dvar Bjarki and Beowulf, both of whose names also mean \"bear\". The name Beorn survives in the name of the Scottish town Borrowstounness, which is derived from the Old English \"Beornweardstun\" (\"the town with Beorn as its guardian\"). The Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey comments that Beorn exemplifies the heroic Northern courage that Tolkien later made a central virtue in his larger novel, \"The Lord of the Rings\", as he is ferocious, rude, and cheerful, characteristics that reflect his huge inner self-confidence. \nPaul W. Lewis, writing in \"Mythlore\", calls Beorn \"essentially a berserker in battle\", alluding to the Old Norse warriors who fought in a trance-like state of fury. The term means \"bear-shirt\"; its Old Norse form, \"hamrammr\", was taken by Tolkien to mean \"skin-changer\", and he gave Beorn this capability.\nDistinctive loner.\nBeorn's name for the large rock in the River Anduin, the Carrock, on the other hand, is not Germanic \u2013 whether Norse or English \u2013 but Brittonic, related to Welsh \"carreg\", \"a stone\". The medievalist Marjorie Burns notes the tension between \"British\" and Norse in Tolkien's handling of his materials. This is one of many instances of what Clyde S. Kilby called \"contrasistency\" \u2013 Tolkien's apparently intentional \"doubleness\" or switching between opposite viewpoints. Burns comments that Beorn's story and character embody tensions \"between forest and garden, home and wayside, comradeship and solitude, risk and security\" and in her view most strongly between \"freedom and obligation\", not to mention bear and man. Burns calls Beorn one of\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the most striking of Tolkien's individuals ... his innate, one-of-a-kind loners, the honorable isolationists, who dwell in secluded domains and ... are distinctive, free, self-reliant but respectful of other lives and hostile only to those deserving hostility.\nThe Tolkien scholar Justin Noetzel compares Beorn to Tom Bombadil in \"The Lord of the Rings\", another one-of-a-kind figure strongly attached to the place where he lives. Both have \"an intimate connection with the natural world\", using this to help their visitors, protecting them from local dangers, whether wolves and goblins, or Old Man Willow and the Barrow-wight.\nNorse and English.\nBurns writes that Beorn's character, too, contains a complex tension between Norse and English. As a skin-changer he is evidently pagan and Norse; but his vegetarianism, reluctance to use metal, home-loving nature and flower garden all look more compatible with Christianity and Englishness, without being those things specifically. Burns comments that he is thus\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBurns states that this blending of wild Norse with civilised English can be seen in Middle English literature such as \"Sir Gawain and the Green Knight\". Gawain meets a big rugged Beorn-like shape-changer, Bertilak (the Green Knight), who lives in a castle in an oak forest, and speaks with Christian courtesy. She calls \"Sir Gawain\"'s oaks \"entirely druidic\", suggesting Celtic mythology or Arthurian legend. But she notes that \"the oak was sacred to [the Norse god] Thor\", allowing Tolkien to assemble Celtic and Norse elements in his composite Middle-earth. Further, she writes, Beorn's home has an almost diagrammatic set of circles of \"mixed English and Nordic characteristics\": at the centre the Nordic hall; the \"Shire-like flower garden\" and courtyard; a wider yard (Norse \"gaard\") with its outbuildings; a \"high thorn-hedge\" in English style; a \"belt of tall and very ancient oaks\" (English or Norse) and fields of flowers; little English-like hills and valleys with oaks and elms; \"wide grass-lands, and a river running through it all\", which remind Burns of Iceland; and finally \"the mountains\", evidently Norse.\nAdaptations.\nFilm.\nThe Swedish actor Mikael Persbrandt portrays Beorn in Peter Jackson's ' and in its sequel \".\" In the DVD commentary, the production team explain that they normally ensured that all characters had accents from the British Isles, but they made an exception for Beorn by letting Persbrandt use his natural Swedish accent. They reasoned that Beorn should have a distinctive and foreign-sounding accent, since he is the last survivor of an isolated race. Jackson stated that many actors were auditioned for the role, but that Persbrandt captured Beorn's primitive energy. Richard Armitage, who played Thorin Oakenshield, said that Persbrandt had a fantastic voice, and that his accent was perfect for the role.\nGames.\nIn the 2003 video game adaptation of \"The Hobbit\", the original encounter with Beorn at his lodge is omitted. Nevertheless, he shows up at the Battle of Five Armies to kill Bolg. Beorn only appears in bear form in the game.\nThe Beornings appear as trainable units in \"\" (2003). The Beornings were added as a playable class to the massively multiplayer online role-playing game \"The Lord of the Rings Online\" in Update 15 (November 2014). One can play as a male or a female Beorning, and can transform into a bear after building up sufficient wrath during combat. Grimbeorn's Lodge in the Vales of Anduin is a starter area for the Beorning class, and Grimbeorn makes a brief appearance.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58106", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58106", "title": "Montgomery County, Indiana", "text": "County in Indiana, United States\nMontgomery County is a county in the U.S. state of Indiana. As of the 2020 United States census, it had a population of 37,936. Its county seat is Crawfordsville. The county is divided into eleven townships which provide local services. Montgomery County comprises the Crawfordsville, IN Micropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nEarly history and settlement.\nThe earliest known inhabitants of the area that would become Montgomery County were the Mound Builders, Native Americans who built large earthen mounds, two of which were assumed to have been constructed in southeastern Franklin Township. However, research in the 1990s determined that those mounds were probably natural rather than human-made formations. Subsequent Native American tribes occupied the area until as late as 1832.\nThe first white settler in the area was William Offield, earlier of Tennessee, who arrived in 1821 with his wife Jennie (n\u00e9e Laughlin) and one child and settled near the confluence of Offield Creek and Sugar Creek, about southwest of present Crawfordsville. The first land in the county to be purchased from the government was a tract in Scott Township sold to John Loop on July 23, 1822; many more tracts were entered in subsequent months, most in Union Township. The area's settlers mostly came from Kentucky and Ohio, with others arriving from Tennessee, Virginia and the Carolinas.\nMontgomery County was established by an act of the Indiana state legislature passed on December 21, 1822, which defined the county's boundaries and provided for the organization of its government. It was formed from parts of Wabash New Purchase attached to Parke and Putnam Counties. The county was named for Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed on December 31, 1775, while attempting to capture Quebec City in the Battle of Quebec. The first county election was held on March 1, 1823, with 61 voters participating to elect the first three county commissioners \u2014 William Offield, James Blevins and John McCollough \u2014 who then ordered that the first jail and courthouse be built.\nBeginning on December 24, 1824, a large land sale was held for several days at the United States Land Office on Crawfordville's North Water Street, during which a large number of the area's tracts were sold at auction. The money raised from the sale, mostly in the form of gold and silver, was packed into kegs, hauled by wagon to Louisville, carried by boat up the Ohio River, and eventually to Washington, D.C. Settlement increased substantially during the subsequent year.\nCourthouses.\nMontgomery County's first courthouse was ordered on June 28, 1823, to be made \"of good hewed logs... to be twenty-six feet long; two stories high, lower story nine feet from floor to joist; upper to be seven feet to roof\". Eliakam Ashton won the contract to construct the building on Crawfordville's Main Street; he finished it in August 1824 at a cost of $295. In 1825 a contract was issued to Henry Ristine to cut trees and pick up chips from under the courthouse so that \"hogs would not find a comfortable place in which to make their beds\".\nA more substantial structure was ordered in 1831, the contract for its construction being awarded to John Hughes for $3,420. The result was completed in 1833, a two-story, 40x40 foot brick building surmounted by a cupola, later supplemented by separate one-story buildings erected to the north and east as wings of the main structure. The building stood on the current public square until 1875, when it was removed.\nThe third and current Montgomery County courthouse was the first courthouse designed by George W. Bunting of Indianapolis; it is one of six of his Indiana courthouses still standing. Bunting had served as a colonel in the Confederacy during the Civil War before establishing himself in Indianapolis; General Lew Wallace, who was on the Union side during the War and was a resident of Montgomery County, spoke at the dedication of the cornerstone in 1875. The building was constructed by McCormack and Sweeney of Columbus, Indiana at a cost of $150,000, and was completed in 1876.\nThe cornerstone contains an embedded copper box of memorable items, including the key to the old courthouse and a Henry VIII coin.\nGeography.\nThe terrain of Montgomery County consists of low rolling hills, completely devoted to agriculture or municipal uses. It is drained by Sugar Creek, which runs toward the west-southwest through the center of the county. The county's highest point is the southeast county line below New Ross, at ASL.\nAccording to the 2010 census, the county has a total area of , of which (or 99.84%) is land and (or 0.16%) is water.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther unincorporated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransportation.\nAirport.\nMontgomery County is served by the Crawfordsville Regional Airport (KCFJ). Located four miles south-southwest of Crawfordsville, the airport handles some 6400 annual operations, nearly all general aviation (some air taxi). The airport has a 4,504-foot asphalt runway with approved GPS and NDB approaches (Runway 4-22).\nBridges.\nTwo historic covered bridges, the Darlington and the Deer's Mill, are in the county.\nClimate and weather.\nIn recent years, average temperatures in Crawfordsville have ranged from a low of in January to a high of in July, although a record low of was recorded in January 1994 and a record high of was recorded in June 1988. Average monthly precipitation ranged from in February to in June.\nGovernment.\nThe county government is a constitutional body granted specific powers by the Constitution of Indiana and the Indiana Code. The county council, the legislative branch of the county government, controls spending and revenue collection. Representatives are elected from county districts. The council members serve four-year terms and are responsible for setting salaries, the annual budget and special spending. The council also has limited authority to impose local taxes, in the form of an income and property tax that is subject to state level approval, excise taxes and service taxes.\nThe executive body of the county is made of a board of commissioners. The commissioners are elected county-wide, in staggered four-year terms. One commissioner serves as president. The commissioners execute the county's legislative acts, collecting revenue and managing the county's government.\nThe county maintains a small claims court that can handle some civil cases. The judge on the court is elected to a term of four years and must be a member of the Indiana Bar Association. The judge is assisted by a constable who is elected to a four-year term. In some cases, court decisions can be appealed to the state level circuit court.\nThe county has other elected offices including sheriff, coroner, auditor, treasurer, recorder, surveyor and circuit court clerk. Each is elected to four-year terms. Members elected to county government positions are required to declare party affiliations and be residents of the county.\nEach township has a trustee who administers rural fire protection and ambulance service, provides poor relief and manages cemetery care, among other duties. The trustee is assisted in these duties by a three-member township board. The trustees and board members are elected to four-year terms.\nMontgomery County is part of Indiana's 4th congressional district; Indiana Senate district 23; and Indiana House of Representatives districts 28 and 41.\nEducation.\nK-12 schools.\nSchool districts include: Crawfordsville Community Schools, North Montgomery Community School Corporation, and South Montgomery Community School Corporation.\nLibraries.\nMontgomery County is home to several Carnegie libraries. These libraries were built in the early 1900s by way of grants from Andrew Carnegie. All but one, the Crawfordsville District Public Library, is still in use today. The Crawfordsville Library was moved to a new location on South Washington Street in 2005 after the old building became too small for the growing collection. The old library building is now the home of the Carnegie Museum of Montgomery County, a museum dedicated to the history of Montgomery County. The other Carnegie libraries include the Waveland-Brown Township Public Library, the Darlington-Franklin Township Public Library, and the Linden-Madison Township Public Library. The Ladoga Clark Township Public Library is not housed in a Carnegie building.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 38,124 people, 14,979 households, and 10,342 families in the county. The population density was . There were 16,535 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 95.2% white, 0.9% black or African American, 0.6% Asian, 0.3% American Indian, 1.8% from other races, and 1.2% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 4.6% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 22.6% were German, 16.5% were American, 14.4% were Irish, and 12.1% were English.\nOf the 14,979\u00a0households, 33.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.2% were married couples living together, 10.4% had a female householder with no husband present, 31.0% were non-families, and 25.9% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 2.94. The median age was 39.4 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $47,697 and the median income for a family was $56,374. Males had a median income of $42,494 versus $30,280 for females. The per capita income for the county was $22,788. About 9.8% of families and 12.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.7% of those under age 18 and 5.0% of those age 65 or over.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58107", "revid": "39033590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58107", "title": "Montgomery County, Texas", "text": "County in Texas, United States\nMontgomery County is a county in the U.S. state of Texas. As of the 2020 census, the population was 620,443, and was estimated to be 749,613 in 2024. Its county seat is Conroe.\nMontgomery County is part of the Houston\u2013The Woodlands\u2013Sugar Land metropolitan statistical area.\nHistory.\nThe county was created by an act of the Congress of the Republic of Texas on December 14, 1837, and is named for the town of Montgomery.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.22%) is water. It is the 65th largest county in Texas by total area.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the fourth quarter of 2024, the median home value in Montgomery County was $371,646.\nAs of the 2023 American Community Survey, there are 235,474 estimated households in Montgomery County with an average of 2.77 persons per household. The county has a median household income of $97,266. Approximately 10.1% of the county's population lives at or below the poverty line. Montgomery County has an estimated 64.6% employment rate, with 37.9% of the population holding a bachelor's degree or higher and 90.2% holding a high school diploma.\nThe top five reported ancestries (people were allowed to report up to two ancestries, thus the figures will generally add to more than 100%) were English (73.0%), Spanish (21.3%), Indo-European (2.8%), Asian and Pacific Islander (1.9%), and Other (1.0%).\nThe median age in the county was 37.3 years.\n \n2023 estimate.\nAs of the 2023 estimate, there were 711,354 people and 235,474 households residing in the county. There were 280,357 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 85.0% White \"(58.8% NH White)\", 7.8% African American, 1.0% Native American, 3.8% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, _% from some other races and 2.3% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 28.3% of the population.\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 620,443 people, 219,796 households, and 164,212 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 238,489 housing units.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 455,746 people, 162,530 households, and 121,472 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 177,647 housing units at an average density of .\nIn 2010, the racial makeup of the county was 83.5% White, 4.3% Black or African American, 0.7% Native American, 2.1% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 7.0% from other races, and 2.3% from two or more races. 20.8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. At the 2020 census, the racial and ethnic makeup was 59.86% non-Hispanic white, 5.51% African American or Black, 0.30% Native American, 3.45% Asian alone, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 0.41% some other race, 3.92% multiracial, and 26.45% Hispanic or Latino American of any race.\nAt the 2010 census there were 162,530 households, out of which 36.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.50% were married couples living together, 10.60% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.70% had a male householder with no wife present, and 25.30% were non-families. 20.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.50% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.78 and the average family size was 3.22.\nIn the county, 27.60% of the population was under the age of 18, 8.00% from 18 to 24, 27.40% from 25 to 44, 26.60% from 45 to 64, and 10.40% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36.1 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.29 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.94 males.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, the median income for a household in the county was $50,864, and the median income for a family was $58,983. Males had a median income of $42,400 versus $28,270 for females. The per capita income for the county was $24,544. About 7.10% of families and 9.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 10.90% of those under age 18 and 10.10% of those age 65 or over.\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\nSeveral school districts operate public schools in the county:\nPrivate schools.\nThe closest Catholic high school is Frassati Catholic High School in north Harris County; the planners of the school intended for it to serve The Woodlands.\nColleges and universities.\nThe county is also home to two campuses of the Lone Star College System (formerly North Harris-Montgomery Community College District): Montgomery and The University Center.\nLone Star College's service area under Texas law includes, in Montgomery County: Conroe, Magnolia, Montgomery, New Caney, Splendora, Tomball, and Willis ISDs. The portion in Richards ISD is zoned to Blinn Junior College District.\nFormer colleges for black students in the pre-desegregation era included Conroe Normal and Industrial College and Royal College.\nPolitics.\nMontgomery County has given Republican candidates 70 percent or more of the vote since 2000, and a Democratic presidential candidate has not won the county since 1964, when native Texan and favorite son Lyndon Johnson won 60.9% of the county's vote.\nIn 2004, county voters gave 78.1 percent of their vote to Republican candidate George W. Bush, who served as Governor of Texas from 1995 to 2000. In 2008, 75.8% of the voters supported the Republican ticket of John McCain and Sarah Palin.\nIn 2016, Montgomery County was the only county in the United States where Republican nominee Donald Trump won against Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton by a margin of greater than 100,000 votes. In 2020, Trump won Montgomery County again, with an expanded margin of 119,000 votes. In 2024, Trump won Montgomery County once again, with another expanded margin of about 140,000 votes.\nLibraries.\nThe county operates the Montgomery County Memorial Library System. The public library system has been the subject of multiple book banning controversies, including a change to the book review process lobbied by local right-wing group Two Moms and Some Books that removed librarians from the review process. Under this new policy, any children books challenged but immediate be placed in the adult sections.\nHealthcare.\nIn 1938, the Montgomery County Hospital, a public institution, opened, the first public hospital in the county. It had 25 beds. The Montgomery County Hospital District opened in the 1970s, and the purpose of the district was making a new hospital, which opened in 1982 and replaced the former hospital.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nConroe-North Houston Regional Airport, a general aviation airport, is located in Conroe.\nThe Houston Airport System stated that Montgomery County is within the primary service area of George Bush Intercontinental Airport, an international airport in Houston in Harris County.\nToll roads.\nMontgomery County has several toll roads within its borders, most of which are operated as \"pass-through toll roads\" or shadow toll roads.\nThere are two \"true\" toll roads within Montgomery County. One toll road consists of a section of mainlanes of State Highway 249 between the Harris County line at Spring Creek to FM 1774 in Pinehurst and is signed as MCTRA 249 Tollway (maintained by the Montgomery County Toll Road Authority). North of Pinehurst, the toll road continues as the TxDOT maintained Aggie Expressway (SH 249 Toll) up north to FM 1774 near Todd Mission then as a two-lane freeway up to State Highway 105 near Navasota. The other toll road within Montgomery County (also maintained by TxDOT) is Grand Parkway (State Highway 99) between the Harris County line at Spring Creek, with an interchange at I-69/US 59 near New Caney, and reentering Harris County before continuing into Liberty and Chambers Counties.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58108", "revid": "1187642802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58108", "title": "Bilbo", "text": "Bilbo can refer to:\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58110", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58110", "title": "Montgomery County, North Carolina", "text": "County in North Carolina, United States\nMontgomery County is a rural county located in the southern Piedmont of the U.S. state of North Carolina. As of the 2020 census, the population was 25,751. Its county seat is Troy.\nHistory.\nThe first inhabitants of the area eventually comprising Montgomery County were Keyauwee and Cheraw Native Americans. The first European settlers were German and Scottish.\nMontgomery County was created in 1779 out of Anson County. It was named in honor of Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed in 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City, Canada. The law establishing the county also directed a group of commissioners to secure land near the center of the county for the construction of a country courthouse and prison. Many residents were dissatisfied with the location chosen, and after several years of demurring on a decision, a courthouse was erected in the community of Henderson, created at the confluence of the Yadkin and Uwharrie rivers in 1794. In 1816, the old courthouse was sold another was erected at the new community of Laurenceville. In 1841, the portion of Montgomery County west of the Yadkin/Pee Dee River became Stanly County. Two years later, commissioners were selected to move the courthouse to Montgomery's geographic center, and in 1844 Troy was established as the county seat.\nThe county's first paved roads were established in the 1920s. The Great Depression, which began in 1929, had a large adverse impact on the local agricultural and manufacturing industries. By 1933, 30 percent of local residents were unemployed.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.99%) is water. Montgomery is bordered by Davidson, Moore, Richmond, Randolph, and Stanly counties. Most of the county lies within the Yadkin-Pee Dee River Basin, with some smaller areas lying within the Cape Fear and Lumber River basins. The Uwharrie National Forest encompasses a large swathe of the county.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 25,751 people, 10,195 households, and 6,788 families residing in the county.\n2000 census.\nAt the 2000 census, there were 26,822 people, 9,848 households, and 7,189 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 14,145 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 69.07% White, 21.84% Black or African American, 0.40% Native American, 1.61% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 5.75% from other races, and 1.29% from two or more races. 10.43% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 9,848 households, out of which 31.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.60% were married couples living together, 12.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.00% were non-families. 24.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.70% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.080.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.90% under the age of 18, 9.00% from 18 to 24, 28.50% from 25 to 44, 23.60% from 45 to 64, and 14.00% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 102.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 100.60 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $32,903, and the median income for a family was $39,616. Males had a median income of $27,832 versus $21,063 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,505. About 10.90% of families and 15.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.50% of those under age 18 and 17.80% of those age 65 or over.\nLaw and government.\nGovernment.\nThe county's government is led by a board of commissioners, is responsible for levying taxes and appropriating county funds, issuing ordinances to regulate resident behavior, and overseeing county government administration. A county manager oversees most regular administrative activities and is responsible for executing the board's wishes.\nMontgomery County is a member of the Piedmont Triad Council of Governments, a regional voluntary association of 12 counties, It is located entirely in the North Carolina Senate's 29th district, the North Carolina House of Representatives' 67th district, and North Carolina's 8th congressional district. It is represented in the 118th United States Congress by Mark Harris(R).\nPolitics.\nAs of March 2022, 35.9 percent of registered voters in Montgomery County were Republicans, 34.1 percent were registered Democrats, and 29.4 percent were registered unaffiliated.\nEconomy.\nOne of the United States' largest lumber mills, a Jordan Lumber &amp; Supply facility, is located near Mt. Gilead.\nTransportation.\nInterstate 73/Interstate 74 runs through the eastern portion of Montgomery County. The main east-to-west road route which crosses the county is North Carolina Highway 27. Freight rail service is run by the Aberdeen, Carolina and Western Railway, which operates an east-to-west line through the county which connects to Charlotte and Raleigh, and another which runs south to the Southern Pines/Pinehurst region. Corporate and private airplane facilities are provided by the Montgomery County Airport, located in the eastern portion of the county.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThe public school system provides five elementary schools (Star, Mt. Gilead, Candor, Page Street, and Green Ridge), two middle schools (West Montgomery and East Montgomery and one high school (Montgomery Central, formed in 2020 by the merger of East Montgomery High and West Montgomery High). Higher education is provided by Montgomery Community College.\nNotable people.\n\u2022 Dusty Blake- MLB Pitching Coach\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58111", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58111", "title": "Dale", "text": "Dale, The Dale, Dales or The Dales may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58113", "revid": "188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58113", "title": "Wild Wolves", "text": ""}
{"id": "58114", "revid": "46810150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58114", "title": "Montgomery County, Pennsylvania", "text": "County in Pennsylvania, United States\nMontgomery County, colloquially referred to as Montco, is in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. As of the 2020 census, the population of the county was 856,553, making it the third-most populous county in Pennsylvania after Philadelphia and Allegheny counties and the most populous county in Pennsylvania without a major city.\nThe county seat and largest city is Norristown. The county is part of the Philadelphia\u2013Camden\u2013Wilmington PA-NJ\u2013DE\u2013MD metropolitan statistical area, known as the Delaware Valley, and marks the Delaware Valley's northern border with the Lehigh Valley region of eastern Pennsylvania.\nThe county borders Philadelphia, the nation's sixth-largest city, to its southeast, Bucks County to its east, Berks and Lehigh counties to its north, Delaware County to its south, and Chester County to its southwest.\nThe county was created on September 10, 1784, out of land originally part of Philadelphia County. The first courthouse was housed in Barley Sheaf Inn. The county is named after Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed on December 31, 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which was land and (0.9%) of which was water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, the county was 73.27% White (72.18% White, non-Hispanic), 9.55% Black or African American, 0.22% Native American or Alaskan Native, 7.94% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, and 2.87% some other race; 6.13% were two or more races. 6.36% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThe largest townships/boroughs in Montgomery County include:\nEconomy.\nMontgomery County is a suburb of Philadelphia, the nation's sixth most populous city. Many Montco residents work in the city, but the county is also a major employment center with large business parks in Blue Bell, Lansdale, Fort Washington, Horsham, and King of Prussia attracting thousands of workers from all over the region. The strong job base and taxes generated by those jobs have resulted in Montgomery County receiving the highest credit rating of 'AAA' from Standard &amp; Poor's, one of fewer than 30 counties in the United States with such a rating. In 2012, Moody's downgraded the general obligation rating to Aa1, and in 2018 the rating was revised back to Aaa.\nMajor employers include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPublic school districts.\nSchool districts:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrivate secondary schools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nUnder Pennsylvania law, five types of incorporated municipalities are listed: cities, boroughs, townships, home rule municipalities (which can include communities that bear the name \"Borough\" or \"Township\") and, in at most two cases, towns. These boroughs, townships, and home rule municipalities are located in Montgomery County:\nBoroughs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated areas.\nCensus-designated places.\nCensus-designated places are geographical areas designated by the United States Census Bureau for the purposes of compiling demographic data. They are not actual jurisdictions under Pennsylvania law. Other unincorporated communities, such as villages, may be listed here, as well.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEven though the historic village of Valley Forge, as well as the park, are partially located within Montgomery County, the modern village is in Chester County, PA\nOther communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation ranking.\nThe population ranking of the following table is based on the 2020 census of Montgomery County.\n\u2020 \"county seat\"\nTransportation.\nMajor roads and highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPublic transportation.\nThe county is served by the SEPTA, which include bus, commuter rail, and interurban rail services. Pottstown Area Rapid Transit (PART) also provides bus services around the Pottstown area in the western portion of the county.\nAirports.\nCommercial airline service is provided primarily by Philadelphia International Airport, one of the nation's largest commercial airports, located in Philadelphia and Delaware counties.\nOther public use airports include Heritage Field in Limerick Township, Wings Field in Blue Bell, and Pottstown Municipal Airport in Pottstown.\nClimate.\nThe majority of the county has a hot-summer humid continental climate (\"Dfa\"). In most southern areas of the county and along the Schuylkill River including Pottstown a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") exists. The hardiness zone is 7a for the majority of the county and 7b in most areas south of Interstate 276. 6b only continues to exist in some very small higher areas in the north. https://\nPolitics.\nAs of May 19, 2025, there are 614,908 registered voters in Montgomery County.\nMontgomery County historically was a stronghold for the Republican Party. The county was the only one carried by Barbara Hafer in the 1990 gubernatorial election over the incumbent governor, Bob Casey. However, the Democratic Party has made substantial gains in the county over the last quarter-century and gained the registration edge early in 2008.\nLike neighboring Bucks County, the county voted Democratic during the Civil War era, voting Democratic between 1856 and 1876, except in 1860 and 1872. Like most of Philadelphia's suburbs, the brand of Republicanism practiced in Montgomery County for much of the 20th century was moderate. As the national parties have polarized, the county's voters have increasingly supported Democrats at the national level. The county voted for the Republican presidential nominee in all but three elections from 1880 to 1988, that being in 1892, 1912 and 1964. However, Montgomery County residents have voted for the Democratic presidential nominee since 1992, with the margins progressively increasing between every election, except in 2012. In the 2020 election, Joe Biden became the first Democrat to obtain over 60% of the county's vote.\nDespite Donald Trump's victory in the state of Pennsylvania in the 2016 presidential election, Montgomery County was one of the few counties in Pennsylvania that swung in the Democratic presidential candidates' direction with Hillary Clinton winning Montgomery County with 58.87% of the vote, an improvement from Barack Obama's 56.6% vote share in 2012. In the 2016 U.S. Senate and Pennsylvania Attorney General elections, Montgomery County voted for Katie McGinty and Josh Shapiro, both Democrats.\nMost county-level offices were held by Republicans until after the 2007 election, when Democrats picked up control of five row offices. Democrats have also won several elections in the Pennsylvania General Assembly in recent years, including two GOP-leaning State House districts in 2004, the 148th with Mike Gerber and the 153rd with current Governor Josh Shapiro. Today, although the county is very Democratic at the national level, at the state and local level, it is not specifically partisan.\nIn the 2004 United States Senate election, Republican Arlen Specter won the county over Montco resident Joe Hoeffel, but Democrat Bob Casey, Jr. out-polled Rick Santorum in the 2006 Senate election. In 2006, Democrat Rick Taylor unseated incumbent Republican Eugene McGill in the 151st, although Taylor lost in 2010 to Republican Todd Stephens and, in 2008, Democrat Matthew Bradford unseated incumbent Republican Jay Moyer in the 70th. Six of the county's 12 state house seats and four of the county's eight senate seats are now held by Democrats. All four statewide Democratic candidates carried Montgomery in 2008, with Barack Obama receiving 60% of the county's vote. Barack Obama won Montgomery County in 2008 and 2012.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58115", "revid": "37273639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58115", "title": "Warg", "text": "Wolf in fantasy\nIn the philologist and fantasy author J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth fiction, a warg is a particularly large and evil kind of wolf that could be ridden by orcs. He derived the name and characteristics of his wargs by combining meanings and myths from Old Norse and Old English. In Norse mythology, a \"vargr\" (anglicised as warg) is a wolf, especially the wolf Fenrir that destroyed the god Odin in the battle of Ragnar\u00f6k, and the wolves Sk\u00f6ll and Hati, Fenrir's children, who perpetually chase the Sun and Moon. In Old English, a \"wearh\" is an outcast who may be strangled to death.\nThrough Tolkien's influence, wargs have featured in fantasy books by authors including George R. R. Martin, and in media such as video games and role-playing games.\nEtymology and origins.\nThe Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey states that Tolkien's spelling \"warg\" is a cross of Old Norse \"vargr\" and Old English \"wearh\". He notes that the words embody a shift in meaning from \"wolf\" to \"outlaw\": \"vargr\" carries both meanings, while \"wearh\" means \"outcast\" or \"outlaw\", but has lost the sense of \"wolf\". \nIn Old Norse, \"vargr\" is derived from the Proto-Germanic root reconstructed as \"*wargaz\", ultimately derived from the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) root reconstructed as \"*werg\u0311\u02b0-\" \"destroy\". \"Vargr\" (compare modern Swedish \"varg\" \"wolf\") arose as a non-taboo name for \"\u00falfr\", the normal Old Norse term for \"wolf\". \nShippey adds that there is also an Old English verb, \"awyrgan\", meaning both \"to condemn [an outcast]\" and \"to strangle [an outcast to death]\"; he adds that a possible further sense is \"to worry [a sheep], to bite to death\". He writes that \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tolkien's word 'Warg' clearly splits the difference between Old Norse and Old English pronunciations, and his concept of them \u2013 wolves, but not just wolves, intelligent and malevolent wolves \u2013 combines the two ancient opinions.\nIn Norse mythology, wargs are in particular the mythological wolves Fenrir, Sk\u00f6ll and Hati. Sk\u00f6ll and Hati are wolves, one going after the Sun, the other after the Moon.\nWolves served as mounts for more or less dangerous humanoid creatures. For instance, \"Gunnr's horse\" was a kenning for \"wolf\" on the R\u00f6k runestone. In the \"Lay of Hyndla\", the eponymous seeress rides a wolf. The j\u00f6tunn Hyrrokkin arrives at Baldr's funeral on a wolf.\nThe medievalist and Tolkien scholar Marjorie Burns writes that Tolkien uses the fact that wolves were among the Norse god Odin's war beasts \"in a particularly innovative way\". Odin kept two wolves, Freki and Geri, their names both meaning \"Greedy\"; and in the final battle that destroys the world, Ragnar\u00f6k, Odin is killed and eaten by the gigantic wolf Fenrir. Thus, Burns points out, wolves were both associates of Odin, and his mortal enemy. She argues that Tolkien made use of both relationships in \"The Lord of the Rings\". In her view, both the dark lord Sauron and the evil Wizard Saruman embody \"attributes of a negative Odin\". She points out that Saruman has wargs in his army, while Sauron uses \"the likeness of a ravening wolf\" for the enormous battering ram named Grond which destroys the main gate of Minas Tirith. On the other side, the benevolent Wizard Gandalf leads the fight against the wargs in \"The Hobbit\", using his ability to create fire, and understands their language. In \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", Gandalf again uses magic and fire to drive off a great wolf, \"The Hound of Sauron\", and his wolf-pack; Burns writes that the wolves' attempt \"to devour Gandalf hints at Odin's fate\", recalling the myth of Fenrir and Odin.\nJ. R. R. Tolkien.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n... and in the middle of the circle was a great grey wolf. He spoke to them in the dreadful language of the Wargs. Gandalf understood it. Bilbo did not, but it sounded terrible to him, and as if all their talk was about cruel and wicked things, as it was. Every now and then all the Wargs in the circle would answer their grey chief all together ...\nTolkien's description of wargs in \"The Hobbit\"\nIn J. R. R. Tolkien's books about Middle-earth, wargs are a malevolent wolf-like race. They are usually in league with the Orcs whom they permit to ride on their backs into battle, sharing any spoils. In \"The Hobbit\", they can speak: they plan their part in \"a great goblin-raid\" on the woodmen's villages.\nTolkien's wargs influenced the ten-year-old Rayner Unwin to write a positive review of \"The Hobbit\", with the words \"Bilbo Baggins was a hobbit who lived in his hobbit hole and \"never\" went for adventures, at last Gandalf the wizard and his dwarves persuaded him to go. He had a very ex[c]iting time fighting goblins and wargs.\" The review led his father, Stanley Unwin, to publish the book, still doubting its likely commercial success.\nPeter Jackson's film adaptations of Tolkien's \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\" extend the role of wargs as mounts for Orcs, battling the horse-riders of Rohan.\nThe critic Gregory Hartley treats wargs as \"personified animals\", along with the sentient eagles, giant spiders, Smaug the dragon, ravens and thrushes. Tolkien writes about their actions using verbs like \"[to] plan\" and \"[to] guard\", implying in Hartley's view that the monstrous wargs are \"more than mere beasts\", but he denies that they \"possess autonomous wills\". T. A. Leederman calls Tolkien's wargs \"a species of semi-intelligent but evil-aligned mount wolves ... on whom the orcs rode into battle\". He notes that they may have been derived, in the fiction, from First Age werewolves like Carcharoth, with their own \"proto-language\".\nIn \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\".\nIn the context of the tabletop game \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", \"wargs\" first appeared in Gary Gygax's \"Swords and Spells\" supplement (1976), but were renamed to \"worgs\" (along with balrogs to \"balors,\" ents to \"treants,\" and hobbits to \"halflings\") in response to a lawsuit from Tolkien's estate.\nIn the first edition of the \"Monster Manual\" (1977), \"dire wolf (worg)\" appears under the entry for \"wolf.\" In later editions, such as the 2014 edition, \"worg\" receives its own entry.\nThe worg of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" is a larger, more intelligent, and demonic version of the wolf, with a fiendish, demonic countenance and glowing eyes. They are neutral evil in alignment, and count as magical beasts. Despite their demonic traits, worgs tend to behave for the most part like regular wolves. They stalk around in dark forests and gloomy plains, hunting in packs (though they are also sometimes solitary). Lone worgs tend to hunt creatures smaller than themselves, while packs hunt large game. They attack with their teeth, and benefit from stealth and keen senses. Worgs bring gloom and menace wherever they go, and are said to have connections with demons. Worgs are sometimes enslaved by orcs, goblins, and other such creatures to act as mounts or as attack dogs. Sometimes they are specifically bred for these purposes.\nWorgs, unlike most animalistic creatures, can speak. They can speak their own language, as well as Goblin and Common.\nOther authors and media.\nIn George R. R. Martin's series of epic fantasy novels, \"A Song of Ice and Fire\", and the series' television adaptation, \"Game of Thrones\", Wargs are skinchangers who can enter the mind of animals (and in Bran Stark's case with Hodor, a person), see what they are seeing, and control their actions. In Wen Spencer's Tinker (Elfhome) series, wargs are large magically engineered wolves.\nSimilar Tolkien-based creatures appear in some fantasy video games, including \"The Lord of the Rings Online\", \"Age of Conan\", and \"World of Warcraft\", both as four-legged monsters, and as a race of anthropomorphic werewolves, the Worgen.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58116", "revid": "51063069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58116", "title": "Montgomery County, Ohio", "text": "County in Ohio, United States\nMontgomery County is in the southwestern part of the U.S. state of Ohio. At the 2020 census, the population was 537,309, making it the fifth-most populous county in Ohio. The county seat is Dayton. The county was named in honor of Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general, who was killed in 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City, Canada. Montgomery County is part of the Dayton, Ohio, Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nGeography.\nThe county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.6%) is water.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 535,153 people, 223,943 households, and 138,060 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 254,775 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 73.9% white, 20.9% black or African American, 1.7% Asian, 0.2% American Indian, 0.8% from other races, and 2.4% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 2.3% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 24.9% were German, 12.8% were Irish, 9.7% were American, and 8.8% were English.\nOf the 223,943 households, 29.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.6% were married couples living together, 15.3% had a female householder with no husband present, 38.4% were non-families, and 32.2% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.33, and the average family size was 2.94. The median age was 39.2 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $43,965, and the median income for a family was $56,559. Males had a median income of $45,680 versus $34,991 for females. The per capita income for the county was $24,828. About 11.7% of families and 15.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.7% of those under age 18 and 8.7% of those aged 65 or over.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 559,062 people, 229,229 households, and 146,935 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 248,443 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 76.57% White, 19.86% Black or African American, 0.23% Native American, 1.31% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.49% from other races, and 1.51% from two or more races. 1.27% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 229,229 households, out of which 29.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.30% were married couples living together, 13.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.90% were non-families. 30.40% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37, and the average family size was 2.96.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.70% under the age of 18, 9.70% from 18 to 24, 29.00% from 25 to 44, 22.90% from 45 to 64, and 13.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.30 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.60 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $40,156, and the median income for a family was $50,071. Males had a median income of $38,710 versus $27,297 for females. The per capita income for the county was $21,743. About 8.30% of families and 11.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.60% of those under age 18 and 8.20% of those age 65 or over.\nPolitics.\nMontgomery County has been a slightly Democratic-leaning swing county since the Civil War. After voting consistently Democratic in presidential elections from 1992 to 2012, Republican Donald Trump narrowly defeated Democrat Hillary Clinton in the county in 2016. The last Democrat to win the county by double digits was Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964, while the last Republican to do so was George H. W. Bush in 1988. Overall, the county long-term has been trending red since 1992.\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\nThe following public school districts are located partially or entirely in Montgomery County:\nThere is also a public independent (not a part of any school district) STEM school:\nPrivate schools.\nThe following private high schools are located in Montgomery County:\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTownships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "58117", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58117", "title": "Montgomery County, Virginia", "text": "County in Virginia, United States\nMontgomery County is a county located in the Valley and Ridge area of the U.S. state of Virginia. As population in the area increased, Montgomery County was formed in 1777 from Fincastle County, which in turn had been taken from Botetourt County. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 99,721. Its county seat is Christiansburg, and Blacksburg is the largest town. Montgomery County is part of the Blacksburg-Christiansburg metropolitan area. It is dominated economically by the presence of Virginia Tech, Virginia's third largest public university, which is the county's largest employer.\nBoard of Supervisors.\nThe Montgomery County Board of Supervisors sets the annual budget and tax rates, enacts legislation governing the county and its citizens, sets policies and oversees their implementation. There are seven supervisors; one is elected from each of the seven geographic districts. Terms are four years; three or four seats are up for re-election each odd year.\nHistory.\nMontgomery County was established on December 31, 1776, made from parts of Fincastle County, which was disbanded at this time and split into Montgomery, Washington, and Kentucky counties. Later, Montgomery lost land to form counties which now border it, including some counties which later formed West Virginia.\nThe county is named for Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed in 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City, Canada.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.6%) is water. The western part of the county is in the New River watershed. Montgomery County is one of the 423 counties served by the Appalachian Regional Commission, and it is identified as part of \"Greater Appalachia\" by Colin Woodard in his book \"American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America\".\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 99,721 people living in the county. The population density was .\n2010 Census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 94,392 people living in the county. 87.6% were White, 5.4% Asian, 3.9% Black or African American, 0.2% Native American, 0.8% of some other race and 2.1% of two or more races. 2.7% were Hispanic or Latino (of any race).\n2000 Census.\nAs of the 2000 United States census, there were 83,629 people, 30,997 households, and 17,203 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 32,527 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.00% White, 3.97% Asian, 3.65% Black or African American, 0.18% Native American, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.63% from other races, and 1.53% from two or more races. 1.58% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 30,997 households, out of which 25.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.80% were married couples living together, 7.60% had a female householder with no husband present, and 44.50% were non-families. 25.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 2.87.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 17.10% under the age of 18, 31.30% from 18 to 24, 25.60% from 25 to 44, 17.30% from 45 to 64, and 8.60% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 26 years. For every 100 females, there were 110.00 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 110.90 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $32,330, and the median income for a family was $47,239. Males had a median income of $33,674 versus $23,555 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,077. About 8.80% of families and 23.20% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.60% of those under age 18 and 8.80% of those age 65 or over.\nPolitics.\nDespite being in the Solid South, Montgomery County did not consistently back Democratic candidates in the 20th century, being consistently Republican due to Unionist sentiment in the area during the Civil War, though the presence of a major university in Virginia Tech helped make the county more competitive to the Democratic Party towards the end of that streak.\nIt was a bellwether county, backing the national winner in every election from 1980 to 2008. In 2012, the county backed the losing candidate by a very narrow margin of 103 votes. It voted against Republican Donald Trump in all three of his runs.\nCommunities.\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58119", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58119", "title": "Montgomery County, Alabama", "text": "County in the United States\nMontgomery County is a county located in the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2020 census, its population was 228,954, making it the seventh-most populous county in Alabama. Its county seat is Montgomery, the state capital. Montgomery County is included in the Montgomery Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nMontgomery County was established by dividing Monroe County on December 6, 1816, by the Mississippi Territorial Legislature. It is named for Lemuel P. Montgomery, a young U.S. Army officer killed at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend, the final battle of the Creek Indian war, which was waged concurrently with the War of 1812.\nThe city of Montgomery, which is the county seat, is named for Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed in 1775 while attempting to capture Quebec City, Canada.\nOver much of the 19th century great wealth was derived from the cotton crop, with the Civil War producing a temporary setback. More lasting trouble came in 1914 with the arrival of the boll weevil, which became very destructive to the cotton harvest from 1915 on. By the 1940s county farms earned more from cattle than cotton.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.0%) is water.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 228,954 people, 93,223 households, and 56,961 families residing in the county. The population density was There were 105,293 housing units.\n2010 census.\nThe 2010 census reported the following county population:\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 223,510 persons, 86,068 households, and 56,804 families in the county. The population density was . There were 95,437 housing units, at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county (including Hispanics in the racial counts) was 48.85% White, 48.58% Black or African American, 0.99% Asian, 0.25% Native American, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.35% from other races, and 0.94% from two or more races. Hispanics and Latinos, of any race, made up 1.19% of the population.\nThere were 86,068 households, 32.20% of which included children under the age of 18, 43.80% were married couples living together, 18.60% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.00% were non-families. Single-persons households were 29.50% of the total; 9.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.46. The average family size was 3.06.\nPersons younger than 18 were 25.80% of the population; those 18\u201324, 11.70%; 25\u201344, 29.80%; 45\u201364, 20.90%; and 65 and older, 11.80%. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.80 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 86.70 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $35,962, and the median income for a family was $44,669. Males had a median income of $32,018; females, $24,921. The per capita income for the county was $19,358. About 13.50% of families and 17.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 25.10% of those under age 18 and 13.70% of those 65 and older.\nPolitics.\nMontgomery County is a strongly Democratic county like most of the Black Belt in Alabama. The last Republican to win the county was George H.W. Bush in 1992.\nInfrastructure inside Montgomery County includes both Interstate 85 and 65 along with shipping hubs on the Alabama River and rail hubs located in the City of Montgomery. The Montgomery Regional Airport also serves as a major airport for the State of Alabama and the Southeastern US for passenger service, military aviation, and commercial aviation.\nEducation.\nMontgomery Public Schools operates public schools serving most of the county. However, Pike Road City School District operates public schools in Pike Road. Additionally Maxwell Air Force Base is zoned to Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA) schools. The DoDEA operates Maxwell Air Force Base Elementary/Middle School. For high school Maxwell AFB residents are zoned to Montgomery Public Schools facilities.\nThe Montgomery City-County Public Library operates public libraries.\nUniversities/Colleges include:\nCultural sites.\nMontgomery County is home to many cultural and historic sites including:\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58120", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58120", "title": "List of counties in Arkansas", "text": "There are 75 counties in the U.S. state of Arkansas. Arkansas is tied with Mississippi for the most counties with two county seats, at 10.\nFormer counties in Arkansas.\nLovely County.\nCreated on October 13, 1827, partitioned from Crawford County. The Treaty of Washington, 1828 ceded most of its territory to Indian Territory. Abolished October 17, 1828 with the remaining portion becoming Washington County.\nMiller County.\nCreated from Hempstead County. Most of its northern portion was in Choctaw Nation (now part of Oklahoma); rest of northern portion was dissolved into Sevier County in 1828. All of its southern portion was in Texas, and was nominally dissolved into Lafayette County in 1838. The present Miller County was created in 1874 from an area that was part of Lafayette County before the former Miller County was dissolved.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58122", "revid": "49889455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58122", "title": "Quebec French", "text": "Variety of French spoken in Quebec\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nQuebec French (), also known as Quebecer French or Quebecker French (, ), is the predominant variety of the French language spoken in Canada. It is the dominant language of the province of Quebec, used in everyday communication, in education, the media, and government.\nCanadian French is a common umbrella term to describe all varieties of French used in Canada, including Quebec French. Formerly it was used to refer solely to Quebec French and the closely related dialects spoken in Ontario and Western Canada, in contrast with Acadian French, which is spoken in some areas of eastern Quebec (Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula), New Brunswick, and in other parts of Atlantic Canada, as well as M\u00e9tis French, which is found generally across the Prairie provinces.\nThe term ' is commonly used to refer to Quebec working class French (when considered a basilect), characterized by certain features often perceived as phased out, \"old world\" or \"incorrect\" in standard French. , in particular, exhibits strong Norman influences largely owing to Norman immigration during the Ancien R\u00e9gime; people from Normandy were perceived as true Catholics and allowed to emigrate to the new world as an example of ideal French settlers. The Acadian French equivalent of ' is called \"Chiac\".\nHistory.\nThe origins of Quebec French lie in the 17th- and 18th-century regional varieties (dialects) of early modern French, also known as Classical French, and of other (especially Poitevin dialect, Saintongeais dialect, Norman and Picard) that French colonists brought to New France. Quebec French either evolved from this language base and was shaped by the following influences (arranged according to historical period) or was imported from Paris and other urban centres of France as a koin\u00e9, or common language shared by the people speaking it.\nNew France.\nUnlike the language of France in the 17th and 18th centuries, French in New France was fairly well unified. It acquired loan words, especially place names such as \"Qu\u00e9bec\", \"Canada\" and \"Hochelaga\", and words to describe the flora and fauna such as (cranberry) and (largemouth bass), from First Nations languages.\nThe importance of the rivers and ocean as the main routes of transportation also left its imprint on Quebec French. Whereas European varieties of French use the verbs and for \"to get in\" and \"to get out\" of a vehicle (lit.\u2009'to mount' or 'to dismount', as one does with a horse or a carriage), the Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois variety in its informal register tends to use and , a result of Quebec's navigational heritage.\nBritish rule.\nWith the onset of British rule in 1760, the French of Canada became isolated from that of Europe. This led to a retention of older pronunciations, such as for () and expressions that later died out in France. In 1774, the Quebec Act guaranteed French settlers as British subjects rights to French law, the Roman Catholic faith and the French language to appease them at a moment when the English-speaking colonies to the south were on the verge of revolting in the American Revolution.\n1840 to 1960.\nIn the period between the Act of Union of 1840 and 1960, roughly 900,000 French Canadians left Canada to emigrate to the United States to seek employment. The ones that returned, brought with them new words taken from their experiences in the New England textile mills and the northern lumber camps. As a result, Quebec French began to borrow from both Canadian and American English to fill accidental gaps in the lexical fields of government, law, manufacturing, business and trade.\n1960 to 1982.\nFrom the Quiet Revolution to the passing of the Charter of the French Language, the French language in Quebec saw a period of validation in its varieties associated with the working class while the percentage of literate and university-educated francophones grew. Laws concerning the status of French were passed both on the federal and provincial levels. The was established to play an essential role of support in language planning. Protective laws and distaste towards anglicisms arose at the same time to preserve the integrity of Quebec French, while Metropolitan French on the other hand does not have that same protective attitude and in recent decades has been more influenced by English, causing Quebec French not to borrow recent English loanwords that are now used in Metropolitan French.\nSocial perception and language policy.\nMutual intelligibility with other varieties of French.\nThere is a continuum of intelligibility between Quebec and European French; the two are most intelligible in their more standardized forms and pose more difficulties in their dialectal forms. The differences between both varieties are analogous to those between\nAmerican and\nBritish English even if differences in phonology and prosody for the latter are greater.\nQuebec's culture has only recently gained exposure in Europe, especially since the Quiet Revolution (). The difference in dialects and culture is large enough that speakers of Quebec French overwhelmingly prefer their own local television dramas or sitcoms to shows from Europe or the United States. Conversely, certain singers from Quebec have become very famous even in France, notably F\u00e9lix Leclerc, Gilles Vigneault, Kate and Anna McGarrigle, C\u00e9line Dion, and Garou. Some television series from Quebec such as and are also known in France. The number of such shows from France shown on Quebec television is about the same as the number of British shows on American television even though French news channels like France 24 and a francophone channel based in France, TV5 Qu\u00e9bec Canada, are broadcast in Quebec. Nevertheless, Metropolitan French series such as \"The Adventures of Tintin\" and are broadcast and known in Quebec. In certain cases, on French TV, subtitles can be added when barbarisms, rural speech and slang are used, not unlike cases in the US of a number of British programmes being shown with subtitles (notably those from Scotland).\nRelation to European French.\nHistorically speaking, the closest relative of Quebec French is the 17th and 18th-century koin\u00e9 of Paris.\nFormal Quebec French uses essentially the same orthography and grammar as the French of France, with few exceptions, and exhibits moderate lexical differences. Differences in grammar and lexicon become more marked as language becomes more informal.\nWhile phonetic differences also decrease with greater formality, Quebec and European accents are readily distinguishable in all registers. Over time, European French has exerted a strong influence on Quebec French. The phonological features traditionally distinguishing informal Quebec French and formal European French have gradually acquired varying sociolinguistic status, so that certain traits of Quebec French are perceived neutrally or positively by Quebecois, while others are perceived negatively.\nPerceptions.\nSociolinguistic studies conducted in the 1960s and 1970s showed that Quebecois generally rated speakers of European French heard in recordings higher than speakers of Quebec French in many positive traits, including expected intelligence, education, ambition, friendliness and physical strength. The researchers were surprised by the greater friendliness rating for Europeans, since one of the primary reasons usually advanced to explain the retention of low-status language varieties is social solidarity with members of one's linguistic group. Fran\u00e7ois Labelle cites the efforts at that time by the \"to impose a French as standard as possible\" as one of the reasons for the negative view Quebecois had of their language variety.\nSince the 1970s, the official position on Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois language has shifted dramatically. An oft-cited turning point was the 1977 declaration of the \"Association qu\u00e9b\u00e9coise des professeurs de fran\u00e7ais\" defining thus the language to be taught in classrooms: \"Standard Quebec French [\"le fran\u00e7ais standard d'ici\", literally, \"the Standard French of here\"] is the socially favoured variety of French which the majority of Francophone Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois tend to use in situations of formal communication.\" \nOstiguy and Tousignant doubt whether Quebecois today would still have the same negative attitudes towards their own variety of French that they did in the 1970s. They argue that negative social attitudes have focused instead on a subset of the characteristics of Quebec French relative to European French, and particularly some traits of informal Quebec French. Some characteristics of European French are even judged negatively when imitated by Quebecois.\nTypography.\nQuebec French has some typographical differences from European French. For example, in Quebec French a full non-breaking space is not used before the semicolon, exclamation mark, or question mark. Instead, a thin space (which according to \"Le Ramat de la typographie\" normally measures a quarter of an em) is used; this thin space can be omitted in word-processing situations where the thin space is assumed to be unavailable, or when careful typography is not required.\nSpelling and grammar.\nFormal language.\nA notable difference in grammar which received considerable attention in France during the 1990s is the feminine form of many professions that traditionally did not have a feminine form. In Quebec, one writes nearly universally or \"a researcher\", whereas in France, and, more recently, and are used. Feminine forms in as in are still strongly criticized in France by institutions like the , but are commonly used in Canada and Switzerland.\nThere are other, sporadic spelling differences. For example, the formerly recommended the spelling for what is in France \"tofu\". This recommendation was repealed in 2013. In grammar, the adjective \"Inuit\" is invariable in France but, according to official recommendations in Quebec, has regular feminine and plural forms.\nInformal language.\nGrammatical differences between informal spoken Quebec French and the formal language abound. Some of these, such as omission of the negative particle , are also present in the informal language of speakers of standard European French, while other features, such as use of the interrogative particle , are either peculiar to Quebec or Canadian French or restricted to nonstandard varieties of European French.\nLexis.\nDistinctive features.\nWhile the overwhelming majority of lexical items in Quebec French exist in other dialects of French, many words and expressions are unique to Quebec, much like some are specific to American and British varieties of English. The differences can be classified into the following five categories. The influences on Quebec French from English and Native American can be reflected in any of these five:\nThe following tables give examples of each of the first four categories, along with the Metropolitan French equivalent and an English gloss. Contextual differences, along with individual explanations, are then discussed.\nExamples of lexically specific items:\nExamples of semantic differences:\nExamples of grammatical differences:\nExamples multi-word or fixed expressions unique to Quebec:\nSome Quebec French lexical items have the same general meaning in Metropolitan French but are used in different contexts. English translations are given in parentheses.\nIn addition, Quebec French has its own set of swear words, or , distinct from other varieties of French.\nUse of anglicisms.\nOne characteristic of major sociological importance distinguishing Quebec from European French is the relatively greater number of borrowings from English, especially in the informal spoken language, but that notion is often exaggerated. The Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois have been found to show a stronger aversion to the use of anglicisms in formal contexts than do European francophones, largely because of what the influence of English on their language is held to reveal about the historically superior position of anglophones in Canadian society. According to Cajolet-Lagani\u00e8re and Martel, out of 4,216 \"criticized borrowings from English\" in Quebec French that they were able to identify, some 93% have \"extremely low frequency\" and 60% are obsolete. Despite this, the prevalence of anglicisms in Quebec French has often been exaggerated.\nVarious anglicisms commonly used in European French informal language are mostly not used by Quebec French speakers. While words such as and are commonly spoken in Europe, Quebec tends to favour French equivalents, namely: and , respectively. As such, the perception of exaggerated anglicism use in Quebec French could be attributed, in part, simply to the fact that the anglicisms used are different, and thus more noticeable by European speakers.\nFrench spoken with a large number of anglicisms may be disparagingly termed \"\". According to Chantal Bouchard, \"While the language spoken in Quebec did indeed gradually accumulate borrowings from English [between 1850 and 1960], it did not change to such an extent as to justify the extraordinarily negative discourse about it between 1940 and 1960. It is instead in the loss of social position suffered by a large proportion of Francophones since the end of the 19th century that one must seek the principal source of this degrading perception.\"\nBorrowings from Indigenous languages.\n, the Canadian French word for bullfrog, a frog species native to North America, originates from an Iroquois word.\n, the word for mosquito, originates from Tupi-guarani, that used to be spoken on the northern coasts of Brazil. It is thought that early French colonists adopted this word in the late 1600s after exchanges with explorers returning from South America.\n, a synonym for Cranberry, also originates from Iroquois.\nAdditional differences.\nThe following are areas in which the lexicon of Quebec French is found to be distinct from those of other varieties of French:\nRecent lexical innovations.\nSome recent Quebec French lexical innovations have spread, at least partially, to other varieties of French, for example:\nSociolinguistics.\nOn Twitter, supporters of the Quebec separatist party Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois used hashtags that align with the syntactic pattern found in hashtags used in French political discourse, rather than adopting the hashtags commonly used by other Canadian parties with similar political positions.\nPhonology.\nSociolinguistic status of selected phonological traits.\nThese examples are intended not exhaustive but illustrate the complex influence that European French has had on Quebec French pronunciation and the range of sociolinguistic statuses that individual phonetic variables can possess.\nSyntax.\nLike other varieties, Quebec French is characterized by increasingly wide gaps between its formal and informal forms. Notable differences include the generalized use of \"on\" (informal for \"nous\"), the use of single negations as opposed to double negations: \"J'ai pas\" (informal) vs \"Je n'ai pas\" (formal) etc. There are increasing differences between the syntax used in spoken Quebec French and that of other regional dialects of French. However, the characteristic differences of Quebec French syntax are not considered standard despite their high-frequency in everyday, relaxed speech.\nOne far-reaching difference is the weakening of the syntactic role of the specifiers (both verbal and nominal), which results in many syntactic changes:\nOther notable syntactic changes in Quebec French include the following:\nHowever, these features are common to all the basilectal varieties of \"fran\u00e7ais populaire\" descended from the 17th century koin\u00e9 of Paris.\nVerbs.\nIn their syntax and morphology, Quebec French verbs differ very little from the verbs of other regional dialects of French, both formal and informal. The distinctive characteristics of Quebec French verbs are restricted mainly to:\nReferences.\nInformational notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWebsites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58123", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58123", "title": "Quechan", "text": "Ethnic group and federally-recognized tribe in Arizona, United States\nThe Quechan (Quechan: \"Kwats\u00e1an\" 'those who descended'), or Yuma, are a Native American tribe who live on the Fort Yuma Indian Reservation on the lower Colorado River in Arizona and California just north of the Mexican border. Despite their name, they are not related to the Quechua people of the Andes. Members are enrolled in the Quechan Tribe of the Fort Yuma Indian Reservation. The federally recognized Quechan tribe's main office is located in Winterhaven, California. Its operations and the majority of its reservation land are located in California, United States.\nHistory.\nThe historic Yuman-speaking people in this region were skilled warriors and active traders, maintaining exchange networks with the Pima in southern Arizona, New Mexico, and with peoples of the Pacific coast.\nThe first significant contact of the Quechan with Europeans was with the Spanish explorer Juan Bautista de Anza and his party in the winter of 1774. Relations were friendly. On Anza's return from his second trip to Alta California in 1776, the chief of the tribe and three of his men journeyed to Mexico City to petition the Viceroy of New Spain for the establishment of a mission. The chief Palma and his three companions were baptized in Mexico City on February 13, 1777. Palma was given the Spanish baptismal name \"Salvador Carlos Antonio\".\nOnce the initial contact had been made, The Quechan people seemed inviting toward Juan Bautista de Anza. He promised them to set up a mission where all people would live together instead of in a hierarchy. Alongside the promise, de Anza gave Palma\u2019s people horses, steel weapons, clothes, and iron as a token of allegiance.\nThis allegiance would soon sour as the bureaucracy of the Spanish Empire would cause major delays to the construction of the missions. When the Spanish\u2019s first gifts arrived in 1780, they would be more of a bad omen than a sign of friendship as the livestock being herded to them would go and trample most of if not all the Quechan\u2019s crops. That year there was severe lack of rain thus forcing the Quechan to raid another nearby tribe known as the Maricopa.\nThe following year, two high members of the tribe were arrested for allegedly plotting to assassinate a high-ranking officer. One of the natives was placed in stocks to humiliate them and this caused Palma to finally turn his back on the Spanish.\nSpanish settlement among the Quechan did not go smoothly; the tribe rebelled from July 17\u201319, 1781 and killed four priests and thirty soldiers. They also attacked and damaged the Spanish mission settlements of San Pedro y San Pablo de Bicu\u00f1er and Puerto de Pur\u00edsima Concepci\u00f3n, killing many. The following year, the Spanish retaliated with military action against the tribe. After 1840, the Quechan people near La Frontera returned to their original ways of religious practice as soon as the mission priests left and no one replaced them.\nAfter the United States annexed the territories after winning the Mexican\u2013American War, it engaged in the Yuma War from 1850 to 1853 in response to a conflict between the Quechan and Jaeger's Ferry and the Glanton Gang, after the Quechan had established a rival ferry service on the Colorado River. During which, the historic Fort Yuma was built across the Colorado River from the present day Yuma, Arizona.\nLa Sierra de las Pintas.\nThe Sierra de las Pintas was a mountain range that most Spanish expeditions would actively avoid. Spanish explorers were able to see the range, but avoided exploring due to the Quechan informing them that it was uninhabitable and had no drinkable water sources.\nWhen the Spanish had the Yumans guide them through the Sierra de las Pintas, they would take the Spanish to an area with little to no water in order to discourage further exploration.\nThe Spanish later on attempted to explore the mountain range, searching for water in creative ways. Explorers would follow herds of Bighorn Sheep up the mountain or by chance would find small patches of vegetation pointing toward a hidden water source.\nThe Yuma Route.\nThe Yuma route was a trail that ran from Southern New Mexico and reached Chihuahua and Sonora. The trail branched out even further to reach the Los Angeles Basin, San Diego, Colorado River and the Gila River. This route was well established before the arrival of the Spanish, and used as a trade route amongst the tribes of the areas.\nAt first, the Spanish used minor portions of the trail. It was not until San Diego and Monterey were established that they needed a more reliable and faster path. The path was first walked by Sebastian Taraval, a Cochimi indigenous who fled from San Gabriel. Sebastian was then followed by Captain Juan Bautista de Anza. Anza was only able to follow Sebastian to the Imperial Valley Kamia village, where he lost Sebastian and was forced to reach the Quechan people on his own.\nPopulation.\nEstimates for the pre-contact populations of most native groups in California have varied substantially (see population of Native California). Alfred L. Kroeber (1925:883) put the 1770 population of the Quechan at 2,500. Jack D. Forbes (1965:341\u2013343) compiled historical estimates and suggested that before they were first contacted, the Quechan had numbered 4,000 or a few more.\nKroeber estimated the population of the Quechan in 1910 as 750. By 1950, there were reported to be just under 1,000 Quechan living on the reservation and more than 1,100 off it (Forbes 1965:343). The 2000 census reported a resident population of 2,376 persons on the Fort Yuma Indian Reservation. As of 2023, there are about 4,000 active members of the tribe living on or near the reservation.\nLanguage.\nThe Quechan language is part of the Yuman language family.\nThe Quechan tribe, in partnership with linguists, have created a fully detailed language guide. This guide includes sections about their alphabet along with the different words for actions, animals, the body, colors, directions, family and friends, house, money, nature and the environment, numbers, place names, plants, time, and shapes.\nFort Yuma Native American Reservation.\nThe Fort Yuma Indian Reservation is a part of the Quechan's traditional lands. Established in 1884, the reservation, at , has a land area of in southeastern Imperial County, California, and western Yuma County, Arizona, near the city of Yuma, Arizona. Both the county and city are named for the tribe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58125", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58125", "title": "United Kingdom/Basic Topics", "text": ""}
{"id": "58128", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58128", "title": "Ob (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "58129", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58129", "title": "Ferdinand Peroutka", "text": "Czech journalist and writer (1895\u20131978)\nFerdinand Peroutka (6 February 1895 \u2013 20 April 1978) was a Czech journalist and writer. A prominent political thinker and journalist during the First Czechoslovak Republic, Peroutka was persecuted by the Nazi regime for his democratic convictions and imprisoned at Buchenwald concentration camp. Following the 1948 coup by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, he emigrated to both the United Kingdom and later, the United States.\nLife.\nPeroutka was born to a Czech family in Prague in 1895. In 1913 he began his career as a journalist. After World War I, he became an editor-in-chief of a new newspaper \"Tribuna\" (\"Tribune\"). Some articles published in \"Tribuna\" were later incorporated into books \"Z den\u00edku \u017eurnalistova\" (\"Of the Journalist's Diary\") and above all \"Jac\u00ed jsme\" (\"What we are like\") \u2014in this book Peroutka mapped some myths about the Czech nation.\nIn 1924 Peroutka passed from \"Tribuna\" to \"Lidov\u00e9 noviny\" and founded\u2014thanks to Tom\u00e1\u0161 Masaryk's donation\u2014the magazine \"P\u0159\u00edtomnost\" (\"The Presence\"). As a commentator he became very influential, standing on the position of the \"Castle\" (group of President Masaryk) and criticizing both communists and the Right represented by the national-democratic party of the first Czechoslovak prime minister Karel Kram\u00e1\u0159. Peroutka expressed his political and other opinions also in several books: \"Boje o dne\u0161ek\" (\"Fights for Today\"), \"Ano a ne\" (\"Yes and No\"), \"Budov\u00e1n\u00ed st\u00e1tu\" (\"Building of the State\") and \"Osobnost, chaos a zlozvyky\" (\"Personality, Chaos and Bad Habits\"). As a representative of the Czech democratic tradition, Peroutka was arrested after the outbreak of World War II in 1939 and held in the Buchenwald concentration camp until 1945. He was offered freedom on the condition that he would serve as editor of a collaborationist \"P\u0159\u00edtomnost\"; he refused and spent the whole of the war in Buchenwald.\nAfter liberation, Peroutka became editor-in-chief of the newspaper \"Svobodn\u00e9 noviny\" and refounded his famous magazine, \"P\u0159\u00edtomnost\", under the name \"Dne\u0161ek\" (\"Today\"). The journal became prominent through its critical stance on postwar violence committed on the German minority and hundreds of alleged collaborators. Nonetheless it also fit the general pattern of the time by hosting illusory views of the Communist party underestimating its totalitarian pretensions. Peroutka wrote two dramas: \"Oblak a val\u010d\u00edk\" (\"The Cloud and the Waltz\") and \"\u0160tastlivec Sula\" (\"Sula the Happy Man\"). Political articles Peroutka issued in the book \"Tak nebo tak\" (\"One Way Or Another\").\nIn 1945\u20131946, Peroutka was also a member of the Provisional National Assembly for the Czechoslovak National Social Party. He sat in parliament until the parliamentary elections in 1946. The 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'\u00e9tat caused Peroutka to decide to emigrate. In 1951 he became a director of the Czech division of Radio Free Europe. The summa of his democratic life views was issued in 1959 as \"Democratic Manifesto\".\nPeroutka also became a novelist in exile. He re-wrote his drama to the novel of the same name. The second novel, \"Pozd\u011bj\u0161\u00ed \u017eivot Panny\" (\"The Later Life of the Virgin\"), deals with the idea of the rescue of Joan of Arc. Peroutka's last drama was named \"Kdybych se je\u0161t\u011b jednou narodil\" (\"If I Was Born One More Time\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58133", "revid": "45179772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58133", "title": "Cancellation (mail)", "text": "Postal marking to deface a stamp and prevent its re-use\nA cancellation (or cancel for short; ) is a postal marking applied on a postage stamp or postal stationery to deface the stamp and to prevent its reuse. Cancellations come in a huge variety of designs, shapes, sizes, and colors. Modern cancellations commonly include the date and post office location where the stamps were mailed, in addition to lines or bars designed to cover the stamp itself. The term \"postmark\" refers specifically to the part that contains the date and posting location, but the term is often used interchangeably with \"cancellation\" as it may serve that purpose. The portion of a cancellation that is designed to deface the stamp and does not contain writing is also called the \"obliteration\" or killer. Some stamps are issued pre-cancelled with a printed or stamped cancellation and do not need to have a cancellation added.\nHistory.\nThe first adhesive postage stamp was the Penny Black, issued in 1840 by Great Britain. The postal authorities recognized there must be a method for preventing reuse of the stamps and simultaneously issued handstamps for use to apply cancellations to the stamps on the envelopes as they passed through the postal system. The cancels were handmade and depicted a Maltese cross design. Initially, the ink used was red, but it was found that this could be cleaned off and the stamps reused, and so after a series of experiments, early in 1841 black cancelling ink was used, which was more permanent. The color of the stamps was also changed to red-brown so as to ensure that the cancellation showed clearly.\nBritain soon abandoned the Maltese crosses and in 1844 began to employ cancellations displaying numbers which referred to the location of mailing. A similar scheme was used for British stamps used abroad in its colonies and foreign postal services, with locations being assigned a specific letter followed by a number, such as A01 used in Kingston, Jamaica, or D22 for Venezuela.\nEarly cancellations were all applied by hand, commonly using hand stamps. Where hand stamps were not available, stamps often were cancelled by marking over the stamp with pen, such as writing an \"x\". Pen cancellations were used in the United States into the 1880s, and in a sense continue to this day, when a postal clerk notices a stamp has escaped cancellation and marks it with a ball point pen or marker.\nIn the early period of the issuance of postage stamps in the United States a number of patents were issued for cancelling devices or machines that increased (or were purported to increase) the difficulty of washing off and reusing postage stamps. These methods generally involved the scraping or cutting-away of part of the stamp, or perhaps punching a hole through its middle. (These forms of cancellation must be distinguished from perfins, a series of small holes punched in stamps, typically by private companies as an anti-theft device.)\nHigh speed cancellation machines were first used in Boston between 1880\u20131890 and subsequently throughout the country.\nToday, cancellations may either be applied by hand or machine. Hand cancellation is often used when sending unusually shaped mail or formal mail (e.g., wedding invitations) to avoid damage caused by machine cancellation.\nPostal meter stamps and similar modern printed to order stamps are not ordinarily cancelled by postal authorities because such stamps bear the date produced and can not readily be re-used.\nPictorial and special cancellations.\nThe United States Postal Service distinguishes between special cancellations which have a caption publicizing an event, and pictorial cancellations, which contain an image of some sort. Special cancellations are essentially a type of slogan cancellations. The USPS Building Bridges Special Postal Cancellation Series, a unique series that began in 1996, combines both a pictorial drawing and an event slogan in what USPS refers to as a cancellation series, even though it also contains a pictorial element.\nIn the United States, official pictorial cancellations are almost invariably applied at special \"stations\", i.e., post offices existing only for a limited time, usually one day, at special events, although there are frequently other pictorial cancellations that are not officially described as such\u2014they are among what are called special cancellations and are special die-hubs added to machine cancels, which usually contain merely a slogan but sometimes contain a picture.\nThere are a very few exceptions in which a particular post office uses a pictorial cancellation on all its mail. \nThe range of allowable subjects is very broad, and may include a variety of commercial tie-ins, such as to movie characters.\nCanada Post uses automated cancellations with computer-printed messaging. In this way, the corporation can automatically print promotional messages on each envelope while simultaneously cancelling the piece of mail. Messages change throughout the year, and include seasonal messages (\"Merry Christmas / Joyeux Noel\") and promotional messages (such as Canada Post's web address).\nOther post offices such as the Isle of Man Philatelic Bureau also create special pictorial cancellations as they did in 1985 to mark the anniversary of the aircraft Douglas DC-3. A special handstamp was created depicting a Dakota flying \"free\" and not \"boxed in\".\nCollectors.\nCancellations can affect the value of stamps to collectors, positively or negatively. Cancellations of some countries have been extensively studied by philatelists, and many stamp collectors and postal history collectors collect cancellations in addition to the stamps themselves.\nGeneralist stamp collectors usually prefer lightly cancelled stamps which have the postmark on a corner or small portion of the stamp without obscuring the stamp itself, which ordinarily are more valuable than heavily cancelled stamps. In order to get the postal clerk to cancel the stamps lightly, collectors may rubber-stamp or write \"philatelic mail\" on the envelope.\nCancellations may significantly affect the value of the stamps. Many stamps are rarer, and consequently much more expensive, in unused condition, such as the Penny Black, which in 1999, catalogued for $1,900 mint and $110 used. The reverse is true for some stamps, such as the hyperinflation stamps of Germany, which may be worth many times more if genuinely postally used. Where stamps are much more valuable in used condition than unused, it may be advisable to have such stamps expertised to confirm that the cancellation is genuine and contemporary.\nSome stamp collectors are interested in the cancellations themselves, on or off cover, of a particular country or issue, or collect a specific type of cancellation, such as fancy cancels. Birth date cancels are also collected. There have been many published studies of the cancellations of many countries, some of which are listed below. Collectors who are interested in the cancellations themselves prefer bold, readable cancellations. Cancellations also are an integral part of the collection of postal history.\nHistorically, collectors disliked pen cancels and removed many of them, making the stamp appear unused or to add a fake cancellation. Today, early United States pen cancelled stamps still are worth considerably less than examples with hand stamped cancels.\nCollectors generally view modern cancelled-to-order stamps or CTOs as philatelic junk, and they rarely have any significant value. Stamp catalogs commonly state whether their values for used stamps are for CTOs or for postally used examples. For example, the Scott Catalog used value listings for the German Democratic Republic are for CTOs from 1950 through mid-1990, over 2700 stamps.\nForgeries.\nForgers have not only manufactured stamps for the philatelic market but also added forged cancellations to those stamps. This was especially common in the late 19th century and the early 20th century, when huge numbers of inexpensive stamps were forged for the packet trade.\nForged cancellations have also been applied to genuine stamps if the stamps are worth much more postally used. In addition, if rare cancellations are desired by collectors, those cancellations have also been forged.\nCancellations may also be used to prove that certain philatelic items are genuine. For example, forgers have fabricated many supposedly-valuable postal covers by adding genuine stamps and forged postal markings to pre-stamp covers. A cover can be shown to be genuine if a genuine cancellation \"ties\" the stamp or stamps to the cover or, in other words, if a genuine cancellation runs continuously over the stamp and adjacent portion of the envelope. However, one still may need to rule out the possibility that the cancellation was added later. Similarly, stamps that were cut in parts and used for a portion of the full value as splits can be shown to have been so used only if a genuine cancel ties the stamp to the cover or piece of cover.\nCancellation symbols.\nThe Michel stamp catalog uses a set of symbols for different types of cancellations:\nPhilatelic dealers and auctioneers may use entirely different sets of symbols.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStudies of cancellations.\nGreat Britain, Ireland &amp; Commonwealth\nUnited States\nAustria-Hungary\nBelgium\nCanada\nFrance\nGerman States\nNetherlands\nLatin America\nElsewhere"}
{"id": "58134", "revid": "34387623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58134", "title": "Proterozoic", "text": "Geologic eon, 2500\u2013539 million years ago\nThe Proterozoic ( ) is the third of the four geologic eons of Earth's history, spanning the time interval from to Ma, and is the longest eon of Earth's geologic time scale. It is preceded by the Archean and followed by the Phanerozoic, and is the most recent part of the Precambrian \"supereon\".\nThe Proterozoic is subdivided into three geologic eras (from oldest to youngest): the Paleoproterozoic, Mesoproterozoic and Neoproterozoic. It covers the time from the appearance of free oxygen in Earth's atmosphere to just before the proliferation of complex life on the Earth during the Cambrian Explosion. The name \"Proterozoic\" combines two words of Greek origin: meaning \"former, earlier\", and , meaning \"of life\".\nWell-identified events of this eon were the transition to an oxygenated atmosphere during the Paleoproterozoic; the evolution of eukaryotes via symbiogenesis; several global glaciations, which produced the 300\u00a0million years-long Huronian glaciation (during the Siderian and Rhyacian periods of the Paleoproterozoic) and the hypothesized Snowball Earth (during the Cryogenian period in the late Neoproterozoic); and the Ediacaran period (635\u2013538.8\u00a0Ma), which was characterized by the evolution of abundant soft-bodied multicellular organisms such as sponges, algae, cnidarians, bilaterians and the sessile Ediacaran biota (some of which had evolved sexual reproduction) and provides the first obvious fossil evidence of life on Earth.\nThe Proterozoic record.\nThe geologic record of the Proterozoic Eon is more complete than that for the preceding Archean Eon. In contrast to the deep-water deposits of the Archean, the Proterozoic features many strata that were laid down in extensive shallow epicontinental seas; furthermore, many of those rocks are less metamorphosed than Archean rocks, and many are unaltered. Studies of these rocks have shown that the eon continued the massive continental accretion that had begun late in the Archean Eon. The Proterozoic Eon also featured the first definitive supercontinent cycles and mountain building activity (orogeny).\nThere is evidence that the first known glaciations occurred during the Proterozoic. The first began shortly after the beginning of the Proterozoic Eon, and evidence of at least four during the Neoproterozoic Era at the end of the Proterozoic Eon, possibly climaxing with the hypothesized Snowball Earth of the Sturtian and Marinoan glaciations.\nThe accumulation of oxygen.\nOne of the most important events of the Proterozoic was the accumulation of oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere. Though oxygen is believed to have been released by photosynthesis as far back as the Archean Eon, it could not build up to any significant degree until mineral sinks of unoxidized sulfur and iron had been exhausted. Until roughly 2.3\u00a0Ga, oxygen was probably only 1% to 2% of its current level. The banded iron formations, which provide most of the world's iron ore, are one mark of that mineral sink process. Their accumulation ceased after 1.9\u00a0Ga, after the iron in the oceans had all been oxidized.\nRed beds, which are colored by hematite, indicate an increase in atmospheric oxygen 2\u00a0Ga. Such massive iron oxide formations are not found in older rocks. The oxygen buildup was probably due to two factors: Exhaustion of the chemical sinks, and an increase in carbon sequestration, which sequestered organic compounds that would have otherwise been oxidized by the atmosphere.\nThe first surge in atmospheric oxygen at the beginning of the Proterozoic is called the Great Oxygenation Event, or alternately the Oxygen Catastrophe \u2013 to reflect the mass extinction of almost all life on Earth, which at the time was virtually all obligate anaerobic. A second, later surge in oxygen concentrations is called the Neoproterozoic Oxygenation Event, occurred during the Middle and Late Neoproterozoic and drove the rapid evolution of multicellular life towards the end of the era.\nSubduction processes.\nThe Proterozoic Eon was a very tectonically active period in the Earth's history. Oxygen changed the chemistry allowing for extensive geological changes. Volcanism was also extensive resulting in more geologic changes.\nThe late Archean Eon to Early Proterozoic Eon corresponds to a period of increasing crustal recycling, suggesting subduction. Evidence for this increased subduction activity comes from the abundance of old granites originating mostly after 2.6\u00a0Ga.\nThe occurrence of eclogite (a type of metamorphic rock created by high pressure, &gt;\u00a01\u00a0GPa), is explained using a model that incorporates subduction. The lack of eclogites that date to the Archean Eon suggests that conditions at that time did not favor the formation of high grade metamorphism and therefore did not achieve the same levels of subduction as was occurring in the Proterozoic Eon.\nAs a result of remelting of basaltic oceanic crust due to subduction, the cores of the first continents grew large enough to withstand the crustal recycling processes.\nThe long-term tectonic stability of those cratons is why we find continental crust ranging up to a few billion years in age. It is believed that 43% of modern continental crust was formed in the Proterozoic, 39% formed in the Archean, and only 18% in the Phanerozoic. Studies by Condie (2000) and Rino et al. (2004) suggest that crust production happened episodically. By isotopically calculating the ages of Proterozoic granitoids it was determined that there were several episodes of rapid increase in continental crust production. The reason for these pulses is unknown, but they seemed to have decreased in magnitude after every period.\nSupercontinent tectonic history.\nEvidence of collision and rifting between continents raises the question as to what exactly were the movements of the Archean cratons composing Proterozoic continents. Paleomagnetic and geochronological dating mechanisms have allowed the deciphering of Precambrian Supereon tectonics. It is known that tectonic processes of the Proterozoic Eon resemble greatly the evidence of tectonic activity, such as orogenic belts or ophiolite complexes, we see today. Hence, most geologists would conclude that the Earth was active at that time. It is also commonly accepted that during the Precambrian, the Earth went through several supercontinent breakup and rebuilding cycles (Wilson cycle).\nIn the late Proterozoic (most recent), the dominant supercontinent was Rodinia (~1000\u2013750\u00a0Ma). It consisted of a series of continents attached to a central craton that forms the core of the North American Continent called Laurentia. An example of an orogeny (mountain building processes) associated with the construction of Rodinia is the Grenville orogeny located in Eastern North America. Rodinia formed after the breakup of the supercontinent Columbia and prior to the assemblage of the supercontinent Gondwana (~500\u00a0Ma). The defining orogenic event associated with the formation of Gondwana was the collision of Africa, South America, Antarctica and Australia forming the Pan-African orogeny.\nColumbia was dominant in the early-mid Proterozoic and not much is known about continental assemblages before then. There are a few plausible models that explain tectonics of the early Earth prior to the formation of Columbia, but the current most plausible hypothesis is that prior to Columbia, there were only a few independent cratons scattered around the Earth (not necessarily a supercontinent, like Rodinia or Columbia).\nLife.\nThe Proterozoic can be roughly divided into seven biostratigraphic zones which correspond to informal time periods. The first was the Labradorian, lasting from 2.0\u20131.65\u00a0Ga. It was followed by the Anabarian, which lasted from 1.65\u20131.2\u00a0Ga and was itself followed by the Turukhanian from 1.2\u20131.03\u00a0Ga. The Turukhanian was succeeded by the Uchuromayan, lasting from 1.03\u20130.85\u00a0Ga, which was in turn succeeded by the Yuzhnouralian, lasting from 0.85\u20130.63\u00a0Ga. The final two zones were the Amadeusian, spanning the first half of the Ediacaran from 0.63\u20130.55\u00a0Ga, and the Belomorian, spanning from 0.55\u20130.542\u00a0Ga.\nThe emergence of advanced single-celled eukaryotes began after the Oxygen Catastrophe. This may have been due to an increase in the oxidized nitrates that eukaryotes use, as opposed to cyanobacteria. It was also during the Proterozoic that the first symbiotic relationships between mitochondria (found in nearly all eukaryotes) and chloroplasts (found in plants and some protists only) and their hosts evolved.\nBy the late Palaeoproterozoic, eukaryotic organisms had become moderately biodiverse. The blossoming of eukaryotes such as acritarchs did not preclude the expansion of cyanobacteria \u2013 in fact, stromatolites reached their greatest abundance and diversity during the Proterozoic, peaking roughly 1.2\u00a0Ga.\nThe earliest fossils possessing features typical of fungi date to the Paleoproterozoic Era, some 2.4\u00a0Ga; these multicellular benthic organisms had filamentous structures capable of anastomosis.\nThe Viridiplantae evolved sometime in the Palaeoproterozoic or Mesoproterozoic, according to molecular data.\nEukaryote fossils from before the Cryogenian are sparse, and there seems to be low and relatively constant rates of species appearance, change, and extinction. This contrasts with the Ediacaran and early Cambrian periods, in which the quantity and variety of speciations, changes, and extinctions exploded.\nClassically, the boundary between the Proterozoic and the Phanerozoic eons was set at the base of the Cambrian Period when the first fossils of animals, including trilobites and archeocyathids, as well as the animal-like \"Caveasphaera\", appeared. In the second half of the 20th century, a number of fossil forms have been found in Proterozoic rocks, particularly in ones from the Ediacaran, proving that multicellular life had already become widespread tens of millions of years before the Cambrian Explosion in what is known as the Avalon Explosion. Nonetheless, the upper boundary of the Proterozoic has remained fixed at the base of the Cambrian, which is currently placed at 538.8\u00a0Ma.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58135", "revid": "42214457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58135", "title": "583", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 583 (DLXXXIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. The denomination 583 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nMedicine.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58136", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58136", "title": "Galaxies", "text": ""}
{"id": "58137", "revid": "90542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58137", "title": "74 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 74 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lucullus and Cotta (or, less frequently, year 680 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 74 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nSpain.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58138", "revid": "27284222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58138", "title": "75 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 75 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Octavius and Cotta (or, less frequently, year 679 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 75 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nLiterature.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58139", "revid": "39471746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58139", "title": "77 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 77 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Brutus and Lepidus (or less frequently, year 677 AUC). The denomination 77 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nArmenia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58140", "revid": "30681431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58140", "title": "76 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 76 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Octavius and Curio (or, less frequently, year 678 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 76 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58141", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58141", "title": "72 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 72 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Publicola and Lentulus (or, less frequently, year 682 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 72 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nEurope.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58143", "revid": "49887303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58143", "title": "Thorin Oakenshield", "text": "Leader of the Dwarves in The Hobbit\nThorin Oakenshield (Thorin II) is a fictional character in J. R. R. Tolkien's 1937 novel \"The Hobbit\". Thorin is the leader of the Company of Dwarves who aim to reclaim the Lonely Mountain from Smaug the dragon. He is the son of Thr\u00e1in II, grandson of Thr\u00f3r, and becomes King of Durin's Folk during their exile from Erebor. Thorin's background is further elaborated in Appendix A of Tolkien's 1955 novel \"The Return of the King\", and in \"Unfinished Tales\".\nCommentators have noted that Thorin is Old Norse both in name and character, being surly, illiberal, independent, proud, aristocratic, and like all Dwarves greedy for gold. Tolkien was a Roman Catholic; from a Christian perspective, Thorin exemplifies the deadly sin of avarice, but is able to free himself from it at the time of his death. This deathbed conversion has been compared to the moral transformation of Ebenezer Scrooge in Charles Dickens's \"A Christmas Carol\".\nThorin appears in Peter Jackson's \"The Hobbit\" film series, in the Rankin/Bass animated version, and in the 1982 game of the same name.\nAppearances.\n\"The Hobbit\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Long ago in my grandfather Thror's time our family was driven out of the far North, and came back with all their wealth and their tools to this Mountain on the map.\"\n Thorin describes his background to Bilbo in ch. 1 \"An Unexpected Party\"\nIn \"The Hobbit\", Thorin, a Dwarf-King in exile and twelve other Dwarves visited Bilbo Baggins at his home in the Shire. The wizard Gandalf had advised Thorin and the other dwarves to hire Bilbo as a burglar to help them steal their treasure back from the dragon Smaug. Smaug had attacked the Dwarves's mountain, Erebor (also known as the Lonely Mountain), about 150 years before, and had taken both the mountain and the dwarves' treasure. Thorin was determined to get the treasure back. He especially wanted the Arkenstone, the Heart of the Mountain, which was an heirloom of the dwarves' Kingdom.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOthers took up the song and it rolled loud and high over the lake.\u00a0\u00a0\"The King beneath the mountains,\u00a0\u00a0The King of carven stone,\u00a0\u00a0The lord of silver fountains\u00a0\u00a0Shall come into his own!\"\nThe people of Lake-town welcome Thorin in ch. 10 \"A Warm Welcome\"\nOn their journey, the dwarves and Bilbo were taken captive by a band of trolls; Thorin was the only dwarf not to be taken unawares. After Gandalf rescued the company (letting dawn turn the trolls to stone), they opened the trolls' lair. Thorin found the Elven blade Orcrist in the trolls' cache. Later, Thorin used Orcrist to fight goblins in the tunnels beneath the Misty Mountains. While the rest of the company battled the goblins, Bilbo found a magic ring in a tunnel under the Misty Mountains and used it to escape from the creature Gollum and from the goblins. \nWhen the Dwarves were captured by the Wood-elves of Mirkwood, Thorin insisted that the others not disclose their quest to their captors. Bilbo, invisible with his magic ring, evaded capture and organised the company's escape, which they accomplished by floating in barrels out of the Wood-elves' fastness. When Thorin emerged from his barrel at Lake-town, he marched up to the town's leaders and identified himself as King Under the Mountain.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0\u00a0\"How came you by it?\" shouted Thorin in gathering rage.\u00a0\u00a0\"I gave it to them!\" squeaked Bilbo...\u00a0\u00a0\"You! You!\" cried Thorin, turning upon him and grasping him with both hands. \"You miserable hobbit! You undersized \u2013 burglar!\"\nThorin responds angrily to Bilbo's taking of the Arkenstone in ch. 17 \"The Clouds Burst\"\nWith provisions from Lake-town, Thorin led the company to Erebor. Seeing that Smaug was not there, the Dwarves reclaimed some of the treasure; Thorin gave Bilbo \"a small coat of mail\" made of \"mithril\" as the first installment of the payment due for his services. The Dwarves then learnt from the ancient raven Ro\u00e4c that Smaug had been killed: Bard the Bowman had managed to shoot Smaug as the dragon was in the process of destroying Lake-town. \nFaced with demands from Thranduil the Elvenking and Bard for a fair share of the treasure to be distributed to the Wood-elves and the men of Lake-town, Thorin refused to acknowledge their right to any of the hoard. He fortified the Mountain against his new rivals and sent to his cousin D\u00e1in Ironfoot for reinforcements. Thorin was furious when he discovered that Bilbo had stolen the Arkenstone to use as a bargaining chip, and he sent him from the Mountain. Conflict amongst the dwarves, men, and elves was averted only by an invasion of goblins and wargs, whereupon the Dwarves joined forces with the Wood-elves, the men of Lake-town, and the great eagles in the Battle of Five Armies. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"If more of us valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world. But, sad or merry, I must leave it now. Farewell.\"\nThorin repents on his deathbed, accepting Bilbo in ch. 18 \"The Return Journey\"\nDuring the battle, Thorin was mortally wounded, but he made his peace with Bilbo before he died. When Thorin died, he was buried with the Arkenstone. Orcrist was laid upon his tomb. The blade would glow blue if Orcs should approach; thus, they could not take the Mountain by surprise. Thorin was succeeded as leader of Durin's Folk by his cousin D\u00e1in.\n\"The Lord of the Rings\".\nPart III of Appendix A in \"The Return of the King\" gives an overview of the history of Durin's Folk and more of Thorin's background. When Thorin was 53 (young for a Dwarf), he marched with a mighty dwarf-army against the orcs of Moria. After the battle he led his people to establish a foothold in the Blue Mountains west of the Shire.\n\"Unfinished Tales\".\n\"Unfinished Tales\" elaborates on Thorin's reasons for accepting Bilbo into his company. As depicted in the story \"The Quest of Erebor\", Thorin met with Gandalf in Bree shortly before the quest began. Gandalf persuaded him that stealth, rather than force, was needed to infiltrate Erebor; they would therefore need a burglar. Gandalf feared that Sauron could use Smaug as a weapon, and was concerned that Thorin's pride and quick temper would ruin the mission to destroy the dragon. He thought that Bilbo would be a calming influence on Thorin, as well as a genuinely valuable addition to the company. Thorin, who did not think much of Hobbits, reluctantly agreed, calculating that Bilbo's presence would be a small price to pay for Gandalf's help.\nOrigins.\nTolkien adopted Thorin's names from the \"Dvergatal\", the list of Dwarves, in the Old Norse poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", which is part of the \"Poetic Edda\". The name \"Thorin\" (\"\u00deorinn\") appears in stanza 12, where it is used for a dwarf, and the name \"Oakenshield\" (\"Eikinskjaldi\") in stanza 13. The name \"Thorin\" ultimately derives from that of the Norse god Thor; it means \"darer\" or \"bold one\".\n The names also appear in Snorri Sturluson's \"Prose Edda\".\nDwarfs in Germanic folklore are skilled in metalwork, including making weapons, ships, rings and jewellery; they are knowledgeable, strong, and turn to stone in sunlight. They are characterised as having a strong association with gold, mining, wealth, living underneath mountains, and being long-lived, ungrateful, and getting into arguments about payment. The Tolkien critic Tom Shippey suggests that Tolkien's \"master-text\" for his Dwarves was the \"Hja\u00f0ningav\u00edg\". In that legend, the Dwarves are characterised by revenge, as in \"the long and painful vengeance of [Thorin's father] Thr\u00e1in for [Thorin's grandfather] Thr\u00f3r\", and Shippey argues that Tolkien chose these qualities for his Dwarves.\nAnalysis.\nShippey writes that in chapters 6\u20138 of \"The Hobbit\", Tolkien explores \"with delight that surly, illiberal independence often the distinguishing mark of Old Norse heroes\". The philosophers Gregory Bassham and Eric Bronson contrast the way Tolkien introduces hobbits, as \"plain, quiet folks who never do anything unexpected\", with how Thorin would have \"introduce[d] himself, with aristocratic titles and songs of ancient lineage. We do not open the book to read of the wrath of Thorin the way we learn of the wrath of Achilles in the opening lines of \"The Iliad\".\" \nThe Tolkien scholar Paul H. Kocher writes that Tolkien characterises Dwarves as having the \"cardinal sin of 'possessiveness'\", seen sharply when Bard the Bowman makes what Bilbo feels is a fair offer for a share of Smaug's treasure, and Thorin flatly refuses, his \"dwarfish lust for gold fevered by brooding on the dragon's hoard\".\nThe Jesuit John L. Treloar, writing in \"Mythlore\", suggests that Tolkien, a Catholic, explores the seven deadly sins in his Middle-earth writings. He states that in \"The Hobbit\", both Smaug and Thorin exemplify avarice, but respond to it differently. In his view, Smaug is evil and lets avarice destroy him, whereas Thorin, sharing the general weakness of Dwarves for this particular vice, nevertheless has sufficient good will to free himself of it at the time of his death.\nBassham and Bronson compare Thorin's deathbed \"conversion\" from his greed and pride, as he reconciles himself with Bilbo, to Ebenezer Scrooge's \"big moral transformation\" from grumpy miserliness to generosity and cheerfulness in Charles Dickens's 1843 novella \"A Christmas Carol\".\nAdaptations.\nIn the 1977 animated version of \"The Hobbit\", Thorin is voiced by Hans Conried.\nIn the 1985 Soviet television play \"The Hobbit\", Thorin was played by Anatoly Ravikovich.\nIn Peter Jackson's three-film adaptation of \"The Hobbit\" (2012\u20132014), Thorin is portrayed by Richard Armitage. The film adaptation adds to Thorin's quest an arch-enemy in the form of the villainous orc leader Azog, as well as a history of enmity with Thranduil, which began with a dispute between his grandfather Thr\u00f3r and the Elvenking over the White Gems of Lasgalen. In his review, Erik Kain from \"Forbes\" wrote that Thorin stood out as a remarkable character with shades of dark and light, at once heroic and stubborn to a fault.\nIn the 1982 game \"The Hobbit\" Thorin appears as an AI controlled character and one of his seemingly random actions (\"Thorin sits down and starts singing about gold\", which occurs when the player does nothing for a while) became quite famous. In the 2003 video game, Thorin is voiced by Clive Revill.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58145", "revid": "50948702", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58145", "title": "Cossacks", "text": "Ethnic group of current Ukraine and Russia\nThe Cossacks are a predominantly East Slavic, Eastern Christian people, originating from the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe of eastern Ukraine and southern Russia. Cossacks played an important role in defending the southern borders of Ukraine and Russia, countering the Crimean-Nogai raids, alongside economically developing steppe regions north of the Black Sea and around the Azov Sea. Historically, they were a semi-nomadic and semi-militarized people, who were allowed a great degree of self-governance in exchange for military service under the nominal suzerainty of various Eastern European states. Although numerous ethnic, linguistic and religious groups came together to form the Cossacks, most of them gradually coalesced and Slavicized, thereby adopting East Slavic culture, East Slavic languages and Eastern Orthodox Christianity.\nThe rulers of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and Russian Empire endowed Cossacks with certain special privileges in return for the military duty to serve in the irregular troops: Zaporozhian Cossacks were mostly infantry soldiers, using war wagons, while Don Cossacks were mostly cavalry soldiers. The various Cossack groups were organized along military lines, with large autonomous groups called hosts. Each host had a territory consisting of affiliated villages called stanitsas.\nThey inhabited sparsely populated areas in the Dnieper, Don, Terek, and Ural river basins, and played an important role in the historical and cultural development of both Ukraine and parts of Russia.\nThe Cossack way of life persisted via both direct descendants and acquired ideals in other nations into the twentieth century, though the sweeping societal changes of the Russian Revolution disrupted Cossack society as much as any other part of Russia; many Cossacks migrated to other parts of Europe following the establishment of the Soviet Union, while others remained and assimilated into the Communist state. Cohesive Cossack-based units were organized and many fought for both Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union during World War II.\nAfter World War II, the Soviet Union disbanded the Cossack units within the Soviet Army, leading to the suppression of many Cossack traditions during the rule of Joseph Stalin and his successors. However, during the Perestroika era in the late 1980s, descendants of Cossacks began to revive their national traditions. In 1988, the Soviet Union enacted a law permitting the re-establishment of former Cossack hosts and the formation of new ones. Throughout the 1990s, numerous regional authorities consented to delegate certain local administrative and policing responsibilities to these reconstituted Cossack hosts.\nBetween 3.5 and 5 million people associate themselves with the Cossack cultural identity across the world, even though the majority have little to no connection to the original Cossack people because cultural ideals and legacy changed greatly with time. Cossack organizations operate in Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Canada, and the United States.\nEtymology.\nMax Vasmer's etymological dictionary traces the name to the Tatar Turkic word , , in which \"cosac\" meant 'free man' but also 'conqueror'. The ethnonym \"Kazakh\" is from the same Turkic root.\nIn written sources, the name is first attested in the \"Codex Cumanicus\" from the 13th\u00a0century. In English, \"Cossack\" is first attested in 1590.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe origins of the Cossacks are disputed. Originally, the term referred to semi-independent Tatar groups (\"qazaq\" or \"free men\") who inhabited the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe, north of the Black Sea near the Dnieper River. By the end of the 15th century, the term was also applied to Slavic peasants who had fled to the devastated regions along the lower Dnieper and Don Rivers, where they established their self-governing communities. Until at least the 1630s, these Cossack groups remained ethnically and religiously open to virtually anybody, although the Slavic element predominated. There were several major Cossack hosts in the 16th century: near the Dnieper, Don, Volga and Ural Rivers; the Greben Cossacks in Caucasia; and the Zaporozhian Cossacks, mainly west of the Dnieper.\nIt is unclear when people other than the Brodnici and Berladnici (which had a Romanian origin with large Slavic influences) began to settle in the lower reaches of major rivers such as the Don and the Dnieper after the demise of the Khazars. Their arrival was probably not before the 13th century, when the Mongols broke the power of the Cumans, who had assimilated the previous population on that territory. It is known that new settlers inherited a lifestyle that long pre-dated their presence, including from that of the Cumans and the Circassian Kassaks. In contrast, Slavic settlements in southern Ukraine started to appear relatively early during Cuman rule, with the earliest, such as Oleshky, dating back to the 11th century.\nEarly \"Proto-Cossack\" groups are generally reported to have come into existence within what is now Ukraine in the 13th century as the influence of Cumans grew weaker, although some have ascribed their origins to as early as the mid-8th century. Some historians suggest that the Cossack people were of mixed ethnic origin, descending from East Slavs, Turks, Tatars, and others who settled or passed through the vast Steppe. Some Turkologists, however, argue that Cossacks are descendants of the native Cumans of Ukraine, who had lived there long before the Mongol invasion. Some other just state that first Cossacks were Turkic origin according to Serhii Plokhy the first Cossacks were of Turkic rather than Slavic stock. Christoph Baumer states that predecessor from the thirteenth century onward were mainly of Turkic stock, but from the sixteenth century the Cossack were increasingly joined by Slavs such as Russians and Poles, Baltic Lithuanians and people from today's Ukraine, thus becoming a Slav-Tatar ethnic hybrid. Hypothesis of the non-Slavic origin of the Zaporozhian, Don and Kuban Cossacks is rejected by the low levels to absence of Caucasian and Asian component in the gene pool of these groups, with exception of the Terek Cossacks who lean towards some North Caucasian groups, likely as a result of the assimilation of these populations into Terek Host.\nAs the grand duchies of Moscow and Lithuania grew in power, new political entities appeared in the region. These included Moldavia and the Crimean Khanate. In 1261, Slavic people living in the area between the Dniester and the Volga were mentioned in Ruthenian chronicles. Historical records of the Cossacks before the 16th century are scant, as is the history of the Ukrainian lands in that period.\nAs early as the 15th century, a few individuals ventured into the Wild Fields, the southern frontier regions of Ukraine separating Poland-Lithuania from the Crimean Khanate. These were short-term expeditions, to acquire the resources of what was a naturally rich and fertile region teeming with cattle, wild animals, and fish. This lifestyle, based on subsistence agriculture, hunting, and either returning home in the winter or settling permanently, came to be known as the Cossack way of life. Crimean\u2013Nogai slave raids in Eastern Europe caused considerable devastation and depopulation in this area. The Tatar raids also played an important role in the development of the Cossacks.\nIn the 15th century, Cossack society was described as a loose federation of independent communities, which often formed local armies and were entirely independent from neighboring states such as Poland, the Grand Duchy of Moscow, and the Crimean Khanate. According to Mykhailo Hrushevsky, the first mention of Cossacks dates back to the 14th century, although the reference was to people who were either Turkic or of undefined origin. Hrushevsky states that the Cossacks may have descended from the long-forgotten Antes, or from groups from the Berlad territory of the Brodnici in present-day Romania, then a part of the Grand Duchy of Halych. There, the Cossacks may have served as self-defence formations, organized to defend against raids conducted by neighbors.\nThe first international mention of Cossacks was in 1492, when Crimean Khan Me\u00f1li I Giray complained to Grand Duke of Lithuania Alexander Jagiellon that his Cossack subjects from Kiev and Cherkasy had pillaged a Crimean Tatar ship: the duke ordered his \"Ukrainian\" (meaning borderland) officials to investigate, execute the guilty, and give their belongings to the khan.76 Sometime in the 16th century, there appeared the old Ukrainian \"Ballad of Cossack Holota\", about a Cossack near Kiliya.\nIn the 16th century, these Cossack societies merged into two independent territorial organizations, as well as other smaller, still-detached groups:\nThere are also references to the less well-known Tatar Cossacks, including the Na\u011fayb\u00e4kl\u00e4r and Meshchera-speaking Volga Finns, of whom Sary Azman was the first Don ataman. These groups were assimilated by the Don Cossacks, but had their own irregular Bashkir and Meshchera Host up to the end of the 19th century. The Kalmyk and Buryat Cossacks also deserve mention.\nLater history.\nThe Zaporizhian Sich became a vassal polity of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth during feudal times. Under increasing pressure from the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, in the mid-17th century the Sich declared an independent Cossack Hetmanate. The Hetmanate was initiated by a rebellion under Bohdan Khmelnytsky against Polish and Catholic domination, known as the Khmelnytsky Uprising. Afterwards, the Treaty of Pereyaslav (1654) brought most of the Cossack state under Russian rule. The Sich, with its lands, became an autonomous region under the Russian protectorate.\nThe Don Cossack Army, an autonomous military state formation of the Don Cossacks under the citizenship of the Moscow State in the Don region in 1671\u20131786, began a systematic conquest and colonization of lands to secure the borders on the Volga, the whole of Siberia (see Yermak Timofeyevich), and the Yaik (Ural) and Terek Rivers. Cossack communities had developed along the latter two rivers well before the arrival of the Don Cossacks.\nBy the 18th century, Cossack hosts in the Russian Empire occupied effective buffer zones on its borders. The expansionist ambitions of the Empire relied on ensuring Cossack loyalty, which caused tension given their traditional exercise of freedom, democracy, self-rule, and independence. Cossacks such as Stenka Razin, Kondraty Bulavin, Ivan Mazepa and Yemelyan Pugachev led major anti-imperial wars and revolutions in the Empire in order to abolish slavery and harsh bureaucracy, and to maintain independence. The Empire responded with executions and tortures, the destruction of the western part of the Don Cossack Host during the Bulavin Rebellion in 1707\u20131708, the destruction of Baturyn after Mazepa's rebellion in 1708, and the formal dissolution of the Lower Dnieper Zaporozhian Host after Pugachev's Rebellion in 1775. After the Pugachev rebellion, the Empire renamed the Yaik Host, its capital, the Yaik Cossacks, and the Cossack town of Zimoveyskaya in the Don region to try to encourage the Cossacks to forget the men and their uprisings. It also formally dissolved the Lower Dnieper Zaporozhian Cossack Host, and destroyed their fortress on the Dnieper (the Sich itself). This may in part have been due to the participation of some Zaporozhian and other Ukrainian exiles in Pugachev's rebellion. During his campaign, Pugachev issued manifestos calling for restoration of all borders and freedoms of both the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and the Lower Dnieper (Nyzovyi in Ukrainian) Cossack Host under the joint protectorate of Russia and the Commonwealth.\nBy the end of the 18th century, Cossack nations had been transformed into a special military estate (\"sosloviye\"), \"a military class\". The Malorussian Cossacks (the former Registered Cossacks also known as \"Town Zaporozhian Host\") were excluded from this transformation, but were promoted to membership of various civil estates or classes (often Russian nobility), including the newly created civil estate of Cossacks.\nUnder a semi-feudal system retained until the end of the Russian Empire, Cossack families received grants of land which they retained free of taxation, provided that commitments to perform military service were met. Typically a single father or son from each registered family would serve several years full-time with his Host before becoming a reservist liable for recall only in the event of emergency or general mobilisation. When joining his regiment a Cossack was required to bring his own horse, uniform clothing, and basic weaponry (sabres and lances) although the larger and more affluent Hosts might assist in sourcing these essentials. The Russian central government provided only firearms plus food and accommodation. Lacking horses, the poor served in the Cossack infantry and artillery. In the navy alone, Cossacks served with other peoples as the Russian navy had no Cossack ships and units. Cossack service was considered rigorous.\nCossack forces played an important role in Russia's wars of the 18th\u201320th\u00a0centuries, including the Great Northern War, the Seven Years' War, the Crimean War, the Napoleonic Wars, the Caucasus War, many Russo-Persian Wars, many Russo-Turkish Wars, and the First World War. In the late 19th and early 20th\u00a0centuries, the Tsarist regime used Cossacks extensively to perform police service. Cossacks also served as border guards on national and internal ethnic borders, as had been the case in the Caucasus War.\nDuring the Russian Civil War, Don and Kuban Cossacks were the first people to declare open war against the Bolsheviks. In 1918, Russian Cossacks declared their complete independence, creating two independent states, the Don Republic and the Kuban People's Republic, and the revived Hetmanate emerged in Ukraine. Cossack troops formed the effective core of the anti-Bolshevik White Army, and Cossack republics became centers for the anti-Bolshevik White movement. With the victory of the Red Army, Cossack lands were subjected to decossackization and the Holodomor famine. As a result, during the Second World War, their loyalties were divided and both sides had Cossacks fighting in their ranks.\nFollowing the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Cossacks made a systematic return to Russia. Many took an active part in post-Soviet conflicts. In the 2002 Russian Census, 140,028\u00a0people reported their ethnicity as Cossack. There are Cossack organizations in Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Belarus, and the United States.\nUkrainian Cossacks.\nZaporozhian Cossacks.\nThe Zaporozhian Cossacks lived on the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe below the Dnieper Rapids (Ukrainian: \"za porohamy\"), also known as the Wild Fields. The group became well known, and its numbers increased greatly between the 15th and 17th centuries. The Zaporozhian Cossacks played an important role in European geopolitics, participating in a series of conflicts and alliances with the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Russia, and the Ottoman Empire. The Zaporozhians gained a reputation for their raids against the Ottoman Empire and its vassals, although they also sometimes plundered other neighbors. Their actions increased tension along the southern border of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. Low-level warfare took place in those territories for most of the period of the Commonwealth (1569\u20131795).\nEmergence.\nPrior to the formation of the Zaporozhian Sich, Cossacks had usually been organized by Ruthenian boyars, or princes of the nobility, especially various Lithuanian starostas. Merchants, peasants, and runaways from the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Muscovy, and Moldavia also joined the Cossacks.\nThe first recorded \"sich\" prototype was formed by the starosta of Cherkasy and Kaniv, Dmytro Vyshnevetsky, who built a fortress on the island of Little Khortytsia on the banks of the Lower Dnieper in 1552. The Zaporozhian Host adopted a lifestyle that combined the ancient Cossack order and habits with those of the Knights Hospitaller.\nThe Cossack structure arose, in part, in response to the struggle against Tatar raids. Socio-economic developments in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth were another important factor in the growth of the Ukrainian Cossacks. During the 16th century, serfdom was imposed because of the favorable conditions for grain sales in Western Europe. This subsequently decreased the locals' land allotments and freedom of movement. In addition, the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth government attempted to impose Catholicism, and to Polonize the local Ukrainian population. The basic form of resistance and opposition by the locals and burghers was flight and settlement in the sparsely populated steppe.\nRelations with surrounding states.\nThe major powers tried to exploit Cossack military power for their own purposes. In the 16th century, with the area of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth extending south, the Zaporozhian Cossacks were mostly, if tentatively, regarded by the Commonwealth as their subjects. Foreign and internal pressure on the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth led to the government making concessions to the Zaporozhian Cossacks. King Stephen B\u00e1thory granted them certain rights and freedoms in 1578, and they gradually began to create their foreign policy. They did so independently of the government, and often against its interests, as for example with their role in Moldavian affairs, and with the signing of a treaty with Emperor Rudolf II in the 1590s. Registered Cossacks formed a part of the Commonwealth army until 1699.\nAround the end of the 16th century, increasing Cossack aggression strained relations between the Commonwealth and the Ottoman Empire. Cossacks had begun raiding Ottoman territories during the second part of the 16th century. The Polish government could not control them, but was held responsible as the men were nominally its subjects. In retaliation, Tatars living under Ottoman rule launched raids into the Commonwealth, mostly in the southeast territories. Cossack pirates responded by raiding wealthy trading port-cities in the heart of the Ottoman Empire, as these were just two days away by boat from the mouth of the Dnieper river. In 1615 and 1625, Cossacks razed suburbs of Constantinople, forcing the Ottoman Sultan to flee his palace. In 1637, the Zaporozhian Cossacks, joined by the Don Cossacks, captured the strategic Ottoman fortress of Azov, which guarded the Don.\nThe Zaporizhian Cossacks became particularly strong in the first quarter of the 17th century under the leadership of hetman Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny, who launched successful campaigns against the Tatars and Turks. Tsar Boris Godunov had incurred the hatred of Ukrainian Cossacks by ordering the Don Cossacks to drive away from the Don all the Ukrainian Cossacks fleeing the failed uprisings of the 1590s. This contributed to the Ukrainian Cossacks' willingness to fight against him. In 1604, 2,000 Zaporizhian Cossacks fought on the side of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and their proposal for the Tsar (Dmitri I), against the Muscovite army. By September 1604, Dmitri I had gathered a force of 2,500 men, of whom 1,400 were Cossacks. Two thirds of these \"cossacks\", however, were in fact Ukrainian civilians, only 500 being professional Ukrainian Cossacks. On July 4, 1610, 4,000 Ukrainian Cossacks fought in the Battle of Klushino, on the side of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. They helped to defeat a combined Muscovite-Swedish army and facilitate the occupation of Moscow from 1610 to 1611, riding into Moscow with Stanis\u0142aw \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiewski.\nThe final attempt by King Sigismund and Wladyslav to seize the throne of Muscovy was launched on April 6, 1617. Although Wladyslav was the nominal leader, it was Jan Karol Chodkiewicz who commanded the Commonwealth forces. By October, the towns of Dorogobuzh and Vyazma had surrendered. But a defeat, when the counterattack on Moscow by Chodkiewicz failed between Vyasma and Mozhaysk, prompted the Polish-Lithuanian army to retreat. In 1618, Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny continued his campaign against the Tsardom of Russia on behalf of the Cossacks and the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Numerous Russian towns were sacked, including Livny and Yelets. In September 1618, with Chodkiewicz, Konashevych-Sahaidachny laid siege to Moscow, but peace was secured.\nConsecutive treaties between the Ottoman Empire and the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth called for the governments to keep the Cossacks and Tatars in check, but neither enforced the treaties strongly. The Polish forced the Cossacks to burn their boats and stop raiding by sea, but the activity did not cease entirely. During this time, the Habsburg monarchy sometimes covertly hired Cossack raiders against the Ottomans, to ease pressure on their own borders. Many Cossacks and Tatars developed longstanding enmity due to the losses of their raids. The ensuing chaos and cycles of retaliation often turned the entire southeastern Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth border into a low-intensity war zone. It catalyzed escalation of Commonwealth\u2013Ottoman warfare, from the Moldavian Magnate Wars (1593\u20131617) to the Battle of Cecora (1620), and campaigns in the Polish\u2013Ottoman War of 1633\u20131634.\nConflict with Poland.\nCossack numbers increased when the warriors were joined by peasants escaping serfdom in Russia and dependence in the Commonwealth. Attempts by the \"szlachta\" to turn the Zaporozhian Cossacks into peasants eroded the formerly strong Cossack loyalty towards the Commonwealth. The government constantly rebuffed Cossack ambitions for recognition as equal to the \"szlachta\". Plans for transforming the Polish\u2013Lithuanian two-nation Commonwealth into a Polish\u2013Lithuanian\u2013Ruthenian Commonwealth made little progress, due to the unpopularity among the Ruthenian \"szlachta\" of the idea of Ruthenian Cossacks being equal to them and their elite becoming members of the \"szlachta\". The Cossacks' strong historic allegiance to the Eastern Orthodox Church also put them at odds with officials of the Roman Catholic-dominated Commonwealth. Tensions increased when Commonwealth policies turned from relative tolerance to suppression of the Eastern Orthodox Church after the Union of Brest. The Cossacks became strongly anti-Roman Catholic, an attitude that became synonymous with anti-Polish.\nAfter the Ottoman-Polish and Polish-Muscovite warfare ceased, the official Cossack register was again reduced. The registered Cossacks (\"reiestrovi kozaky\") were isolated from those who were excluded from the register, and from the Zaporizhian Host. This, together with intensified socioeconomic and national-religious oppression of the other classes in Ukrainian society, led to many Cossack uprisings in the 1630s. The nobility, which had obtained legal ownership of vast expanses of land on the Dnipro from the Polish kings, attempted to impose feudal dependency on the local population. Landowners utilized the locals in war, by raising the Cossack registry in times of hostility, and then radically decreasing it and forcing the Cossacks back into serfdom in times of peace. This institutionalized method of control bred discontent among the Cossacks. By the end of the 16th century, they began to revolt, in the uprisings of Kryshtof Kosynsky (1591\u20131593), Severyn Nalyvaiko (1594\u20131596), Hryhorii Loboda (1596), Marko Zhmailo (1625), Taras Fedorovych (1630), Ivan Sulyma (1635), Pavlo Pavliuk and Dmytro Hunia (1637), and Yakiv Ostrianyn and Karpo Skydan (1638). All were brutally suppressed and ended by the Polish government. Cossack rebellions eventually culminated in the Khmelnytsky Uprising, led by the hetman of the Zaporizhian Sich, Bohdan Khmelnytsky.\nUnder Russian rule.\nThe Zaporozhian Sich had its own authorities, its own \"Lower\" Zaporozhian Host, and its own land.\nIn 1775, the Lower Dnieper Zaporozhian Host was destroyed. Later, its high-ranking Cossack leaders were exiled to Siberia, its last chief, Petro Kalnyshevsky, becoming a prisoner of the Solovetsky Islands. Some Cossacks moved to the Danube Delta region, where they established a new sich under Ottoman rule. To prevent further defection of Cossacks, the Russian government restored the special Cossack status of the majority of Zaporozhian Cossacks. This allowed them to unite in the Host of Loyal Zaporozhians, and later to reorganize into other hosts, of which the Black Sea Host was most important. Because of land scarcity resulting from the distribution of Zaporozhian Sich lands among landlords, they eventually moved on to the Kuban region.\nThe majority of Danubian Sich Cossacks moved first to the Azov region in 1828, and later joined other former Zaporozhian Cossacks in the Kuban region. Groups were generally identified by faith rather than language in that period, and most descendants of Zaporozhian Cossacks in the Kuban region are bilingual, speaking both Russian and Balachka, the local Kuban dialect of central Ukrainian. Their folklore is largely Ukrainian. The predominant view of ethnologists and historians is that its origins lie in the common culture dating back to the Black Sea Cossacks.\nCossack Hetmanate.\nFormation of the Cossack class in the Hetmanate.\nThe waning loyalty of the Cossacks, and the \"szlachta's\" arrogance towards them, resulted in several Cossack uprisings against the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth in the early 17th century. Finally, the King's adamant refusal to accede to the demand to expand the Cossack Registry prompted the largest and most successful of these: the Khmelnytsky Uprising, that began in 1648. Some Cossacks, including the Polish \"szlachta\" in Ukraine, converted to Eastern Orthodoxy, divided the lands of the Ruthenian \"szlachta\", and became the Cossack \"szlachta\". The uprising was one of a series of catastrophic events for the Commonwealth, known as The Deluge, which greatly weakened the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and set the stage for its disintegration 100 years later.\nInfluential relatives of the Ruthenian and Lithuanian \"szlachta\" in Moscow helped to create the Russian\u2013Polish alliance against Khmelnitsky's Cossacks, portrayed as rebels against order and against the private property of the Ruthenian Orthodox \"szlachta\". Don Cossacks' raids on Crimea left Khmelnitsky without the aid of his usual Tatar allies. From the Russian perspective, the rebellion ended with the 1654 Treaty of Pereyaslav, in which, in order to overcome the Russian\u2013Polish alliance against them, the Khmelnitsky Cossacks pledged their loyalty to the Russian Tsar. In return, the Tsar guaranteed them his protection; recognized the Cossack \"starshyna\" (nobility), their property, and their autonomy under his rule; and freed the Cossacks from the Polish sphere of influence and the land claims of the Ruthenian \"szlachta\".\nOnly some of the Ruthenian \"szlachta\" of the Chernigov region, who had their origins in the Moscow state, saved their lands from division among Cossacks and became part of the Cossack \"szlachta\". After this, the Ruthenian \"szlachta\" refrained from plans to have a Moscow Tsar as king of the Commonwealth, its own Micha\u0142 Korybut Wi\u015bniowiecki later becoming king. The last, ultimately unsuccessful, attempt to rebuild the Polish\u2013Cossack alliance and create a Polish\u2013Lithuanian\u2013Ruthenian Commonwealth was the 1658 Treaty of Hadiach. The treaty was approved by the Polish king and the Sejm, and by some of the Cossack \"starshyna\", including hetman Ivan Vyhovsky. The treaty failed, however, because the \"starshyna\" were divided on the issue, and it had even less support among rank-and-file Cossacks.\nRelations with neighbours.\nAs a result of the mid-17th century Khmelnytsky Uprising, the Zaporozhian Cossacks briefly established an independent state, which later became the autonomous Cossack Hetmanate (1649\u20131764). It was placed under the suzerainty of the Russian Tsar from 1667 but was ruled by local hetmans for a century. The principal political problem of the hetmans who followed the Pereyeslav Agreement was defending the autonomy of the Hetmanate from Russian/Muscovite centralism. The hetmans Ivan Vyhovsky, Petro Doroshenko and Ivan Mazepa attempted to resolve this by separating Ukraine from Russia.\nRelations between the Hetmanate and their new sovereign began to deteriorate after the autumn of 1656, when the Muscovites, going against the wishes of their Cossack partners, signed an armistice with the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in Vilnius. The Cossacks considered the Vilnius agreement a breach of the contract they had entered into at Pereiaslav. For the Muscovite tsar, the Pereiaslav Agreement signified the unconditional submission of his new subjects; the Ukrainian hetman considered it a conditional contract from which one party could withdraw if the other was not upholding its end of the bargain.\nThe Ukrainian hetman Ivan Vyhovsky, who succeeded Khmelnytsky in 1657, believed the Tsar was not living up to his responsibility. Accordingly, he concluded a treaty with representatives of the Polish king, who agreed to re-admit Cossack Ukraine by reforming the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth to create a third constituent, comparable in status to that of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The Union of Hadiach provoked a war between the Cossacks and the Muscovites/Russians that began in the fall of 1658.\nIn June 1659, the two armies met near the town of Konotop. One army comprised Cossacks, Tatars, and Poles, and the other was led by a top Muscovite military commander of the era, Prince Aleksey Trubetskoy. After terrible losses, Trubetskoy was forced to withdraw to the town of Putyvl on the other side of the border. The battle is regarded as one of the Zaporizhian Cossacks' most impressive victories.\nIn 1659, Yurii Khmelnytsky was elected hetman of the Zaporizhian Host/Hetmanate, with the endorsement of Moscow and supported by common Cossacks unhappy with the conditions of the Union of Hadiach. In 1660, however, the hetman asked the Polish king for protection, leading to the period of Ukrainian history known as The Ruin.\nSuppression of Cossack autonomy in the Russian Empire.\nHistorian Gary Dean Peterson writes: \"With all this unrest, Ivan Mazepa of the Ukrainian Cossacks was looking for an opportunity to secure independence from Russia and Poland\". In response to Mazepa's alliance with Charles XII of Sweden, Peter I ordered the sacking of the then capital of the Hetmanate, Baturyn. The city was burnt and looted, and 11,000 to 14,000 of its inhabitants were killed. The destruction of the Hetmanate's capital was a signal to Mazepa and the Hetmanate's inhabitants of severe punishment for disloyalty to the Tsar's authority. The Zaporizhian Sich at Chortomlyk, which had existed since 1652, was also destroyed by Peter I's forces in 1709, in retribution for decision of its otaman Kost Hordiyenko, to ally with Mazepa.\nUnder Russian rule, the Cossack nation of the Zaporozhian Host was divided into two autonomous republics of the Russian Tsardom: the Cossack Hetmanate, and the more independent Zaporizhia. These organizations gradually lost their autonomy, and were abolished by Catherine II in the late 18th century. The Hetmanate became the governorship of Little Russia, and Zaporizhia was absorbed into New Russia.\nBlack Sea, Azov and Danubian Sich Cossacks.\nWith the destruction of the Zaporizhian Sich, a number of Ukrainian-speaking Eastern Orthodox Zaporozhian Cossacks fled to the territory under the control of the Ottoman Empire. Together with Cossacks of Greater Russian origin, as well as the vast majority of Old Believers and other people from \"Greater Russia\" (Muscovy), they settled in the area of the Danube river, and founded a new Sich. Many Ukrainian peasants and adventurers later joined the Danubian Sich. While Ukrainian folklore remembers the Danubian Sich, other new siches of Loyal Zaporozhians on the Bug and Dniester rivers did not achieve such fame. Other Cossacks settled on the Tisa river in the Austrian Empire, also forming a new Sich.\nDuring the Cossack sojourn under Turkish rule, a new host was founded that numbered around 12,000 people by the end of 1778. Cossack settlement on the Russian border was approved by the Ottoman Empire after the Cossacks officially vowed to serve the sultan. Yet internal conflict, and the political maneuvering of the Russian Empire led to splits among the Cossacks. Some of the runaway Cossacks returned to Russia, where the Russian army used them to form new military bodies that also incorporated Greeks, Albanians and Crimean Tatars. After the Russo-Turkish war of 1787\u20131792, most of these Cossacks were absorbed into the Black Sea Cossack Host together with Loyal Zaporozhians. Most of the remaining Cossacks who had stayed in the Danube Delta returned to Russia in 1828. They settled in the area north of the Azov Sea, becoming known as the Azov Cossacks. The majority of Zaporizhian Cossacks who had remained loyal to Russia despite the destruction of Sich became known as Black Sea Cossacks. Both Azov and Black Sea Cossacks were resettled to colonize the Kuban steppe, a crucial foothold for Russian expansion in the Caucasus. In 1860, more Cossacks were resettled to the North Caucasus, and merged into the Kuban Cossack Host.\nRussian Cossacks.\nThe native land of the Cossacks is defined by a line of Russian town-fortresses located on the border with the steppe, and stretching from the middle Volga to Ryazan and Tula, then breaking abruptly to the south and extending to the Dnieper via Pereyaslavl. This area was settled by a population of free people practicing various trades and crafts.\nThese people, constantly facing the Tatar warriors on the steppe frontier, received the Turkic name \"Cossacks\" (\"Kazaks\"), which was then extended to other free people in Russia. Many Cumans, who had assimilated Khazars, retreated to the Principality of Ryazan (Grand Duchy of Ryazan) after the Mongol invasion. The oldest mention in the annals is of Cossacks of the Russian principality of Ryazan serving the principality in the battle against the Tatars in 1444. In the 16th century, the Cossacks (primarily of Ryazan) were grouped in military and trading communities on the open steppe, and began to migrate into the area of the Don.\nCossacks served as border guards and protectors of towns, forts, settlements, and trading posts. They performed policing functions on the frontiers, and also came to represent an integral part of the Russian army. In the 16th century, to protect the borderland area from Tatar invasions, Cossacks carried out sentry and patrol duties, guarding against Crimean Tatars and nomads of the Nogai Horde in the steppe region.\nThe most popular weapons of the Cossack cavalrymen were the sabre, or \"shashka\", and the long spear.\nFrom the 16th to 19th centuries, Russian Cossacks played a key role in the expansion of the Russian Empire into Siberia (particularly by Yermak Timofeyevich), the Caucasus, and Central Asia. Cossacks also served as guides to most Russian expeditions of civil and military geographers and surveyors, traders, and explorers. In 1648, the Russian Cossack Semyon Dezhnyov discovered a passage between North America and Asia. Cossack units played a role in many wars in the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries, including the Russo-Turkish Wars, the Russo-Persian Wars, and the annexation of Central Asia.\nWestern Europeans had a lot of contact with Cossacks during the Seven Years' War, and had seen Cossack patrols in Berlin. During Napoleon's Invasion of Russia, Cossacks were the Russian soldiers most feared by the French troops. Napoleon himself stated, \"Cossacks are the best light troops among all that exist. If I had them in my army, I would go through all the world with them.\" Cossacks also took part in the partisan war deep inside French-occupied Russian territory, attacking communications and supply lines. These attacks, carried out by Cossacks along with Russian light cavalry and other units, were one of the first developments of guerrilla warfare tactics and, to some extent, special operations as we know them today. Several thousands of Cossacks were commended by Pyotr Bagration during the French invasion of Russia behind Bug.\nDon Cossacks.\nThe Don Cossack Host (, \"Vsevelikoye Voysko Donskoye\") was either an independent or an autonomous democratic republic, located in present-day Southern Russia. It existed from the end of the 16th century until the early 20th century. There are two main theories of the origin of the Don Cossacks. Most respected historians support the migration theory, according to which they were Slavic colonists. The various autochthonous theories popular among the Cossacks themselves do not find confirmation in genetic studies. The gene pool comprises mainly the East Slavic component, with a significant Ukrainian contribution. There is no influence of the peoples of the Caucasus; and the steppe populations, represented by the Nogais, have only limited impact.\nThe majority of Don Cossacks are either Eastern Orthodox or Christian Old Believers (\u0441\u0442\u0430\u0440\u043e\u043e\u0431\u0440\u044f\u0434\u0446\u044b). Prior to the Russian Civil War, there were numerous religious minorities, including Muslims, Subbotniks, and Jews.\nKuban Cossacks.\nKuban Cossacks are Cossacks who live in the Kuban region of Russia. Although many Cossack groups came to inhabit the Western North Caucasus, most of the Kuban Cossacks are descendants of the Black Sea Cossack Host (originally the Zaporozhian Cossacks), and the Caucasus Line Cossack Host.\nA distinguishing feature is the \"Chupryna\" or \"Oseledets\" hairstyle, a roach haircut popular among some Kubanians. This tradition traces back to the Zaporizhian Sich.\nTerek Cossacks.\nThe Terek Cossack Host was created in 1577 by free Cossacks resettling from the Volga to the Terek River. Local Terek Cossacks joined this host later. In 1792, the host was included in the Caucasus Line Cossack Host, from which it separated again in 1860, with Vladikavkaz as its capital. In 1916, the population of the host was 255,000, within an area of 1.9 million desyatinas.\nYaik Cossacks.\nThe Ural Cossack Host was formed from the Ural Cossacks, who had settled along the Ural River. Their alternative name, Yaik Cossacks, comes from the river's former name, changed by the government after Pugachev's Rebellion of 1773\u20131775. The Ural Cossacks spoke Russian, and identified as having primarily Russian ancestry, but also incorporated many Tatars into their ranks. In 1577, twenty years after Moscow had conquered the Volga from Kazan to Astrakhan, the government sent troops to disperse pirates and raiders along the Volga. Among them was Yermak Timofeyevich. Some escaped to flee southeast to the Ural River, where they joined the Yaik Cossacks. In 1580, they captured Saraichik. By 1591, they were fighting on behalf of the government in Moscow. Over the next century, they were officially recognized by the imperial government.\nRazin and Pugachev Rebellions.\nAs a largely independent nation, the Cossacks had to defend their liberties and democratic traditions against the ever-expanding Muscovy, succeeded by the Russian Empire. Their tendency to act independently of the Tsardom of Russia increased friction. The Tsardom's power began to grow in 1613, with the ascension of Mikhail Romanov to the throne following the Time of Troubles. The government began attempting to integrate the Cossacks into the Russian Tsardom by granting elite status and enforcing military service, thus creating divisions among the Cossacks themselves as they fought to retain their traditions. The government's efforts to alter their traditional nomadic lifestyle resulted in the Cossacks being involved in nearly all the major disturbances in Russia over 200 years, including the rebellions led by Stepan Razin and Yemelyan Pugachev.\nAs Russia regained stability, discontent grew within the serf and peasant populations. Under Alexis Romanov, Mikhail's son, the Code of 1649 divided the Russian population into distinct and fixed hereditary categories. The Code increased tax revenue for the central government and put an end to nomadism, to stabilize the social order by fixing people on the same land and in the same occupation as their families. Peasants were tied to the land, and townsmen were forced to take on their fathers' occupations. The increased tax burden fell mainly on the peasants, further widening the gap between the poor and wealthy. Human and material resources became limited as the government organized more military expeditions, putting even greater strain on the peasants. War with Poland and Sweden in 1662 led to a fiscal crisis, and rioting across the country. Taxes, harsh conditions, and the gap between social classes drove peasants and serfs to flee. Many went to the Cossacks, knowing that the Cossacks would accept refugees and free them.\nThe Cossacks experienced difficulties under Tsar Alexis as more refugees arrived daily. The Tsar gave the Cossacks a subsidy of food, money, and military supplies in return for acting as border defense. These subsidies fluctuated often; a source of conflict between the Cossacks and the government. The war with Poland diverted necessary food and military shipments to the Cossacks as fugitive peasants swelled the population of the Cossack host. The influx of refugees troubled the Cossacks, not only because of the increased demand for food but also because their large number meant the Cossacks could not absorb them into their culture by way of the traditional apprenticeship. Instead of taking these steps for proper assimilation into Cossack society, the runaway peasants spontaneously declared themselves Cossacks and lived alongside the true Cossacks, laboring or working as barge-haulers to earn food.\nDivisions among the Cossacks began to emerge as conditions worsened and Mikhail's son Alexis took the throne. Older Cossacks began to settle and become prosperous, enjoying privileges earned through obeying and assisting the Muscovite system. The old Cossacks started giving up the traditions and liberties that had been worth dying for, to obtain the pleasures of an elite life. The lawless and restless runaway peasants who called themselves Cossacks looked for adventure and revenge against the nobility that had caused them suffering. These Cossacks did not receive the government subsidies that the old Cossacks enjoyed, and had to work harder and longer for food and money.\nRazin's Rebellion.\nThe divisions between the elite and the lawless led to the formation of a Cossack army, beginning in 1667 under Stenka Razin, and ultimately to the failure of Razin's rebellion.\nStenka Razin was born into an elite Cossack family, and had made many diplomatic visits to Moscow before organizing his rebellion. The Cossacks were Razin's main supporters, and followed him during his first Persian campaign in 1667, plundering and pillaging Persian cities on the Caspian Sea. They returned in 1669, ill and hungry, tired from fighting, but rich with plundered goods. Russia tried to gain support from the old Cossacks, asking the ataman, or Cossack chieftain, to prevent Razin from following through with his plans. But the ataman was Razin's godfather, and was swayed by Razin's promise of a share of expedition wealth. His reply was that the elite Cossacks were powerless against the band of rebels. The elite did not see much threat from Razin and his followers either, although they realized he could cause them problems with the Muscovite system if his following developed into a rebellion against the central government.\nRazin and his followers began to capture cities at the start of the rebellion, in 1669. They seized the towns of Tsaritsyn, Astrakhan, Saratov, and Samara, implementing democratic rule and releasing peasants from slavery as they went. Razin envisioned a united Cossack republic throughout the southern steppe, in which the towns and villages would operate under the democratic, Cossack style of government. Their sieges often took place in the runaway peasant Cossacks' old towns, leading them to wreak havoc there and take revenge on their old masters. The elder Cossacks began to see the rebels' advance as a problem, and in 1671 decided to comply with the government in order to receive more subsidies. On April\u00a014, ataman Yakovlev led elders to destroy the rebel camp. They captured Razin, taking him soon afterward to Moscow to be executed.\nRazin's rebellion marked the beginning of the end of traditional Cossack practices. In August 1671, Russian envoys administered the oath of allegiance and the Cossacks swore loyalty to the tsar. While they still had internal autonomy, the Cossacks became Russian subjects, a transition that was a dividing point again in Pugachev's Rebellion.\nPugachev's Rebellion.\nFor the Cossack elite, noble status within the empire came at the price of their old liberties in the 18th century. Advancing agricultural settlement began to force the Cossacks to give up their traditional nomadic ways and adopt new forms of government. The government steadily changed the entire culture of the Cossacks. Peter the Great increased Cossack service obligations, and mobilized their forces to fight in far-off wars. Peter began establishing non-Cossack troops in fortresses along the Yaik River. In 1734, construction of a government fortress at Orenburg gave Cossacks a subordinate role in border defense. When the Yaik Cossacks sent a delegation to Peter with their grievances, Peter stripped the Cossacks of their autonomous status, and subordinated them to the War College rather than the College of Foreign Affairs. This consolidated the Cossacks' transition from border patrol to military servicemen. Over the next fifty years, the central government responded to Cossack grievances with arrests, floggings, and exiles.\nUnder Catherine the Great, beginning in 1762, the Russian peasants and Cossacks again faced increased taxation, heavy military conscription, and grain shortages, as before Razin's rebellion. Peter III had extended freedom to former church serfs, freeing them from obligations and payments to church authorities, and had freed other peasants from serfdom, but Catherine did not follow through on these reforms. In 1767, the Empress refused to accept grievances directly from the peasantry. Peasants fled once again to the lands of the Cossacks, in particular the Yaik Host, whose people were committed to the old Cossack traditions. The changing government also burdened the Cossacks, extending its reach to reform Cossack traditions. Among ordinary Cossacks, hatred of the elite and central government rose. In 1772, a six\u2013month open rebellion ensued between the Yaik Cossacks and the central government.\nYemelyan Pugachev, a low-status Don Cossack, arrived in the Yaik Host in late 1772. There, he claimed to be Peter\u00a0III, playing on the Cossack belief that Peter would have been an effective ruler but for his assassination in a plot by his wife, Catherine\u00a0II. Many Yaik Cossacks believed Pugachev's claim, although those closest to him knew the truth. Others, who may have known of it, did not support Catherine\u00a0II due to her disposal of Peter\u00a0III, and also spread Pugachev's claim to be the late emperor.\nThe first of three phases of Pugachev's Rebellion began in September 1773. Most of the rebels' first prisoners were Cossacks who supported the elite. After a five-month siege of Orenburg, a military college became Pugachev's headquarters. Pugachev envisioned a Cossack tsardom, similar to Razin's vision of a united Cossack republic. The peasantry across Russia stirred with rumors and listened to the manifestos Pugachev issued. But the rebellion soon came to be seen as an inevitable failure. The Don Cossacks refused to help the final phase of the revolt, knowing that military troops were closely following Pugachev after lifting the siege of Orenburg, and following his flight from defeated Kazan. In September 1774, Pugachev's own Cossack lieutenants turned him over to the government troops.\nOpposition to centralization of political authority led the Cossacks to participate in Pugachev's Rebellion. After their defeat, the Cossack elite accepted government reforms, hoping to secure status within the nobility. The ordinary Cossacks had to follow and give up their traditions and liberties.\nIn the Russian Empire.\nCossack relations with the Tsardom of Russia were varied from the outset. At times they supported Russian military operations, at other times they rebelled against the central power. After one such uprising at the end of the 18th century, Russian forces destroyed the Zaporozhian Host. Many of the Cossacks who had remained loyal to the Russian Monarch and continued their service later moved to the Kuban. Others, choosing to continue a mercenary role, escaped control in the large Danube Delta. The service of the Cossacks in the Napoleonic wars led them to be celebrated as Russian folk heroes, and throughout the 19th century a \"powerful myth\" was promoted by the government that portrayed the Cossacks as having a special and unique bond to the Emperor. This image as the Cossacks as the ultra-patriotic defenders of not only Russia, but also of the House of Romanov was embraced by many ordinary Cossacks, making them into a force for conservatism.\nBy the 19th century, the Russian Empire had annexed the territory of the Cossack Hosts, and controlled them by providing privileges for their service such as exemption from taxation and allowing them to own the land they farmed. At this time, the Cossacks served as military forces in many wars conducted by the Russian Empire. Cossacks were considered excellent for scouting and reconnaissance duties, and for ambushes. Their tactics in open battle were generally inferior to those of regular soldiers, such as the Dragoons. In 1840, the Cossack hosts included the Don, Black Sea, Astrakhan, Little Russia, Azov, Danube, Ural, Stavropol, Mesherya, Orenburg, Siberian, Tobolsk, Tomsk, Yeniseisk, Irkutsk, Sabaikal, Yakutsk, and Tartar \"voiskos\". In the 1890s, the Ussuri, Semirechensk, and Amur Cossacks were added; the last had a regiment of elite mounted rifles.\nIncreasingly as the 19th century went on, the Cossacks served as a mounted para-military police force in all of the various provinces of the vast Russian Empire, covering a territory stretching across Eurasia from what is now modern Poland to the banks of the river Amur that formed the Russian-Chinese border. The police forces of the Russian Empire, especially in rural areas, were undermanned owing to the low wages while the officers of the Imperial Russian Army disliked having their units deployed to put down domestic unrest, which was viewed as destructive of morale and possibly an incentive to mutiny. For the government, deploying Cossacks as a para-military police force was the best solution as the Cossacks were viewed as one of the social groups most loyal to the House of Romanov while their isolation from local populations was felt to make them immune to revolutionary appeals. Traditionally, Cossacks were viewed in Russia as dashing, romantic horsemen with a rebellious and wild aura about them, but their deployment in the role of a mounted police force gave them a \"novel\" image as a rather violent and thuggish institution fiercely committed to upholding the social order. This change from an irregular cavalry force that fought against the enemies of Russia, such as the Ottoman Empire and France, to a repressive gendarmerie deployed against the subjects of the Empire caused much disquiet within the various Hosts, as it was contrary to the heroic ethos of frontier warfare that the Cossacks cherished.\nIn 1879, the Shah of Iran, Nasir al-Din, who had been impressed with the equestrian skills and distinctive uniforms of the Cossacks while on a visit to Russia the previous year, requested that the Emperor Alexander II sent some Cossacks to train a Cossack force for himself. Alexander granted his request and later in 1879 a group of 9 Cossacks led by Kuban Cossack Colonel Aleksey Domantovich arrived in Tehran to train the Persian Cossack Brigade. The shah very much liked the colorful uniforms of the Cossacks and Domantovich devised uniforms for one regiment of the brigade based on the uniforms of the Kuban Cossack Host and another regiment had its uniform based on the Terek Cossack Host. The uniforms of the Cossacks were based on the flamboyant costumes of the peoples of the Caucasus, and what in Russia were viewed as exotic and colorful uniforms were viewed in Iran as a symbol of Russianness. Nasir al-Din, who was widely regarded as a deeply superficial and shallow man, was not interested in having his Cossack Brigade be an effective military force, and for him merely seeing his brigade ride before him while dressed in their brightly colored uniforms was quite enough. Over the shah's indifference, Domantovich and his Cossacks worked hard on training the Cossack Brigade, which became the only disciplined unit in the entire Persian Army, and thus of considerable importance in maintaining the shah's authority.\nBy the end of the 19th century, Cossack communities enjoyed a privileged tax-free status in the Russian Empire, although they had a 20-year military service commitment (reduced to 18 years from 1909). They were on active duty for five years, but could fulfill their remaining obligation with the reserves. At the beginning of the 20th century, the Russian Cossacks numbered 4.5 million. They were organized as independent regional hosts, each comprising a number of regiments. The need for the government to call up Cossack men to serve either with the Army or a mounted police force caused many social and economic problems, which compounded by the growing impoverishment the communities of the Hosts.\nTreated as a separate and elite community by the Tsar, the Cossacks rewarded his government with strong loyalty. His administration frequently used Cossack units to suppress domestic disorder, especially during the Russian Revolution of 1905. The Imperial Government depended heavily on the perceived reliability of the Cossacks. By the early 20th century, their decentralized communities and semi-feudal military service were coming to be seen as obsolete. The Russian Army Command, which had worked to professionalize its forces, considered the Cossacks less well disciplined, trained, and mounted than the hussars, dragoons, and lancers of the regular cavalry. The Cossack qualities of initiative and rough-riding skills were not always fully appreciated. As a result, Cossack units were frequently broken up into small detachments for use as scouts, messengers, or picturesque escorts.\nCossacks between 1900 and 1917.\nIn 1905, the Cossack hosts experienced deep mobilization of their menfolk amid the fighting of the Russo-Japanese War in Manchuria and the outbreak of revolution within the Russian Empire. Like other peoples of the empire, some Cossack stanitsas voiced grievances against the regime by defying mobilization orders, or by making relatively liberal political demands. But these infractions were eclipsed by the prominent role of Cossack detachments in stampeding demonstrators and restoring order in the countryside. Subsequently, the wider population viewed the Cossacks as instruments of reaction. Tsar Nicholas II reinforced this concept by issuing new charters, medals, and bonuses to Cossack units in recognition for their performance during the Revolution of 1905.\nIn September 1906, reflecting the success of the Cossacks in putting down the Revolution of 1905, \"Polkovnik\" (Colonel) Vladimir Liakhov was sent to Iran to command the train and lead the Persian Cossack Brigade. Liakhov had led a Cossack squad in putting down the revolution in the Caucasus, and following the outbreak of the Constitutional Revolution in Iran he was sent to Tehran to recognize the Cossack Brigade as a force for power to the shah. The Persian Cossack Brigade had not been paid for months and proved to be dubious loyalty to the House of Qajar during the Constructional revolution while its Russian officers were uncertain what to do with Russia itself in revolution. Liakhov, a vigorous, able, and reactionary officer firmly committed to upholding absolute monarchies whatever in Russia or Iran, transformed the Persian Cossack Brigade into a mounted para-military police force rather than as a combat force. Liakhov was close to the new Shah, Mohammed Ali, who ascended to the Peacock Throne in January 1907, and it was due to the shah's patronage that Liakhov transformed the Persian Cossack Brigade into the main bulwark of the Iranian state. In June 1908, Liakhov led the Cossack Brigade in bombarding the \"Majlis\" (Parliament) while being appointed military governor of Tehran as the shah attempted to do away with the constitution his father had been forced to grant in 1906 Reza Khan, who became the first Iranian to command the Cossack Brigade led the coup d'\u00e9tat in 1921 and in 1925 deposed the Qajars to found a new dynasty.\nAfter the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, Cossacks became a key component in the cavalry of the Imperial Russian Army. The mounted Cossacks made up 38\u00a0regiments, plus some infantry battalions and 52\u00a0horse artillery batteries. Initially, each Russian cavalry division included a regiment of Cossacks in addition to regular units of hussars, lancers, and dragoons. By 1916, the Cossacks' wartime strength had expanded to 160 regiments, plus 176 independent sotnias (squadrons) employed as detached units.\nThe importance of cavalry in the frontlines faded after the opening phase of the war settled into a stalemate. During the remainder of the war, Cossack units were dismounted to fight in trenches, held in reserve to exploit a rare breakthrough, or assigned various duties in the rear. Those duties included rounding up deserters, providing escorts to war prisoners, and razing villages and farms in accordance with Russia's scorched earth policy.\nCossacks after the Russian Revolution.\nFebruary Revolution, 1917.\nIn Greater Russia.\nAt the outbreak of the disorder on 8\u00a0March 1917 that led to the overthrow of the tsarist regime, approximately 3,200\u00a0Cossacks from the Don, Kuban, and Terek Hosts were stationed in Petrograd. Although they comprised only a fraction of the 300,000\u00a0troops in the proximity of the Russian capital, their general defection on the second day of unrest (10 March) enthused raucous crowds and stunned the authorities and remaining loyal units.\nIn the aftermath of the February Revolution, the Cossacks hosts were authorized by the War Ministry of the Russian Provisional Government to overhaul their administrations. Cossack assemblies (known as \"krugs\" or, in the case of the Kuban Cossacks, a \"rada\") were organized at regional level to elect atamans and pass resolutions. At national level, an all-Cossack congress was convened in Petrograd. This congress formed the Union of Cossack Hosts, ostensibly to represent the interests of Cossacks across Russia.\nDuring the course of 1917, the nascent Cossack governments formed by the \"krugs\" and atamans increasingly challenged the Provisional Government's authority in the borderlands. The various Cossack governments themselves faced rivals, in the form of national councils organized by neighboring minorities, and of soviets and \"zemstvos\" formed by non-Cossack Russians, especially the so-called \"outlanders\" who had immigrated to Cossack lands.\nIn Ukraine.\nSimilarly to the events in imperial Cossack hosts, a revival of Cossack self-organization also took place in Ukraine, inspired by the traditions of the Zaporozhian Sich and Cossack Hetmanate. In April 1917 a congress in Zvenyhorodka, Kyiv Governorate, established Free Cossacks as a volunteer militia in order \"to defend the liberties of the Ukrainian people\" and maintain civil order.\nThe revived Cossack structure in Ukraine was organized according to the territorial principle, with villages providing companies of volunteers, which were grouped into a kurin (battalion) on the volost level, subordinate to a regiment led by polkovnyk, which was itself part of a \"kish\" (division) led by an Ottoman. All officers of Free Cossacks were elected, and funds were provided from taxation. Most volunteers of the organization were peasants, but industrial workers did also enlist themselves, especially in cities.\nDuring 1917 the Free Cossack movement spread around Kyiv, Volhynia, Kherson, Poltava and Chernihiv governorates. At the All-Ukrainian Congress of Free Cossacks in Chyhyryn on 16\u201320 October 1917 Pavlo Skoropadskyi was elected otaman of the movement.\nBolshevik uprising and Civil War, 1917\u20131922.\nCossack autonomies in Don, Kuban and North Caucasus.\nSoon after the Bolsheviks seized power in Petrograd on 7\u20138\u00a0November 1917, most Cossack atamans and their government refused to recognize the legitimacy of the new regime. The Don Cossack ataman, Aleksey Kaledin, went as far as to invite opponents of the Bolsheviks to the Don Host. But the position of many Cossack governments was far from secure, even within the boundaries of their hosts. In some areas, soviets formed by outlanders and soldiers rivaled the Cossack government, and ethnic minorities also tried to acquire a measure of self-rule. Even the Cossack communities themselves were divided, as the atamans tended to represent the interests of prosperous landowners and the officer corps. Poorer Cossacks, and those serving in the army, were susceptible to Bolshevik propaganda promising to spare \"toiling Cossacks\" from land appropriation.\nThe unwillingness of rank-and-file Cossacks to vigorously defend the Cossack government enabled the Red Army to occupy the vast majority of Cossack lands by late spring of 1918. But the Bolsheviks' policy of requisitioning grain and foodstuffs from the countryside to supply Russia's starving northern cities quickly fomented revolt among Cossack communities. These Cossack rebels elected new atamans and made common cause with other anticommunist forces, such as the Volunteer Army in South Russia. Subsequently, the Cossack homelands became bases for the White movement during the Russian Civil War.\nThroughout the civil war, Cossacks sometimes fought as an independent ally, and other times as an auxiliary, of White armies. In South Russia, the Armed Forces of South Russia (AFSR) under General Anton Denikin relied heavily on conscripts from the Don and Kuban Cossack Hosts to fill their ranks. Through the Cossacks, the White armies acquired experienced, skilled horsemen that the Red Army was unable to match until late in the conflict. But the relationship between Cossack governments and the White leaders was frequently acrimonious. Cossack units were often ill-disciplined, and prone to bouts of looting and violence that caused the peasantry to resent the Whites. In Ukraine, Kuban and Terek Cossack squadrons carried out pogroms against Jews, despite orders from Denikin condemning such activity. Kuban Cossack politicians, wanting a semi-independent state of their own, frequently agitated against the AFSR command. In the Russian Far East, anticommunist Transbaikal and Ussuri Cossacks undermined the rear of Siberia's White armies by disrupting traffic on the Trans-Siberian Railway and engaging in acts of banditry that fueled a potent insurgency in that region.\nAs the Red Army gained the initiative in the civil war during late 1919 and early 1920, Cossack soldiers, their families, and sometimes entire stanitsas retreated with the Whites. Some continued to fight with the Whites in the conflict's waning stages in Crimea and the Russian Far East. As many as 80,000\u2013100,000\u00a0Cossacks eventually joined the defeated Whites in exile.\nAlthough the Cossacks were sometimes portrayed by Bolsheviks and, later, \u00e9migr\u00e9 historians, as a monolithic counterrevolutionary group during the civil war, there were many Cossacks who fought with the Red Army throughout the conflict, known as Red Cossacks. Many poorer Cossack communities also remained receptive to the communist message. In late 1918 and early 1919, widespread desertion and defection among Don, Ural, and Orenburg Cossacks fighting with the Whites produced a military crisis that was exploited by the Red Army in those sectors. After the main White armies were defeated in early 1920, many Cossack soldiers switched their allegiance to the Bolsheviks, and fought with the Red Army against the Poles and in other operations.\nOn 22 December 1917, the Council of People's Commissars effectively abolished the Cossack estate by ending their military service requirements and privileges. After the widespread anticommunist rebellions among Cossacks in 1918, the Soviet regime's approach hardened in early 1919, when the Red Army occupied Cossack districts in the Urals and northern Don. The Bolsheviks embarked on a policy of \"de-Cossackization\", intended to end the Cossack threat to the Soviet regime. This was pursued through resettlement, widespread executions of Cossack veterans from the White armies, and favoring the outlanders within the Cossack hosts. Ultimately, the de-Cossackization campaign led to a renewed rebellion among Cossacks in Soviet-occupied districts and produced a new round of setbacks for the Red Army in 1919.\nWhen the victorious Red Army again occupied Cossack districts in late 1919 and 1920, the Soviet regime did not officially reauthorize the implementation of de-Cossackization. There is, however, disagreement among historians as to the degree of Cossack's persecution by the Soviet regime. For example, the Cossack hosts were broken up among new provinces or autonomous republics. Some Cossacks, especially in areas of the former Terek host, were resettled so their lands could be turned over to natives displaced from them during the initial Russian and Cossack colonization of the area. At the local level, the stereotype that Cossacks were inherent counterrevolutionaries likely persisted among some Communist officials, causing them to target, or discriminate against, Cossacks despite orders from Moscow to focus on class enemies among Cossacks rather than the Cossack people in general.\nUkrainian State.\nUntil January 1918, the Free Cossacks of Ukraine were subordinate to the Ukrainian General Secretariat of Internal Affairs. With the beginning of the Ukrainian-Soviet War, their units were incorporated into the regular army. However, after a number of battles against the Bolsheviks, Free Cossacks were disarmed in compliance with orders of the German command, whose troops had occupied Ukraine in March\u2013April 1918 after the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.\nOn 29 April 1918 Pavlo Skoropadskyi, the earlier leader of Free Cossacks, was proclaimed Hetman of Ukraine at a congress of the conservative All-Ukrainian Union of Landowners. This coup was backed by generals of German and Austrian armies which were occupying Ukraine at that time. The previously democratic Ukrainian People's Republic was replaced with the Hetmanate, the Central Rada and the Council of Ministers of the Ukrainian People's Republic were abolished, with all their powers, as well as command over the military, being transferred to Skoropadskyi, and private land ownership was reinstated. Local administration was entrusted to commissioners personally appointed by the hetman.\nTo achieve legitimacy among the Ukrainian population, the Skoropadskyi styled his regime as a continuation of Ukrainian Cossack traditions of the 17-18th centuries. The hetman's government included representatives of old Cossack nobility (starshyna), most prominently Fedir Lyzohub (head of the Conucil of Ministers) and Dmytro Doroshenko (Minister of Foreign Affairs). Skoropadskyi himself supported the idea of reviving the Cossack class in Ukraine as a privileged social group personally loyal to the hetman. However, his initiative was viewed with skepticism by his ministers, and the law on re-establishment of Cossack administration in Ukraine was adopted only in October 1918, shortly before the hetman's resignation, and never realized.\nDuring Skoropadskyi's tenure in power the Ukrainian State developed diplomatic ties with Cossack entities in the Kuban and Don region.\nCossacks in the Soviet Union, 1922\u20131945.\nRebellions in the former Cossack territories erupted occasionally during the interwar period. In 1920\u20131921, disgruntlement with continued Soviet grain-requisitioning activities provoked a series of revolts among Cossack and outlander communities in South Russia. The former Cossack territories of South Russia and the Urals also experienced a devastating famine in 1921\u20131922. In 1932\u20131933, another famine, known as the Holodomor, devastated Ukraine and some parts of South Russia, causing a population decline of about 20\u201330%. While urban areas were less affected, the decline was even higher in the rural areas, populated largely by Cossacks. Robert Conquest estimates the number of famine-related deaths in the Northern Caucasus at about one million. Government officials expropriated grain and other produce from rural Cossack families, leaving them to starve and die. Many families were forced from their homes in the severe winter and froze to death. Mikhail Sholokhov's letters to Joseph Stalin document the conditions and widespread deaths, as do eyewitness accounts. Besides starvation, the collectivization and dekulakization campaigns of the early 1930s threatened Cossacks with deportation to labor camps, or outright execution by Soviet security organs.\nIn April 1936, the Soviet regime began to relax its restrictions on Cossacks, allowing them to serve openly in the Red Army. Two existing cavalry divisions were renamed as Cossack divisions, and three new Cossack cavalry divisions were established. Under the new Soviet designation, anyone from the former Cossack territories of the North Caucasus provided they were not Circassians or other ethnic minorities, could claim Cossack status.\nIn World War II, during the German invasion of the Soviet Union, many Cossacks continued to serve in the Red Army. Some fought as cavalry in the Cossack divisions, such as the 17th Kuban Cossack Cavalry Corps and the famous Lev Dovator Corps, later awarded the honorific designation \"guard\" in recognition of its performance. Other Cossacks fought as partisans, although the partisan movement did not acquire significant traction during the German occupation of the traditional Cossack homelands in the North Caucasus.\nThe 4th Guards Cossacks Cavalry Corps took part in the Moscow Victory Parade of 1945 on Red Square.\nAnticommunist Cossacks in exile and World War II, 1920\u20131945.\nRussian Cossack emigration.\nThe Cossack emigration consisted largely of relatively young men who had served, and retreated with, the White armies. Although hostile to communism, the Cossack \u00e9migr\u00e9s remained broadly divided over whether their people should pursue a separatist course to acquire independence or retain their close ties with a future post-Soviet Russia. Many quickly became disillusioned with life abroad. Throughout the 1920s, thousands of exiled Cossacks voluntarily returned to Russia through repatriation efforts sponsored by France, the League of Nations, and even the Soviet Union.\nThe Cossacks who remained abroad settled primarily in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, France, Xinjiang, and Manchuria. Some managed to create farming communities in Yugoslavia and Manchuria, but most eventually took up employment as laborers in construction, agriculture, or industry. A few showcased their lost culture to foreigners by performing stunts in circuses or serenading audiences in choirs.\nCossacks who were determined to carry on the fight against communism frequently found employment with foreign powers hostile to Soviet Russia. In Manchuria, thousands of Cossacks and White \u00e9migr\u00e9s enlisted in the army of that region's warlord, Zhang Zuolin. After Japan's Kwantung Army occupied Manchuria in 1932, the ataman of the Transbaikal Cossacks, Grigory Semyonov, led collaboration efforts between Cossack \u00e9migr\u00e9s and the Japanese military.\nIn the initial phase of Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union, Cossack \u00e9migr\u00e9s were initially barred from political activity or travelling into the occupied Eastern territories. Hitler had no intention of entertaining the political aspirations of the Cossacks, or any minority group, in the USSR. As a result, collaboration between Cossacks and the Wehrmacht began in ad hoc manner through localized agreements between German field commanders and Cossack defectors from the Red Army. Hitler did not officially sanction the recruitment of Cossacks and lift the restrictions imposed on \u00e9migr\u00e9s until the second year of the Nazi-Soviet conflict. During their brief occupation of the North Caucasus region, the Germans actively recruited Cossacks into detachments and local self-defense militias. The Germans even experimented with a self-governing district of Cossack communities in the Kuban region. When the Wehrmacht withdrew from the North Caucasus region in early 1943, tens of thousands of Cossacks retreated with them, either out of conviction or to avoid Soviet reprisals.\nIn 1943, the Germans formed the 1st Cossack Cavalry Division, under the command of General Helmuth von Pannwitz. While its ranks mostly comprised deserters from the Red Army, many of its officers and NCOs were Cossack \u00e9migr\u00e9s who had received training at one of the cadet schools established by the White Army in Yugoslavia. The division was deployed to occupied Croatia to fight Tito's Partisans. There, its performance was generally effective, although at times brutal. In late 1944, the 1st\u00a0Cossack Cavalry Division was admitted into the Waffen-SS, and enlarged into the XV SS Cossack Cavalry Corps.\nIn late 1943, the Reich Ministry for the Occupied Eastern Territories and Wehrmacht headquarters issued a joint proclamation promising the Cossacks independence once their homelands were \"liberated\" from the Red Army. The Germans followed this up by establishing the Cossack Central Administration, under the leadership of the former Don Cossack ataman, Pyotr Krasnov. Although it had many attributes of a government-in-exile, the Cossack Central Administration lacked any control over foreign policy or the deployment of Cossack troops in the Wehrmacht. In early 1945, Krasnov and his staff joined a group of 20,000\u201325,000\u00a0Cossack refugees and irregulars known as \"Cossachi Stan\". This group, then led by Timofey Domanov, had fled the North Caucasus alongside the Germans in 1943 and was moved between Kamianets-Podilskyi in Ukraine, Navahrudak in Belarus, and Tolmezzo, Italy.\nIn early May 1945, in the closing days of WWII, both Domanov's \"Cossachi Stan\" and Pannwitz's XV SS Cossack Cavalry Corps retreated into Austria, where they surrendered to the British. Many Cossack accounts collected in the two volume work \"The Great Betrayal\" by Vyacheslav Naumenko allege that British officers had given them, or their leaders, a guarantee that they would not be forcibly repatriated to the Soviet Union, but there is no hard evidence that such a promise was made. At the end of the month, and in early June 1945, the majority of Cossacks from both groups were transferred to Red Army and SMERSH custody at the Soviet demarcation line in Judenburg, Austria. This episode is known as the Betrayal of the Cossacks, and resulted in sentences of hard labour or execution for the majority of the repatriated Cossacks.\nUkrainian Hetman movement.\nAfter his abdication on 14 December 1918, Ukrainian hetman Pavlo Skoropadskyi emigrated to Germany. From there he led the so-called Hetman movement (), which consisted of a number of Ukrainian conservative monarchist organizations from different groups of Ukrainian diaspora. Most prominent of these organizations were the Ukrainian Union of Agrarians-Statists () founded in Vienna by Vyacheslav Lypynskyi and Serhiy Shemet, and the United Hetman Organization () active in Canada and the United States. In his \"Letters to Brothers Agrarians\", published in 1926, Lypynskyi elaborated the idea of an independent, classocratic, pan-Ukrainian \"toilers' monarchy\" without political parties, ruled by hetman and his dynasty with the help of an agrarian aristocracy and the co-operation of the productive classes. In Canada and the United States the Hetman movement emerged from the pre-WW1 Sich scouting societies and was implicitly supported by the Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Church. The movement supported the re-establishment of the Hetman state of Pavlo Skoropadskyi and devoted a lot of energy to military training of Ukrainian \u00e9migr\u00e9s for the future liberation of their homeland, going as far as to acquire a number of airplanes. In 1940 the Canadian branch of the organization became one of the founders of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress. The North American Hetman movement reached the height of its influence around 1937\u20131938, when it was visited by Danylo Skoropadskyi, the hetman's son and successor. However, the organizations lost their influence during WW2 and in the following years due to internal splits and government investigations into their activity.\nModern times.\nFollowing the war, Cossack units, and the cavalry in general, were rendered obsolete and released from the Soviet Army. In the post-war years, many Cossack descendants were thought of as simple peasants, and those who lived in one of the autonomous republics usually gave way to the local minority and migrated elsewhere.\nThe principal Cossack \u00e9migr\u00e9 leader after 1945 was Nikolai Nazarenko, the self-proclaimed president of the World Federation of the Cossack National Liberation Movement of Cossackia, who enjoyed a prominence in New York as the organizer of the annual Captive Nations parade held every July. In 1978, Nazarenko dressed in his Don Cossack uniform led the Captive Days day parade in New York city, and told a journalist: \"Cossackia is a nation of 10 million people. In 1923 the Russians officially abolished Cossackia as a nation. Officially, it no longer exists...America should not spend billions supporting the Soviets with trade. We don't have to be afraid of the Russian army because half of it is made up of Captive Nations. They can never trust the rank and file\". The journalist Hal McKenzie described Nazarenko as having \"cut a striking figure with his white fur cap, calf-length coat with long silver-sheathed dagger and ornamental silver cartridge cases on his chest\". Nazarenko was also the president of Cossack American Republican National Federation, which in turn was part of the National Republican Heritage Groups Council, and he attracted much controversy in the 1980s owing to his wartime career and certain statements he made about Jews. The American journalist Christoper Simpson in his 1988 book \"Blowback: America's Recruitment of Nazis and Its Effects on the Cold War\" called Nazarenko a leading Republican activist who made \"explicit pro-Nazi, anti-semitic\" statements in his speeches.\nDuring the Perestroika era of the Soviet Union of the late 1980s, many descendants of the Cossacks became enthusiastic about reviving their national traditions. In 1988, the Soviet Union passed a law allowing the reestablishment of former hosts and creation of new ones. The ataman of the largest, the Almighty Don Host, was granted Marshal rank and the right to form a new host. Simultaneously, many attempts were made to increase Cossack's impact on Russian society, and throughout the 1990s many regional authorities agreed to hand over some local administration and policing duties to the Cossacks.\nAccording to the 2002 Russian Census, 140,028 people self-identified as ethnic Cossacks. Between 3.5 and 5 million people associate themselves with the Cossack identity in post-Soviet Russia and around the world.\nIn Ukraine the national revival of late 1980s led to the appreciation of Cossack history and culture as symbols of the Ukrainian nation. Cossack symbols and songs were widely used in mass events and demonstrations, particularly during the celebration of the 500th anniversary of the Zaporozhian Sich in 1990. A number of Ukrainian Cossack organizations emerged during that time.\nCossacks have taken an active part in many of the conflicts that have taken place since the disintegration of the Soviet Union. These include the War of Transnistria, Georgian\u2013Abkhazian conflict, Georgian\u2013Ossetian conflict, First Nagorno-Karabakh War, 2016 Nagorno-Karabakh war, First Chechen War, Second Chechen War, and the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine and both the subsequent War in Donbas and the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nCulture and organization.\nIn early times, an ataman (later called hetman) commanded a Cossack band. He was elected by the Host members at a Cossack \"rada,\" as were the other important officials: the judge, the scribe, the lesser officials, and the clergy. The ataman's symbol of power was a ceremonial mace, a \"bulava\". Today, Russian Cossacks are led by atamans, and Ukrainian Cossacks by hetmans.\nAfter the Polish\u2013Russian Treaty of Andrusovo split Ukraine along the Dnieper River in 1667, Ukrainian Cossacks were known as Left-bank and Right-bank Cossacks. The ataman had executive powers, and in wartime was the supreme commander in the field. Legislative power was given to the Band Assembly (\"Rada\"). The senior officers were called \"starshyna\". In the absence of written laws, the Cossacks were governed by the \"Cossack Traditions\" \u2013 the common, unwritten law.\nCossack society and government were heavily militarized. The nation was called a host (\"vois'ko\", or \"viys'ko\", translated as \"army\"). The people and territories were subdivided into regimental and company districts, and village posts (\"polky\", \"sotni\", and \"stanytsi\"). A unit of a Cossack troop could be called a Kurin. Each Cossack settlement, alone or in conjunction with neighboring settlements, formed military units and regiments of light cavalry or, in the case of Siberian Cossacks, mounted infantry. They could respond to a threat on very short notice.\nA high regard for education was a tradition among the Cossacks of Ukraine. In 1654, when Macarius III Ibn al-Za'im, the Patriarch of Antioch, traveled to Moscow through Ukraine, his son, Deacon Paul Allepscius, wrote the following report:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All over the land of Rus', i.e., among the Cossacks, we have noticed a remarkable feature which made us marvel; all of them, with the exception of only a few among them, even the majority of their wives and daughters, can read and know the order of the church-services as well as the church melodies. Besides that, their priests take care and educate the orphans, not allowing them to wander in the streets ignorant and unattended.\nGroupings.\nRussian Cossacks are divided into two broad groups: the Stepnoy (Ru:\u0421\u0442\u0435\u043f\u043d\u043e\u0439), those of the Steppes, and the Kavkas (Ru:\u041a\u0430\u0432\u043a\u0430\u0441), those of the Caucasus. In 1917 the Caucasians were divided into two hosts, the Kuban and the Terek; while the Steppe were divided into 8 hosts, the Don (the largest), Siberia, Orenburg, Astrakhan, Trans-Baikal, Semiretchi, Amur, and Ussurki voiskos.\nSettlements.\nRussian Cossacks founded numerous settlements (\"stanitsas\") and fortresses along troublesome borders. These included the forts Verny (Almaty, Kazakhstan) in south Central Asia; Grozny in North Caucasus; Fort Alexandrovsk (Fort Shevchenko, Kazakhstan); Krasnovodsk (Turkmenbashi, Turkmenistan); Novonikolayevskaya stanitsa (Bautino, Kazakhstan); Blagoveshchensk; and towns and settlements along the Ural, Ishim, Irtysh, Ob, Yenisei, Lena, Amur, Anadyr (Chukotka), and Ussuri Rivers. A group of Albazin Cossacks settled in China as early as 1685.\nCossacks interacted with nearby peoples and exchanged cultural influences (the Terek Cossacks, for example, were heavily influenced by the culture of North Caucasian tribes). They also frequently intermarried with local non-Cossack settlers and local inhabitants, regardless of race or origin, sometimes setting aside religious restrictions. War brides brought from distant lands were also common in Cossack families. General Bogaevsky, a commander in the Russian Volunteer Army, mentions in his 1918 memoir that one of his Cossacks, Sotnik Khoperski, was a native Chinese who had been brought back as a child from Manchuria during the Russian-Japanese War of 1904\u20131905 and adopted and raised by a Cossack family.\nCossacks initially relied on raiding, herding, fishing and hunting, despising agriculture as lowly. After the defeat of Stenka Razin in 1672, the Cossacks began transitioning to agriculture, but this would remain a secondary concern for Cossacks until the late 19th century.\nFamily life.\nHistorically, when Cossack men fought in permanent wars far from home, women took over the role of family leaders. Women were also called upon to physically defend their villages and towns from enemy attacks. In some cases, they raided and disarmed neighboring villages composed of other ethnic groups. Leo Tolstoy described such Cossack female chauvinism in his novel, \"The Cossacks\". Relations between the sexes within the \"stanitsas\" were relatively egalitarian. The American historian Thomas Barrett wrote \"The history of Cossack women complicates general notions of patriarchy within Russian society\".\nWhen the Malorossian Cossack regiments were disbanded, those Cossacks who were not promoted to nobility, or did not join other estates, were united into a civil Cossack estate. Sergei Korolev's mother was the daughter of a leader of the civil estate of the Zaporozhian Sich.\nPopular image.\nCossacks have long appealed to romantics as idealizing freedom and resistance to external authority, and their military exploits against their enemies have contributed to this favorable image. For others, Cossacks are a symbol of repression, for their role in suppressing popular uprisings in the Russian Empire, during the Khmelnytsky Uprising of 1648\u20131657, and in pogroms, including those perpetrated by the Terek Cossacks during the Russian revolution and by various Cossack atamans in Ukraine in 1919, among them atamans Zeleny, Hryhoriv, and Semosenko.\nLiterary reflections of Cossack culture abound in Russian, Ukrainian, and Polish literature, particularly in the works of Nikolai Gogol (\"Taras Bulba\"), Taras Shevchenko, Mikhail Sholokhov (And Quiet Flows the Don), Henryk Sienkiewicz (\"With Fire and Sword\"). One of Leo Tolstoy's first novellas, \"The Cossacks\", depicts their autonomy and estrangement from Moscow and from centralized rule. Many of Isaac Babel's stories (for instance, those in Red Cavalry) depict Cossack soldiers, and were based on Babel's experiences as a war correspondent attached to the 1st Cavalry Army.\nPolish Romantic literature also commonly dealt with Cossack themes. Some of the Polish writers of this period (for instance, Micha\u0142 Czajkowski and J\u00f3zef Bohdan Zaleski) were known as \"Cossacophiles\" who wholeheartedly celebrated the Cossack history and lifestyle in their works. Others, such as Henryk Rzewuski and Micha\u0142 Grabowski, were more critical in their approach.\nIn the literature of Western Europe, Cossacks appear in Byron's poem \"Mazeppa\", Tennyson's \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\", and Richard Connell's short story \"The Most Dangerous Game\". In many stories by adventure writer Harold Lamb, the main character is a Cossack.\nDuring the Imperial period, Cossacks acquired an image as the ferocious defenders of the antisemitic Russian state. Still, during the Soviet era, Jews were encouraged to admire Cossacks as the antitheses of the \"parasitic\" and \"feeble dwellers of the shtetl.\" A number of Yiddish writers, including Khaim Melamud, Shmuel Gordon, Viktor Fink, and Shmuel Godiner, presented fictionalized accounts of peaceful Jewish-Cossack coexistence, while efforts were made by the pro-Soviet press to present Khmelnytsky as a heroic figure and Cossacks as liberators from the Nazis.\nHistoriography interprets Cossackdom in imperial and colonial terms. In Ukraine, where Cossackdom represents historical and cultural heritage, some people have begun attempting to recreate the images of Ukrainian Cossacks. Traditional Ukrainian culture is often tied in with the Cossacks, and the Ukrainian government actively supports these attempts. The traditional Cossack \"bulava\" serves as a symbol of the Ukrainian presidency, and the island of Khortytsia, the origin and center of the Zaporozhian Sich, has been restored. The video game is a Ukrainian-made game series influenced by Cossack culture.\nCossacks are also mentioned outside Europe. The Japanese anime The Doraemons, part of the larger Doraemon anime series, has a Cossack character, Dora-nichov, who is from Russia.\nMusic.\nThe official military march of Russian Cossacks units is \"Cossacks in Berlin\", composed by Dmitry Pokrass and Daniil Pokrass, with lyrics being made by Caesar Solodar. Solodar was present when Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel signed the act of surrender to Allied forces. That same day, he left for Moscow and by the evening of 9 May, the song was written. The lyrics detail an interaction between a Cossack and a girl from Berlin.\nThe S. Tvorun arrangement of the Zaporizhian March (known as the \"Cossack march\") is one of the main marches of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, replacing \"Farewell of Slavianka\" in 1991 as the official sendoff music for army recruits. The Kuban Cossack Choir is a leading folkloric ensemble that reflects the dances and folklore of the Kuban Cossack.\nThe second movement of Mily Balakirev's Second Symphony is marked \"Scherzo alla Cosacca\", which means \"scherzo in the style of the Cossacks\".\nRanks.\nThe Russian Empire organized its Cossacks into several \"voiskos\" (hosts), which lived along the Russian border and internal borders between Russian and non-Russian peoples. Each host originally had its own leadership, ranks, regalia, and uniforms. By the late 19th century, ranks were standardized following the example of the Imperial Russian Army. The ranks and insignia were kept after the 1988 law allowing the hosts to reform, and the 2005 law legally recognizing the hosts as a combat service. They are given below as per all military tickets that are standard for the Russian Army.\nAs with the ranks Polkovnik and General, the Colonel ranks are only stable for small hosts, being given to atamans of regional and district status. The smallest unit, the \"stanitsa\", is commanded by a Yesaul. If the region or district lacks any other \"stanitsa\"s, the rank Polkovnik is applied automatically, but with no stars on the shoulder. As the hosts continue to grow, starless shoulder patches are becoming increasingly rare.\nIn addition, the supreme ataman of the largest Don Cossack Host is officially titled Marshal, and so wears insignia derived from the Russian/Soviet Marshal ranks, including the diamond Marshal Star. This is because the Don Cossack Supreme Ataman is recognized as the official head of all Cossack armies, including those outside the present Russian borders. He also has the authority to recognize and dissolve new hosts.\nUniforms.\nCossacks were expected to provide their own uniforms. While these were sometimes manufactured in bulk by factories owned by the individual host, families often handed down garments or made them within the household. Accordingly, individual items might vary from those laid down by regulation, or be of obsolete pattern. Each host had distinctive uniform colourings. Similar uniforms are in service today amongst the Cossacks of Russia.\nFor most hosts, the basic uniform consisted of the standard loose-fitting tunics and wide trousers typical of Russian regular troops from 1881 to 1908, and shown in the two photographs opposite. In marked contrast the two Caucasian hosts (Kuban and Terek) wore the very long, open-fronted, \"cherkesska\" coats with ornamental cartridge loops and coloured \"beshmet\"s (waistcoats). These have come to epitomize the popular image of the Cossacks. Most hosts wore fleece hats with coloured cloth tops in full dress, and round caps with or without peaks for ordinary duties. These caps were worn sharply slanted to one side by the rank-and-file of Cossack regiments, over hair trimmed longer than that of ordinary Russian soldiers. The two Caucasian hosts wore high fleece caps on most occasions, together with black felt cloaks (\"burke\") in bad weather.\nUntil 1909, Cossack regiments in summer wore white \"gymnasterkas\" (blouses) and cap covers of standard Russian army pattern. The shoulder straps and cap bands were in the host colour, as detailed below. From 1910 to 1918, they wore a khaki-grey jacket for field wear. The dress uniform had blue or green breeches with broad, coloured stripes in the host colour, which were often worn with the service jacket.\nWhile most Cossacks served as cavalry, several of the larger hosts had infantry and artillery units. Three regiments of Cossacks formed part of the Imperial Guard, as well as the \"Konvoi\"\u2014the tsar's mounted escort. The Imperial Guard regiments wore tailored, government-issue uniforms, which were colourful and elaborate. For example, the \"Konvoi\" wore scarlet \"cherkesska\"s, white \"beshmet\"s, and red crowns on their fleece hats. The Guard Cossacks of His Majesty and the Ataman's Guard Cossacks, both drawn from the Don Host, wore red, and light blue, coats respectively. The Combined Cossack Guard Regiment, comprising representative detachments from each of the remaining hosts, wore red, light blue, crimson, or orange coats, according to squadron.\nModern-day Cossack identity.\nEthnic, or \"born\" (\"prirodnye\"), Cossacks are those who can trace, or claim to trace, their ancestry to people and families identified as Cossack in the Tsarist era. They tend to be Christian, practicing as Orthodox Christians or Old Believers; though there are growing numbers of Rodnovers, especially among Ukrainian Cossacks.\nOthers may be initiated as Cossacks, particularly men in military service. Such initiates may be neither ethnic Slavs, nor Christian. Not all agree that such initiates should be considered Cossack. There is no consensus on an initiation rite or rules.\nIn other cases, individuals may wear Cossack uniform and pass themselves off as Cossack, perhaps because there is a large ethnic Cossack population in the area and the person wants to fit in. Others adopt Cossack clothing in an attempt to take on some of their mythic status. Ethnic Cossacks refer to the re-enactors as \"ryazhenye\" (\u0440\u044f\u0436\u0435\u043d\u044b\u0435, or \"dressed up phonies\").\nBecause of the lack of consensus on how to define Cossacks, accurate numbers are not available. According to the Russian Census of 2010, 67,573\u00a0people identify as ethnic Cossack in Russia. Between 3.5 and 5\u00a0million people associate themselves with the Cossack identity in Europe and across the world.\nOrganizations.\nAmericas.\nThe Cossack Congress in America unites the Cossack communities of the North American Continent. It has branches in the U.S., Canada, and Colombia.\nArmenia.\nOn April 24, 1999, the founding meeting of the International Armenian-Cossack Friendship and Cooperation Association was held in Yerevan. There is a Separate Cossack District of the Great Don Army operating in Armenia. The organization was established by the decision of the Council of Atamans on December 15, 2015. It is a partner of the Ministry of Defense of Armenia.\nAzerbaijan.\nThe Association of Cossacks of Azerbaijan operates in the Republic of Azerbaijan. The association was established in 1992 and registered with the Ministry of Justice of Azerbaijan on 16 November 1994, with 1,500 members. Many Cossacks under the association join the Azerbaijani Armed Forces.\nBelarus.\nThere are 3 republican Cossack organizations in Belarus: the All-Belarusian United Cossacks, the All-Belarusian Unified Cossacks and the Belarusian Cossacks, which have existed since the mid-1990s.\nRussia.\nRegistered Cossacks of the Russian Federation.\nThe Registered Cossacks of the Russian Federation are the Cossack paramilitary formation providing public and other services, under the Federal Law of the Russian Federation dated December 5, 2005, No. 154-FZ \"On State Service of the Russian Cossacks\".\nAll-Russian Cossack Society.\nThe All-Russian Cossack Society () is responsible for the coordination of the activities of all 11 registered Cossack hosts, particularly in the spheres of patriotic education and the continuity of historical Cossack customs and traditions. Both registered and non-registered Cossack organizations can be part of the society. On 4 November 2019, Russian President Vladimir Putin appointed Kuban Vice Governor and Kuban Cossack Host Ataman Nikolai Doluda as Ataman of the All-Russia Cossack Society. Cossack General Doluda was appointed two years after the atamans and the Cossacks created it in October 2017. The idea was first proposed in 1994. On 27 November 2018, delegates of the Constitutive Assembly voted for the establishment of the society and adopted its official statute. Doluda was then nominated for head of the society, in which he was backed by the Presidential Council on Cossack Affairs.\nUkraine.\nThe following organizations operate in Ukraine:\nPropaganda and stereotypes.\nThe propaganda machine of Napoleon, a French military and political leader, spread the myth of \"English Cossacks\". French propaganda portrayed the inhabitants of the Scottish Highlands as barbarian with non-human bodily functions, who allegedly felt great joy when destroying civilian housing, farmland, and even entire human settlements. This stereotype of Scottish people was later mingled with observations on Russian soldiers fighting on the European continent. In Europe \"Cossack\" is a titulation for a thief, while Russians have been stereotyped by French authors as exotic.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
