{"id": "68418", "revid": "1310186420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68418", "title": "Mare Island Naval Shipyard", "text": "The Mare Island Naval Shipyard (MINSY or MINS) was the first United States Navy base established on the Pacific Ocean and was in service 142 years from 1854 to 1996. It is located on the peninsula of Mare Island, which is part of the city of Vallejo, on San Pablo Bay in the San Francisco Bay area of California, northeast of San Francisco. MINSY made a name for itself as the premier U.S. West Coast submarine port as well as serving as the controlling force in San Francisco Bay Area shipbuilding efforts during World War II.\nThe naval base was closed on 31 March 1996, with more than 7,500 civilians on its payroll, and has gone through several redevelopment phases. It was registered as a California Historical Landmark in 1960, and parts of it were declared a National Historic Landmark District in 1975.\nBeginnings.\nIn September 1849, Lieutenant Commander William Pope McArthur was placed in command of the US survey schooner \"Ewing\", which had been brought around Cape Horn to the West Coast by Lieutenant Washington Allon Bartlett. Upon reaching San Francisco, \"Ewing\" and the other ship assigned to the survey, , were hampered from progress due to desertions of their crews to the gold fields, including a mutiny when crew members rowing into the city from \"Ewing\" threw an officer overboard in an attempt to desert. They managed to survey the Mare Island Strait before steaming to Hawaii to obtain crewmen from Hawaiian monarch King Kamehameha III. They returned to San Francisco in the spring of 1850 with the coastal survey of northern California beginning on 4 April 1850 and continued up to the mouth of the Columbia River. On 1 August 1850, while still in Oregon, McArthur purchased a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204416 interest in Mare Island for $468.50 then returned to San Francisco later that month to prepare charts and write reports.\nOn 15 January 1852, Secretary of the Navy William A. Graham ordered a Naval Commission to select a site for a naval yard on the Pacific Coast. Commodore D. Sloat along with Commodore C. Ringgold, Simon F. Blunt and William P.S. Sanger (former overseer of construction of Drydock Number One, Norfolk Naval Shipyard) were appointed to the commission. On 13 July 1852, Sloat recommended Mare Island, across Mare Island Strait from the settlement of Vallejo. The next month, a sectional floating dry dock, authorized by Secretary Graham for use in California, arrived in San Francisco. It was built in New York and shipped in sections around Cape Horn. In 1853, the Navy purchased Mare Island, the original 956 acres (387 ha) of land for MINSY, for a grand sum of $83,491; subsequently the floating dry dock was moved into place in Mare Island Strait. McArthur's family share (he had died a few months after purchasing his share of Mare Island) was $5,218. Based on observations at the site, Sanger conceived the original plan for the naval yard at Mare Island, later formalized by planners at the Navy Bureau of Yards and Docks in Washington, D.C. Although the 1854 Sanger plan was basically sound and mostly implemented, it did not overcome its natural shortcoming: the naval yard was built on an island on shallow San Pablo Bay.\nOn 16 September 1854, the Navy commenced shipbuilding and ship repair operations at Mare Island under the command of then-Commander David Farragut, who later gained fame during the U.S. Civil War Battle of Mobile Bay, when he gave the order, \"Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead!\" Farragut and his newly appointed Civil Engineer, Daniel Turner, began to implement Sanger's original plan with only a few minor modifications. Of the early buildings constructed under Turner, five are still standing in historic Shipyard North: Building 46, a smithery built in 1856; Building 71, a storage built in 1858; Building 85, a foundry built in 1858; Building 87, a machine shop built in 1858; and Building 89/91, a boiler shop built in 1858. The other MINSY area constructed was the Ammunition Depot at the south end of the Island, used to store ordnance from warships under repair. Still standing from the Turner years in Ammunition Depot is Building A1, a magazine built in 1857.\nMINSY served as a major Pacific Ocean repair station during the late 19th century, handling American as well as Japanese and Russian vessels in the course of duty.\nIn 1861, the longest lived of the clipper ships, , was brought to Mare Island Navy Yard for $15,000 of repairs. \"Syren\" had struck Mile Rock twice while trying to sail out of the Golden Gate.\nMarines first arrived for duty in 1862 under the command of Maj Addison Garland, who was the first officer to command the Marine barracks on the island.\nBuilt in 1901 under the guidance of Chaplain Adam A. McAlister and U.S. Senator George C. Perkins, St. Peter's Chapel was the second chapel built on a U.S. Navy property, the first in the Pacific, and the first interdenominational chapel in the armed services. According to historian McDonald, \"The chapel, more than any other building, bears witness to the closeness of the community that developed at the Mare Island Naval Shipyard.\"\nMare Island Naval Shipyard also took a commanding role in civil defense and emergency response on the West Coast, dispatching warships to the Pacific Northwest to subdue Native American unrest. MINSY sent ships such as south to Central America and the Panama Canal to protect US political and commercial interests. Some of the support, logistics and munition requirements for the Spanish\u2013American War were filled by Mare Island. MINSY sent men, materiel and ships to San Francisco in response to the fires following the 1906 earthquake. Arctic rescue missions were mounted as necessary. Ordnance manufacturing and storage were two further key missions at MINSY for nearly all of its active service, including ordnance used prior to the American Civil War.\nIn 1911, the Marine Corps established two West Coast recruit training depots first at Mare Island, the second at Puget Sound, Washington. Mare Island eventually became the West Coast's only recruit training facility when the Puget Sound operation consolidated to the San Francisco Bay Area in 1912. Instructors trained recruits there until 10 August 1923, when they relocated to Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego.\nWorld War I.\nIn 1917, when the Marine Expeditionary Force in the Pacific was assigned to Mare Island, the MINSY Marine Corps compound, which was always under Marine Corps command, was relocated to the large hilltop isolated from and west of Shipyard South. The newly built Building M37, a handsome three-story reinforced-concrete building of Beaux Arts design, occupied the entire eastern end of a huge parade ground. It served as the focal point, headquarters, and barracks of the Marine Corps detachment at MINSY. During World War I, the MINSY Marine Corps compound was the major training station on the West Coast.\nIn July 1917, MINSY was the site of a major explosion that killed six people. On July 9, a gunpowder magazine containing 127,600 pounds of black powder blew up, damaging a number of surrounding buildings, and leaving a mystery as to what had caused it. Suspicion settled on an identified German agent and possible saboteur, Lothar Witzke, but the investigation proved inconclusive and the official verdict was that the cause was unknown. Stephen C. Ruder has suggested in a 2022 article that it may not have been an act of German sabotage but suicide by a civilian, Neil Damstedt, who was the principal victim and only individual inside the magazine at the moment of explosion.\nMINSY saw major shipbuilding efforts during World War I. MINSY holds a shipbuilding speed record for a destroyer that still stands, launching in just &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;17+1\u20442 days in May\u2013June 1918. Mare Island was selected by the Navy for construction of the only US West Coast-built dreadnought battleship, , launched in 1919. Several pre-dreadnought battleships had previously been launched at San Francisco and Seattle. Noting the power of underwater warfare shown by German U-boats in World War I, the Navy doubled their Pacific-based submarine construction program at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard by founding a submarine program at MINSY in the early 1920s.\nMare Island Marines Football Team.\nDuring this period, the Marines stationed at MINSY fielded a college football team which competed against teams in the Pacific Coast Conference and other military service football teams. After the United States entered WWI during April 1917, many college athletes joined or were drafted into the military. Enrolments diminished at universities around the country, with many schools cutting back their sports programs as a result. Consequently, military academies and training bases established football teams composed mostly of college players who had been recruited for service. This was further encouraged by officials who considered football to be excellent war training, with its themes of leadership, teamwork, and discipline. The 1917 Mare Island Marines football team strung together an impressive first season, going 8\u20130, shutting out six opponents, winning the 1918 Rose Bowl against the Camp Lewis 91st Division football team, and outscoring all of their opponents by a combined total of 200 to 10. This was despite only 500 Marines being stationed at the base when the team was formed. The 1918 Mare Island Marines football team fielded an entirely new roster, which achieved a similar level of success as the previous year. They finished the season with a 10\u20131 record, losing only in the 1919 Rose Bowl to the Great Lakes Navy Bluejackets.\nInterwar years.\nThe Marine Corps training continued after World War I until 1921, when the Marine Corps recruitment center opened in San Diego. The MINSY Marine Corps detachment continued to occupy Building M37 until 1996, but never regained its pre-1921 importance. From around 1922 to 1937, an airfield was established west of the Marine Barracks (Building M37) as a support base for the Navy's first aircraft carrier, , which had her origin at Mare Island. When \"Langley\" was at MINSY for repairs, her planes had to be removed to the MINSY airfield, which was also used for training. At her overhaul at MINSY in 1925, her deck was extended 23 feet, increasing her complement of planes to two full squadrons (36 planes). From October 1936 to February 1937, she was converted to a seaplane tender at MINSY.\nIn 1919, MINSY was finally, after 65 years, linked to mainland Vallejo by a causeway with a drawbridge, which provided direct land-based movement of supplies and personnel across Mare Island Strait. Owing to the shallowness of the shipping channels in Mare Island Strait and San Pablo Bay, the larger battleships and carriers of the Pacific fleet were sent not to MINSY but to leased dry docks then-privately owned at Hunters Point. However, submarine work was especially suited for Mare Island. MINSY became the major West Coast submarine repair facility in WWI and in 1925 was awarded a contract to build its first submarine, . In the 1930s, land reclamation nearly doubled the usable acreage on Mare Island. For example, the low-lying North End marshland were raised above high tide, making it available for future MINSY expansion.\nBefore World War II, the Navy established Station I at Mare Island as one of four High Frequency Direction Finding (HFDF) stations on the Pacific mainland to track Japanese naval and merchant shipping east of Hawaii. The other stations were: Point Arguello, California (Station Z), Point Saint George, California (Station T), and Fort Stevens, Oregon (Station S).\nWorld War II.\nBase facilities included a hospital, ammunition depot, paint and rubber testing laboratories, and schools for firefighters, opticians, and anti-submarine attack during World War II. MINSY reached peak capacity for shipbuilding, repair, overhaul, and maintenance of many different kinds of seagoing vessels including both surface combatants and submarines. Up to 50,000 workers were employed. Mare Island even received Royal Navy cruisers and destroyers and four Soviet Navy subs for service.\nBefore the wartime expansion, MINSY had a usable area of about 635 acres. By 1945, MINSY more than doubled its usable area to about 1500 acres, much of which was reclaimed land at the North End. Most of the large permanent buildings were built between 1938 and 1941, before concrete and steel became restricted because of wartime demands. Shipyard South had the newest and best-built or redesigned industrial buildings for mass pre-fabricated sub-assembly production of submarines as well as the waterfront repair of battle-damaged vessels. The open North End was transformed into a new assembly plant for mass production of escort vessels and landing crafts, producing at its peak performance one destroyer escort every ten days and one landing craft each day.\nFollowing the War, MINSY was considered to be one of the primary stations for construction and maintenance of the Navy's Pacific fleet of submarines, having built seventeen submarines and four submarine tenders by the end of hostilities.\nWar bonds.\nPatriotism and \"esprit de corps\" among the workers ran very high. Mare Island's military and civilian workforce raised almost $76M in war bonds; enough to pay for every one of the submarines built at MINSY prior to VJ Day. More than 300 landing craft were built at Mare Island.\nDry docks and slipways.\nWhen the shipyard was commissioned in 1854, it relied on a floating dry dock for ship repair. Although the Navy intended from the outset to have a permanent dry dock at Mare Island, the funds were not available until 1872, when Congress authorized $2 million for its construction. By then, Calvin Brown took over design and construction from Daniel Turner, the first civil engineer at the base. Dry Dock 1 was designed by Brown, who prepared for it by touring facilities throughout the U.S. and Europe, and was his most enduring achievement. Dry Dock 1 was the \"raison d'etre\" of the 19th century shipyard, the most important single structure at Mare Island. It remains one of the most remarkable examples of stone masonry construction in the United States.\nThe first concrete foundation for Dry Dock 1 was poured in 1874 and the first granite stone was laid the next year. The granite blocks were cut at quarries at Crystal Lake, Pino, Rocklin, Folsom, and Penryn. The entire surface of Dry Dock 1 is finished in dressed granite blocks. The floor is smooth and the walls are finished in stepped blocks. Construction of Dry Dock 1 was completed in 1891, $400,000 or 20% over budget. Owing to the large increases in the size of American ships in the late 19th century, the Navy began construction of a much longer, concrete, second dry dock shortly after the completion of the historic granite Dry Dock 1.\nDry Dock 2 was built between 1899 and 1910 during a period of intense modernization of Mare Island. The March 1898 Mare Island earthquake that leveled many of the unreinforced masonry structures on the base and the 1898 Spanish-American War convinced the Navy and Congress to modernize Mare Island in order to maintain a substantial fleet in the Pacific. A key element to supporting the Pacific fleet was the construction a \"state-of-the-art\" Dry Dock 2 that can accommodate any ship of the Navy afloat or under design. It needed to be several hundred feet longer than Dry Dock 1 and had to be built at a 45-degree angle to the shoreline, adjacent to Dry Dock 1, to avoid demolition of the older shop buildings on the waterfront. It was lined with modern hydraulic concrete, with granite masonry used only in critical areas, like its locks and upper sill. Dry Dock 2 served as the main dry dock at Mare Island for three decades, from 1910 through the 1930s. During the build-up leading to and during World War II to meet the sharply increasing demand for the shipyard's dual and competing mission of shipbuilding and ship-repairing, two more dry docks were built: Dry Dock 3, the second largest dry dock at Mare Island, and Dry Dock 4, used primarily for submarines and destroyers, both in the newer, more modernized Shipyard South area.\nPrior to the wartime expansion beginning in 1938, there were two building ways, No. 1 and 2, at Shipyard North. By the end of World War II, six new building ways had been added in two areas. Ways No. 3 was added to the redesigned Shipyard South and was used primarily for dry dock tugs, barges, and other small crafts. Ways No. 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 were added to the newly transformed North End and were used primarily for mass production of destroyer escorts and landing crafts. The yard also increased greatly its berthing capacity; at its peak MINSY was capable of berthing and working on 100 ships at one time.\nShipbuilding.\nMare Island Naval Shipyard constructed at least eighty-nine seagoing vessels. Among the more important ships &amp; boats built were:\nWith the prelude to, and the outbreak of World War II, the Mare Island Naval Shipyard specialized in submarines, and other than a few submarine tenders and destroyer escorts, no more surface ships were built there. MINSY continued building non-nuclear subs through the Cold War including two of the three \"Barracuda\"-class submarines and , an early guided missile launcher. In 1955, Mare Island was awarded the contract to build , the first nuclear submarine laid down at a Pacific base.\nThe shipyard became one of the few that built and overhauled nuclear submarines, including several UGM-27 Polaris submarines. 1970 saw the launching of , the last nuclear submarine built in California. In 1972, the Navy officially ceased building new nuclear submarines at Mare Island, though overhaul of existing vessels continued. was decommissioned at Mare Island in 1980, then rigged for towing back to Groton, Connecticut, to serve as a museum of naval history.\nRiverine training.\nIn 1966, during the Vietnam War, the U.S. Navy transferred their Brown Water Navy Riverine Training Operations from Coronado, California, to Mare Island. Motorists traveling along Highway 37 could often see U.S. Navy River Patrol Boats, among other river assault type boats, maneuvering through the sloughs of what is now the Napa-Sonoma State Wildlife Area, which borders the north and west portions of Mare Island.\nU.S. Navy Reserve Units may still operate the slough portions of the State Wildlife Area for training purposes, as the navigable waters are considered public property. The U.S. Navy Brown Water Riverine Forces were inactivated after the Vietnam War, maintaining only the U.S. Naval Reserve PBRs and auxiliary craft at Mare Island, until the 1996 base closure.\nU.S. Naval Construction Battalion Unit 421\nMare Island was also home to the Seabees CBU 421 who completed many construction projects in the bay area including renovation and restoration of St. Peter's chapel. St. Peter's is the oldest Navy Chapel in the United States built in 1901.\nPacific Reserve Fleet, Mare Island.\nPacific Reserve Fleet, Mare Island was a large US reserve fleet that opened in 1946 to store the many surplus ships after World War II. As part of the United States Navy reserve fleets, the fleet \"mothballed\" ships and submarines. Some ships in the fleet were reactivated for the Korean War and Vietnam War. The Reserve Fleet closed in 1996 with the shipyard. The ships were scrapped or moved to other reserve fleets.\nBase closure.\nMare Island Naval Shipyard expanded to over during its service life and was responsible for construction of over 500 naval vessels and overhauling thousands of other vessels. Though it remained a strong contender for continued operations, MINSY was identified for closure during the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) process of 1993. Naval operations ceased and the facility was decommissioned on 31 March 1996.\nThe California Conservation Corps, Touro University California, and numerous commercial and industrial businesses are currently leasing property aboard the former naval shipyard. In May 2000, the Navy completed the transfer of a former housing area called Roosevelt Terrace using an \"economic development conveyance\"; a method to accelerate the transfer of BRAC facilities back to civilian communities for their economic benefit. The Navy is also transferring property at the shipyard to other government agencies such as Fish and Wildlife Service refuge, a Forest Service office building, an Army Reserve Center, a Coast Guard communications facility, and a Department of Education school.\nAppearances in popular culture.\nThe shipyard was featured by Huell Howser in \"California's Gold\" Episode 704.\nThe Netflix hit series \u201cThirteen Reasons Why\u201d filmed in various locations of the city. Filming locations included Georgia Street in Downtown Vallejo, Virginia Street specifically Monet\u2019s Cafe, and sound stages on Mare Island. https://www.visitvallejo.com/film-office/13-reasons-why-film-locations-in-vallejo-ca\nScenes from the 2018 science fiction film \"Bumblebee\" were filmed in the industrial section of Mare Island, most notably the dry dock slipways.\nIn 2015 FIAT shot an automobile commercial along the industrial waterside, including a chase scene on the old coal shed loading platform.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68419", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68419", "title": "Historical novel", "text": ""}
{"id": "68421", "revid": "14419815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68421", "title": "Flashman Papers", "text": ""}
{"id": "68423", "revid": "1102976", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68423", "title": "Bob Hayes", "text": "American football player and sprinter (1942\u20132002)\nRobert Lee Hayes (December 20, 1942 \u2013 September 18, 2002), nicknamed \"Bullet Bob\", was an American sprinter and professional football player. After winning gold medals at the 1964 Summer Olympics, he played as a split end in the National Football League (NFL) for the Dallas Cowboys (for 11 seasons). Hayes is the only athlete to win both an Olympic gold medal and a Super Bowl ring. He was a two-sport standout in college in both track and field and football at Florida A&amp;M University. Hayes was enshrined in the Dallas Cowboys Ring of Honor in 2001 and was selected for induction in the Pro Football Hall of Fame in January 2009. Hayes is the second Olympic gold medalist to be inducted to the Pro Football Hall of Fame, after Jim Thorpe. He once held the world record for the 70-yard dash (with a time of 6.9 seconds). He also is tied for the world's second-fastest time in the 60-yard dash.\nHe was once considered the \"world's fastest human\" by virtue of his multiple world records in the 60-yard, 100-yard, 220-yard, and Olympic 100-meter dashes. He was inducted into the United States Olympic Hall of Fame.\nEarly life.\nHayes attended Matthew Gilbert High School in Jacksonville, where he was a halfback on the football team. The 1958 Gilbert High Panthers finished 12\u20130, winning the Florida High School Athletic Association black school state championship with a 14\u20137 victory over Dillard High School of Fort Lauderdale before more than 11,000 spectators. In times of racial segregation laws, their achievement went basically unnoticed, until 50 years later when they were recognized as one of the best teams in Florida High School Athletic Association (FHSAA) history.\nCollege career.\nA highly recruited athlete, Hayes accepted a football scholarship from Florida A&amp;M University, a historically black college, where he excelled in track and field. \nIn 1962, the University of Miami invited him to a meet on their campus, where he tied the world record of 9.2 seconds in the 100-yard dash, which had been set by Frank Budd of Villanova University the previous year. He also was the first person to break six seconds in the 60-yard dash with his indoor world record of 5.9 seconds.\nIn 1963, although he never used a traditional sprinter form, he broke the 100-yard dash record with a time of 9.1, a mark that would not be broken for eleven years (until Ivory Crockett ran a 9.0 in 1974). The same year, Hayes set the world best for 200 meters (20.5 seconds, although the time was never ratified) and ran the 220-yard dash in a time of 20.6 seconds (while running into an wind). He was selected to represent the United States in the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo. His football coach Jake Gaither was not very high on giving Hayes time to train, which caused then president Lyndon B. Johnson to call him and insist he allow Hayes time off and to keep him healthy.\nHe was the AAU 100-yard dash champion three years running, from 1962 to 1964, and in 1964 was the NCAA champion in the 200-meter dash. He missed part of his senior year because of his Olympic bid for the gold medal.\nIn 1976, he was inducted into the inaugural class of the Florida A&amp;M University Sports Hall of Fame. In 1996, he was inducted into the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference Hall of Fame. In 2011, he was inducted into the Black College Football Hall of Fame.\nOlympics.\nAt the 1964 Summer Olympics, in Tokyo, Hayes won the 100 m and in doing so tied the then world record in the 100 m with a time of 10.06 seconds, even though he was running in lane 1 which had, the day before, been used for the 20\u00a0km racewalk and this badly damaged the cinder track. He also was running in borrowed spikes because one of his shoes had been kicked under the bed when he was playing with some friends and he didn't realize until he got there. This was followed by a second gold medal in the 4 \u00d7 100-meter relay, which also produced a new World Record (39.06 seconds).\nHowever, the international track and field federation World Athletics, formerly IAAF, faultily \"only\" accredits Hayes with a hand-timed 10.0 s during his 10.06 s race making him Olympic Champion over 100 m - that although the official manual stopwatches clocked Hayes at 9.8 s, 9.9 s and 9.9 s, which, according to the rules, was a hand-timed 9.9 s.\nHayes' come-from-behind win for the US team in the relay was one of the most memorable Olympic moments. Hand-timed between 8.5 and 8.9 seconds, his relay leg is the fastest in history. Jocelyn Delecour, France's anchor leg runner, famously said to Paul Drayton before the relay final that, \"You can't win, all you have is Bob Hayes.\" Drayton was able to reply afterwards, \"That's all we need.\" The race was also Hayes' last as a track and field athlete, as he permanently switched to football after it, aged only 21.\nIn some of the first meets to be timed with experimental fully automatic timing, Hayes was the first man to break ten seconds for the 100 meters, albeit with a 5.3\u00a0m/s wind assistance in the semi-finals of the 1964 Olympics. His time was recorded at 9.91 seconds. Jim Hines officially broke 10 seconds at the high altitude of Mexico City, Mexico in 1968 (and on a synthetic track) with a wind-legal 9.95 which stood as the world record for almost 15 years. The next to surpass Hayes at a low altitude Olympics was Carl Lewis in 1984 when he won in 9.99, some 20 years later (though Hasely Crawford equaled the time in 1976).\nUntil the Tokyo Olympics, world records were measured by officials with stopwatches, measured to the nearest tenth of a second. Although fully automatic timing was used in Tokyo, the times were given the appearance of manual timing. This was done by subtracting 0.05 seconds from the automatic time and rounding to the nearest tenth of a second, making Hayes' time of 10.06 seconds convert to 10.0 seconds, despite the fact that the officials with stopwatches had measured Hayes' time to be 9.9 seconds, and the average difference between manual and automatic times was typically 0.15 to 0.20 seconds. This unique method of determining the official time therefore denied Hayes the record of being the first to officially record 9.9 seconds for the 100 meters. The first official times of 9.9 seconds were recorded at the \"Night of Speed\" in 1968.\nProfessional football career.\nDallas Cowboys.\nThe Dallas Cowboys selected Hayes in the seventh round (88th overall) of the 1964 NFL draft with a future draft pick, which allowed the team to draft him before his college eligibility was over, taking a chance that the Olympic sprinter with unrefined football skills could excel as a wide receiver. He was also selected by the Denver Broncos in the 14th round (105th overall) of the 1964 AFL draft, with a future selection. Hayes has been credited by many with forcing the NFL to develop a zone defense and the bump and run to attempt to contain him.\nHayes' first two seasons were most successful, during which he led the NFL both times in receiving touchdowns with 12 and 13 touchdowns, respectively. In 1966 Hayes caught six passes for 195 yards against the New York Giants at the Cotton Bowl. Later, in the Dallas Cowboys-Washington Redskins match-up, Hayes caught nine passes for 246 yards (a franchise record until Miles Austin broke it with a 250-yard performance on October 11, 2009, against the Kansas City Chiefs). Hayes' speed forced other teams to go to a zone since no single player could keep up with him. Spreading the defense out in hopes of containing Hayes allowed the Cowboys' talented running game to flourish, rushers Don Perkins, Calvin Hill, Walt Garrison and Duane Thomas taking advantage of the diminished coverage at the line of scrimmage. In the 1967 season, Hayes led the NFL in punt return yards, and went on to set an NFL playoff record with 141 punt return yards in Dallas' 52-14 win over the Cleveland Browns. Hayes also caught 5 passes for 145 yards in that game, including an 86-yard touchdown catch.\nHayes is also infamous for two events, both involving the NFL championship games in 1966 and 1967, both against the Green Bay Packers. In the 1966 game, on the last meaningful play of the game, Hayes missed an assignment of blocking linebacker Dave Robinson, which resulted in Don Meredith nearly being sacked by Robinson and as a result throwing a desperation pass into the end zone that was intercepted by Tom Brown. In the 1967 NFL championship, the \"Ice Bowl\" played on New Year's Eve, 1967, Hayes was alleged to have inadvertently disclosed whether the upcoming play was a pass or run because on running plays he kept his hands inside his pants to keep them warm and the Green Bay defense knew they didn't need to cover him.\nOn July 17, 1975, he was traded to the San Francisco 49ers in exchange for a third round draft choice (#73-Duke Fergerson).\nHayes wore No. 22 with the Cowboys, which would later be worn by running back Emmitt Smith.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nIn 1975 with the San Francisco 49ers, Hayes teamed up with Gene Washington in the starting lineup. After not playing up to expectations in the first five games, he was waived on October 22 to make room for wide receiver Terry Beasley.\nMultiple offensive threat.\nIn addition to receiving, Hayes returned punts for the Cowboys and was the NFL's leading punt returner in 1968 with a 20.8 yards per return average and two touchdowns, including a 90 yarder against the Pittsburgh Steelers. He was named to the Pro Bowl three times and First-team All-Pro twice and Second-team All-Pro twice. He helped Dallas win five Eastern Conference titles, two NFC titles, played in two Super Bowls, and was instrumental in Dallas' first-ever Super Bowl victory after the 1971 season, making Hayes the only person to win both an Olympic gold medal and a Super Bowl ring. Later in his career, as defenses improved playing zone and the bump and run was refined, Hayes' value was as a decoy rather than a deep threat.\nCowboy records.\nHayes was the second player (after Franklin Clarke) in the history of the Dallas Cowboys franchise to surpass 1,000 yards (ground or air) in a single season, and he did that in his rookie year by finishing with 1,003 yards. Also during his rookie year, he led the team with 46 receptions and set franchise records for total touchdowns (13) and total receiving touchdowns (12). He finished his 11-year career with 371 receptions for 7,414 yards and 71 touchdowns, giving him an impressive 20 yards per catch average (his yards per catch average remains a franchise record, while his touchdown reception record stood until 2017, when it was broken by Dez Bryant.) He also rushed for 68 yards on 24 carries and two touchdowns, gained 581 yards on 23 kickoff returns, and returned 104 punts for 1,158 yards and three touchdowns.\nIn 1965 he also started a streak (1965\u20131966) of seven consecutive games with at least a touchdown catch, which still stands as a Cowboys record shared with Franklin Clarke (1961\u20131962), Terrell Owens (2007) and Dez Bryant (2012).\nHis 7,295 receiving yards are the sixth-most in Dallas Cowboys history. To this day, Hayes holds ten regular-season receiving records, four punt return records and 22 overall franchise marks, making him one of the greatest receivers to ever play for the Cowboys.\nIn 2004, he was named to the Professional Football Researchers Association Hall of Very Good in the association's second HOVG class.\nDeath.\nOn September 18, 2002, Hayes died in his hometown of Jacksonville of kidney failure, after battling prostate cancer and liver ailments.\nPro Football Hall of Fame.\n2004 controversy.\nHayes was close to being inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2004, but was denied the opportunity in the final round of decision-making. The decision was marred by controversy, with many claiming that the Hall of Fame Senior Selection Committee had a bias against members of the Dallas Cowboys and other NFL teams. Others believe Hayes' legal and drug use issues marred his chances. Shortly after the announcement of the new 2004 Hall of Fame members, long-time \"Sports Illustrated\" writer Paul Zimmerman resigned from the Selection Committee in protest of the decision to leave Hayes out of the Hall. Zimmerman eventually returned as a Hall of Fame voter.\n2009 induction.\nOn August 27, 2008, Hayes was named as one of two senior candidates for the 2009 Hall of Fame election. On Saturday, January 31, 2009, he was selected as a member of the Pro Football Hall of Fame's Class of 2009.\nThe next day Lucille Hester, who claimed to be Hayes's sister, released a letter she said he had drafted three years before he died, on October 29, 1999, in case he did not live to see his induction. Its full text read:\nYou know I am not sure I am going to be around if I get into the Pro Football Hall of Fame so you must read this for me, I am not sure, I guess I am feeling sorry for myself at this time but you must remember everything I want you to do and say. Mother said you would do what I want because you always did. So read this for me.\nI would like to thank everyone who supported me to get into the NFL Hall of Fame, the Dallas Cowboys organization, all of my team mates and everyone who played for the Cowboys, (thank the San Francisco 49rs [\"sic\"] too). Thank the fans all around the country and the world, thank the committee who voted for me and also the ones who may did not vote for me, thank Mother and my family, thank Roger Stauback [\"sic\"] and tell all my teammates I love them dearly.\nThank the Pro Football Hall of Fame, all the NFL teams and players, Florida A&amp;M University, thank everyone who went to Mathew [\"sic\"] Gilbert High School, thank everyone in Jacksonville and Florida and everyone especially on the East Side of Jacksonville. Thank everyone in the City of Dallas and in Texas and just thank everyone in the whole world.\nI love you all.\nDelivered by Hester in front of hundreds and a national cable television audience, the moment was described as \"... one of the most compelling and touching scenes the Hall of Fame has seen.\" Shortly after, it was discovered that the supposedly signed letter was printed in the Calibri font, which was not released to the public until five years after Hayes' death. Some family members disputed Lucille Hester's claim to be related to Bob, and took steps to ensure she was not part of the Hall of Fame ceremony.\nOn August 8, 2009, Hayes was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame. Roger Staubach, Hayes' Dallas Cowboy teammate, along with Hayes' son Bob Hayes Jr., unveiled the bust, which was sculpted by Scott Myers. On hand were six members of Bob's Gilbert High School championship team. He was later inducted into the Texas Track and Field Coaches Hall of Fame, Class of 2017.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68424", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68424", "title": "Alec Guiness", "text": ""}
{"id": "68425", "revid": "35344964", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68425", "title": "Bobby Morrow", "text": "American sprinter (1935\u20132020)\nBobby Joe Morrow (October 15, 1935\u00a0\u2013 May 30, 2020) was an American sprinter who won three gold medals at the 1956 Olympics. He has been called \"the dominant sprinter of the 1950s\" and \"the most relaxed sprinter of all time, even more so than his hero Jesse Owens\".\nEarly life.\nMorrow was born in Harlingen, Texas, on October 15, 1935, and raised on a cotton and carrot farm on the outskirts of San Benito, Texas. Before becoming a sprinter, Morrow played football for San Benito High School. Morrow also was a sprinter at Abilene Christian University, and became a member of the men's club Frater Sodalis in 1955.\nCareer.\nMorrow won the 1955 AAU 100-yard title. His most successful season was in 1956, when he was chosen by \"Sports Illustrated\" as \"Sportsman of the Year\". Morrow won the sprint double in the national college championships and defended his AAU title. Morrow then went to the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne, where he won three gold medals and was the leader of the American sprint team. First, he was victorious in the 100-meter dash. He then led an American sweep of the medals in the 200-meter dash, while equaling the world record at that distance with a time of 20.6 seconds (unofficially auto-timed at 20.75). He won his third gold by anchoring the 4 \u00d7 100-meter relay team to a world record time. He was the first sprinter since Jesse Owens in 1936 to win gold medals in those three events.\nMorrow achieved great fame after winning his three gold medals, and was featured on the covers of \"Life\" and \"SPORT\", as well as \"Sports Illustrated\". He appeared on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\", \"To Tell The Truth\" and \"Arthur Godfrey and His Friends\", and addressed a joint session of the Texas legislature.\nMorrow's success on a national level continued after the Olympics, but he retired in 1958 to become a farmer and a woodworker. He made a short comeback before the 1960 Olympic Games, but failed to qualify for the U.S. Olympic team.\nLegacy.\nIn October 2006, San Benito High School named its new 12,000 seat sporting facility in San Benito, used for football and soccer, Bobby Morrow Stadium. Morrow was on hand to help dedicate the new facility. He was inducted into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame in 1989 and into the Texas Track and Field Coaches Hall of Fame in 2016.\nPersonal life.\nMorrow was married to Jo Ann Strickland, whom he met in high school, in what was described as a \"fairy-tale marriage\". They moved to Odessa, and later to Houston, where he restarted his career in banking that he had put on hold to train for the 1960 Olympics. They divorced around 1968. He subsequently moved to Ohio, where he met and married Judy.\nMorrow died of natural causes on May 30, 2020, at his home in Harlingen, Texas, at the age of 84.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68430", "revid": "51046745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68430", "title": "Galactic Empire (Star Wars)", "text": "Fictional state in the Star Wars franchise\nThe Galactic Empire, also known simply as the Empire, is a fictional autocracy featured in the \"Star Wars\" franchise. Introduced in the 1977 film \"Star Wars,\" it is the main antagonistic faction of the original trilogy, which also includes \"The Empire Strikes Back\" (1980) and \"Return of the Jedi\" (1983). An oppressive dictatorship with a complicated bureaucracy, the Galactic Empire seeks the rule and social control of every planet and civilization within the galaxy, based on anthropocentrism, nationalisation, state terrorism, power projection, and threat of lethal force.\nThe Galactic Empire's rise was not a violent takeover by force, but rather a consolidating unprecedented and unchecked power in the Chancellor via a calculated \"Gleichschaltung\"-like dismantling of the galaxy's most powerful institutions by undermining the public's faith in these institutions, rewriting constitutional foundations, controlling the Jedi Council, weakening the Galactic Senate, court packing the Supreme Court and the appointment of loyal Governors. At its peak, the Galactic Empire sprawls over much of the known \"Star Wars\" galaxy, which consists of millions of habitable star systems and billions more fringe colonies, shipyards, fortress worlds, and outer territories. The Empire's origins are depicted in the prequel film \"\" (2005), where it replaces the Galactic Republic at the end of the Clone Wars orchestrated by the Republic's Supreme Chancellor, Palpatine. Palpatine is also secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, who masterminds the war to destroy the Jedi and restore the Sith to power.\nPalpatine falsely accuses the Jedi of causing the secessionist Clone Wars to weaken the Republic and gain political power. He manipulates the Galactic Senate into using clone troopers created during the conflict to purge the Jedi. After engineering these threats, Palpatine reorganizes the Republic into a state meant to \"ensure the security and continuing stability, and a safe and secure society\": the Galactic Empire, with himself as Emperor \"ad infinitum\". The Senate overwhelmingly supports this decision and lauds his apparent resolve, bravery, and selflessness.\nWith Emperor Palpatine keeping mostly to the shadows, his Sith apprentice, commander-in-chief Darth Vader maintains a more public presence and leads the Imperial forces, acting as a national personification of the Galactic Empire's power. By the time of \"Episode IV \u2013 A New Hope\", the faction has transformed into a fully autocratic regime, though it is opposed by the insurgent Alliance to Restore the Republic. The completion of the Death Star, a planet-destroying battle station, allows Emperor Palpatine to instigate a self-coup, dissolving the Imperial Senate and transferring power to \"Praetor\"-officers called Imperial Moffs, such as Grand Moff Tarkin.\nThe Galactic Empire collapses after the events of \"Return of the Jedi.\" Its remnants form the First Order in the sequel trilogy, set 30 years later.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThemes.\n\"Star Wars\" creator George Lucas sought to make the First Galactic Empire aesthetically and thematically similar to Nazi Germany and to appear to be fascist. Similar to Nazi Germany, the Galactic Empire is a dictatorship based on rigid control of society that dissolved a previous democracy and is led by an all-powerful supreme ruler. The Empire, like the Nazis, desires the creation of totalitarian order and utilizes excessive force and violence to achieve their ends. The title of the Empire's main soldiers, the stormtroopers, is somewhat similar to the name given to Adolf Hitler's (SA, \"storm department\") paramilitary bodyguards.\nThe visual appearance of Darth Vader in his all-black uniform combined with his fanatical obedience to Palpatine has allusion to the black-uniformed Nazi (SS). According to a Lucasfilm-authorized source, Darth Vader's relationship with Palpatine is akin to SS leader Heinrich Himmler's relationship with Hitler. The uniforms of Imperial military officers also bear resemblance to uniforms used in Nazi Germany, as well as 19th century Polish \"ulans\" (mounted lancers)\u2014who wore tunics, riding breeches, and boots like the Empire's officers wear\u2014as well as the Imperial officers' cap resembling the field caps historically worn by German and Austrian troops.\nIn addition to Nazi Germany, there was also at least one portion of the Galactic Empire that was based on the Soviet Union, which is the various military personnel and TIE Fighters that are flying in formation as Palpatine arrives on the second Death Star in \"Return of the Jedi\". According to Lucas, the ceremony for the Emperor's arrival was inspired by October Revolution Day military parades in the Soviet Union.\nLucas has also indicated that the Galactic Empire's struggle against a smaller guerrilla force was inspired by the United States' involvement in the Vietnam War and his surprise at how relatively few people spoke up against the war.\nPalpatine's rise to power has been related to political strongmen such as Augustus Caesar, Napoleon Bonaparte, and Adolf Hitler. Palpatine's consolidation of power and declaring himself emperor is like the Roman political figure Augustus Caesar, in that Augustus manipulated the Roman Senate as Palpatine did with the Galactic Senate; he legitimized authoritarian rule by saying that corruption in the Senate was hampering the powers of the head of state; he pressured the Roman Senate to give him extraordinary powers as Consul of the Republic to deal with a crisis and he falsely claimed that he would rescind those powers once the crisis was over; and, as with the transition of the Roman Republic into the Roman Empire, Augustus, like Palpatine, relied on his strong control over military force.\nMany Imperial officers speak with the Received Pronunciation accent (known in-universe as Coruscanti), and Irvin Kershner \"deliberately cast British actors as the high-rank imperials for \"The Empire Strikes Back\" to mirror the composition of the American revolution, with the rebels mostly Americans\".\nDepiction.\nOrigins.\nNote: All dates in this article are in the BBY/ABY format. This is a fictional in-universe dating system centred on the Battle of Yavin in \"Episode IV: A New Hope\" in which the first Death Star is destroyed. BBY is Before the Battle of Yavin; ABY is After the Battle of Yavin.\nThe Twilight of the High Republic.\nThe Galactic Empire is born out of the declining High Republic; the rise of the empire wasn't sudden but instead unfolded gradually, step by step with one power grab after the next. However, its seeds of decadence are planted and nurtured by the Sith over a period of centuries, that bore fruit during the Clone Wars, the epic war between the Republic and the separatist Confederacy of Independent Systems (CIS) depicted in ' and '. The Jedi Council, sitting atop Coruscant in their ivory tower, pride themselves in having permanently eradicated the Sith-menace, and are romanticized as guardians that ushered an unprecedented 1000-year era of peace and justice, yet beneath their solemn chants and stoic meditation lies arrogance masked as wisdom, complacency mistaken for serenity. Palpatine's ascension came with the final layer of poison instilled into a governmental system on the brink of collapse. Because of the hubristic Jedi, the corrupt senate and a civil war, Palpatine was seen by many as a savior and is easily able to take near-complete control of the Republic.\nIn \"\", amid a trade dispute and invasion of his homeworld of Naboo, Senator Palpatine convinces Queen Padm\u00e9 Amidala to call for a vote of no confidence in Supreme Chancellor of the Republic Finis Valorum. Palpatine is elected Supreme Chancellor in Valorum's place. For the Jedi, clairvoyant beings who sat calmly as corruption festered in the heart of the Republic, Chancellor Palpatine, a \"Sith Lord\", the greatest galactic threat the Jedi swore to oppose, rose right under their noses.\nThe Clone Wars.\nAs the Separatists Crisis fighting intensifies in \"Episode II\", the Galactic Senate, the legislature of the Republic, grants Palpatine emergency powers to deal with the crisis. Palpatine promises safety at the cost of individual freedoms, all while tightening his own control over every facet of society; he promises to relinquish his powers once peace and order is restored. His first executive order creates a massive army of clone troopers. His second executive order conscripts the Jedi as commissioned officers of the Grand Army of the Republic (GAR) armed forces; by seizing influence over the Jedi Council, Palpatine indirectly takes command of the GAR. His third executive order nationalizes the military-industrial and financial sectors to finance the war effort. He intentionally prolongs and exploits the Clone Wars to amass unprecedented political power, using his apprentice Darth Tyranus, Head of State of the Confederacy of Independent Systems, as a pawn to keep everyone distracted and focused on ending the war.\nBy the time of \"Episode III\", he is effectively a dictator who overstayed his term limits; he exploits the people's fears, systematically rewrites constitutional laws and crushes the institutions that threaten his goals. He orchestrates his own kidnapping by the Separatists by leaking classified information, and thereby bringing the war to the capital, Coruscant, to further spread terror. The Jedi are overstretched across the galaxy trying the end the war; they distrust Palpatine's motives, fearing he has come under the influence of a Dark Lord of the Sith named Darth Sidious. Their concerns are shared by more than 2,000 loyalist, pro-democracy senators who suspect Palpatine may not return his emergency powers once the war ends. These senators set into motion plans that will eventually lead to the creation of the Rebellion. The film reveals that Palpatine and Sidious are one and the same, and Palpatine engineered the conflicts as a false flag.\nThe Purge.\nPalpatine reveals himself as a Sith Lord to Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, promising to save Padm\u00e9, Skywalker's secret wife, from dying in childbirth as Anakin has foreseen. Skywalker reports Palpatine's true identity to the Jedi Council; confirming their worst-case scenario and triggering a constitutional crisis. Knowing the extent of his crimes and influence, Jedi Council are forced to circumvent bureaucratic procedure to arrest him on the two charges of \"instigating a war of aggression\" and \"high treason\" (and if necessary, execute him as they would any Sith, should he resist) without consulting the Senate and without following the rule of law.\nHowever, they fell for Palpatine's trap; when Jedi Master Mace Windu confronts Palpatine, he had broken the Jedi Code. The execution that he provokes is the ultimate hypocrisy and treason; and once the Jedi become hypocrites and traitors, their moral authority died. And this is exactly what Palpatine desired when he conveniently cuts the recordings from that room (as it was described in the \"Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith\" novel where he was screaming, \"No, please don't!\"). Anakin comes to Palpatine's aid, and helps him kill Windu. Desperate to save Padm\u00e9, Anakin pledges himself to the dark side of the Force and becomes Palpatine's third apprentice, Darth Vader. Palpatine declares the Jedi to be traitors, providing \"irrefutable evidence\" that they were the instigating masterminds behind the Clone Wars, and all but exterminates the Jedi Order in a galaxy-wide slaughter, while sending Vader to kill everyone in the Jedi Temple and assassinate the Separatist leaders. Vader then immediately ends the Clone War by transmitting deactivation codes to all Separatist droids in galaxy.\nTwo remaining Jedi, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, mount a counterattack. Obi-Wan defeats Vader and leaves him for dead, but Yoda's duel with Palpatine ends in a stalemate; both Jedi flee into exile. Grievously wounded, Vader is rescued by Palpatine and fitted with cybernetics and a black suit of armor with a life-support system. After Padm\u00e9 dies giving birth to twins, Yoda and Obi-Wan decide to separate the children \u2013 Luke and Leia \u2013 to hide them from the Sith. Luke goes to Vader's stepfamily on Tatooine, while Leia is adopted by Senator Bail Organa of Alderaan.\nThe New Order.\nHaving \"won\" the war, with GAR liberators occupying every known star system, Palpatine orders them to annex planets, suppress the sectors and subjugate the people. The average citizen is oblivious to the effects of the Empire's policies; any repression or brutal behavior on the Empire's part is localized, covered up with propaganda, or just isolated in the outer rim. Secured in his power and position, with no one left to stop him, Palpatine reorganizes the Republic into the Galactic Empire, with himself as Emperor for life. He moves on to his final political opposition, the Senate; rather than dismantling it outright, he reduces it to a powerless symbol that exists only as an illusion of representation, and as an echo chamber for his rhetoric. Senators with no dedication to public service are bribed or coerced into rubberstamping Palpatine's policy; the remaining pro-democracy senators are spied upon, arrested, extorted, assassinated, or otherwise made to resign and/or disappear. Palpatine appoints governors to oversee all star systems in the Republic; these governors, later known as Imperial Moffs, report directly to Palpatine and are appointed without a vote or approval from any senators. This effectively sidelines the Senate, leaving it unable to influence how the galaxy is governed.\nThe Old Republic symbolisms are discarded in favor of the Imperial crest, an emblem that comes from the Galactic Roundel symbol of the ancient Bendu monks (predecessors of the Jedi). Originally a symbol of unity and non-confrontation, the wheel is perverted by Palpatine by removing two spokes, echoing Hitler's appropriation of the swastika from Hinduism and Buddhism.\nGovernment.\nLegislature.\nThe Senate, known as the Imperial Senate, nominally continues to exist following Palpatine's establishment of the Empire, though it is virtually powerless. Palpatine dissolves the Senate (off-camera) in \"A New Hope\" after discovering that several members helped found the Rebel Alliance, a guerrilla army dedicated to overthrowing the Empire and restoring the Republic.\nExecutive.\nWith the end of the Clone Wars, the purge of the Jedi Order, and the formation of the First Galactic Empire, Palpatine rules with absolute power as Emperor. Between the events of \"Revenge of the Sith\" and \"A New Hope\", Palpatine rules the galaxy from the confines of his heavily guarded Imperial Palace on Coruscant. Coruscant was introduced in Timothy Zahn's then-canon novel \"Heir to the Empire\". It made its film debut in the special edition of \"Return of the Jedi\". Inspiration for the world-spanning city came from 1940s science fiction works, especially Isaac Asimov's \"Trantor\". Visually, it resembles the Art Deco skyscrapers of Manhattan.\n\"Star Wars Battlefront II (2017)\" depicts Palpatine as intentionally having no clear line of succession, desiring either immortality or the destruction of the Empire.\nImperial Ruling Council.\nUnwilling to embroil himself in the day-to-day running of the Galactic Empire, the Emperor leaves the mundane work to the Imperial Ruling Council (IRC), an advisory body with whom he confers on vital affairs of state. The group is made up of Imperial Advisors, \"yes-men\" who serve as ministers and counselors. The spokesman of the Imperial Ruling Council is the Grand Vizier Mas Amedda, who attends most of the Imperial Senate's sessions. Amedda functions as an intermediary for Palpatine, managing his schedule, screening his calls and contacting other Imperial dignitaries and officers on his behalf. The Imperial Ruling Council also keeps tabs on the progress of the Imperial Military and delivers news from Imperial High Command to the Emperor.\nImperial High Command.\nThe Emperor leaves the actual martial management to Imperial High Command (IHC), a central command structure that notably coordinates the Galactic Empire's war effort. The cabinet enjoys much power within the government's hierarchy, being responsible for: sanctioning weapons programs (such as the TIE Defender project), supervising the armed forces, forming strategies and organizing expansionary or pacification campaigns. Despite this, Imperial High Command was unable to take any serious action against rebel sympathizers with allies in the Imperial Senate. The group works closely with the Council of Moffs and notifies the Imperial Ruling Council on important developments. Imperial High Command's overseer is Darth Vader - also a Sith Lord - who relentlessly pursues the fledging Rebel Alliance, in addition to quelling insurgencies and purging the last of the Jedi Order. As Emperor Palpatine's second-in-command, Vader is treated with almost the same deference as his master and has his personal battalion and armada- the 501st Legion and \"Death Squadron\", respectively - at his beck and call.\nImperial High Command maintained a number of subdivisions, each charged with directing the naval, ground and intelligence assets of the Imperial Military. The most important of these were the Joint Chiefs, an executive group of senior officers who advised both the Emperor and the Commander-in-Chief on all martial-related matters. Other members included the Grand Admirals, a cadre of the 12 highest-ranking naval officers that helmed large Imperial fleets and policed Imperial Space; Grand Admiral Thrawn, the commander of the 7th Fleet, is the most famous of their number.\nCouncil of Moffs.\nAside from the Imperial Ruling Council and Imperial High Command, power resides in the hands of \"\"Praetorian\" administrators\" (planetary governors) that form the Council of Moffs. The cabinet is composed of 20 Moffs (sector governors) and their superiors, the \"Grand Moffs\" (oversector governors), all of whom answer directly to the Emperor. The Moffs are senior officials who held the governorship over Administrators of minor provinces and commanded a Sector Fleet-size imperial armed forces at the sector level. The Grand Moffs are among the Galactic Empire's top figures, being on equal-footing with the Grand Vizier and the Commander-in-Chief and having been similarly appointed by the Emperor himself. The Council of Moffs works closely with Imperial High Command and is therefore able to dispose of the Imperial Military's assets to enforce the Emperor's authority in its \"provinces\". Governor Wilhuff Tarkin is the most prominent Grand Moff, having suggested the creation of the role and thus holds the distinction of being the first.\nJudiciary.\nIn the series \"Andor\", the Galactic Empire is depicted as foregoing \"habeas corpus\", \"right to counsel\", \"right to a fair trial\" and other fundamental rights. It is authoritarian, arbitrary and cruel in its \"presumption of guilt\" rule over ordinary people, particularly when it comes to certain agencies such as the Imperial Security Bureau (ISB), which acts as a secret police force. In the latter part of the series, the Imperial Supreme Tribunal autocracy takes to retroactively extending the sentences of prisoners, moving prisoners around to different facilities after they are due to be released, euthanizing labor camp prisoners when they become too ill to work, not permitting defendants in criminal cases to present a defense, and committing mass murder when its officers feel they are losing control of a situation. It also engages in torture of subjects of interest, uses agent provocateurs to instigate rebellion as justification for genocide, and carries out arbitrary extrajudicial executions for political purposes. ISB agents are assigned to spy on political dissidents in the Imperial Senate, such as Senator Mon Mothma.\nImperial Supreme Tribunal.\nWhile a body with \"Supreme Court\" in the name existed, the Imperial Supreme Tribunal served as a rubber stamp for Imperial authority rather than an independent judiciary, its function was drastically altered from its Republic predecessor. The entire Imperial court system was designed to prioritize control and the extraction of labor over traditional justice. Cases, especially politically sensitive ones, often had extrajudicial punishment and predetermined outcomes in favor of the Empire. The Imperial Supreme Court was effectively overseen by the \"Select Committee of the Commission for the Preservation of the New Order\" (COMPNOR), an organization dedicated to enforcing the Emperor's will and human-centric policies. The Imperial criminal justice system was headed by the \"Procurator of Justice\", who was in charge of the \"Imperial Department of Justice\" and responsible for prosecuting political prisoners and administering sentences.\nImperial Security Bureau.\nThe Imperial Security Bureau (ISB) is the politically aligned and indoctrinated civilian intelligence branch of the Galactic Empire that is charged with matters of internal state security and law enforcement, being analogous to the political commissar, Gestapo, the Schutzstaffel, the CIA, Mossad and the KGB. The ISB was not a national agency, but a part of COMPNOR (\"Commission for the Preservation of the New Order\"); Palpatine's own political party. Because the ISB is so directly connected and fanatically loyal to Palpatine, there are no checks and balances to their power as they did whatever Palpatine wanted them to do; ISB agents frequently bypassed the bureaucracy and patronage in\nthe Imperial government, and were empowered to commandeer whatever resources an Admiral or General had if deemed necessary for their mission.\nConsisting of several supervisors overseeing multiple sectors, they are charged with matters of dissidents, counter-terrorism, criminal investigation, internal affairs, state security, state-sponsored propaganda and ensuring the political loyalty of citizens to the Galactic Empire. Each supervisor had at least one ISB attendant assigned to them that helped them do their duties. Veteran Colonel Wullf Yularen acts as ISB's main figurehead and spokesman, answering to the likes of Emperor Palpatine, Darth Vader and Amedda.\nTowards the end of the Galactic Empire's reign after the death of Emperor Palpatine, ISB officers were entrusted with carrying out Operation Cinder. When that operation fails and the empire collapses, some former ISB officers, such as Moff Gideon, become warlords and part of the Imperial remnants.\nInquisitorius.\nOutside the formal chain of command, the Galactic Empire's reins are \"de facto\" held by the Sith, a cult of Force-wielders \u2013 called Sith Lords \u2013 that call on the dark side in their plot to dominate the galaxy and destroy the Jedi. Both Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader are part of this cult, although this is known to or guessed by only a very few figures in the regime's upper echelons, such as Governor Tarkin. The Imperial Inquisition, or Inquisitorius, acts as an extension of the Sith Order; but are not \"true Sith\". Its Force-attuned operatives, the Inquisitors, are routinely given control of Imperial Military assets to hunt down the Jedi that survived the initial purge. They are above the law and have complete discretion as to the methods used to accomplish their mission. They exploit Jedi compassion by whatever means necessary, often holding entire population centers hostage. They also hunt and abduct Force-sensitive children to be brainwashed into the Emperor's service. Inquisitorius work either alone or in small groups according to the nature of a particular task. The Inquisitors' lack of proper rank within the armed forces, as well as their reliance on \"occult\" ways, earn the ire of the standard officers. The Inquisitorius was founded by the Emperor and is governed by the Commander-in-Chief, but the agency is virtually led by a Grand Inquisitor who defers to both.\nAt some point before \"A New Hope\", the group essentially became defunct, with almost all members either defecting, getting killed by other force users or suffered punishment by Vader himself.\nMilitary.\nTarkin doctrine.\nThe Tarkin doctrine, named after Grand Moff Tarkin, is a military doctrine of using fear through overt displays of overwhelming power to keep control over the galaxy. The plan presented by Tarkin himself to Palpatine in 18 BBY that outlined the Empire's goal and structure: bringing order to the galaxy and restoring rule of law to sectors overtaken by piracy and organized crime, ending destructive conflicts through grand strategy, a plan for maximizing social control and propaganda, maintaining economic order and increasing security in the Galactic Empire. Tarkin believed the chief factor that contributed most to the demise of the Republic was not, in fact, the war, but rampant self-interest, which left the body politic feckless and corrupt.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Consider the self-interest of the Core Worlds, unwavering in their exploitation of the Outer Systems for their resources; the Outer Systems themselves, undermined, by their permissive disregard of smuggling and slavery; those ambitious members of the Senate who sought only status and opportunity. By partitioning the galaxy into regions, we, The Empire, actually achieve a unity previously absent; where once our loyalties and allegiances were divided, they now serve one being, with one goal: a cohesive galaxy in which everyone prospers. For the first time in one thousand generations our sector governors will not be working solely to enrich Coruscant and the Core Worlds, but to advance the quality of life in the star systems that make up each sector \u2014 keeping the spaceways safe, maintaining open and accessible communications, assuring that tax revenues are properly levied and allocated to improving the infrastructure.\u2014\u200aGrand Moff Tarkin, in \nThe plan which Palpatine ultimately had implemented in its entirety contained three main principles: territorial consolidation, rapid communication, and coercive diplomacy. Tarkin's concept was that rule could be established and maintained \"through fear of force rather than force itself\", and he believed grand displays of power\u2014when combined with oppressive means of terrorizing communities\u2014could suppress dissent and crush any would-be rebellion. This Doctrine became the Empire's core military doctrine of peacekeeping, internal security, counter-insurgency, and state terrorism-philosophy. The instrument of this power is the military, which includes the Imperial stormtroopers, a massive fleet of about 1,000 Star Destroyers, a couple of Super Star Destroyers, and the Death Star, a moon-sized superweapon capable of destroying entire planets.\nPlans for the Death Star first appear (in universe chronology) in \"Attack of the Clones\" and construction begins at the end of \"Revenge of the Sith\". Summarized measures set forth by the Tarkin Doctrine:\nImperial Navy.\nThe Imperial Naval Command (INC), also referred to as the Imperial Starfleet, is the foremost military arm of the Galactic Empire in charge of maintaining security, peace and order in the galaxy. Led by Darth Vader, it absorbed the military forces of the Galactic Republic after Emperor Palpatine's declaration of the New Order.\nAt its peak, the Imperial Navy fields millions of warships, including an estimated 25,000 Star Destroyers, fulfilling the Emperor's will throughout the galaxy. The Empire's central warship cadre is well structured and uniformed, but the Imperial Navy suffers against strike craft, largely due to the inadequacies of its own starfighters and point defense. The Empire's focus on size, firepower, and terror comes at the expense of a well-balanced fleet. After its defeat at the Battle of Endor, the Galactic Empire splits up into warring factions, and the Imperial Starfleet along with it. While much of the remnants of the Imperial Navy are later reunited under impressive Imperial commanders, the military organization ceases to exist shortly after the death of the Emperor.\nSpecific responsibilities of the Imperial Navy include defending Imperial citizens from space-based threats (such as pirates, smugglers and rebel contingents), enforcing Imperial will, and overseeing commerce through customs and blockade operations. The Imperial Navy also performs orbital bombardments and transports major ground force deployments, supporting them with space, orbital, and aerial support. Imperial Navy officers wear the same standard uniform that their Army counterparts use but is colored grey, and both services use colored chest plaques to denote rank.\nImperial Starfighter Corps.\nThe Imperial Starfighter Corps (ISC) was the starfighter pilot branch of the Galactic Empire. Although the Corps was a component of the Navy, most pilots were assigned to ground operations with the Imperial Army. Imperial starfighters include TIE (Twin Ion Engine) fighters, TIE interceptors, TIE Defenders, TIE Brutes, TIE strikers, and TIE bombers. The Corps were scattered after the Battle of Endor (4 ABY).\nImperial Army.\nThe Imperial Army was the ground based force. Imperial Army enlisted soldiers wore gray uniforms with a mandarin collar and four pockets along with chest pieces similar to Stormtroopers but in black. Corporals displayed their rank on one of their shoulder pauldrons with a single white diagonal stripe. They also wore a gray Imperial kepi or Imperial Combat Helmet\nImperial Stormtrooper Corps.\nImperial Stormtrooper Corps (ISC) are elite corps of rapid response all-environment shock troops\u2014organized like the U.S. Marine Corps with their own separate divisions. The Stormtroopers operate in conjunction with the Army Ground Troopers and Navy Marine Troopers\u2014who were used as garrison forces\u2014to reinforce and hold defensive positions until the regular military arrived. When not in their signature white armor, stormtrooper officers wear black uniforms.\nGalactic Civil War.\nAfter the formation of the Empire and the purge of the Jedi, Palpatine declares martial law throughout the galaxy. Those in hiding, or attempting to either flee from or oppose the New Imperial Order, are subject to persecution or death. This is the start of the bloody decades-long Galactic Civil War fought between the Empire and the Rebel Alliance. Lacking any industrial base at all, the rebels focused on surgical strikes, using whatever ships they were surreptitiously given or whatever they could steal; in contrast the Empire had seemingly endless industrial capacity and manpower, and focused all of it on making mass quantities of fighters and huge weapons of mass destruction to terrorize both the rebels and the galactic citizenry.\nAs portrayed in the live-action series \"Andor\", one single moment in Galactic history completely changed the Empire's policy towards its citizens and therefore changed its relationship with them. In 5 BBY, on the relatively unremarkable planet of Aldhani, a small rebel team managed to infiltrate the local Imperial depository, stealing a decent portion of the sector payroll. This created a massive Imperial overreaction, increasing their security spending and draconian law enforcement policies, making all future rebellious activity even more costly and difficult, which is exactly what the mastermind of the heist Luthen Rael wanted.\nThe Two Death Stars.\nAs portrayed in the animated series \"Star Wars Rebels\" and \"\", the Empire explores ways to weaponize Force-sensitive kyber crystals, which are sacred to the Jedi and are at the core powersource of every lightsaber. They mine for kyber crystals across worlds, but are thwarted twice in securing massive crystal reserves by the \"Ghost\" crew and Saw Gerrera. On Jedha, however, the Empire uncovers a surplus of kyber, with which they power the Death Star.\nThe Death Star, a moon-sized battle station with sufficient firepower to destroy an entire planet, is designed to be the ultimate weapon of the Empire's power. The threat of this weapon provoked a desperate suicidal raid, the Battle of Scarif, by the Rebel Alliance. The engagement and loss of the classified Death Star blueprint plans was seen as a complete embarrassment for the Imperial forces along with a loss of two Star Destroyers and the destruction of Scarif base.\nTarkin, the station's commander, demonstrates that power in \"A New Hope\" when he destroys Alderaan as a show of force. In the film's climactic scene, however, the station is attacked by rebel starfighters who have come into possession of the station's blueprints. The battle ends with the Death Star's destruction at the hands of Luke Skywalker, which is the Rebel Alliance's first major military success against the Empire. Politically, Alderaan's destruction was a watershed moment for most Imperial loyalists, many whom would later defect to the Alliance; it revealed the Empire's willingness to kill loyalists on Alderaan, along with millions of innocents, just to prove a point to a rebellious Senator. Tarkin's Doctrine, meant to perpetually \"tighten the noose\" and instill fear of being killed for engaging in rebellion, eventually gets overridden by people realizing that no one was actually safe.\nAfter the \"Battle of Yavin\", Vader's special powers as Commander-in-Chief are increased by Palpatine, granting him full command over all other officials and officers to ease his campaign against the Rebellion. In \"The Empire Strikes Back\", Vader becomes obsessed with finding the Force-sensitive Luke and leads his stormtroopers to attack on the rebel base on Hoth, but the rebels escape. Vader would continue to systematically and ruthlessly dismantle Alliance assets, and to hunt for Luke in the process, forcing Alliance survivors to abandon all static bases and regroup with Alliance HQ and remain nomadic.\nIn \"Return of the Jedi\", after four years of conflict and near constant harassments by Vader's forces, the Alliance achieves a decisive victory over the Empire during the \"Battle of Endor\". In the film's climactic battle, the Rebellion destroys the second Death Star and a number of capital ships that contain a great portion of the Imperial Navy's highest-ranking officers. During this battle, Vader redeems himself by sacrificing his life to kill Palpatine in order to save his son, Luke Skywalker.\nState Collapse.\nThe dual loss of the Emperor and his right-hand, the Commander-in-Chief, creates a power vacuum of chaos and instability. Most of the intelligent, competent, and experienced officers who might have succeeded them were killed at the Battle of Endor. By design, Palpatine desired the Empire had no clear line of succession, for he had intended to rule \"ad infinitum\"; and there was no next-in-line after Palpatine and Vader. Revolts, infighting, fiefdoms and warlordism gradually fracture the Empire apart more effectively than any damage capable of being inflicted by the Rebel Alliance, as the Moffs and Grand Moffs maneuver to grab power for themselves amidst civil unrest.\nPalpatine left posthumous orders. Upon verification of his death, messenger droids are sent to select Imperial officers to relay his last orders: to begin \"Operation: Cinder\", a scorched earth policy tasking hardline Imperials to destroy entire planets so the Rebellion cannot claim them. The fallen Emperor does not desire the Empire to continue without his presence; if he cannot live forever as the galaxy's Emperor, he would rather see it destroyed.\nA year after the Battle of Endor, the bolstered Rebellion defeats the weakened Empire during the Battle of Jakku and formally establishes the New Republic.\nPost-conflict collapse.\nNew Republic Era.\nBy the time of \"The Mandalorian\", set five years after the Battle of Endor, the Galactic Empire no longer exists as an official government or a major power and is essentially a failed state. Its former leaders who are now warlords that represent several different rump states, are competing with each other, as well as the New Republic over the power vacuum left behind. One Imperial remnant established a base on the planet Nevarro, where Mandalorian bounty hunter Din Djarin was hired to acquire an asset, later revealed to be a Force-sensitive infant named Grogu. Djarin abandoned his job and decided to protect the child, making him an enemy of the Imperial warlord Moff Gideon and his army of mercenary stormtroopers.\nDjarin later returned to Nevarro, reuniting with his allies Greef Karga and Cara Dune, as well as an unnamed Mythrol, to take down an Imperial facility to eradicate the Empire's presence on the planet. The group soon discovered that it was housing Imperial experiments, using blood rich in midichlorians obtained from Grogu. The group succeeded in taking down the base. Gideon was informed of the developments while overseeing a unit of enhanced droids known as darktroopers, who would later help him capture Grogu. Djarin led a mission to rescue Grogu, assisted by several allies including Dune, Boba Fett, Fennec Shand, and Mandalorian warrior Bo-Katan Kryze. The group boarded Gideon's command ship and subdued him. Djarin turned Grogu over to Luke Skywalker, who took down the Moff's darktroopers.\nSuccessor.\nThe most successful remnants of the Empire reformed as the First Order, led by Supreme Leader Snoke and former Imperial officers. They become a major faction in the galaxy in ' and face a reformed Rebel Alliance called the Resistance. The First Order rises to power through the use of Starkiller Base, a planet-converted superweapon that later destroys the Hosnian system, the location of the New Republic's capital and therefore the empire reclaim authority over the galaxy. Starkiller Base is destroyed by the Resistance in \"The Force Awakens\". In the sequel ', however, First Order forces draw the Resistance out of hiding and wipe out a majority of their fleet. During the battle, Snoke is killed by his apprentice Kylo Ren, who assumes the title of Supreme Leader.\nIn \"\", the final film in the sequel trilogy, the First Order allies itself with the Sith Eternal, a cult led by Palpatine, who had transferred his essence into a cloned body and formerly positioned himself to control the First Order over Snoke, a puppet ruler. The cult is stationed on the isolated Sith planet of Exegol. Palpatine offers Ren, who had tracked him to the planet, control of the Sith Eternal's fleet, the Final Order, in exchange for killing the young Jedi Rey, Palpatine's own granddaughter. Ren initially accepts the assignment, but later forsakes the dark side after a duel with Rey in the wreckage of the second Death Star. With Ren's defection, Palpatine turns command over to Allegiant General Enric Pryde, previously an Imperial officer.\nWith help from the spirit of Luke Skywalker, Rey eventually makes her way to Exegol, guiding the Resistance away to the planet to take down the Sith Eternal forces, including the Sith fleet. With help from a redeemed Ren and the spirits of Jedi past, she resists Palpatine's promises of power and turns his own Force lightning against him, destroying the Sith Lord once and for all. The Resistance, with help from their allies across the galaxy, destroys the remaining Sith forces and prevents an establishment of a new Sith Empire. Without reinforcements of the Sith, people across the galaxy rises up against the First Order.\n\"Legends\".\nWith the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed \"Star Wars\" Expanded Universe material was rebranded as \"Star Wars Legends\" and declared non-canon to the franchise on April 25, 2014.\n\"Thrawn\" trilogy.\nIn Timothy Zahn's \"Thrawn trilogy\" of novels \u2013 \"Heir to the Empire\" (1991), \"Dark Force Rising\" (1992), and \"The Last Command\" (1993) \u2013 an army of former Imperials, led by Grand Admiral Thrawn, attempt to overthrow the New Republic and install a dictatorship known as the Empire of the Hand. The backstory of the series explains that following their defeat at the Battle of Endor, the galactic sectors that are still under Imperial control are now governed by several different military juntas that fight each other in a conflict known as the Imperial Civil War, all the while resuming the Galactic Civil War with the Rebellion's successor, the New Republic, for control of the galaxy for years until mostly uniting under Grand Admiral Thrawn. By the time of \"The Last Command\", Thrawn has nearly defeated the New Republic, but they claim victory in a last-ditch effort, and Thrawn is killed by his own bodyguard, shattering the Empire's unity.\n\"Agent of the Empire\".\n\"Agent of the Empire\" is a 10-issue comic book series published by Dark Horse Comics from 2011 to 2013. It was written by John Ostrander and illustrated by Stephane Roux, and is set three years before the original \"Star Wars\" film. Two five-issue story arcs follow an Imperial secret agent, and feature characters such as Han Solo, Princess Leia and Boba Fett. Both arcs were collected in trade paperback volumes.\n\"Jedi Prince\".\nIn the \"Jedi Prince\" novel series, a group of impostors calling themselves the Prophets of the Dark Side install a three-eyed mutant named Trioculus as Emperor by claiming that he is Palpatine's son, reforming the Empire (as Trioculus's Empire). By the end of the series, Palpatine's true son, Triclops, helps the New Republic defeat this new enemy.\n\"Dark Empire\".\nIn the \"Dark Empire\" comic book series, Palpatine is reborn in a clone body and unites most of the scattered remnants of the Empire (forming the Dark Empire), hoping to retake control of the galaxy. By the sequel, \"Empire's End\", he is defeated and destroyed once and for all. Following the final death of Palpatine, Luke Skywalker, influenced by the force ghost of Obi-Wan Kenobi, starts the New Jedi Order in an ancient temple on Yavin 4, which had undone the Emperor's purge of the Old Jedi Order 28 years earlier at the rise of the Galactic Empire.\n\"Jedi Academy\" trilogy.\nIn the \"Jedi Academy\" trilogy, an Imperial admiral named Daala commandeers the remainder of the Imperial Navy (the Crimson Empire) and mounts a ferocious assault on the New Republic. She nearly succeeds in taking over the galaxy, but is foiled by New Republic pilots Wedge Antilles and Lando Calrissian in the final entry, \"Champions of the Force\". A year later she would arrange the assassination of the rival Imperial warlords to unify the feuding Imperial factions into the Imperial Remnant and bring an end to the Imperial Civil War.\n\"Darksaber\".\nIn the 1995 novel \"Darksaber\", Daala, frustrated with the Imperial warlords in the Core fighting and bickering amongst themselves, orchestrates the warlords' deaths and unites and becomes the leader of the remaining Imperial forces. After being defeated in battle once again by the New Republic, she resigns and selects Gilad Pellaeon (originally in the \"Thrawn\" trilogy) as the new leader, where he becomes Grand Admiral Pellaeon. At the end of the novel, he signs a peace treaty with the New Republic representative Ponc Gavrisom and finally ends the Galactic Civil War.\n\"New Jedi Order\".\nBy the time of the \"New Jedi Order\" series, the remaining Imperial military factions sign a truce with the New Republic, becoming the Imperial Remnant. The former enemies then become allies against the invading Yuuzhan Vong. A few years later, the Remnant help the Galactic Alliance fight an assimilating insect species known as the Killiks, which become a third party in the Second Galactic Civil War. Eventually, they make peace with the Alliance and Confederation. All three of these are represented by former Imperial commanders.\n\"Legacy\".\nThe \"\" comic book series, set 127 years after the original \"Star Wars\" film, explains that, during a civil war, the New Galactic Empire known as the Fel Empire declares war on the Galactic Federation of Free Alliances (Galactic Alliance), the successor state of the New Republic, after 83 years of a cold war that began in 44 ABY. This conflict begins the Sith-Imperial War, which after three years leads to the eventual defeat of the Galactic Alliance and the Galactic Empire asserting its domination over the galaxy once again in 130 ABY. A few months later, the Sith overthrows the Fel Empire. The Sith Lord Darth Krayt, the leader of the One Sith, usurps the throne and forces Emperor Roan Fel to take refuge in the fortress planet of Bastion.\nIn 138 ABY, the Galactic Alliance Remnant led by Admiral Gar Stazi, Fel's forces known as the Empire-in-exile led by Empress Marasiah Fel, and the New Jedi Order led by Jedi Master K'Krukk unite against Krayt's empire and eventually destroy it in the Battle of Coruscant, after a grand total of 157 years of its existence. The three united factions form a new galactic government called the Galactic Federation Triumvirate.\nThe One Sith, led by Darth Wredd, remains at large and wages a war against the GFT. One year later, the former Empire-in-exile works with the other two factions, killing Wredd, rounding up all surviving members including their new leader Darth Nihl, and permanently dissolving the One Sith and the Sith religion itself for good. The next year, the GFT defeats the secular alliances of the One Sith and in the aftermath of that conflict, the galaxy after 172 years of Palpatine's influence, enters an era of peace and unity for the first time since before the Clone Wars.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68431", "revid": "1765847", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68431", "title": "Gran Valira", "text": "River in Andorra\nThe Gran Valira () is the largest river in Andorra. It flows through the capital, Andorra la Vella, and exits the country in the south near the Spain\u2013Andorra road border crossing.\nThe Gran Valira is a tributary to the Segre, which in turn is a tributary to the Ebro. It flows into the Segre in La Seu d'Urgell. Its main tributaries are the Valira d'Orient, the Valira del Nord and the Madriu. The Valira river system is long.\nThe map service of the Andorran government calls it the Gran Valira. In certain sources, especially those with a Spanish influence such as maps published in Spain, it is sometimes referred to as the Valira because in the territory of Spain there is only one Valira river. In Andorra, however, there are several different Valiras and hence there is a need to distinguish between them.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68432", "revid": "39935221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68432", "title": "White Ruthenia", "text": "Archaic name for a historical region in Belarus\nWhite Ruthenia (; ; ; ; ) is one of the historical divisions of Kievan Rus' according to the color scheme, which also includes Black and Red Ruthenia. In the Late Middle Ages and Early Modern period, the name White Ruthenia was characterized by instability, designating a number of different regions on the territory of modern Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine. It is recorded mainly in Western European sources, starting from the middle of the 13th century.\nHistory.\nVasily Tatishchev believed that for the first time the term \"White Rus'\" is found in the Rostov chronicles in the year 1135, where the lands of Rostov-Suzdal Principality were mentioned. Referring to the publications of the Pole Maciej Stryjkowski, Persian and other Eastern peoples who called the Russian princes \"ak-padishah\"(white tsar), and the state \"Ak-Urus\" (White Rus), the historian in his narrative extends this name to all Vladimir-Rostov princes, starting with Yuri Dolgorukiy, and Andrei Bogolyubsky. He also calls the lands controlled by them \"White Rus'\", and calls the princes \"White Russians\" or \"grand dukes of White Russia\".\nThe praiseworthy songs composed in the second half of the 14th century by the Austrian poet Peter Suchenwirt tell how in 1349, in the battle of Izborsk (\"Eysenburk\" in the poem), German knights faced \"Weizzen Reuzzen\" (\"White Russians\"). However, it is known that it was a squad of Pskov and Izborsk people, led by Georgy Viktorovich, voivode of the Grand Duke of Lithuania Algirdas.\nOn the world Fra Mauro map (1459), the territory of Novgorod-Moscow Rus' between Volga and White Sea is called White Russia (Rossia Biancha). This map gives the following explanation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This distinction, which is made between White, Black and Red Rus' has no other reason than that that part of Russia that is near the White Sea is called White; that which is near the Black River is called Black; and that which is near the Red River is called Red.\n(\"Questa distinction che si fata de rossia biancha, negra e rossa non ha altra cason cha questa, \u00e7o\u00e8 quela parte de rossia che \u00e9 de qua dal mar biancho se chiama biancha, quela ch'\u00ea de l\u00e0 dal fiume negro se chiama negra e quela ch'\u00ea de l\u00e0 dal fiume rosso se chiama rossa\").\nMany other variations of this name appeared on ancient maps; for instance, \"Russia Alba, Russija Alba, Wit Rusland, Wei\u00df Reu\u00dfen (Wei\u00dfreu\u00dfen), White Russia, Hviterussland, Hv\u00edta R\u00fassland, Wei\u00df Russland (Wei\u00dfrussland), Ruthenia Alba, Ruth\u00e9nie Blanche\" and \"Wei\u00df Ruthenien\" \"(Wei\u00dfruthenien)\". The name was also assigned to various territories, often quite distant from that of present Belarus.\nAccording to Alfred Nicolas Rambaud:The name of \"White () Russia\" is given to the provinces conquered from the 13th to the 14th century by the Grand Dukes of Lithuania. These were the ancient territories of the Krivitches, Polotchans, Dregovitches, Drevlians, Doulebes, now forming the governments of Vitepsk, Mohilef, and Minsk. The Lithuanian territories of Grodno, Novogrodek and Belostok were sometimes called Black Russia.\nAn ethno-religious theory suggests that the name used to describe the part of old Ruthenian lands within the Grand Duchy of Lithuania that had been populated mostly by Slavs who had been Christianized early, as opposed to Black Ruthenia, which was predominantly inhabited by pagan Balts.\nAs stated by historian Andrej Kotljarchuk, the first person who called himself \"Belarusian\" was Calvinist writer Salomon Rysinski (Solomo Pantherus Leucorussus, ca 1569-1626). According to his words, he was born \"in richly endowed with forests and animals Ruthenia near the border to frigid Muscovy\" and doctorated at the University of Altdorf.\nOn the 1712 map of French cartographer Henri Chatelain \"Russie noire\" (Black Ruthenia) is placed in region of Eastern Galicia (today Western Ukraine), which traditionally known as \"Russie rouge\" (Red Ruthenia).\nVasmer's dictionary mentions the dichotomy of \"white\" land and \"taxed\" land in Domostroy and speculates that \"white\" Rus' may have referred to the parts of Kievan Rus' that were not conquered by Golden Horde. Another speculation in Vasmer is that the color of the clothes of the White Ruthenians (perhaps as well as the color of their hair) may have contributed to the name. Oleg Trubachyov calls both theories \"complete fantasies\".\nAlso, the 16th century chronicler Alexander Guagnini's book \"Sarmatiae Europeae descriptio\" wrote that Rus' was divided in three parts. The first part, under the rule of the Muscovite Grand Duke, was called \"White Ruthenia\". The second one, under the rule of Polish king, was called \"Black Ruthenia\". And the rest was \"Red Ruthenia\". He also said Moscow was the center of White Rus' and the Russian metropolitanate, and that the Grand Duke of Moscow was called the \"White Czar\", especially by his subjects.\nAccording to the late 19th-century \"Geographical Dictionary of the Kingdom of Poland\", White Ruthenia (Ru\u015b Bia\u0142a) constituted the Minsk, M\u015bcis\u0142aw, Po\u0142ock, Smolensk and Witebsk voivodeships of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth (before the Partitions of Poland), or the Mogilev Governorate, eastern parts of the Minsk and Vitebsk Governorates, the western half of the Smolensk Governorate, and the northern part of the Chernihiv Governorate, i.e. the central, northern and eastern parts of modern Belarus, and the western outskirts of modern Russia with Smolensk and Starodub. The largest cities in the region so defined today are Minsk, Gomel, Vitebsk, Mogilev, Smolensk and Babruysk.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68440", "revid": "6781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68440", "title": "Region (France)", "text": ""}
{"id": "68442", "revid": "33583126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68442", "title": "Yeoman", "text": "Social class in late medieval/early modern England\nIn medieval and early modern England, a yeoman was a member of a social class ranking between the peasantry and the landed gentry. The class was first documented in mid-14th century England, where it included people who cultivated their own land as well as the middle ranks of servants in an English royal or noble household. \nThe 14th century witnessed the rise of the yeoman longbowmen during the Hundred Years' War, and the yeoman outlaws celebrated in the Robin Hood ballads. Yeomen joined the English Navy during the Hundred Years' War as seamen and archers. In the early 15th century, yeoman was the rank of chivalry between page and squire. By the late 17th century, yeoman became a rank in the Royal Navy for the common seamen who were in charge of ship's stores, such as foodstuffs, gunpowder, and sails.\nReferences to the emerging social stratum of wealthy land-owning commoners began to appear after 1429. In that year, the Parliament of England re-organized the House of Commons into counties and boroughs, with voting rights granted to all freeholders. The Electors of Knights of the Shires Act 1429 restricted voting rights to those freeholders whose land value exceeded 40 shillings. These yeomen became a social stratum of commoners below the landed gentry, but above the husbandmen. This \"stratum\" later embodied the political and economic ideas of the English Enlightenment and Scottish Enlightenment, and transplanted those ideas to British North America during the early modern era.\nNumerous yeoman farmers in North America served as citizen soldiers in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War. The 19th century saw a revival of interest in the medieval period with English Romantic literature. The yeoman outlaws of the ballads were refashioned into heroes fighting for justice under the law and the rights of freeborn Englishmen.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of yeoman is uncertain, for several reasons.\nThe earliest documented use occurs in Middle English. There are no known Old English words which are considered acceptable parent words for yeoman. Nor are there any readily identifiable cognates of yeoman in Anglo-Norman, Old Frisian, Old Dutch, Old Saxon, or Middle Low German. The four last-named of these languages are West Germanic languages, closely related to Old English at the time they were spoken. Taken together, these facts would indicate that yeoman (1) is a word specific to the regional dialects found in England; and (2) is nothing similar to any word used in continental Europe.\nAnother complicating factor for the etymology is that yeoman is a compound word made by joining two other words: \"yeo\" + \"man\". Linguists have been perplexed about the origin of \"yeo\" since scholars such as John Mitchell Kemble and Joseph Bosworth began the modern linguistic study of Old English in the early to mid 19th century. Two possible etymologies have been proposed to explain the origin of \"yeo\".\n\"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (OED) has proposed that yeoman is derived from \"yongerman\", which first appeared in a manuscript called \"Pseudo-Cnut's Constitutiones de Foresta\". Although the manuscript has been demonstrated to be a forgery (it was produced during the reign of King Henry II of England, rather than during the reign of King Cnut), it is considered authentic to the 11th and 12th-century forest laws. According to the OED, the manuscript refers to 3 social classes: (1) the thegn (noble) at the top; (2) the tunman (townman) at the bottom; and (3) the lesser thegn in the middle. \"Yongerman\" is considered a synonym for a lesser thegn. OED suggested that \"yongerman\" is related to \"youngman\", meaning a male youth or young male adult who was in the service of a high-ranking individual or family.\nThis proposed etymology is that \"youngman\" is in turn related to Old Norse \"ungmenni\" (youths); North Frisian \"ongman\" (lad, fellow); Dutch \"jongeman\" (youngman); and German \"Jungmann\" (deckhand, ordinary seaman); cf. also German \"Junker\" \u21d0 \"jung[er] Herr\". This etymology provides a plausible semantic link from \"yongerman\" to \"youngman\", while at the same time providing most of the earliest definitions of yeoman.\n\"Chambers Dictionary of Etymology\".\nThe \"Chambers Dictionary of Etymology\" (CDE) is another well-respected scholarly source, as it is published by the same company which produces \"The Chambers Dictionary\". Their proposed etymology reconstructs a possible Old English word, \"*\u0121\u0113amann\", as the parent of yeoman. (The asterisk or star as the first letter is a linguistic convention to indicate the word has been reconstructed, and is unattested in any surviving record). The reconstructed word is a compound word made from the root word \"\u0121\u0113\", \"\u0121\u0113a\" (district, region) + \"mann\" (man). To further strengthen their etymology, CDE compares their reconstructed word to Old Frisian \"g\u0101man\" (villager), and modern West Frisian \"gea\", \"goa\", Dutch \"gouw\", German \"Gau\" (district, region).\nMedieval meanings.\nIn the history of the English language, the earliest recorded usage of yeoman occurs in the Late Middle English period, and then becoming more widespread in the Early Modern English period. The transition from Middle English to Early Modern English was a gradual process occurring over decades. For the sake of assigning a historical date, OED defines the end of Middle English and the beginning of Early Modern English as occurring in 1500. The year 1500 marks the end of nearly 200 years of political and economic upheaval in England. The Hundred Years War, the recurring episodes of the Black Death, and over 32 years of civil war known as the War of the Roses all contributed to the end of the Middle Ages in England, and the beginning of the English Renaissance. It was during this time that English gradually replaced Norman French as the official language.\nThe first single-language dictionary of the English language, Robert Cawdrey's \"Table Alphabeticall\", was published in 1604. The dictionary only included unusual English words, and loan words from foreign languages such as Hebrew, Greek, Latin, or French. Yeoman is not included in this dictionary. This suggests that in 1604, yeoman was a very commonly used English word.\nA more comprehensive, or general dictionary, was published in 1658. Edward Phillips' \"The New World of English Words\" contained basic definitions. Yeoman is included; probably for the first time in an English language dictionary. But only a legal definition was given: (1) a social class immediately below a Gentleman; and (2) a freeborn man who can sell \"his own free land in yearly revenue to the summe of 40 shillings Sterling\". The fact that only the legal definition (introduced in the Electors of Knights of the Shires Act 1429) was given is another suggestion that yeoman was a common word at the time.\nBetween the 12th century \"Pseudo-Cnut de Foresta\" and \"The New World of English Words\" in 1658, linguists have had to re-construct the meanings of yeoman from the surviving manuscripts. The various meanings of yeoman were apparently widely understood by the document author and his audience, and were not explained in the manuscripts. Linguists have deduced these specific historical meanings based on the context in which yeoman was used within the document itself. It is these meanings which are described in the following sections.\nHousehold attendant or servant (14th century-present).\nYeoman, as a household servant, is one of the earliest documented uses of the word. During the 14th century, it referred to a servant or attendant in a royal or noble household, usually one who was of higher rank in the household hierarchy. This hierarchy reflected the feudal society in which they lived. Everyone who served a royal or noble household knew their duties, and knew their place.8 This was especially important when the household staff consisted of both nobles and commoners. There were actually two household hierarchies which existed in parallel. One was the organization based upon the function (duty) being performed. The other was based upon whether the person performing the duty was a noble or a commoner.8\nSimilar household duties were grouped into Household Offices, which were then assigned to one of several Chief Officers. In each Household Office, the servants were organized into a hierarchy, arranged in ranks according to the level of responsibility.8\n The highest rank, which reported directly to the Chief Officer and oversaw an individual Household Office.31 The word was introduced to England by the Normans, and meant an attendant or servant.\n The middle rank of the Household Office.\n The lowest rank of the Household Office. It generally referred to a menial position for a free-born commoner.\nThe Chief Officers were nobles, but the servant ranks of Sergeant, Yeoman, and Groom\ncould be filled by either commoners or members of noble families. Any household duties which required close contact with the lord's immediate family, or their rooms, were handled by nobles.\nFor example, the Steward oversaw the Offices concerned with household management. Procurement, storage, and preparation of food, waiting at table, and tending to the kitchen gardens, were some of the duties for which the Steward was responsible. Under the Steward during the reign of King Edward III, there were two separate groups of yeomen: \"Yeomen of the King's Chamber\" and \"Yeomen of the Offices\". The first group were members of noble families who waited only on the King, and the second group were commoners who performed similar duties for other household residents and guests in the Great Hall, kitchen, pantry, and other areas.\nYeoman service.\nYeoman service (also yeoman's service) is an idiom which means \"good, efficient, and useful service\" in some cause. It has the connotations of the work performed by a faithful servant of the lower ranks, who does whatever it takes to get the job done.\nThe sense \u2013 although not the use \u2013 of the idiom can be found in the \"Gest of Robyn Hode\", dated to about 1500. In the \"First Fitte\" (the first section of the ballad), Robin gives money to a poor knight to pay his debt to the abbot of St Mary's Abbey. Noticing that the knight was traveling alone, Robin offers him the service of Little John as a yeoman:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"I shall thee lend Little John, my man,\nFor he shall be thy knave;\nIn a yeoman's stead he may thee stand,\nIf thou great need have.\"\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nHere Robin vouches for Little John as a yeoman, a faithful servant who will perform whatever duties are required in times of great need.\nThe phrase \"yeoman's service\" is used by William Shakespeare in \"Hamlet\" (published in 1601). In act V, scene 2, Prince Hamlet tells Horatio how he discovered the king's plot against himself in a commission (document). Hamlet then says he has substituted for the original a commission which he himself wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"... I sat me down,\nDevised a new commission, wrote it fair\u2014\nI once did hold it, as our statists do,\nA baseness to write fair, and labored much\nHow to forget that learning; but, sir, now\nIt did me yeoman's service.\"\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"Hamlet\", V, 2\nHamlet remarks that he \"wrote it fair\", that is, in elegant, gentlemanly prose; a style of writing which he tried very hard to forget. But in composing the fake commission, Hamlet had to resort to \"that learning\". He tells Horatio that \"it did me yeoman's service\", that is, his learning stood him in good stead. \"Standing one in good stead\" is another idiom very similar in meaning to yeoman service. Note that it was used in the third line of Stanza of the \"Gest of Robyn Hode\" quoted in the paragraph above.\nAttendant or assistant to an official (ca 14th\u201317th centuries).\nMarshalsea Court was a court of the English royal household, presided over by the Steward and the Knight-Marshal. The court kept records from about 1276 until 1611. Unfortunately, only a few survive from the years 1316\u201359. Some information on the yeomen of the Marshalsea Court can be found in the Household Ordinance of King Edward IV from about 1483.1 The author of the Ordinance, looking back to the earlier household ordinances of King Edward III wrote: \"Our sovereign lord's household is now discharged ... of the Court of Marshalsea, and all his clerks and yeomen.\"19 The writer was referring to the transfer of the Marshalsea Court from the royal household.\nThe Ordinance describe the duties of the Steward of the Household, who was also the Steward of the Court of Marshalsea. The Steward was assigned one chaplain, two squires, and four yeomen as his personal retinue. One yeoman was specifically attached to the Steward's rooms at the Court of Marshalsea \"to keep his chamber and stuff\". When the Steward was present in Court, he was entitled to a 10-person retinue. Besides the Steward and the Knight-Marshal, two other members of the royal household were empowered to preside: the Treasurer and the Controller. Of the Steward, Treasurer, and the Controller, at least one of them must preside in the Court every day.56\nA chivalric rank.\nOne of the earliest documents which contains yeoman as a chivalric rank is the \"Chronicon Vilodunense\" (\"Life of Saint Edith\"). Originally written in Latin by Goscelin sometime in the 11th century, it was later translated into the Wiltshire dialect of Middle English about 1420. Part of the manuscript relates a story about the archbishop of York caught in a storm at sea while on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. He prayed to Saint Edith for the storm to subside, and suddenly he saw Saint Edith standing beside him. The Blessed Virgin had sent her, she said, to assure the archbishop he would arrive home safe and sound. Miraculously, the storm stopped. The archbishop kept his vow, and visited St Edith's tomb at Wilton Abbey. There he preached a sermon about the miracle to each man there: knight, squire, yeoman, and page.lines 4531-58\nAlthough Wilton Abbey was a Benedictine nunnery, it held its lands from the king by knight service. The Abbess' knights were her tenants, who in turn held land from the Abbey by knight service. Usually the abbess fulfilled her duty to the king by scutage. But she had knights with King Henry III on his 1223 Welsh campaign, and at the Siege of Bedford Castle the following year. Between 1277 and 1327 she offered knight service at least four times.\nAbout 50 years later in 1470, another reference to yeomen is made in the Warkworth Chronicle. The scene is King Edward IV's coronation, and the chronicler lists the nobles who received titles from His Majesty. At the end of the list he notes: \"And other gentlemen and yeomen he made knights and squires, as they had deserved.\"36 (modern spelling) The chronicler makes no further mention of these men.\nYeomanry (14th\u201315th centuries).\nAn early historical meaning that seems to have disappeared before our modern era is \"something pertaining to or characteristic of a yeoman\", such as the speech or the dress. Perhaps the best way of illustrating this meaning is to quote briefly from one of the earliest Middle English ballads. \"Robin Hood and the Potter\" survives as a manuscript dated from about 1500. Robin demands a one penny toll of the Potter, for which the traveler could then proceed unharmed by the outlaw. The Potter refuses to pay. A scuffle ensues, in which the Potter overcomes Robin. The Potter then wants to know whom he has beaten. After hearing Robin's name, the Potter responds (modern translation from glossary notes):lines 85\u201389\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"It is full little courtesy,\" said the potter.\n\"As I have heard wise men say,\nIf'n a poor yeoman come driving over the way,\nTo hold him on his journey.\"\n\"By my troth, thou says truth\", said Robin.\n\"Thou says good yeomanry;\nAnd though thou go forth every day,\nThou shalt not be held by me.\"\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn the first stanza the Potter describes himself as a poor yeoman, whom people say Robin Hood would never stop or waylay (also known as a holdup). It is obvious from the story that the Potter was not dressed in a yeomanly manner, otherwise Robin would have never accosted him. It was not until Robin heard the Potter speak that he recognizes him as a yeoman. Whether he was referring to his direct straightforward manner, or his dialect, or both, is unclear to a 21st-century reader. But it is apparent that the original 15th century audiences knew exactly what \"good yeomanry\" was.\nYeoman archer (14th\u201315th centuries).\nThe Yeoman Archer is a term applied specifically to English and Welsh military longbow archers (either mounted or on foot) of the 14th\u201315th centuries. Yeoman archers were commoners; free-born members of the social classes below the nobility and gentry. They were a product of the English form of feudalism in which the military duty of a knight to his lord (which was implicit in tenure feudalism) was replaced by paid, short-term service.\nThe Yeoman Archers were the English Army's response to a chronic manpower problem when trying to field an army on the European continent during the 14th century. Against 27,000 French knights, England could only muster at most 5,000 men-at-arms.39 With this 5:1 tactical disadvantage, the English needed a strategic advantage.\nWhen Edward I invaded Wales in 1282, he quickly realized the battlefield importance of the opposing Welsh archers. Firing from ambush, they inflicted serious casualties on Edward's army. When Edward invaded Scotland for the second time in 1298, his army consisted mostly of infantry (12,500 of 15,000 men). His infantry included about 10,500\u201310,900 Welshmen.27-9 2,000 men, including archers, were raised as part of the Lancashire and Cheshire levies under the Commission of Array.27-9 At the Battle of Falkirk, the English army archers opened up the Scottish schiltrons with hails of arrows. The Scottish infantrymen fled the battlefield, to be pursued and killed by the English cavalry. In 1333, his grandson, Edward III, undertook his first invasion of Scotland, which culminated with the Battle of Halidon Hill. Halidon Hill is where the 20-year old Edward III learned how to combine archers and dismounted men-at-arms \u2013 tactics that he would employ during his Cr\u00e9cy campaign in France. The English victory at the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy was followed by another victory at the Battle of Poitiers, and a final victory at the Siege of Calais. After the Battle of Agincourt, the Yeoman Archer had become as legendary as his bow. By negating the tactical advantage of large numbers of cavalry (mounted knights and men-at-arms) with their ability to rapidly fire volleys of arrows, Yeoman Archers are considered part of the Infantry revolution of the 14th century. They could be deployed as \"Archers on horse\" (mounted archers who could reach the scene quickly, dismount, &amp; set up a firing line) or as \"Archers on foot\" (foot archers who followed as reinforcements).45\nYeoman of the Guard (15th century-present).\nOn 22 August 1485, near the small village of Stoke Golding, Henry Tudor met King Richard III in battle for the Crown of England. The War of the Roses had persisted intermittently for more than 30 years between the rival claimants of the House of York (white rose) and the House of Lancaster (red rose). In 1483, Richard, of the House of York, had deposed his young nephew, 12-year old Edward V. Henry Tudor, of the House of Lancaster, was the favored candidate to replace Richard.\nThree armies met that day on Bosworth Field: Richard, with his supporters, Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of Northumberland; Henry, with his troops under command of the veteran John de Vere, Earl of Oxford; and the troops of Thomas, Lord Stanley. Stanley was a powerful lord in northwest England. But he was stepfather of Henry Tudor, and Richard was holding his son hostage. Stanley's forces remained uncommitted as the battle raged. As Oxford advanced, the troops appeared to leave Henry, his bodyguards, and some French mercenaries isolated. Or so it appeared to Richard. Sensing an opportunity, Richard charged toward Henry. Seeing this, Stanley made his decision, and charged to reinforce Henry. Henry's bodyguards fought bravely to hold off Richard's bodyguards until the arrival of Stanley's troops. During the melee, Richard's horse became mired in the marsh, and he was killed. Henry had won.\nHenry rewarded his bodyguards by formal establishing the \"Yeomen of the Guard of (the body of) our Lord the King\". The King of England always had bodyguards (\"Yeoman of the Crown\"). This royal act recognized their bravery and loyalty in doing their duty, and designated them as the first members of a bodyguard to protect the King (or Queen) of England forever. In their first official act on 1 October 1485, fifty members of the Yeoman of the Guard, led by John de Vere, 13th Earl of Oxford, formally escorted Henry Tudor to his coronation ceremony.916\nYeoman Warder (16th century-present).\nThe Tower of London was used as permanent royal residence until 1509\u201310, during the reign of King Henry VIII. Henry ordered 12 Yeoman of the Guard to remain as a garrison, indicating that the Tower was still a royal palace. When the Tower no longer served that function, the garrison became warders, and were not permitted to wear the Yeoman of the Guard uniform. During the reign of Henry's son, Edward VI, the warders were given back the uniform. This was done as a result of petition from the former Lord Protector of the Realm, Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset. Seymour, who was Edward's uncle, had been confined there, and found the warders to be most considerate.917\nEnglish Navy yeoman (to 1485).\nThe earliest documented use of yeoman relative to a navy is found in the \"Merchant's Tale of Beryn\": \"Why gone the yeomen to boat \u2013 Anchors to haul?\"line 1995 The context of the quotation sheds no further light on either yeomen or boats. What is important is the date of the manuscript: between 1450 and 1470. This places the \"Merchant's Tale of Beryn\" about the same time as the \"Robin Hood and the Monk\" manuscript, and shortly before the end of the Hundred Years War. To understand the connections between yeoman and the early English navy, it is necessary to examine King Edward III's reign and the beginning of the Hundred Years War.\nEngland did not have a standing navy until the Tudor Navy of King Henry VIII. Before then, the \"King's Ships\" were a very small fleet allocated for the King's personal use. During the Hundred Years War, King Edward III actually owned only a few ships. The rest were made available to the King through agreements with his nobles and the various port towns of England. About 25 ships of various sizes were made available to Edward III every year.20-21 They ranged from the small Thames sailing barges (descended from the famous Norman longships of the Bayeux Tapestry26-7) which shuttled the royal retinue up and down the River Thames, to large cogs. Cogs were large merchant ships, with high prows and sterns, and a single mast with a single square sail. The largest cogs were built to carry sizable wine casks. The Vintners' Company, in return for their monopoly on the wine trade, had to make their cogs available to the King on demand.23\nThe 1345 \"Household Ordinance of Edward III\" provides a brief summary of the Fleets organized for the Cr\u00e9cy campaign. The South Fleet (which included all English ports south and west of River Thames) consisted of 493 ships with 9,630 mariners. Of these, the \"King's Ships\" (25 ships with 419 mariners), the ports of Dartmouth (31 ships with 757 mariners), Plymouth (26 ships with 603 mariners), and London (25 ships with 602 mariners) were the largest contingents. The North Fleet (which included all English ports north of River Thames) consisted of 217 ships with 4521 mariners. The port of Yarmouth, with 43 ships with 1095 mariners, was the largest contingent.6-8 The definition of a mariner is unclear, as is the difference between a mariner and a sailor.406 The number of mariners given is about twice that needed to man a ship. Edward's warships carried two crews. The second crew was used for night sailing, for providing a crew for prize ships, and for providing more fighting men.85\nEarly in the Hundred Years War, the largest existing merchant ships, such as the cog, were converted to warships with the addition of wooden castles. There were three types of castles: forecastle (at the prow), aftcastle (at the stern), and the topcastle (at the top of the mast). A record from 1335 tells of the vessel \"Trinity\" (200 tons) being converted for war.169-70 As new ships were built, the castles became integral with the ship's hull.26\nAs the King was impressing all the big ships and their crews for the war effort, the mayors and merchants of the port towns were retrofitting old ships and building new ones for harbor defense, and patrols to protect coastal ships and fishing boats from enemy ships and pirates.84\nBy this time (mid-14th century), the Captain of the ship was a separate military rank.400-01 He was responsible for the defense of the ship. For every 4 mariners aboard the warship, there was 1 man-at-arms and 1 archer who was stationed in the castles. For a vessel the size of the \"Trinity\", which carried about 130 mariners, there were at least 32 men-at-arms and 32 archers.158\nThese illuminations from a 14th-century manuscript provide some insight as to how the retrofitted castles were used in battle. The first illustration shows a 2-masted vessel, with a man-at-arms in the retrofitted aftcastle, and an archer in the retrofitted topcastle.\nThe next illustration shows a battle scene.365-66 The tactics included using grappling hooks to position the ships so that the archers on the aftcastles had clear shots into the opposing ship. After raking the deck with arrows, the men-at-arms would swing over to finish the job.\nThe warship Captain was also responsible for convoying 30 merchant vessels from English ports to the French shore. These vessels carried the troops, horses, food, forage, and whatever else was needed upon landing in France.85\nThe Master (or Master Mariner) was responsible for sailing the vessel. Under him were the Constables (equivalent to today's boatswains). One constable oversaw twenty crewmen.400-02 Collecting a crew was traditionally the task of the Master. However, with the need for double-crews, the King authorized his Admirals to offer the King's pardon to outlaws and pirates. In 1342, the number of men who responded exceeded the demand. Edward's deputies never had trouble again raising the crews they needed. This is reminiscent of the pardons offered by Edward to outlaws of the Robin Hood ballads. Therefore, it is possible that the real answer to \"Why gone the yeomen to boat \u2013 Anchors to haul?\" was a pardon.\nInstances of yeoman in a naval context are rare before 1700. In 1509, the Office of Ordnance had a Master, Clerk, and Yeoman. In 1608, a House of Lords manuscript mentions a ship's gunner and a yeoman. Then in 1669 appeared \"The Mariner's Magazine\", dedicated to the Society of Merchant-Adventurers of the City of Bristol. Among the various chapters on the use of mathematics in sea navigation and gunnery, the author suggests \"He [the Gunner] must be careful in making Choice of a sober honest Man, for the Yeoman of the Powder.\"(modern spelling) In 1702, actual titles of seamen appear in the \"London Gazette\": Yeomen of the Sheets, and Yeomen of the Powder Room.\nSocial stratum of small freeholders.\nThis review of the yeoman freeholders is divided into three periods: (a) up to 1500; (b) between 1500 and 1600; and (c) between 1600 and 1800. This division corresponds roughly to the historical changes experienced by the freeholders themselves, as well as the shifting contemporary social hierarchies in which they lived. It is also influenced by the availability of sources for each period.\nUp to 1500.\nThe parliament of 1327 was a watershed event. For the first time since the Norman Conquest, an English king was deposed peaceably, and not usurped by military means. Although Edward II had been previously threatened with deposition in 1310 and 1321, all those who attended the parliament of 1327 were aware of the constitutional crisis. The king was imprisoned by his Queen Isabella and her paramour Roger Mortimer after their invasion of England. The Parliament was a legal pretense to confer legitimacy upon their actions. The Lords Temporal and the Lords Spiritual were summoned in the King's name, while the Knights of the Shire, Burgesses from the towns, and representatives from the Cinque Ports were elected to attend. According to Michael Prestwich: \"What was necessary was to ensure that every conceivable means of removing the King was adopted, and the procedures combined all possible precedents\". Hence, establishing the legitimacy of Edward III was paramount. But it was the Knights of the Shire and Burgesses (hereafter referred to as \"the commons\") who drove the proceedings, both before and after Edward III's coronation. Beginning in 1327, the commons became a permanent part of parliament.\nIn the 14th century, the name commons did not have its modern meaning of \"common people\". It referred to \"the communities\", which was \"les Communs\" in Anglo-Norman French. The word meant that those elected to the parliament were representatives of their communities, that is, the shires and the urban areas. To distinguish between this early assembly from the later House of Commons, \"the commons\" is used herein.\nThe commons included the proctors of the lesser clergy as members of the sessions. In 1333, the commons sat together in a single chamber for the first time. About this same time, the commons was evolving into its role of legislating taxation. The king preferred to include taxes on clerical income with the direct taxes on the laity. The church hierarchy (archbishops and bishops) considered that no secular authority had the right to enforce tax collection from clerical income in a secular court. Such cases, they thought, should be considered in an of law. In 1340, the bishops negotiated a settlement with the Crown, wherein disputes between the king and clergy over taxation would be heard in ecclesiastical courts at either Canterbury or York. Therefore, there was no longer a need for the proctors to attend the commons. This was an important milestone for the commons. It became a secular assembly, its deliberations unaffected by ecclesiastical concerns. In 1342, the commons reorganized itself as the House of Commons, deliberating separately from the king, nobles and higher clergy of noble status. Each county had two Knights of the Shire as representatives, except for Durham and Cheshire, which were county palatines.\nInitially, the Knights of the Shire were selected from among the belted knights.\nSir Anthony Richard Wagner, Garter Principal King of Arms, wrote that \"a Yeoman would not normally have less than 100 acres\" (40 hectares) \"and in social status is one step down from the Landed gentry, but above, say, a husbandman\". Often it was hard to distinguish minor landed gentry from the wealthier yeomen, and wealthier husbandmen from the poorer yeomen.\n1500\u20131600.\nAs some yeomen overlapped into the newly emerging gentry through wealth and marriage; others merged with the merchants and professions of the towns through education; some became local officials in the counties; and still others maintained their original identity as farmers.\nYeomen were often constables of their parish, and sometimes chief constables of the district, shire or hundred. Many yeomen held the positions of bailiffs for the High Sheriff or for the shire or hundred. Other civic duties would include churchwarden, bridge warden, and other warden duties. It was also common for a yeoman to be an overseer for his parish. Yeomen, whether working for a lord, king, shire, knight, district or parish, served in localised or municipal police forces raised by or led by the landed gentry. Some of these roles, in particular those of constable and bailiff, were carried down through families. Yeomen often filled ranging, roaming, surveying, and policing roles. In districts remoter from landed gentry and burgesses, yeomen held more official power: this is attested in statutes of the reign of Henry VIII (reigned 1509\u20131547), indicating yeomen along with knights and squires as leaders for certain purposes.\nYeoman farmer.\nIn the United States, yeomen were identified in the 18th and 19th centuries as non-slaveholding, small landowning, family farmers. In areas of the Southern United States where land was poor, like East Tennessee, the landowning yeomen were typically subsistence farmers, but some managed to grow crops for market. Whether they engaged in subsistence or commercial agriculture, they controlled far more modest landholdings than those of the planters, typically in the range of 50\u2013200 acres. In the Northern United States, practically all the farms were operated by yeoman farmers as family farms.\nThomas Jefferson was a leading advocate of the yeomen, arguing that the independent farmers formed the basis of republican values. Indeed, Jeffersonian Democracy as a political force was largely built around the yeomen. After the American Civil War (1861\u20131865), organizations of farmers, especially the Grange, formed to organize and enhance the status of the yeoman farmers.\nModern meanings.\nThe Yeomanry.\nDuring the 1790s, the threat of French invasion of Great Britain appeared genuine. In 1794, The British Volunteer Corps was organized for home defense, composed of local companies of part-time volunteers. Their cavalry troops became known as the Yeomanry Cavalry. The infantry companies were disbanded by 1813, as the threat of Napoleon Bonaparte's invasion evaporated. However, the Yeomanry Cavalry was retained. They were used to quell the food riots of 1794\u201395 and break up workers' strikes during the 1820s\u20131840s, as part of their mandate was to maintain the King's Peace.246-291 The rise of civilian police forces during this same period (the Metropolitan Police Act 1829, the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, and the County Police Act 1839) replaced the Yeomanry Cavalry as an instrument of law enforcement. In 1899, the Yeomanry Cavalry were deployed overseas during the Second Boer War, after a series of devastating British Army defeats. In 1901, the Yeomanry Cavalry formed the nucleus of the new Imperial Yeomanry. Eight years later, the Imperial Yeomanry and the Volunteer Force were combined as the Territorial Force.\nUnited States Navy.\nIn the modern Navy, a yeoman is an enlisted service member who performs administrative and clerical work.\nThe Continental Navy was established by the Continental Congress in 1775. The legislation called for officers, warrant officers, and enlisted men. The roster of enlisted men was left open to each ship captain to fill as he deemed necessary. After the Treaty of Paris, the Navy was considered unnecessary by Congress, and it was disbanded in 1785. The surviving ships were sold off.\nThe US Constitution (Article I, Section 8, Clause 14) granted the new US Congress the power to build and maintain a navy. It wasn't until 1794, when the worsening US relations with Great Britain and France, as well as the continuing attacks by Barbary pirates, forced Congress to appropriate funds to construct 6 frigates. The US naval hierarchy established followed the precedent set by the British Royal Navy. To which the US Navy added Petty Officers, which included the jobs traditionally assigned to naval yeomen. The first US Navy yeomen were \"Yeoman of the Gunroom\" and the \"Captain's Clerk\". Petty officers were appointed by the ship's captain, and served at his pleasure. They did not retain their rank when they moved to another ship.\nAs the US Navy transformed from sail to steam, and from wood to steel, the yeoman's duties gradually changed to more administrative tasks. The \"Gunner's Yeoman\" was eliminated in 1838, the \"Boatswain's Yeoman\" in 1864, the \"Engineer's Yeoman\" and the \"Equipment Yeoman\" in 1893. The \"Captain's Clerk\" of 1798 became a \"Yeoman\" in 1893, which makes today's Yeoman a descendant of one of the original rates and ratings in the US Navy.\nYeomen in Late Middle/Early Modern English literature.\nUntil the 16th century, yeomen were mentioned either as servants in Norman French-speaking aristocratic households, or as members of the English army or navy in the Anglo-Norman kings' military expeditions across the English Channel. It was not until Middle English became England's official language during the 14th century and the new social stratum of yeoman freeholders gained respectability during the 15th century, that the oral ballads repeated by previous generations of English-speaking yeomen were written down and distributed to a wider audience.\nThe best-known ballads were about the yeoman outlaw Robyn Hode (Robin Hood, in modern spelling). A J Pollard, in his book \"Imagining Robin Hood: The Late Medieval Stories in Historical Context\",x proposed that the first Robin Hood was a literary fiction of the 15th and early 16th centuries. This does not mean that Pollard claims that Robin Hood was \"not\" historical. He considers that what modern popular culture \"thinks\" it knows about Robin is actually based upon how previous generations over the last 500 years have viewed him. The historical Robyn Hode was (or were, in the case of there possibly being several men whose exploits were melded into the single individual of the ballads) of secondary importance to his cultural symbolism for succeeding generations. In his review of Pollard's book, Thomas Ohlgren, one of the editors of the University of Rochester's \"The Robin Hood Project\", agreed with this assessment. Because \"A Gest of Robyn Hode\" is a 16th-century collective memory of a fictional past, it can also be seen as a reflection of the century in which it was written. Following in the footsteps of Pollard and Ohlgren, this section examines some of the literature written in Late Middle English and Early Modern English to explore how the historical Yeoman was slowly transformed by succeeding generations into a legend for their own times.\n\"A Gest of Robyn Hode\".\nRhymes (ballads) of Robin Hood were being sung as early as the 1370s. William Langland, the author of \"Piers Plowman\", has Sloth say that he does not know his \"Pater Noster\" (Latin for the \"Our Father\" prayer) as perfectly as the priest sings it, but he does know the rhymes of Robin Hood. Unfortunately, the rhymes that William Langland heard have not survived. The earliest surviving ballads are \"Robin Hood and the Monk\" (dated to 1450), \"Robin Hood and the Potter\" (dated to about 1500), and \"A Gest of Robyn Hode\".\nThe oldest copies of \"A Gest of Robyn Hode\" are print editions dated between 1510 and 1530. These early rhymes are witnesses to a crucial time in English history. The 14th\u201315th centuries saw the rise of the common people's Middle English over the decline of the aristocrats' Norman French, the military prowess of the yeoman longbowmen during the Hundred Years War (see Yeoman Archers), and the beginnings of a yeoman class (see Social Class of Small Freeholders).\nIn the \"Gest\", Robin is an outlaw (meaning \"outside the law\"); someone who was summoned to a law court, but failed to appear. He has gathered around himself a fellowship of \"sevenscore men\"lines 1555, that is, 140 skilled bowmen. Nevertheless, Robin is the King's Man: \"I love no man in all the world/So well as I do my king;\"lines 1541\u201342. Disguised as a monk carrying the King's Seal, King Edward finally meets Robin, and is invited to a feast. During the archery contest afterwards, Robin suddenly recognizes Edward. He immediately kneels to offer homage, asking for mercy for his men. Edward grants pardon, and invites Robin to court. Robin agrees, and offers his men as a retinue.lines 1409\u201358 Note how Robin's behavior fits a commander of men. This entire scene is reminiscent of the contracted indenture offered by Edward III, where pardons were granted for war service (see Yeoman Archers). It is interesting that this historical detail had been preserved in the \"Gest of Robyn Hode\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nHarken, good yeomen,\nComely, courteous, and good,\nOne of the best that ever bore bow,\nHis name was Robin Hood.\nRobin Hood was the yeoman's name,\nThat was both courteous and generous;\nFor the love of Our Lady,\nAll women honored him.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"Robin Hood and the Potter\", lines 5\u201312lines 5\u201312\nThese earliest ballads contain clues to the changes in the English social structure which elevated the yeoman to a more powerful and influential level (see A Chivalric Rank). In the box to the left is the opening of \"Robin Hood and the Potter\". (Note that all quotations have modern spelling, and obsolete words have been substituted.) The audience is addressed as \"good yeomen\", and yeoman Robin is described as possessing the \"knightly virtues\" of courtesy (good manners), goodness, generosity, and a devotion to the Virgin Mary. Thomas Ohlgren, a Robin Hood scholar, considers this to be an indication of the social changes the yeomen were undergoing. The yeomen may be lower in social rank to the knight, but they see themselves as possessing the traits of the knightly class.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nLithe and listen, gentlemen,\nThat be of freeborn blood;\nI shall you tell of a good yeoman,\nHis name was Robin Hood.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"Gest of Robyn Hode\", lines 1\u20134lines 1\u20134\nIn the box to the right, the opening lines of \"Gest of Robyn Hode\" offer confirmation that yeomen now consider themselves as part of the gentry. The audience is now composed of \"gentlemen\". Stephen Knight and Thomas Ohlgren suggest that the \"Gest\" audience was a literate audience interested in political resistance. This interpretation appears to be supported by the rise of the new social class of yeoman (see Social Class of Small Freeholders).\nChaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\".\nGeoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales include several characters described as yeoman, shedding light on the nature of the yeoman in the late 14th century when the work was written.\nGeneral Prologue: The Yeoman.\nIn the \"General Prologue\", Chaucer describes The Yeoman as being the only servant The Knight wanted on the pilgrimage. From the way he was dressed, Chaucer supposes he is a forester. The man is wearing a green tunic and hood. His hair is closely cropped, his face is tanned and weather-beaten, and his horn is slung from a green baldric. The Yeoman is well-armed. He carries a \"mighty bow\" in his hand with a sheaf of arrows hung from his belt. Chaucer points out that the peacock feather fletching was well-made. The archer obviously took great care when making his arrows. He also carries a sword, a buckler, and a small dagger. (Note the similarity between this yeoman's accoutrements and those of the \"Yeomen of the King's Crown\".) The forester's final protection is a medal of Saint Christopher, the patron saint of travelers.lines 101-17\nChaucer's description of a forester is based upon his experiences as a deputy forester of North Petherton Park in Somersetshire.xl\nThe very first line of The Yeoman's description is the statement the Knight wanted no other servant. Kenneth J Thompson quoted Earle Birney as saying that a forester was the only attendant the Knight needed; he was a \"huntsman-forester, knight's bodyguard, squire's attendant, lord's retainer, king's foot-soldier\".388 The forester's job was to protect the \"vert and venison\" \u2013 the deer and the Royal forest they inhabited. The foresters not only discouraged poaching, but provided winter feed, and cared for newly born calves. The medieval English foresters also provided basic woodland management by preventing unauthorized grazing, and illegal logging. Another function of the forester was assist the King's Huntsmen in planning the royal hunts. The foresters knew the game animals, and where to find them.388\nWhen his lord was campaigning in wartime, the forester was capable of providing additional meat for the lord's table. During the 1358\u201360 campaign in France, Edward III had 30 falconers on horseback, and 60 couples (or pairs) of hounds.390\nThe Yeoman has his \"mighty bow\" (most probably a longbow) at the ready, implying he is on duty serving as bodyguard against highwaymen and robbers. He carries a sheaf of arrows under his belt, which implies an arrow bag suspended from his belt.391\nChaucer's description of The Yeoman has been interpreted as an iconographic representation of the dutiful servant, diligent and always ready to serve.391 In other words, the very picture of yeoman service.\nThompson quotes an interesting excerpt from the Anonimalle Chronicle. It is part of the description of King John II's journey to London, after he had been captured by the Black Prince at the Battle of Poitiers:\n\"On their way through England, the King of England aforesaid caused many lords and other people of the countryside to meet them, in a forest, dressed in coats and mantles of green. And when the said King of France passed through the said forest, the said men showed themselves in front of the King of France and his company, like robbers or malefactors with bows and arrows and with swords and bucklers; and the King of France marveled greatly at the sight, asking what manner of men these were. And the prince answered that these were men of England, forest-dweller, living as they pleased in the wild; and it was their custom to be arrayed thus every day.\"400-01\nThe encounter was obviously some political posturing staged by Edward III for the benefit of the French king. It displayed the opposition the French army would face should the King decide to invade England.\nThe Friar's Tale.\nIn the tale told by the Friar, the devil assumes the disguise of a yeoman dressed in a green tunic, a hat with black fringes, and carrying a bow and some arrows.lines 1380\u20131383 The devil meets a summoner on his rounds. The tale continues as a scathing condemnation of the vile corruption of the summoner, whom the devil eventually takes to hell:\n\"And with that word this foul fiend seized him;\nBody and soul he with the devil went\nWhere summoners have their heritage.\"lines 1639\u20131641\nThe Canon's Yeoman's Prologue.\nChaucer constructed this tale quite differently than the other ones. The Canon and his Yeoman are not part of the original party. They are introduced when the group reaches Boughton under Blean, only 5 miles from Canterbury. From the top of Boughton Hill, those traveling along the Pilgrim's Way from London can see the towers of Canterbury Cathedral for the first time. This close proximity to Canterbury makes the entrance of the Canon and his Yeoman suspicious. Even more suspicious is the sudden exit of the Canon, leaving his Yeoman to tell the tale himself.lines 554\u2013702\nTwo Chaucerian scholars have different but complementary interpretations, and neither concern a satire on alchemy. Albert E Hartung proposes that the \"Canon's Yeoman's Prologue\" is a device to include a previously written story into \"the Canterbury Tales\" as the \"Pars Secunda\"111-128. Jackson J. Campbell proposes the interruption of the pilgrims' journey by the Canon and his yeoman so near to Canterbury is a device to prepare for the Parson's Tale, which is actually a sermon.171\u2013181 Both interpretations place importance on the characterization of the Yeoman.\nHartung proposes that the real reason the Canon rode so fast and so hard to join the pilgrims is that he was seeking new victims.124 The Yeoman urges that it would be to the pilgrims' advantage to know the Canon better; that he is a remarkable man.lines 609\u2013614 The Canon knows the secret of turning the road they are traveling upside down, and repaving it with silver and gold.lines 620\u2013626 When The Host asks why The Canon is dressed in dirty rags, when he can afford clothes of the finest material, the Yeoman deftly replies that the Canon will never prosper, because his faith will not allow him to enrich himself though his knowledge.lines 627-51\nThe impression that it was time for the Canon and his Yeoman to move on is reinforced by the Yeoman's description of where they lived:\n\"In the outskirts of a town,\" said he,\n\"Lurking in hiding places and in dead-end alleys,\nWhere these robbers and these thieves by nature\nHold their private fearful residence, ...\" (lines 657\u2013660)\nAt this point the Canon reins his horse in beside his Yeoman, demanding that he not reveal any secrets. The Host dismisses the Canon's threats as mere bluster, and the Canon gallops away. The Yeoman's reaction implies that he may have hoped that this would happen.lines 703\u2013719 It was the Yeoman who noticed the Pilgrims leaving the hostelry that morning, and informed the Canon.lines 589-90\nAt this point, at the beginning of the \"Prima Pars\" (\"First Part\"), Campbell draws attention to the Yeoman's manner of speaking. He notes that the Yeoman rambles on impulsively in an unorganized fashion. His speech is full of free association and stream of consciousness.(p 174, 176) Seeing the Canon ride off unleashes a torrent of inventive against the Canon \u2013 and against himself. He sorrowfully remembers when his face was fresh and ruddy; now it is the color of lead. He used to wear fine clothing and have \"splendid furnishings\", now he wears a legging on his head. When their experiments failed to convert one gold coin into two, he borrowed the gold to pay the customer.lines 722\u2013736 Campbell describes the self-revulsion felt by the Yeoman for the futility of alchemy, and the deception and dishonesty employed while searching for the philosopher's stone. He hates it, but is fascinated by it at the same time.174-75\nHartung agrees that Chaucer is presenting the pursuit of the philosopher's stone as an affliction124 He contrasts the Yeoman's Canon in the \"Prima Parta\" with the charlatan alchemist in the \"Pars Secunda\" (\"Second Part\") of the \"Yeoman's Tale\". Huntung proposes that this part of the Tale was composed for an audience of clergymen.126 The alchemist is compared with the devil, and the \"worshipful canons\" who pursue the study of alchemy are no better than Judas, who betrayed Jesus for 30 pieces of silver. But the tirade is not against alchemy itself.126\nThe penitent Yeoman reinforces the overall theme of pilgrimage, with its emphasis on repentance, and forgiveness. Chaucer is preparing the reader (or listener) for the \"Parson's Tale\", which a sermon about penitence, \"which can not fail to man nor to woman who through sin has gone astray from the right way to Jerusalem celestial\".\nShakespeare's \"Henry V\".\nThe initial performance of William Shakespeare's play \"Henry V\" was in 1599. The focus of the play was the Battle of Agincourt, which had occurred 184 years before. It is a rousing patriotic play, but it was also propaganda. Elizabeth I sat upon a shaky throne. The Catholic threat from Spain and at home, war with Spain, concern over who she would marry, concern over the succession.\nThe Nine Years War was underway. The English army had suffered defeat by the Irish at the Battle of the Yellow Ford in 1598. Elizabeth and her counsellors were preparing an invasion in 1599. However, her Privy Council was no longer composed of her most trusted advisors. Most of them \u2013 Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, Sir Francis Walsingham, and Sir Christopher Hatton had died by 1591. William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley died in 1598. The council was split between Robert Cecil (Burghley's son) and Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, who were locked in a bitter rivalry.\nIn 1599, Elizabeth was 66 years old, and her personal power was waning. She could not prevent the execution of her personal physician, Roderigo Lopez on a false charge of treason brought by the Earl of Essex. In spite of his irresponsibility, the Earl of Essex was appointed Lord Lord Lieutenant, and given command of the 16,000-man Irish invasion force.\nShakespeare wrote \"Henry V\" to rally support for the Ireland invasion. The play followed naturally after his \"Henry IV, Part 2\", written between 1576 and 1599. Henry's victory at Agincourt in spite of overwhelming odds was the perfect plot. Shakespeare presented Henry's invasion of France and his Agincourt victory in all its complexity. The play can be interpreted either as a celebration of Henry's military skill, or as an examination of the moral and human cost of war.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nOnce more unto the breach, dear friends, once more,\nOr close the wall up with our English dead!\nAnd you, good yeomen,\nWhose limbs were made in England, show us here\nThe mettle of your pasture. Let us swear\nThat you are worth your breeding, which I doubt not,\nFor there is none of you so mean and base\nThat hath not noble luster in your eyes.\nFollow your spirit, and upon this charge\nCry \u201cGod for Harry, England, and Saint George!\u201d\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nShakespeare, \"Henry V\", act 3, scene 1, lines 26\u201337\nIn the famous rousing call to action in act 3, scene 1, Henry urges his yeomen to show the French what fine bowmen are raised in England. His yeomen are not \"mean and base\", but possess a \"noble luster\" in their eyes. \"Unto the breach, dear friends, once more\", he almost pleads. The yeomen have been besieging Harfleur for over a month; they are suffering from dysentery. \"Follow your spirit\" and charge, Henry commands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nThis story shall the good man teach his son,\nAnd Crispin Crispian shall ne\u2019er go by,\nFrom this day to the ending of the world,\nBut we in it shall be remember\u00e8d\u2014\nWe few, we happy few, we band of brothers;\nFor he today that sheds his blood with me\nShall be my brother; be he ne\u2019er so vile,\nThis day shall gentle his condition;\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nShakespeare, \"Henry V\", act 4, scene 3, lines 58\u201369\nBut Shakespeare's ultimate speech comes on 25 October in act 4, scene 3. Henry now calls his army a \"band of brothers\". The camaraderie of combat has made gentlemen of them all. When they hear a veteran speak of what happened on St Crispin's Day, \"gentlemen in England\" will be ashamed of being asleep in bed at the time such deeds were done.\nYeomen in 19th century Romanticism.\nSir Walter Scott.\nWalter Scott's \"Ivanhoe: a Romance\" was published to an English audience that was experiencing a medieval revival.315-8 His notes show that he had read much of the medieval poetry and chronicles which were reprinted during the 17th and 18th centuries. \"Ivanhoe\" was \"... an historical reconstruction of 12th century England in the spiritual image of the 19th.\"230 Scott's highly detailed medieval setting attracts the interest of his reading audience; but his characters behave in a 19th-century manner in order to retain that interest. It was a device Scott employed to explore the struggle between good and evil in the guise of the struggle between the Anglo-Saxons and their Norman overlords shortly after the Conquest.230\nScott invented The Captain/Locksley/Robin Hood (hereafter referred to as Locksley) by drawing from Thomas Percy's \"Reliques\" (1765) and Joseph Ritson's \"Robin Hood\" (1795), which contained all that was known at the time about the heroic outlaw.230 However, Scott's Locksley is closest to the yeoman depicted in A Gest of Robyn Hode. Simeone points out that Scott deliberately made Robin Hood a yeoman as well as an outcast in order to show that ordinary men, and not just the rich and powerful, have an important part to play in the making of a nation. Scott re-inforced his point by having Gurth and Wamba, thralls of Cedric, play pivotal roles as well.230-1 This was a new concept at the time, as it was during this period (1775\u20131779) that the American Revolution and the French Revolution occurred.\nScott refashioned the traditional hero of the Robin Hood ballads into an ancestral hero who would crush the misrule of evil men and restore the rightful rule of law.230He demonstrates Locksley's physical superiority with the victory in the archery contest at the Tournament of Ashby. Locksley's ability to lead men in the field is displayed at the attack on Torquilstone castle. At the victory feast under the Tryst Tree, Locksley shares his high table with Cedric, the Saxon franklin, and the Norman Black Knight. His sense of justice supports the democratic system set up by the outlaws concerning the division of the spoils. Locksley's insistence on the Black Knight taking the horn as protection against Prince John's evil henchman Fitzurse demonstrates that he bows to the lawful authority of the King.231-2 In turn, the King himself bows to the noble spirit of the Yeoman:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor he that does good, having the unlimited power to do evil, deserves praise not only for the good which he performs, but for the evil which he forbears\nWalter Scott, \"Ivanhoe\", p. 661\nHoward Pyle.\nHoward Pyle's contribution to the Robin Hood revival of the 19th century was his richly illustrated children's book \"The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood\". Pyle is the author who first portrayed Robin as a kind-hearted outlaw who \"robs from the rich to give to the poor\". Each chapter covered one of the Robin Hood tales and the chapter sequence was arranged to present a coherent narrative. The resulting storyline was reused in early films such as \"Douglas Fairbanks in Robin Hood\" and Errol Flynn's \"The Adventures of Robin Hood\".\nPyle's visual and verbal depiction of the outlaw yeoman Robin Hood has become a 20th-century popular culture icon. Any resemblance to the yeoman of Gest, or with any possible historical persons who may have inspired the 15th\u201316th century ballads, is strictly coincidental. Pyle's storyline has been adapted to appeal to 20th century film audiences as a romanticized rousing action-adventure."}
{"id": "68447", "revid": "22960196", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68447", "title": "University of Caen Normandy", "text": "French university\nThe University of Caen Normandy (French: \"Universit\u00e9 de Caen Normandie\"), also known as Unicaen, is a public university in Caen, France.\nHistory.\nThe institution was founded in 1432 by John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford, the first rector being a Cornishman, Michael Tregury, afterwards Archbishop of Dublin. It originally consisted of a faculty of Canon Law and a faculty of Law. By 1438, it already had five faculties. The foundation was confirmed by the King of France Charles VII the Victorious in 1452.\nOn 7 July 1944 the university was completely destroyed by aerial bombing during Operation Charnwood, an action of the Battle of Caen. Between 1944 and 1954, the university was based in the buildings of the regional teachers\u2019 college. A new campus was designed by Henry Bernard and constructed between 1948 and 1957. The new university was inaugurated on 1 and 2 June 1957. Its logo, the mythical Phoenix, symbolises this revival.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68451", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68451", "title": "Abetalipoproteinemia", "text": "Medical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAbetalipoproteinemia (also known as: Bassen\u2013Kornzweig syndrome, microsomal triglyceride transfer protein deficiency disease, MTP deficiency, and betalipoprotein deficiency syndrome) is a disorder characterized by abnormal absorption of fat and fat-soluble vitamins from food. It is caused by a mutation in microsomal triglyceride transfer protein resulting in deficiencies in the apolipoproteins B-48 and B-100, which are used in the synthesis and exportation of chylomicrons and VLDL respectively. It is not to be confused with familial dysbetalipoproteinemia.\nIt is a rare autosomal recessive disorder.\nPresentation.\nSymptoms.\nInitial symptoms usually appear in infancy, including:\nThe rate of occurrence of additional symptoms later in life varies and increases with age. These may include:\nFeatures.\nAbetalipoproteinemia affects the absorption of dietary fats, cholesterol, and certain vitamins. People affected by this disorder are not able to make certain lipoproteins, which are molecules that consist of proteins combined with cholesterol and particular fats called triglycerides. This leads to a multiple vitamin deficiency, affecting the fat-soluble vitamin A, vitamin D, vitamin E, and vitamin K. However, many of the observed effects are due to vitamin E deficiency in particular.\nSigns and symptoms vary and present differently from person to person. In general, 80\u201399% of individuals exhibit malabsorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins. Approximately 30\u201379% of people with the disease display symptoms related to abnormality of the retinal pigmentation, ataxia, muscular hypotonia or reduced tendon reflexes.\nThe signs and symptoms of abetalipoproteinemia appear in the first few months of life (because pancreatic lipase is not active in this period). They can include failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive); diarrhea; abnormal spiny red blood cells (acanthocytosis); and fatty, foul-smelling stools (steatorrhea). The stool may contain large chunks of fat and/or blood. Infants often present with gastrointestinal problems caused by the poor fat absorption, which also contributes to steatorrhea. Other features of this disorder may develop later in childhood and often impair the function of the nervous system. They can include poor muscle coordination, difficulty with balance and movement (ataxia), and progressive degeneration of the retina (the light-sensitive layer in the posterior eye) that can progress to near-blindness (due to deficiency of vitamin A, retinol). Adults in their thirties or forties may have increasing difficulty with balance and walking. Many of the signs and symptoms of abetalipoproteinemia result from a severe vitamin deficiency, especially vitamin E deficiency, which typically results in eye problems with degeneration of the spinocerebellar and dorsal column tracts.\nGenetics.\nMutations in the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein gene (\"MTTP\") have been associated with this condition (apolipoprotein B deficiency, a related condition, is associated with deficiencies of apolipoprotein B).\nThe \"MTTP\" gene provides instructions for making a protein called microsomal triglyceride transfer protein, which is essential for creating beta-lipoproteins. These lipoproteins are both necessary for the absorption of fats, cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins from the diet and necessary for the efficient transport of these substances in the bloodstream. Most of the mutations in this gene lead to the production of an abnormally short microsomal triglyceride transfer protein, which prevents the normal creation of beta-lipoproteins in the body. MTTP-associated mutations are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene must be faulty to produce the disease.\nThe disease is extremely rare with approximately 100 reported cases worldwide since it was first identified by doctors Bassen and Kornzweig in 1950.\nMechanism.\nAbetalipoproteinemia effects multiple physiological systems, the two most common being the nervous and the skeletal. Disruption of nervous function includes loss of reflexes, speech impairments, tremors or involuntary motor tics, or peripheral neuropathy (damage to the nerves outside of the brain and spinal cord). Peripheral neuropathy causes loss of sensation, weakness or numbness and pain in the extremities through stabbing, burning, or tingling sensations. Skeletal system developments often include lordosis, kyphoscoliosis, or pes cavus. Individuals often have abnormal bleeding due to the difficulty of forming clots.\nAdditional complications of the diseases if not properly treated include blindness, mental deterioration, ataxia, loss of peripheral nerve function.\nDiagnosis.\nAcanthocytes are seen on blood smear. Since there is no or little assimilation of chylomicrons, their levels in plasma remains low.\nThe inability to absorb fat in the ileum will result in steatorrhea, or fat in the stool. As a result, this can be clinically diagnosed when foul-smelling stool is encountered. Low levels of plasma chylomicron are also characteristic.\nThere is an absence of apolipoprotein B. On intestinal biopsy, vacuoles containing lipids are seen in enterocytes. This disorder may also result in fat accumulation in the liver (hepatic steatosis). Because the epithelial cells of the bowel lack the ability to place fats into chylomicrons, lipids accumulate at the surface of the cell, crowding the functions that are necessary for proper absorption.\nMultiple related disorders present with similar symptoms as abetalipoproteinemia that can provide a useful diagnosis through comparisons. Some of those disorders are:\nTreatment.\nTreatment normally consists of rigorous dieting, involving massive amounts of vitamin E. High-dose Vitamin E therapy helps the body restore and produce lipoproteins, which people with abetalipoproteinemia usually lack. Vitamin E also helps keep skin and eyes healthy; studies show that many affected males will have vision problems later on in life. Common additional supplementation includes medium chain fatty acids and linoleic acid. Treatments also aim to slow the progression of nervous system abnormalities. Developmental coordination disorder and muscle weakness are usually treated with physiotherapy or occupational therapy. Dietary restriction of triglycerides has also been useful. Nutritionists often work with medical professionals to design appropriate dietary treatments for their patients.\nPrognosis.\nPrognosis can vary heavily based on the severity of the neurological dysfunction. If treatment is initiated early in disease the neurologic sequelae may be reversed and further deterioration can be prevented. Long-term outlook is reasonably good for most people when diagnosed and treated early. A case study presented a female patient diagnosed at the age of 11. Despite the relatively late diagnosis, the patient married and at the age of 34, gave birth to a full-term healthy infant. Her medication included vitamin K 10\u00a0mg twice a week, beta-carotene 40,000 IU daily, vitamin A 10,000 IU daily, vitamin E 400 IU daily, vitamins B6 and B12, calcium, magnesium and eye drops.\nProlonged vitamin deficiencies can further compromise health. Specifically, a prolonged vitamin E deficiency can lead to the development of limiting ataxia and gait disturbances. Some individuals may develop retinal degeneration and blindness. If left untreated, the condition may lead to death.'\nCurrent research.\nA primary goal of abetalipoproteinemia research is to supply the fat-soluble vitamins the body lacks in the disease. Previous research considered the short-term use of intravenous infusion of vitamins A and E. The goal was to determine whether these infusions would delay or counteract the symptoms in patients. No results were posted.\nMore recent research has focused on different ways to supply the patient with vitamin E. In 2018, the \"Journal of Lipid Research\" published a study testing alternative forms of vitamin E absorption. Currently, vitamin E is most often supplemented in the fat-soluble form vitamin E acetate. Due to fat malabsorption, the intended supplementation is considerably compromised. Two different forms were tested: vitamin E tocofersolan and \u03b1-tocopherol acetate. The study concluded that plasma bioavailabilities were extremely low (2.8% and 3.1%, respectively). Additionally, plasma concentrations of tocopherol were not significantly different in patients.\nThis study provides new insight in vitamin E supplementation and suggests further research is needed with different forms of vitamin E as possible treatment options to abetalipoproteinemia.\nCurrently, there is a clinical study recruiting abetalipoproteinemia patients to study inherited retinal degenerative disease. There is also a second clinical study, currently under recruitment, to investigate the consequences of deficiencies in lipophilic nutrients in this disease, such as lutein and carotenes, on retinal macular function. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68453", "revid": "29538438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68453", "title": "Basset Hound", "text": "The Basset Hound is a short-legged breed of scent hound. The Basset Hound was developed in Great Britain from several now-extinct strains of French basset breeds. It was bred primarily for hunting rabbit and hare on foot, moving slowly enough that horses were not required. Their sense of smell and ability to \"ground-scent\" is second only to the Bloodhound.\nBasset Hounds are one of six recognized \"basset\"-type breeds in France. The name \"Basset\" is derived from the French word , meaning 'low', with the attenuating suffix \"-et\"\u2014together meaning 'rather low'. Basset Hounds are usually bicolours or tricolours of standard hound coloration.\nDescription.\nAppearance.\nBasset Hounds are proportionally akin to a large breed dog with short legs. Their slightly-curved tail is held high above their long backs. Size and weight is variable between bloodlines, but weigh between on average. This breed, relative to size, is heavier-boned than any other breed.\nSimilar to the bloodhound, the basset hound has wrinkled, loose skin that incites a sad expression. The loose skin around the neck is known as the dewlap. The characteristic long ears help to stir up ground scent. They have slightly crook'd legs that help to support the broad chest and ribs.\nThe coat is most-often short with coarse hairs under the tail. They come in all hound colors except merle and brindle. The most popular colors tend to be variations in tricolor patterns, but they also come in various shades of red and white.\nTemperament.\nThe Basset Hound is a friendly, outgoing, and playful dog, tolerant of children and other pets. Their temperament is typically mild and extremely devoted, though not timid.\nHealth.\nOsteochondrodysplasia.\nThe Basset Hound's short stature is due to the genetic condition osteochondrodysplasia. Osteochondrodysplasia causes stunted growth and impacts movement. Affected dogs develop splayed hind limbs, enlarged joints, flattened rib cages, shortened and bent long bones, and deformed paws.\nLife expectancy.\nThe breed has a median life span of 10\u201312 years. A 2015 French study found a life expectancy of 10.3 years. A 2024 study in the UK found a life expectancy of 12.5 years compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds.\nOther health issues.\nBasset Hounds are prone to yeast infections.\nLeading causes of death in a 2004 UK Kennel Club survey were cancer (31%), old age (13%), gastric dilatation volvulus (11%), and cardiac (8%).\nInformation from veterinary data found the prevalence of glaucoma to be 5.44%, second highest in the study.\nThe Basset Hound is predisposed to gastric dilatation volvulus. One study found the odds ratio to be 5.9.\nBasset Hound hereditary thrombopathy is an autosomally inherited platelet disorder characterised by a thrombasthenia defect in primary aggregation abnormality of clot retraction. Glycoprotein IIb-IIIa is defective although detectable.\nThe Basset Hound is prone to several skin conditions: allergic skin disease; intertrigo; Malassezia dermatitis; and otitis, primary keratinization defects.\nThe Basset Hound is one of the more commonly affected breeds for primary open angle glaucoma. An autosomal recessive mutation of the ADAMTS17 gene is responsible for the condition in the breed.\nHistory.\nSt Hubert's Hound.\nThe Basset type originated in France, and is descended from the 6th-century hounds belonging to St Hubert of Belgium, which through breeding at the Benedictine Abbey of St. Hubert eventually became what is known as the St Hubert's Hound around 1000\u00a0AD. St Hubert's original hounds are descended from the Laconian (Spartan) Hound, one of four groups of dogs discerned from Greek representations and descriptions. These scent hounds were described as large, slow, \"short-legged and deep mouthed\" dogs with a small head, straight nose, upright ears and long neck, and either tan with white markings or black with tan markings. Laconian Hounds were reputed to not give up the scent until they found their prey. They eventually found their way to Constantinople, and from there to Europe.\nFrance.\nThe first mention of a \"Basset\" dog appeared in La Venerie, an illustrated hunting text written by Jacques du Fouilloux in 1585. The name \"Basset\" has its origins in the Latin word for low, \"bassus\", and the French diminutive -\"et\". The dogs in Fouilloux's text were used to hunt foxes and badgers. It is believed that the Basset type originated as a mutation in the litters of Norman Staghounds, a descendant of the St Hubert's Hound. These precursors were most likely bred back to the St. Hubert's Hound, among other derivative French hounds. Until after the French Revolution around the year 1789, hunting from horseback was the preserve of kings, large aristocratic families and of the country squires, and for this reason short-legged dogs were highly valued for hunting on foot.\nBasset-type hounds became popular during the reign of Emperor Napoleon III (r. 1852\u20131870). In 1853, Emmanuel Fremiet, \"the leading sculptor of animals in his day\" exhibited bronze sculptures of Emperor Napoleon III's Basset Hounds at the Paris Salon. Ten years later in 1863 at the first exhibition of dogs held in Paris, Basset Hounds attained international attention.\nThe controlled breeding of the short haired Basset began in France in 1870. From the existing Bassets, Count Le Couteulx of Canteleu fixed a utilitarian type with straight front legs known as the Chien d'Artois, whereas Mr. Louis Lane developed a more spectacular type, with crooked front legs, known as the Basset Normand. These were bred together to create the original Basset Art\u00e9sien Normand.\nEngland.\nFrench Basset Hounds were being imported into England at least as early as the 1870s. While some of these dogs were certainly Basset Art\u00e9sien Normands, by the 1880s linebreeding had thrown back to a different heavier type. Everett Millais, who is considered to be the father of the modern Basset Hound, bred one such dog, Nicholas, to a Bloodhound bitch named Inoculation through artificial insemination in order to create a heavier Basset in England in the 1890s. The litter was delivered by caesarean section, and the surviving pups were refined with French and English Bassets. The first breed standard for what is now known as the Basset Hound was made in Great Britain at the end of 19th century. This standard was updated in 2010.\nThe only Basset Hound to win at Crufts is Antoinette's Hili's Basset hound, Ch. &amp; Eng. Ch. Switherland Sensation At Haven. He also became the first dog from Malta to win Best of Breed at Crufts. 2004.\nHunting with Bassets.\nThe Basset Hound was bred to hunt, with a keen nose and short stature suited to small-game hunting on foot. A variety of Basset Hound developed purely for hunting by Colonel Morrison was admitted to the Masters of Basset Hounds Association in 1959 via an appendix to the Stud Book. This breed differs in being straighter and longer in the leg and having shorter ears.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\u2014An active listing of Basset Hound links"}
{"id": "68454", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68454", "title": "World War II/Tokyo", "text": ""}
{"id": "68455", "revid": "20425983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68455", "title": "Bombing of Tokyo", "text": "Air raids by the US Army Air Forces in the Pacific War\nThe was a series of air raids on Japan by the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF), primarily launched during the closing campaigns of the Pacific Theatre of World War II in 1944\u20131945, prior to the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.\nThe strikes conducted by the USAAF on the night of 9\u201310 March 1945, codenamed Operation Meetinghouse, constitute the single most destructive aerial bombing raid in human history. of central Tokyo was destroyed, leaving an estimated 100,000 civilians dead and over one million homeless.\nThe U.S. mounted the Doolittle Raid, a small-scale air raid on Tokyo by carrier-based long-range bombers, in April 1942. However, strategic bombing and urban area bombing of Japan only began at scale in 1944 after the long-range B-29 Superfortress bomber entered service. Superfortress were first deployed from China and thereafter from the Mariana Islands, after they were seized from Japanese forces in mid-1944. B-29 raids from the Marianas began on 17 November 1944 and lasted until 15 August 1945, the day of the Japanese surrender.\nOver half of Tokyo's industry was spread out among residential and commercial neighborhoods; firebombing cut the city's industrial output in half. Some modern post-war analysts have called the raids a war crime due to the mass targeting of civilian infrastructure and ensuing large-scale loss of civilian life.\nDoolittle Raid.\nThe first American air attack on Tokyo was the Doolittle Raid on 18 April 1942. Sixteen B-25 Mitchells modified for carrier operations were launched from , after which they bombed Yokohama and Tokyo and flew on to airfields in China. The raid was largely symbolic, carried out in retaliation for the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor five months prior. The raid caused minimal damage to Japan's warfighting capability, but was a significant propaganda victory for the United States. The bombers took off at longer range than planned when the \"Hornet's\" task force encountered a Japanese picket boat, resulting in all of the attacking aircraft either crashing or being ditched by their crews short of their designated landing sites. One bomber landed in the neutral Soviet Union and its crew was interned, but then smuggled over the border into Iran on 11 May 1943. Two crews were captured by the Japanese in occupied China. Three captured crewmen were later executed by Japanese troops.\nB-29 raids.\nThe key development that enabled the USAAF to bomb Japan at scale was the B-29 Superfortress strategic bomber, which had an operational range of and was capable of attacking at high altitude above , where Japanese air defenses struggled to reach them. Almost 90% of the bombs dropped on the Japanese home islands were delivered by the B-29. The capture of islands sufficiently close to Japan (particularly Saipan and Tinian, seized in June 1944) enabled B-29s based at airfields there to bomb the home islands with increasing regularity.\nPrior to the capture of the Marianas, long-range bombing raids were carried out by the Twentieth Air Force operating out of mainland China in Operation Matterhorn under XX Bomber Command. However, while these raids were able to strike parts of southern Japan, they were out of range of Tokyo. It was also logistically difficult for the Allies to maintain a large bomber force in China via circuitous supply routes from India. The strategic situation improved when flight operations from the Northern Mariana Islands commenced in November 1944, but high-altitude bombing attacks using general-purpose bombs were observed to be ineffective by USAAF leaders due to high winds\u2014later discovered to be the jet stream\u2014which carried the bombs off target. Between May and September 1943, bombing trials were conducted on the Japanese Village set-piece target, located at the Dugway Proving Grounds in Utah. These trials demonstrated the effectiveness of incendiary bombs against wood-and-paper buildings common in Japan, and eventually resulted in Curtis LeMay ordering his bomber wings to change tactics and utilize these munitions against Japanese targets.\nThe first American raid utilizing incendiary munitions was carried out against Kobe on 4 February 1945. Tokyo was hit by incendiaries on 25 February 1945 when 174 B-29s flew a high altitude raid during daylight hours, destroying around (2.6\u00a0km2) of the snow-covered city, using 453.7 tons of both incendiary and fragmentation bombs. Subsequently, LeMay ordered further B-29 raids on the capital, but at a much lower altitude of and at night, judging that Japan's air defenses were weakest in this altitude range, and that Japanese fighter defenses were ineffective at night. LeMay ordered all defensive guns but the tail gun removed from the B-29s, allowing the aircraft to be lighter, use less fuel and carry more ordnance.\nWhen selecting targets for incendiary raids, USAAF planners had consulted maps produced by the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) which ranked Tokyo's five wards by their potential susceptibility to fire. OSS analysts had considered factors such as the average density and structural composition of buildings, and had even utilized risk assessments produced by Japanese insurance companies prior to the war. While the military objective of incendiary raids was to target small, geographically dispersed \"light industry\" workshops supplying larger Japanese factories, the decision of which specific neighborhoods to bomb was made based on how well USAAF strategists believed they would burn.\nOperation Meetinghouse.\nOn the night of 9\u201310 March 1945, 334 B-29s targeted the Shitamachi neighborhood of Tokyo in a low-altitude bombing raid. Ultimately, 279 bombers dropped 1,665 tons of bombs on the city. The ordnance consisted mostly of E-46 cluster bombs, which released 38 napalm-carrying M69 incendiary bomblets at an altitude of . The M69s punched through thin roofing material or landed on the ground; in either case they ignited 3\u20135 seconds later and regurgitated a jet of flaming napalm. A smaller number of M47 incendiary bombs were also dropped; the M47 was a jelled-gasoline and white phosphorus bomb, designed to ignite upon impact. Within the first two hours of the raid, rapidly spreading fires had overwhelmed the Japanese authorities' firefighting capabilities. The first B-29s to arrive dropped bombs in a large X pattern centered in Tokyo's densely populated working class district near the docks in both Koto and Ch\u016b\u014d city wards on the water; follow-on aircraft simply aimed near this flaming X. Individual fires caused by the bombs swiftly coalesced into a general conflagration, which would have been classified as a firestorm if not for prevailing natural winds gusting at . Approximately of the city were destroyed and some 100,000 people are estimated to have been killed. A total of 282 out of 339 B-29s launched for \"Meetinghouse\" reached Tokyo, 27 of which were lost due to being shot down by Japanese air defenses, mechanical failure, or being caught in massive updrafts caused by the fires below.\nThe Operation Meetinghouse firebombing of Tokyo on the night of 9 March 1945 was the single deadliest air raid of World War II, causing more destruction than the bombings of Dresden and Hamburg, and even Hiroshima and Nagasaki as single events.\nResults.\nHigh-altitude daylight bombing had previously caused minimal damage to Tokyo's heavy industry, but the destruction caused by low-altitude night-time firebombing wiped out much of the dispersed light industry that provided a crucial source for small machine parts for Japanese war manufacturing. Firebombing also killed or made homeless many factory workers critical to the war effort. According to American intelligence in early 1945, over 50% of Tokyo's industry was spread out among residential and commercial neighborhoods; the destruction of these neighborhoods in firebombing raids cut the whole city's output in half. Damage was especially severe in the eastern areas of Tokyo. The districts bombed were home to 1.2 million people in total. The Tokyo police force recorded 267,171 buildings destroyed, which left more than one million people homeless.\nEmperor Hirohito's tour of the destroyed areas of Tokyo in March 1945 ended his relative lack of involvement in the Japanese wartime decision-making process and contributed to his eventual decision to capitulate to the Allied powers, culminating in Japan's surrender six months later.\nCasualty estimates.\nThe US Strategic Bombing Survey later estimated that nearly 88,000 people died, 41,000 were injured, and over a million residents lost their homes in the 9\u201310 March raid alone. The Tokyo Fire Department estimated a higher death toll of 97,000 killed and 125,000 wounded. The Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department established a figure of 83,793 dead, 40,918 wounded, and 286,358 buildings and homes destroyed. Historian Richard Rhodes placed the death toll at over 100,000, injuries at a million, and homeless residents at a million. These casualty and damage figures could be low, according to Mark Selden:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The figure of roughly 100,000 deaths, provided by Japanese and American authorities, both of whom may have had reasons of their own for minimizing the death toll, seems to be arguably low in light of population density, wind conditions, and survivors' accounts. With an average of and peak levels as high as , the highest density of any industrial city in the world, and with firefighting measures ludicrously inadequate to the task, of Tokyo were destroyed on a night when fierce winds whipped the flames and walls of fire blocked tens of thousands fleeing for their lives. An estimated 1.5 million people lived in the burned out areas.\nIn his 1968 book, reprinted in 1990, historian Gabriel Kolko cited a figure of 125,000 deaths. Elise K. Tipton, a professor of Japan Studies, arrived at a rough range of 75,000 to 200,000 deaths. Donald L. Miller, citing Knox Burger, stated that there were \"at least 100,000\" Japanese deaths and \"about one million\" injured.\nThe wider strategic and area bombing campaign against Japan killed more than 300,000 people and injured an additional 400,000, mostly civilians.\nPostwar recovery.\nAfter the war, Tokyo struggled to rebuild. In 1945 and 1946, the city received a share of the national reconstruction budget roughly proportional to its amount of bombing damage (26.6%), but in successive years Tokyo saw this share dwindle. By 1949, Tokyo was given only 10.9% of the budget, at the same time that runaway inflation had significantly devalued the Japanese currency. Occupation authorities such as Joseph Dodge eventually stepped in and drastically cut back on Japanese government rebuilding programs, focusing instead on simply improving roads and transportation. Tokyo did not experience fast economic growth until the 1950s.\nMemorials.\nBetween 1948 and 1951 the ashes of 105,400 people killed in the attacks on Tokyo were interred at Sumida Ward in Yokoamicho Park. A memorial to the raids was opened in the park in March 2001. The park maintains a list people who died due to the bombings, made based on applications from the victims' families; this list had 81,273 names as of March 2020. Families who lost members in the bombings can submit applications to the government of Tokyo to have names of victims added to the list.\nAfter the war, Japanese author Katsumoto Saotome, a survivor of the 10 March 1945 firebombing, helped start a library about the raid in Koto Ward called the Center of the Tokyo Raids and War Damage. The library contains documents and literature about the raid, along with survivor accounts collected by Saotome and the Association to Record the Tokyo Air Raid.\nMemorials to fallen American crewman.\nIn addition to the memorials across Japan for the Japanese that were killed during the air raids, there are also memorials created in Japan for American bomber crews that were killed in action. One such memorial is in Higashimurayama, Tokyo, that commemorates the eleven American crewmen who were killed when their B-29 crashed on April 2, 1945. A local farmer, whose land upon which the plane crashed, sought out the families of the fallen crewmen after the war and built a memorial in the form of a Heiwa Kannon Buddhist statue.\nPostwar Japanese politics.\nIn 2007, 112 members of the Association for the Bereaved Families of the Victims of the Tokyo Air Raids brought a class action against the Japanese government, demanding an apology and 1.232 billion yen in compensation. Their suit charged that the Japanese government invited the raid by failing to end the war earlier, and then failed to help the civilian victims of the raids while providing considerable support to former military personnel and their families. The plaintiffs' case was dismissed at the first judgement in December 2009, and their appeal was rejected. The plaintiffs then appealed to the Supreme Court, which rejected their case in May 2013.\nIn 2013, during Japanese Prime Minister Shinz\u014d Abe's second term, Abe's cabinet stated that the raids were \"incompatible with humanitarianism, which is one of the foundations of international law\", but also noted that it is difficult to argue whether the raids were illegal under the international laws of the time.\nPartial list of missions.\nOther.\n16\u201317 February 1945: carrier-based aircraft, including dive bombers, escorted by Hellcat fighters attacked Tokyo. Over two days, over 1,500 American planes and hundreds of Japanese planes were in the air. \"By the end of 17 February, more than five hundred Japanese planes, both on the ground and in the air, had been lost, and Japan's aircraft works had been badly hit. The Americans lost eighty planes.\"\n18 August 1945: The last U.S. air combat casualty of the Pacific War occurred during mission 230 A-8, when two Consolidated B-32 Dominators of the 386th Bomb Squadron, 312th Bomb Group, launched from Yontan Airfield, Okinawa, for a photo reconnaissance run over Tokyo, Japan. Both bombers were attacked by several Japanese fighters of both the 302nd Naval Air Group at Atsugi and the Yokosuka Air Group that made 10 gunnery passes. Japanese IJNAS aces Sadamu Komachi and Sabur\u014d Sakai were part of this attack. The B-32 piloted by 1st Lt. John R. Anderson, was hit at 20,000 feet; cannon fire knocked out the number two (port inner) engine, and three crew were injured, including Sgt. Anthony J. Marchione, 19, of the 20th Reconnaissance Squadron, who took a 20\u00a0mm hit to the chest and died 30 minutes later. Tail gunner Sgt. John Houston destroyed one attacker. The lead bomber, \"42-108532\", \"Hobo Queen II\", piloted by 1st Lt. James Klein, was not seriously damaged but the second, \"42-108578\", lost an engine, had the upper turret knocked out of action, and partially lost rudder control. Both bombers landed at Yontan Airfield just past ~1800 hrs. having survived the last air combat of the Pacific war. The following day, propellers were removed from Japanese aircraft as part of the surrender agreement. Marchione was buried on Okinawa on 19 August, his body being returned to his Pottstown, Pennsylvania home on 18 March 1949. He was interred in St. Aloysius Old Cemetery with full military honors. \"Hobo Queen II\" was dismantled at Yonton Airfield following a 9 September nosegear collapse and damage during lifting and \"42-108578\", was scrapped at Kingman, Arizona after the war.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68457", "revid": "49875926", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68457", "title": "\u00cele-de-France (disambiguation)", "text": "\u00cele-de-France (or \"Isle de France\" in Old French and Middle French) is a region in France centred on Paris.\n\u00cele-de-France or \u00cele de France may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68458", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68458", "title": "VAZ", "text": ""}
{"id": "68459", "revid": "1310621414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68459", "title": "Storyboard", "text": "Use of graphics to plan a film or story\nA storyboard is a graphic organizer that consists of simple illustrations or images displayed in sequence for the purpose of pre-visualizing a motion picture, animation, motion graphic or interactive media sequence. The storyboarding process, in the form it is known today, was developed at Walt Disney Productions during the early 1930s, after several years of similar processes being in use at Walt Disney and other animation studios.\nOrigins.\nMany large budget silent films were storyboarded, but most of this material has been lost during the reduction of the studio archives during the 1970s and 1980s. Special effects pioneer Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s is known to have been among the first filmmakers to use storyboards and pre-production art to visualize planned effects. However, storyboarding in the form widely known today was developed at the Walt Disney studio during the early 1930s. In the biography of her father, \"The Story of Walt Disney\" (Henry Holt, 1956), Diane Disney Miller explains that the first complete storyboards were created for the 1933 Disney short \"Three Little Pigs\". According to John Canemaker, in \"Paper Dreams: The Art and Artists of Disney Storyboards\" (1999, Hyperion Press), the first storyboards at Disney evolved from comic book-like \"story sketches\" created in the 1920s to illustrate concepts for animated cartoon short subjects such as \"Plane Crazy\" and \"Steamboat Willie\", and within a few years the idea spread to other studios.\nAccording to Christopher Finch in \"The Art of Walt Disney\" (1995), Disney credited animator Webb Smith with creating the idea of drawing scenes on separate sheets of paper and pinning them up on a bulletin board to tell a story in sequence, thus creating the first storyboard. According to Pete Docter and Don Peri in \"Directing at Disney\" (2024), Dick Huemer credited Ted Sears with first inventing the storyboard while he was working at Fleischer Studios, but that studio was uninterested. Sears then switched to working for Walt Disney Productions and introduced the storyboard to Walt Disney, who promptly understood its importance. \nEither way, it was Walt Disney who first recognized the necessity for studios to maintain a separate \"story department\" with specialized storyboard artists (that is, a new occupation distinct from animators), as he had realized that audiences would not watch a film unless its story gave them a reason to care about the characters. The second studio to switch from \"story sketches\" to storyboards was Walter Lantz Productions in early 1935; by 1936 Harman-Ising and Leon Schlesinger Productions also followed suit. By 1937 or 1938, all American animation studios were using storyboards.\n\"Gone with the Wind\" (1939) was one of the first live-action films to be completely storyboarded. William Cameron Menzies, the film's production designer, was hired by producer David O. Selznick to design every shot of the film.\nStoryboarding became popular in live-action film production during the early 1940s and grew into a standard medium for the previsualization of films. Pace Gallery curator Annette Micheloson, writing of the exhibition \"Drawing into Film: Director's Drawings\", considered the 1940s to 1990s to be the period in which \"production design was largely characterized by the adoption of the storyboard\". Storyboards are now an essential part of the creative process.\nUse.\nFilm.\nA film storyboard (sometimes referred to as a shooting board), is essentially a series of frames, with drawings of the sequence of events in a film, similar to a comic book of the film or some section of the film produced beforehand. It helps film directors, cinematographers and television commercial advertising clients visualize the scenes and find potential problems before they occur. Besides this, storyboards also help estimate the cost of the overall production and save time. A storyboard can also be helpful with the first stage of the film editing process, when the film editor is trying to assemble a rough cut to show to the director. Often storyboards include arrows or instructions that indicate movement. For fast-paced action scenes, monochrome line art might suffice. For slower-paced dramatic films with an emphasis on lighting, color impressionist style art might be necessary.\nIn creating a motion picture with any degree of fidelity to a script, a storyboard provides a visual layout of events as they are to be seen through the camera lens. Storyboard frames are traditionally drawn on rectangles with the same aspect ratio as the video format in which the film will be shot. In the case of interactive media, it is the layout and sequence in which the user or viewer sees the content or information. In the storyboarding process, most technical details involved in crafting a film or interactive media project can be efficiently presented either in pictorial form in a storyboard frame, or as notes in the margins of specific frames.\nDuring principal photography for live-action films, scenes are rarely shot in the sequence in which they occur in the script. It is also sometimes necessary to film individual shots within a scene out of order and on different days, which can be very confusing. (The reasons for this are explained at length in the production board article.) In the latter scenario, directors can use storyboards on set to quickly refresh their memory as to the desired effect when those shots are later edited together in the correct order. This is more efficient than having to reread the script for each shot (with cast and crew waiting) to refresh their memory as to how they originally visualized they would film that shot.\nTheatre.\nA common misconception is that storyboards are not used in theatre. Directors and playwrights frequently use storyboards as special tools to understand the layout of the scene. The great Russian theatre practitioner Stanislavski developed storyboards in his detailed production plans for his Moscow Art Theatre performances (such as of Chekhov's \"The Seagull\" in 1898). The German director and dramatist Bertolt Brecht developed detailed storyboards as part of his dramaturgical method of \"fabels.\"\nAnimatics.\nIn animation and special effects work, the storyboarding stage may be followed by simplified mock-ups called \"animatics\" to give a better idea of how a scene will look and feel with motion and timing. At its simplest, an animatic is a sequence of still images (usually taken from a storyboard) displayed in sync with rough dialogue (i.e., scratch vocals) or rough soundtrack, essentially providing a simplified overview of how various visual and auditory elements will work in conjunction to one another.\nThis allows the animators and directors to work out any screenplay, camera positioning, shot list, and timing issues that may exist with the current storyboard. The storyboard and soundtrack are amended if necessary, and a new animatic may be created and reviewed by the production staff until the storyboard is finalized. Editing at the animatic stage can help a production avoid wasting time and resources on the animation of scenes that would otherwise be edited out of the film at a later stage. A few minutes of screen time in traditional animation usually equates to months of work for a team of traditional animators, who must painstakingly draw and paint countless frames, meaning that all that labor (and salaries already paid) will have to be written off if the finished scene simply does not work in the film's final cut. In the context of computer animation, storyboarding helps minimize the construction of unnecessary scene components and models, just as it helps live-action filmmakers evaluate what portions of sets need not be constructed because they will never come into the frame.\nOften storyboards are animated with simple zooms and pans to simulate camera movement (using non-linear editing software). These animations can be combined with available animatics, sound effects, and dialog to create a presentation of how a film could be shot and cut together. Some feature film DVD \"special features\" include production animatics, which may have scratch vocals or may even feature vocals from the actual cast (usually where the scene was cut after the vocal recording phase but before the animation production phase).\nAnimatics are also used by advertising agencies to create inexpensive test commercials. A variation, the \"rip-o-matic\", is made from scenes of existing movies, television programs or commercials, to simulate the look and feel of the proposed commercial. Rip, in this sense, refers to ripping-off an original work to create a new one.\nPhotomatic.\nA photomatic (probably derived from 'animatic' or photo-animation) is a series of still photographs edited together and presented on screen in a sequence. Sound effects, voice-overs, and a soundtrack are added to the piece to show how a film could be shot and cut together. Increasingly used by advertisers and advertising agencies to research the effectiveness of their proposed storyboard before committing to a 'full up' television advertisement.\nThe photomatic is usually a research tool, similar to an animatic, in that it represents the work to a test audience so that the commissioners of the work can gauge its effectiveness.\nOriginally, photographs were taken using a color negative film. A selection would be made from contact sheets and prints made. The prints would be placed on a rostrum and recorded to videotape using a standard video camera. Any moves, pans or zooms would have to be made in-camera. The captured scenes could then be edited.\nDigital photography, web access to stock photography and non-linear editing programs have had a marked impact on this way of filmmaking also leading to the term 'digimatic'. Images can be shot and edited very quickly to allow important creative decisions to be made 'live'. Photo composite animations can build intricate scenes that would normally be beyond many test film budgets.\nPhotomatix was also the trademarked name of many of the booths found in public places which took photographs by coin operation. The Photomatic brand of the booths was manufactured by the International Mutoscope Reel Company of New York City. Earlier versions took only one photo per coin, and later versions of the booths took a series of photos. Many of the booths would produce a strip of four photos in exchange for a coin (or coins).\nComic books.\nSome writers have used storyboard type drawings (albeit rather sketchy) for their scripting of comic books, often indicating staging of figures, backgrounds, and balloon placement with instructions to the artist as needed often scribbled in the margins and the dialogue or captions indicated. John Stanley and Carl Barks (when he was writing stories for the Junior Woodchuck title) are known to have used this style of scripting.\nIn Japanese comics, the word is used for rough manga storyboards.\nBusiness.\nStoryboards used for planning advertising campaigns such as corporate video production, commercials, a proposal or other business presentations intended to convince or compel to action are known as presentation boards. Presentation boards will generally be a higher quality render than shooting boards as they need to convey expression, layout, and mood. Modern ad agencies and marketing professionals will create presentation boards either by hiring a storyboard artist to create hand-drawn illustrated frames or often use sourced photographs to create a loose narrative of the idea they are trying to sell. Storyboards can also be used to visually understand the consumer experience by mapping out the customer's journey brands can better identify potential pain points and anticipate their emerging needs.\nSome consulting firms teach the technique to their staff to use during the development of client presentations, frequently employing the \"brown paper technique\" of taping presentation slides (in sequential versions as changes are made) to a large piece of kraft paper which can be rolled up for easy transport. The initial storyboard may be as simple as slide titles on Post-It notes, which are then replaced with draft presentation slides as they are created.\nStoryboards also exist in accounting in the ABC System activity-based costing (ABC) to develop a detailed process flowchart which visually shows all activities and the relationships among activities. They are used in this way to measure the cost of resources consumed, identify and eliminate non-value-added costs, determine the efficiency and effectiveness of all major activities, and identify and evaluate new activities that can improve future performance.\nA \"quality storyboard\" is a tool to help facilitate the introduction of a quality improvement process into an organization.\n\"Design comics\" are a type of storyboard used to include a customer or other characters into a narrative. Design comics are most often used in designing websites or illustrating product-use scenarios during design. Design comics were popularized by Kevin Cheng and Jane Jao in 2006.\nArchitectural studios.\nOccasionally, architectural studios need a storyboard artist to visualize presentations of their projects. Usually, a project needs to be seen by a panel of judges and nowadays it's possible to create virtual models of proposed new buildings, using advanced computer software to simulate lights, settings, and materials. Clearly, this type of work takes time \u2013 and so the first stage is a draft in the form of a storyboard, to define the various sequences that will subsequently be computer-animated.\nNovels.\nStoryboards are now becoming more popular with novelists. Because most novelists write their stories by scenes rather than chapters, storyboards are useful for plotting the story in a sequence of events and rearranging the scenes accordingly.\nInteractive media.\nMore recently the term \"storyboard\" has been used in the fields of web development, software development, and instructional design to present and describe, in written, interactive events as well as audio and motion, particularly on user interfaces and electronic pages.\nSoftware.\nStoryboarding is used in software development as part of identifying the specifications for a particular set of software. During the specification phase, screens that the software will display are drawn, either on paper or using other specialized software, to illustrate the important steps of the user experience. The storyboard is then modified by the engineers and the client while they decide on their specific needs. The reason why storyboarding is useful during software engineering is that it helps the user understand exactly how the software will work, much better than an abstract description. It is also cheaper to make changes to a storyboard than an implemented piece of software.\nAn example is the Storyboards system for designing GUI apps for iOS and macOS.\nScientific research.\nStoryboards are used in linguistic fieldwork to elicit spoken language. An informant is usually presented with a simplified graphical depiction of a situation or story, and asked to describe the depicted situation, or to re-tell the depicted story. The speech is recorded for linguistic analysis.\nBenefits.\nOne advantage of using storyboards is that it allows (in film and business) the user to experiment with changes in the storyline to evoke stronger reaction or interest. Flashbacks, for instance, are often the result of sorting storyboards out of chronological order to help build suspense and interest.\nAnother benefit of storyboarding is that the production can plan the movie in advance. In this step, things like the type of camera shot, angle, and blocking of characters are decided.\nThe process of visual thinking and planning allows a group of people to brainstorm together, placing their ideas on storyboards and then arranging the storyboards on the wall. This fosters more ideas and generates consensus inside the group. Modern digital storyboard tools also streamline this process by allowing teams to collaborate remotely, automatically organize panels, and even generate visuals using AI.\nCreation.\nStoryboards for films are created in a multiple-step process. They can be created by hand drawing or digitally on a computer. The main characteristics of a storyboard are:\nIf drawing by hand, the first step is to create or download a storyboard template. These look much like a blank comic strip, with space for comments and dialogue. Then sketch a \"thumbnail\" storyboard. Some directors sketch thumbnails directly in the script margins. These storyboards get their name because they are rough sketches not bigger than a thumbnail. For some motion pictures, thumbnail storyboards are sufficient.\nHowever, some filmmakers rely heavily on the storyboarding process. If a director or producer wishes, more detailed and elaborate storyboard images are created. These can be created by professional storyboard artists by hand on paper or digitally by using 2D storyboarding programs. Some software applications even supply a stable of storyboard-specific images making it possible to quickly create shots that express the director's intent for the story. These boards tend to contain more detailed information than thumbnail storyboards and convey more of the mood for the scene. These are then presented to the project's cinematographer who achieves the director's vision.\nFinally, if needed, 3D storyboards are created (called 'technical previsualization'). The advantage of 3D storyboards is they show exactly what the film camera will see using the lenses the film camera will use. The disadvantage of 3D is the amount of time it takes to build and construct the shots. 3D storyboards can be constructed using 3D animation programs or digital puppets within 3D programs. Some programs have a collection of low-resolution 3D figures which can aid in the process. Some 3D applications allow cinematographers to create \"technical\" storyboards which are optically-correct shots and frames.\nWhile technical storyboards can be helpful, optically-correct storyboards may limit the director's creativity. In classic motion pictures such as Orson Welles' \"Citizen Kane\" and Alfred Hitchcock's \"North by Northwest\", the director created storyboards that were initially thought by cinematographers to be impossible to film. Such innovative and dramatic shots had \"impossible\" depth of field and angles where there was \"no room for the camera\" \u2013 at least not until creative solutions were found to achieve the ground-breaking shots that the director had envisioned.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68460", "revid": "13892204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68460", "title": "Lada Niva", "text": "Russian 4\u00d74 vehicle\nThe Lada Niva Legend, formerly called the Lada Niva, VAZ-2121, VAZ-2131, and Lada 4\u00d74 (), is a series of four-wheel drive, small (hatchback), and compact (wagon and pickup) off-road cars designed and produced by AvtoVAZ since 1977. Initially aimed at the rural market, later models also targeted urban users. The three- and later five-door 4\u00d74 hatchbacks were sold under the Lada marque in many markets, and have been in continuous production since 1977.\nIn the 1990s, three- and five-door wagons on a longer wheelbase and an extra-long wheelbase pick-up were added to the range. After the original Land Rover and its successor, the Land Rover Defender, were discontinued in 2016, the Niva became the longest-production-run off-road light vehicle still manufactured in its original form. By the end of 2020, an estimated 650,000 Lada Nivas had been sold globally.\nThe Lada Niva is the world's first mass-produced off-road vehicle with a unibody construction (fully integrated body and frame). It is the predecessor of current crossover SUVs, most of which are built similarly.\nIn August 2020, Lada took over production of the 2003 Chevrolet Niva and rebranded it the \"new\" Lada Niva. In December 2020, the new Niva was further rebranded as the Lada Niva Travel, while the old model was renamed Lada Niva Legend in January 2021.\nName.\n\u041d\u0438\u0432\u0430 (Niva) is a Russian word that literally means \"(corn) field\". The name \"Niva \"(\u041d\u0418\u0412\u0410) was formed as an acronym from the initials of Niva's chief designers' children: Pyotr Prusov's two daughters and Vladimir Solovyev's two sons.\nThe Lada Niva was formerly called the Lada 4\u00d74, or the VAZ-2121 in the domestic Russian market. The name was changed after the brand was transferred to General Motors, though AvtoVAZ retained the rights to the equivalent Cyrillic name: \u041d\u0438\u0432\u0430. It was also marketed as the Lada Sport in Iceland, Lada Taiga in Austria, and Lada Cossack in the United Kingdom. In 2014, it was sold as the LADA 4\u00d74 in Russia. Since 2021, it is sold as the Lada Niva Legend in Russia.\nHistory.\nPrototypes and testing.\nThe Niva was described by its designers as a \"Renault 5 put on a Land Rover chassis\". Development began in 1971 after the 24th Congress of the CPSU, in which Alexei Kosygin (the then-Premier of the Soviet Union) gave the designers at VAZ and AZLK the task of creating a car suitable for rural areas (specifically for the villagers and farmers of the Soviet Union), since the usual Zhiguli, Moskvitch, and Zaporozhets, intended primarily for ordinary people, were not much of use in the isolated areas that made up a large part of the USSR. In the same year, a team of VAZ designers led by Solovyev began competing with AZLK to work on a \"civilized\" four-wheel drive vehicle. The new car was partly inspired by the IZh-14 prototype of 1974. It was VAZ's first model that was not based on Fiat, though many of its mechanics were carried over from the earlier Fiat 124- or 125-based Zhiguli models (mostly the VAZ-2103 and 2106); the body, four-wheel drive system, and front suspension were all designed by VAZ. The first prototype appeared in 1971 and was officially designated the E-2121 and nicknamed \"krokodil\" (the crocodile) due to its distinctive frontal section, but was rejected for being too utilitarian, so doors and a hardtop were added. This version (designated the 2E-2121) debuted in 1973 and deviated from the off-road vehicles of the period, as it used a modern hatchback body. The design choice was inspired by the prototype known as the VAZ-1101 (itself derived from the Fiat 127), and was created by designer Valery Pavlovitch.\nThe influence of the Fiat 127 is obvious from the Niva's distinctive \"clamshell\" hood design and its rear three-quarter section. The 1974 prototype (designated the VAZ-2121M) was derived from an existing model, the VAZ-2103 (then the newest model in VAZ arsenal). It used the VAZ-2103's 1,452 cc engine and shared some of its features, like chrome-plated bumpers, headlights and taillights, instruments, seats, and steering wheel. In the following year, two samples of the prototype were modified to install a 1,478 cc UZAM-412 engine, which originally powered the Moskvich 1500. Testing later revealed that the engine was incompatible with the newly designed car. The Moskvich engine was abandoned, and the older engine was reused. The 1974 prototype (2121M) was ready to be mass-produced in 1975, but the appearance of the new VAZ-2106 at the end of the year resulted in a delay because the company wanted to develop another prototype based on the model in 1976, which became the sixth and final (serial production) prototype.\nBefore its production, the Niva was tested over a period of years by a team led by Vadim Kotlyarov in the most difficult terrain of the Soviet Union, such as the Ural Mountains and Siberia, the deserts of the Kazakh SSR, and the Pamir Mountains in the Tajik SSR, where it was compared with its military counterpart, the UAZ-469, and some Western off-road vehicles\u2014the British-made Land Rover Series and the Range Rover Classic. Its off-road capabilities were demonstrated for the very first time, which were based on its effective permanent four-wheel drive system featuring a transfer case and central differential lock, with the combination of a short wheelbase (only 2,2m), relatively low weight (just over a ton), independent front suspension, small dimensions (3,74\u00d71,68 m), and high ground clearance (about 265\u00a0mm). Its large but narrow wheels (175/80-R16 in dimensions), originally featuring domestically designed \"Voltyre\" VLI-5 high-tread tires, offered relatively strong ground pressure, which lowered the chances of slipping or getting bogged down off-road. For example, in the 1973 and 1974 trials, the Niva climbed a 58% slope, and crossed of water and of mud and snow. Solovyev died the following year and was replaced by engineer Pyotr Prusov, who took credit for creating the car.\nIn 1976, the final prototype appeared. The engine was changed to a one, the most powerful engine in VAZ during the Soviet era, taken from their VAZ-2106 (from which the production model of the first Niva generation was generally derived). Like the previous prototype, it featured a permanent four-wheel drive and a transfer case with a lockable central differential. The VAZ prototype displayed better design and real-world performance than its AZLK counterpart, the Moskvitch 416, so it was approved for production in March of the same year, after the 25th Congress of the CPSU. The car was named Niva 1600 (Field) for exports and the VAZ-2121 (alternatively \"Niva 2121\" or \"VAZ Niva\") for the domestic market. For domestic customers, it was described as \"[a] high-speed car with the improved capabilities and comfort of all VAZ models,\" and also as \"[a] combination of the speed and comfort of a Zhiguli with the capabilities of a UAZ.\" Production began the following year on 5 April 1977, while the first export models appeared in 1978 at the Paris Motor Salon and quickly took over at least 40% of Europe's market for four-wheel drive vehicles, making it Lada's top-selling export. It was the only Soviet car that was ever regularly sold in Japan, starting in the early 1980s. Because of export demand and the higher priority given to exports, domestic customers faced long wait times, despite the car being developed primarily for Soviet citizens.\nDesign.\nThe original Niva has a naturally aspirated 1.6-L overhead-cam four-cylinder petrol engine producing and at 5,000 rpm, a four-speed manual transmission, and a full-time four-wheel drive. The drive system uses three differentials: center, front, and rear. The transfer case involves a high/low range selector lever and another to lock the central differential. Like usual gear shifting, both of the aforementioned features naturally require the use of clutch to be properly selected. However, while the central differential can usually be locked while in motion, the transfer case cannot and requires a complete stop. The original Niva has a maximum speed of .\nCoil springs are located at each of the four wheels, and the suspension is independent in front, whereas the rear axle is a five-link live-type, with ratios between 3.90 and 4.30 depending on the model and market. Ground clearance is , and go as far as deep in water.\nThe brakes are servo-assisted dual-circuit style and the clutch is hydraulic. The turning circle is 36.25\u00a0ft. Cargo space is , or with the rear seats folded down and, like the classic Zhiguli, the front seats can be set up to make two berths. A spare tire can be stored in the engine bay under the bonnet.\nAdditional equipment for the basic model was similar to other Lada and Eastern Bloc cars of the period; it included headlight wipers, a rear fog lamp, a right external mirror (for domestic units until the end of the 1980s), rear seat belts, a rear window wiper, a rear window heater, and a radio set. On the Niva 1.7 or VAZ-21213 from 1994, all of the above features except headlight wipers and the rear fog lamp (which were discontinued) became default and air conditioning, an antilock braking system, and a hydraulic servomotor for the steering column were made optional, although they became standard equipment on the newest models.\nForeign (usually Western) local Lada importers often offered their own additional equipment before buying the car, such as front and rear bull bars and roll bars, side rocker rails, roof rails, a winch, fender plastics, additional headlights for front bumper and for roof rails, and aftermarket aluminium rims, which can be often seen mounted on many Nivas.\nThe existing model was slightly restyled during first half of the 1980s when VAZ discontinued the VAZ-2103 (which had slowly been replaced by the VAZ-2106 since 1975). Due to high prices and production complexity, some of the chrome-plated elements disappeared in later models, such as the chrome-plated mask and rocker panel edges. Other elements were changed, such as the side mirrors, which became black metallic. The background of the front Lada badge was changed from red to white (and later black on the new model) on all models. The side rear retroreflectors (or turn signals on some models, depending on market) were replaced by Lada (left) and Niva (right) labels, and the rear mudflaps received the brand logo. For easier access to certain areas of the engine compartment, the window washer reservoir was moved from the left to the right section of the compartment (right in front of the battery). The interior was only minimally changed, along with some minor changes to the instrument panel and choke knob.\nPre-1985 models are visually recognized by the aforementioned details, and are rare today (almost nonexistent in a well-preserved condition), so they are highly valued by various collectors of classic cars. A mint-condition 1980 unit in Russia reached a price of five million RUB and ultimately sold for 3,2 million in 2016 (approximately \u20ac38,570 or $44,570), which remains the most expensive Niva ever sold.\nThe VAZ-2121 Niva or Lada Niva 1600 was in production until 1993 (it existed in parallel production with the new model until the end of 1993) when the newer and more powerful four-cylinder petrol engine was introduced, replacing the previously used VAZ-2106 engine. The standard Weber carburetor was replaced by a single-point fuel injection initially supplied by General Motors on the 21214/1.7i model, and an improved Solex carburetor on the 21213/1.7 model. The transmission was changed from four to five speeds, mechanical ignition was replaced, and the electronics and suspension received some relatively minor changes. The exhaust system was also slightly redesigned, and on newer models, the drive shafts received homokinetic joints.\nOn the exterior, the rear section of the body was redesigned with the tailgate extended and license plate on it. These changes prompted new vertical taillights that replaced the former VAZ-2106 horizontal ones and the VAZ-2102 chromed tailgate knob, which was replaced by a simple plastic handle. On the newest models, the old hand-adjustable, square black-metallic (previously chrome-plated) side mirrors, which originated from the VAZ-2103 were replaced with larger plastic ones that could be automatically adjusted.. The previous front Lada badge was replaced with the larger ellipsoid design. The Fiat 125 chrome-plated doorknobs are still present, though they are plastic on the newest models. Although the rest of the exterior has remained generally unchanged (except for the Lada 4\u00d74 Urban and Bronto), the interior was almost completely redesigned and shares only a few interchangeable parts with the previous one: the archaic partially chrome-plated VAZ-2106 steering wheel was replaced with the more modern and thick one from the VAZ-2107 and later, even newer models, as well as its VAZ-2103/2106 instruments, which were replaced with the dashboard from the VAZ-21099. The black artificial leather seats that originated from the VAZ-2106 were replaced by higher, more modern ones from the VAZ-2108, with the front surface made of polyester, while the rear seat was improved for easier folding. The Fiat 124 swiveling windows from the side doors disappeared and were replaced with air conditioning, which was installed with the ABS and servomotor for the steering column as additional equipment on request, while the headlight wipers and rear fog lamp disappeared. It received completely new front and door panels (with interior door knobs relocated above the hand rests instead of under like on previous generation), various plastics and even new floor mats. The hand openings for the side-door windows was replaced with an automatic opening on the newest models (and on the Lada 4\u00d74 Urban) starting from 2014. Multipoint fuel injection designed by Bosch has been used since 2004, replacing the previously mentioned single-point injection from General Motors.\nLater models.\nThe lengthened model of the Niva appeared in 1993. It was known as the VAZ-2129 and was produced very briefly, only for about a year, so it is very rare. It was also never exported. Although it has a longer wheelbase, it kept three doors like the basic hatchback model. In design, it was a hybrid of old and new generations, since it featured the old VAZ-2121 (Niva 1600) body and interiors combined with new VAZ-21213 (Niva 1.7) 1680-cc engine and 5-speed transmission (although later, 1994 production models featured even new body and interiors).\nThe lengthened estate model with a longer wheelbase and five doors was made in 1995. It was originally known as the VAZ-2131 Niva, but commercially, it has no difference in name from the standard three-door model, and it is often referred as the Niva five-door. Due to its increased weight from the longer wheelbase, it can use the 1774-cc inline four petrol engine. Although it was still in production like the basic model, it had limited use and was infrequently exported, mainly due to the longer wheelbase and increased weight, and it was slightly higher priced compared to the standard model. In 2015, a five-door model also appeared for the Lada 4\u00d74 Urban.\nIn 1999, a diesel-engine model of the Niva known as the VAZ-21215 Niva, or commercially as the Lada Niva 1.9, was released. It was produced until 2007 and sold only in a few markets. It was powered by a 1905-cc Peugeot XUD 9SD inline four diesel engine, and it was less powerful than the standard VAZ-21213/21214 1680-cc petrol engine. However, the VAZ-21215 was a relatively short-lived model despite lower fuel consumption, because it was not popular in the domestic market, Peugeot stopped producing XUD engines in 2001 (although existing supplies were available until 2007, when the last VAZ-21215 came off the production line), and VAZ did not make another contract for diesel engine production for the Niva.\nIn 2006, the model with the carbureted engine of the new generation (VAZ-21213/Lada Niva 1.7) was discontinued, and the name Niva was formally dropped in favor of the new official name Lada 4\u00d74, as General Motors received naming rights. The Niva was discontinued under the old Soviet VAZ-2121 domestic market classification.\nIn 2014, the new, restyled model called the Lada 4\u00d74 Urban was released. It has more modern, ordinary looks, including a new mask, plastic bumpers, new side mirrors, different aluminium rims, new tires, a central brake light, heated front seats, and a slightly restyled interior. As of 2019, no version of the Lada 4x4 has airbags.\nIn 2017, the Lada 4\u00d74 Bronto, intended mainly for off-road use, is released. It features characteristic mask and plastic bumpers with integrated front and rear fog lamps, plastic roof rails, new, larger wheels with black aluminium rims and 235/75-R16 Bontyre Stalker off-road tires, even higher ground clearance (increased another 35\u00a0mm) and plastic rust-protected body edges (fenders and rocker panels). Internally, it is similar to the Lada 4\u00d74 URBAN, also featuring heated front seats. It also includes a front winch, roof headlights, and additional fog lights on the front bumper. With all the mentioned equipment included, the Bronto is currently the most expensive Lada 4\u00d74 model, with a current price of 720 thousand RU in the domestic market (around \u20ac10,130). The slightly different pickup model designed by VIS was also revealed (featuring an integrated metallic grille, different bumpers, and a snorkel), called the Lada Bronto AMC.\nOn 5 April at the car's 40th anniversary, a special, limited edition of the classic Lada 4\u00d74 called the Lada 4\u00d74 40th-Anniversary was presented, which used the 1977 design. It features new aluminium rims similar to the Urban, five new color schemes, \"40th Anniversary\" metallic labels on the fenders, a tailgate, a glove compartment cover, front-seat backrests, and floor mats. Also, it has a slightly restyled interior featuring genuine leather seat upholstery and a steering wheel cover, and sills made out of stainless steel. The model is available from June 2017 in both domestic and export markets.\nA convertible version appeared back in 1983, but was neither serially produced nor designed by VAZ. It was a modification of the original Niva 1600 bodied by French coachbuilder Wassermann for the local market. It was known as the Niva Plein Soleil (Sunlight) and it was one of many Niva modifications made by local importers for their markets.\nIn recent years, changes included better lights, more comfortable seats, an instrument panels with LCD displays, alloy wheels, electric windows and mirrors, heated seats and air conditioning.\nCossack and other importer special editions.\nDuring the 1980s, local Lada importers in various markets made their own upgrades to help compete with more modern SUVs. In the UK, the Cossack model featured large body decals, roof rails, running boards, 15-in alloy wheels, and on some versions, a sunroof, steel bullbars, spotlights, a rear-mounted spare tire, and semi-bucket seats. Other markets' importers made similar upgrades and many were also called Cossack.\nIn 1995, Lada UK introduced a face-lifted version of the Niva Cossack and renamed the basic model as the \"Hussar\". Whereas the Hussar had the original 1977 trim, the new UK Cossack featured a new Rover-designed grille and other body kit items, and gained soft nudge-bars at the front in deference to public opinion against bullbars. Both models received the same new 1.7-litre engine and a new deeper tailgate which extended the rear opening to the level of the bumper \u2013 a vast improvement over the original model's high lip. Official Niva imports to the UK ceased in 1997 due to the importers having difficulty in sourcing the GM fuel injection unit required to satisfy ever-tightening UK emissions regulations.\nSeveral attempts were made to reintroduce Ladas into the UK. In May 2010, the basic Niva became available again through an independent importer. Aimed largely at the agricultural market, three models were made available: the three-door, four-seat hatchback; a two-seat commercial van; and a two-door, four-seat pickup.\nVAZ-2122 Reka.\nAlthough VAZ was meant exclusively to produce passenger cars, the Soviet military was impressed by its off-road capabilities and ordered VAZ to create a military version, to replace the UAZ-469 as the standard military 4\u00d74 vehicle. In 1976, when VAZ-2121 development was almost finished, engineers from Tolyatti began working on an amphibian off-roader, which became known as VAZ-2122 Reka (River). A simplified and more rugged body was combined with the Niva chassis. It weighed about the same as the usual Niva, but instead of the 1600-cc VAZ-2106 engine, it used an older and less powerful 1300-cc engine derived from the VAZ-2101. Internally, it featured a different metal dashboard, though it used the same Niva instruments along with the same steering wheel and artificial leather seats.\nSix different evolution prototypes were built. They were tested in an experimental military unit, on the proving grounds of the Ministry of Defense, and in the Karakum Desert in Turkmenistan. The VAZ-2122 showed better results than the UAZ-469 (especially the fact that it featured amphibious capabilities, which UAZ did not have) and received very positive feedback; the military was satisfied with its capabilities, reliability, firmness and durability. By 1987, VAZ had completed development work, and the car was ready for mass production and military service. Nevertheless, the results were not enough to convince the military to start mass production.\nLWB Nivas.\nLonger wheelbase versions \u2013 the five-door VAZ-2131, three-door VAZ-2129, and VAZ-2329 pickup were also produced from the 1990s, but not generally exported.\nNameplate changes.\nThe Lada Niva was formally renamed Lada 4\u00d74 in 2006 as the Niva name was reserved for the new Chevrolet Niva. This version has a low-range gearbox, differential lock, ABS, airbags, heated front seats, air conditioning, servomotor for the steering column, underbody protection. Prices for the model started at \u20ac10,990. It is available in five body styles: three- and five-door hatchbacks, two- and four-door pickups, and a two-door van. Two petrol engines were available \u2013 the standard 1.7-litre and the 1.8-litre (only for five-door model) along with a five-speed manual transmission.\nStarting with the 2014 model year, the Niva nameplate was discontinued for the Russian market, and the vehicle is branded Lada 4\u00d74 for both short and long wheelbases to make way for the upcoming restart of the Chevrolet Niva series, which was scheduled to start production by March 2015. Due to Russia\u2013West economic relations, AvtoVAZ analysts suggested that the production of Chevrolet Niva may be delayed further into 2015.\nLada Niva II.\n1998 \u2013 2002.\nGM-AvtoVAZ, a joint venture between AvtoVAZ and General Motors, presented in 1998 the VAZ-2123, a new sport utility vehicle (SUV) based on the old VAZ 2121 engine, transmission and most mechanicals; but with a modern exterior design. \n2003 \u2013 2019.\nIn 2003, the VAZ-2123 was rebadged as the Chevrolet Niva. It features an updated body and 1.7-litre gasoline engine with fuel injection. Although the body and the interiors are new, it is still based on the old VAZ-2121 engine, transmission, and most mechanicals. Its off-road ability is exemplary compared with many modern budget SUVs, having been designed for tough tundra territory.\n2020 \u2013 Present.\nIn 2019 Lada acquired General Motors' stake in GM-AvtoVAZ and then announced that the Chevrolet Niva would be produced under Lada's name. The rebranded Lada Niva was revealed by AvtoVAZ in July 2020, with the firm saying that there was still strong demand for the 20 year old line of cars. The 2020 model is produced at the Togliatti factory with minor design updates (but no technical changes) and joins the Lada 4\u00d74 in the firm's range.\nIn December 2020, following a new generation of the line, the new Lada Niva was further rebranded as Lada Niva Travel, while the old Lada 4x4 was rebranded as the Lada Niva Legend in January 2021.\nSafety by modern standards.\nIn 2002, the Lada Niva was awarded zero stars out of a possible four by the Russian ARCAP safety-assessment program. The reviewer noted the very rugged body of the car as the only positive aspect in terms of safety. During the safety test, the passenger dummy was hit by the glove compartment hard enough to risk traumatic brain injury.\nThe reviewers noted that they did not expect a high rating and that the result was natural, as \"it would be naive to believe that a 30-year-old design complies with modern requirements for passive safety\". They added that a complete modernization of the car would be required to comply with modern safety standards.\nUses.\nThe Niva was the first wheeled vehicle to spend more than 10 years in Antarctica, where the classic VAZ-2121 Niva (Lada Niva 1600) was used by the Soviet Antarctic Expedition for transportation of personnel and goods, communication between Antarctic stations, and towing boats. It covered more than in 1990\u20132001 and operated at temperatures as low as \u221254\u00a0\u00b0C. A Niva also reached the North Pole in 1998, when the lengthened VAZ-2131 Niva was dropped by parachute on ice and successfully completed its route, operating at an average temperature of \u221230\u00a0\u00b0C, becoming the first wheeled vehicle to spend time there. It also set the world record of the highest point ever reached by a motorized vehicle, when another VAZ-2131 climbed to the 5200-m-high base camp on Mount Everest in 1998 and even higher just a year later, on 16 September 1999, when a similar Niva belonging to the Saint Petersburg extreme expedition team reached a height of 5725 m on a Tibet mountain during off-roading. There is also visual confirmation of Russian soldiers using the Lada Niva as a method of transport for assaults in the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine. \nAssembly outside Russia.\nAutomeccanica assembled different versions of the Lada Niva in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including an in-house developed convertible version.\nThe Lada Niva was also assembled in Ecuador by Aymesa between December 2000 and 2004. In Uruguay, a vehicle armorer called Bognor (a subsidiary of PSA assemblers Oferol) teamed up with Latin American VAZ concessionaires Rusia Automotriz in 2002 to assemble armored Lada Nivas locally, calling them the Bognor Diva. The armouring parts were made locally, and all Divas were fitted with Peugeot's 1.9-litre, diesel engine. Around 500 examples were built between 2003 and 2007 (192 knock-down kits were sent in 2003, the first year), with about 400 of them sold to Cuba.\nConcept Cars.\nChevrolet Niva Concept (2014).\nGM-AvtoVAZ introduced a concept vehicle for a new generation of the Chevrolet Niva at the Moscow International Automobile Salon in late August 2014. The Niva Concept, designed by Ondrej Koromh\u00e1z of GM (or at General Motors' headquarters in Melbourne according to other sources), had a longitudinal mounted engine, full-time four-wheel-drive, two-gear transfer case and rigid-axle rear suspension. The production model was supposed to get a 1.8-liter PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn EC8 engine (135\u00a0hp) paired with a 5-speed manual gearbox, although more recent news reports suggested that it was planned to be based on the Renault Duster platform. The new model's production version was initially expected in 2016, but following Chevrolet stopping sales of its mainstream models in Russia, no further information has been released on the topic.\nIn September 2018, it was reported that GM has suspended all the work on planned replacement of Chevrolet Niva.\nLada 4x4 Vision Concept (2018).\nIn May 2018 AvtoVAZ patented the new concept car called the Lada 4x4 Vision. At a Moscow International Automobile Salon in August 2018, AvtoVAZ presented the concept, built in honour of the original Niva's 40th anniversary. According to preliminary information, the car would be based on Renault Duster and production was scheduled to start in 2022 at the earliest.\nLada T-134 (2025).\nAfter Steve Mattin left AvtoVAZ in 2021 Jean-Philippe Salar was chosen as the new chief designer, he began to work on another concept of Niva's third generation which had to be based on CMF and unified with Dacia Duster and Dacia Bigster. Russian engineers were supposed to develop an all-wheel-drive system for the car. The work on the project was stopped when Groupe Renault dropped Lada in response to Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022. In the summer of 2023 AvtoVAZ renewed the work by themselves, switching the platform of the almost finished car to Lada Vesta chassis. In 2025 the concept was showcased to the President of Russia Vladimir Putin under the name T-134 that might be a reference to both T-34 tank and Tu-134 plane.\nModifications.\nShort/regular versions.\nLada 4\u00d74 Urban.\nA version of the base three-door car, it sports updated bumpers, grille, steering wheel, and some additional options: power and heated mirrors, power windows, air conditioning, and alloy wheels. The car has been produced by VIS-Auto since October 2014.\nVehicles based on the Niva.\nVAZ-1922 Bronto \"March-1\".\nBronto March is one of the few mass-produced vehicles on ultra-large-diameter pneumatic wheels. A production is being made by the PSA Bronto in Tolyatti since 1997. In the first 8 years of production, about 350 cars were produced.\nAPAL-21541 \"Stalker\".\nA modification based on the VAZ-21214, it was planned for series production at the plant \"Pishchemash\" in the city of Argun, Chechen Republic. This short run is made by LLC \"APAL\" since 2003.\nLong versions.\nNiva with BRDM-2-style modification.\nNotable owners.\nVladimir Putin bought a Niva in May 2009. He showed his camouflage-painted Opel-engined offroader in the Russian media, allegedly to support domestic car producers despite the 2008 financial crisis.\nSerbian football player Aleksandar Kolarov received a certificate for a Lada 4\u00d74/Niva as a reward for scoring a goal in his team's match against Costa Rica during the Russia 2018 World Cup.\nNorwegian musician Varg Vikernes is seen driving a Lada Niva in his 2013 indie film \"ForeBears\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68461", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68461", "title": "Poly Vinyl Pyrrolidone", "text": ""}
{"id": "68462", "revid": "36742351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68462", "title": "Cervera", "text": "Cervera () is the capital of the \"comarca\" of Segarra, in the province of Lleida, Autonomous Community of Catalonia, Spain. The title Comte de Cervera is a courtesy title, formerly part of the Crown of Aragon, that has been revived for Leonor, Princess of Asturias. The city is also the birthplace of the Grand Prix motorcycle racing world champions M\u00e1rquez brothers, nine-time champion Marc M\u00e1rquez and two-time champion \u00c1lex M\u00e1rquez. The church of Sant Miquel de Tudela is near Cervera. It has a population of .\nHistory.\nThe town and its medieval origins.\nIn the year 1026, three peasant families built the first settlement in the comarca of Segarra, as in those days it was uninhabited. Later on, the Barcelona counts committed ownership of those lands to those people. By this, the counts wanted to establish their power in the area, as the Segarra was at that time the border between Christian and Muslim territories, thereby establishing the first fortress (\"castrum Cervarie\").\nWhen the Western border was established at Lleida at the year 1149, Cervera grew up into terraced houses on the other side of the border. The inhabitants were freed from the feudal lord's abuses and with the royal privileges, the town gradually became established first as a Confraria (1182), then Consolat (municipal organ) (1202), and from 1267 up to the present, as a Paeria.\nThe most significant episode was the signature, in 1452, of the nuptial agreement between Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile (the Spanish Catholic Monarchs).\nHistorically, there was a prosperous Jewish community in Cervera, dating from the 12th century to the expulsion of the Jews in the 15th century.\nIn 1702, the town got the title of city from the king Philip V, for which the townspeople thanked the king. The king bestowed this title because in a small way during the war, and then more strongly after the war, the local people had demonstrated support for the king's politics.\nThe university.\nCharles II, the last Spanish king from the house of Austria, died in 1700, and in his will he designated Philip V as his heir. The new king, with the name of Philip V, was accepted in the kingdom of Castile, as well as in Crown of Aragon. \nEngland, which was at the head of the opposing nations proposed Charles VI as the heir of the Spanish throne and in 1702 a European war started (the War of the Spanish Succession). An appropriate diplomatic intervention could make the Crown of Aragon finally give support to Charles VI. In Cervera, there were people in favour of both sides.\nWhen the war was finished, Cervera, which had been destroyed, decided to give support to the ones who were governing (the Bourbons) and sent two ambassadors to the Courts with the mission to persuade the ministers of Philip V of his absolute support, with the goal to obtain some logical compensation and in one of their 30 requests, they requested one university like the one in the city of Lleida. Philip V, then, built the University of Cervera and closed the rest (the Nueva Planta decrees). The creation of the university gave an economic boost to the town, basically (among other reasons) because students lodged in the town.\nDecay and prosperity.\nIn 1842 the University was relocated to Barcelona, which portended an important economic loss.\nHowever, when train service arrived in the town in 1860 along with improvements to some public services (such as the water supply) and as the establishment of some industries and an important wine trade, there was an improvement in the local economy.\nWhen the Phylloxera arrived, this caused a lot of people with vineyards to go bankrupt, due to a major crisis with the Cervera wine trade, which recovered somewhat with the creation of the Sindicat Agr\u00edcola (1919).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68463", "revid": "43537120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68463", "title": "Peripheral unit", "text": "Peripheral unit may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68465", "revid": "1298465795", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68465", "title": "Ripoll", "text": "Ripoll () is the capital of the \"comarca\" of Ripoll\u00e8s, in the province of Girona, Catalonia, Spain. It is located on the confluence of the Ter river and its tributary the Freser, next to the Pyrenees near the border with France. The population was 11,057 in 2009.\nHistory.\nThe first traces of humans inhabiting the area date from the Bronze Age and can be seen in form of dolmens such as those found in \"El Sot de Dones Mortes\" or in \"Pardinella\". This area was later used by peoples from the Atlantic culture to store bronze weapons and as a passway from the Catalan Central Depression to the Pyrenees. The area also has tombs from the late Roman occupation age and some belonging to the Visigoths.\nIt has a famous Benedictine monastery built in the Romanesque style, Santa Maria de Ripoll, founded by the count Wilfred the Hairy in 879. The count used it as a centre to repopulate the region after conquering it. In the High Middle Ages, its castle, the Castle of Saguardia, located in the county of Les Llosses was ruled by the Sagu\u00e0rdia family, of which Pon\u00e7 de la Gu\u00e0rdia was a famous troubadour.\nAn abundance of coal and iron ore, coupled with the ample water supply of the rivers Ter and Freser, encouraged a metal-working industry in the early Middle Ages. The furnaces of Ripoll were a prime source of nails for the peninsula. Later, pole arms and crossbows, always in demand, were added to Ripoll's exports. Ripoll enjoyed a reputation throughout Europe for the production of firearms. That success as a manufactory of firearms brought frequent trouble to the city. French invasions in 1794, 1809, 1812, and 1813 crippled the city\u2019s industries. However, the final and utter destruction of Ripoll, resulting from mines and blasting, occurred in 1839 during the Carlist Wars. Due to the loss of records and archives, not much is known of Ripoll and its industry to this day.\nClimate.\nRipoll has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfa\") bordering on an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") with cool winters and warm to hot summers. As in many areas of the province of Girona, rainfall is well distributed throughout the year. During the winter, temperatures below are common, although there may be some winters in which they do not occur.\nDemographics.\nRipoll is over 5% Muslim, predominately of Moroccan origin, who arrived in the 1990s to work in industrial factories.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68466", "revid": "90654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68466", "title": "Gamma correction", "text": "Image luminance mapping function\nGamma correction or gamma is a nonlinear operation used to encode and decode luminance in video or images. \nGamma correction is, in the simplest cases, defined by the following power-law expression:\n formula_1\nwhere the non-negative real input value formula_2 is raised to the power formula_3 and multiplied by the constant \"A\" to get the output value formula_4. In the common case of \"A\" = 1, inputs and outputs are typically in the range 0\u20131.\nA gamma value formula_5 is sometimes called an \"encoding gamma\", and the process of encoding with this compressive power-law nonlinearity is called gamma compression; conversely, a gamma value formula_6 is called a \"decoding gamma\", and the application of the expansive power-law nonlinearity is called gamma expansion.\nExplanation.\nGamma encoding of images is used to optimize the usage of bits when encoding an image, or bandwidth used to transport an image, by taking advantage of the non-linear manner in which humans perceive light and color. The human perception of brightness (lightness), under common illumination conditions (neither pitch black nor blindingly bright), follows an approximate power function (which has no relation to the gamma function), with greater sensitivity to relative differences between darker tones than between lighter tones, consistent with the Stevens' power law for brightness perception. If images are not gamma-encoded, they allocate too many bits or too much bandwidth to highlights that humans cannot differentiate, and too few bits or too little bandwidth to shadow values that humans are sensitive to and would require more bits/bandwidth to maintain the same visual quality. Gamma encoding of floating-point images is not required (and may be counterproductive), because the floating-point format already provides a piecewise linear approximation of a logarithmic curve.\nAlthough gamma encoding was developed originally to compensate for the brightness characteristics of cathode-ray tube (CRT) displays, that is not its main purpose or advantage in modern systems. In CRT displays, the light intensity varies nonlinearly with the electron-gun voltage. Altering the input signal by gamma compression can cancel this nonlinearity, such that the output picture has the intended luminance. However, the gamma characteristics of the display device do not play a factor in the gamma encoding of images and video. They need gamma encoding to maximize the visual quality of the signal, regardless of the gamma characteristics of the display device. The similarity of CRT physics to the inverse of gamma encoding needed for video transmission was a combination of coincidence and engineering, which simplified the electronics in early television sets.\nPhotographic film has a much greater ability to record fine differences in shade than can be reproduced on photographic paper. Similarly, most video screens are not capable of displaying the range of brightnesses (dynamic range) that can be captured by typical electronic cameras.\nFor this reason, considerable artistic effort is invested in choosing the reduced form in which the original image should be presented. The gamma correction, or contrast selection, is part of the photographic repertoire used to adjust the reproduced image.\nAnalogously, digital cameras record light using electronic sensors that usually respond linearly. In the process of rendering linear raw data to conventional RGB data (e.g. for storage into JPEG image format), color space transformations and rendering transformations will be performed. In particular, almost all standard RGB color spaces and file formats use a non-linear encoding (a gamma compression) of the intended intensities of the primary colors of the photographic reproduction. In addition, the intended reproduction is almost always nonlinearly related to the measured scene intensities, via a tone reproduction nonlinearity.\nGeneralized gamma.\nThe concept of gamma can be applied to any nonlinear relationship. For the power-law relationship formula_7, the curve on a log\u2013log plot is a straight line, with slope everywhere equal to gamma (slope is represented here by the derivative operator):\n formula_8\nThat is, gamma can be visualized as the slope of the input\u2013output curve when plotted on logarithmic axes. For a power-law curve, this slope is constant, but the idea can be extended to any type of curve, in which case gamma (strictly speaking, \"point gamma\") is defined as the slope of the curve in any particular region.\nFilm photography.\nWhen a photographic film is exposed to light, the result of the exposure can be represented on a graph showing log of exposure on the horizontal axis, and density, or negative log of transmittance, on the vertical axis. For a given film formulation and processing method, this curve is its characteristic or Hurter\u2013Driffield curve. Since both axes use logarithmic units, the slope of the linear section of the curve is called the gamma of the film. Negative film typically has a gamma less than 1; positive film (slide film, reversal film) typically has a gamma with absolute value greater than 1.\nStandard gammas.\nAnalog TV.\nOutput to CRT-based television receivers and monitors does not usually require further gamma correction. The standard video signals that are transmitted or stored in image files incorporate gamma compression matching the gamma expansion of the CRT (although it is not the exact inverse). \nFor television signals, gamma values are fixed and defined by the analog video standards. CCIR System M, associated with NTSC color, use gamma 2.2; systems B/G, H, I, D/K, K1, L, M, and N, associated with PAL or SECAM color use gamma 2.8.\nComputer displays.\nIn most computer display systems, images are encoded with a gamma of about 0.45 and decoded with the reciprocal gamma of 2.2. A notable exception, until the release of Mac OS X 10.6 (Snow Leopard) in September 2009, were Macintosh computers, which encoded with a gamma of 0.55 and decoded with a gamma of 1.8. In any case, binary data in still image files (such as JPEG) are explicitly encoded (that is, they carry gamma-encoded values, not linear intensities), as are motion picture files (such as MPEG). The system can optionally further manage both cases, through color management, if a better match to the output device gamma is required.\nThe sRGB color space standard used with most cameras, PCs, and printers does not use a simple power-law nonlinearity as above, but has a decoding gamma value near 2.2 over much of its range, as shown in the plot to the right/above. Below a compressed value of 0.04045 or a linear intensity of 0.00313, the curve is linear (encoded value proportional to intensity), so \"\u03b3\" = 1. The dashed black curve behind the red curve is a standard \"\u03b3\" = 2.2 power-law curve, for comparison.\nGamma correction in computers is used, for example, to display a gamma = 1.8 Apple picture correctly on a gamma = 2.2 PC monitor by changing the image gamma. Another usage is equalizing of the individual color-channel gammas to correct for monitor discrepancies.\nGamma meta information.\nSome picture formats allow an image's intended gamma (of transformations between encoded image samples and light output) to be stored as metadata, facilitating automatic gamma correction. The PNG specification includes the gAMA chunk for this purpose and with formats such as JPEG and TIFF the Exif Gamma tag can be used. Some formats can specify the ICC profile which includes a transfer function.\nThese features have historically caused problems, especially on the web. For HTML and CSS colors and JPG or GIF images without attached color profile metadata, popular browsers passed numerical color values to the display without color management, resulting in substantially different appearance between devices; however those same browsers sent images with gamma explicitly set in metadata through color management, and also applied a default gamma to PNG images with metadata omitted. This made it impossible for PNG images to simultaneously match HTML or untagged JPG colors on every device. This situation has since improved, as most major browsers now support the gamma setting (or lack of it).\nPower law for video display.\nA \"gamma characteristic\" is a power-law relationship that approximates the relationship between the encoded luma in a television system and the actual desired image luminance.\nWith this nonlinear relationship, equal steps in encoded luminance correspond roughly to subjectively equal steps in brightness. Ebner and Fairchild used an exponent of 0.43 to convert linear intensity into lightness (luma) for neutrals; the reciprocal, approximately 2.33 (quite close to the 2.2 figure cited for a typical display subsystem), was found to provide approximately optimal perceptual encoding of grays.\nThe following illustration shows the difference between a scale with linearly-increasing encoded luminance signal (linear gamma-compressed luma input) and a scale with linearly-increasing intensity scale (linear luminance output).\nOn most displays (those with gamma of about 2.2), one can observe that the linear-intensity scale has a large jump in perceived brightness between the intensity values 0.0 and 0.1, while the steps at the higher end of the scale are hardly perceptible. The gamma-encoded scale, which has a nonlinearly-increasing intensity, will show much more even steps in perceived brightness.\nA CRT, for example, converts a video signal to light in a nonlinear way, because the electron gun's intensity (brightness) as a function of applied video voltage is nonlinear. The light intensity \"I\" is related to the source voltage \"V\"s according to\n formula_9\nwhere \"\u03b3\" is the Greek letter gamma. For a CRT, the gamma that relates brightness to voltage is usually in the range 2.35 to 2.55; video look-up tables in computers usually adjust the system gamma to the range 1.8 to 2.2, which is in the region that makes a uniform encoding difference give approximately uniform perceptual brightness difference, as illustrated in the diagram at the top of this section.\nFor simplicity, consider the example of a monochrome CRT. In this case, when a video signal of 0.5 (representing a mid-gray) is fed to the display, the intensity or brightness is about 0.22 (resulting in a mid-gray, about 22% the intensity of white). Pure black (0.0) and pure white (1.0) are the only shades that are unaffected by gamma.\nTo compensate for this effect, the inverse transfer function (gamma correction) is sometimes applied to the video signal so that the end-to-end response is linear. In other words, the transmitted signal is deliberately distorted so that, after it has been distorted again by the display device, the viewer sees the correct brightness. The inverse of the function above is\n formula_10\nwhere \"V\"c is the corrected voltage, and \"V\"s is the source voltage, for example, from an image sensor that converts photocharge linearly to a voltage. In our CRT example 1/\"\u03b3\" is 1/2.2\u00a0\u2248\u00a00.45.\nA color CRT receives three video signals (red, green, and blue) and in general each color has its own value of gamma, denoted \"\u03b3\"\"R\", \"\u03b3\"\"G\" or \"\u03b3\"\"B\". However, in simple display systems, a single value of \"\u03b3\" is used for all three colors.\nOther display devices have different values of gamma: for example, a Game Boy Advance display has a gamma between 3 and 4 depending on lighting conditions. In LCDs such as those on laptop computers, the relation between the signal voltage \"V\"s and the intensity \"I\" is very nonlinear and cannot be described with gamma value. However, such displays apply a correction onto the signal voltage in order to approximately get a standard \"\u03b3\" = 2.5 behavior. In NTSC television recording, \"\u03b3\" = 2.2.\nThe power-law function, or its inverse, has a slope of infinity at zero. This leads to problems in converting from and to a gamma colorspace. For this reason most formally defined colorspaces such as sRGB will define a straight-line segment near zero and add raising \"x\" + \"K\" (where \"K\" is a constant) to a power so the curve has continuous slope. This straight line does not represent what the CRT does, but does make the rest of the curve more closely match the effect of ambient light on the CRT. In such expressions the exponent is \"not\" the gamma; for instance, the sRGB function uses a power of 2.4 in it, but more closely resembles a power-law function with an exponent of 2.2, without a linear portion.\nMethods to perform display gamma correction in computing.\nUp to four elements can be manipulated in order to achieve gamma encoding to correct the image to be shown on a typical 2.2- or 1.8-gamma computer display:\nIn a correctly calibrated system, each component will have a specified gamma for its input and/or output encodings. Stages may change the gamma to correct for different requirements, and finally the output device will do gamma decoding or correction as needed, to get to a linear intensity domain. All the encoding and correction methods can be arbitrarily superimposed, without mutual knowledge of this fact among the different elements; if done incorrectly, these conversions can lead to highly distorted results, but if done correctly as dictated by standards and conventions will lead to a properly functioning system.\nIn a typical system, for example from camera through JPEG file to display, the role of gamma correction will involve several cooperating parts. The camera encodes its rendered image into the JPEG file using one of the standard gamma values such as 2.2, for storage and transmission. The display computer may use a color management engine to convert to a different color space (such as older Macintosh's \"\u03b3\" = 1.8 color space) before putting pixel values into its video memory. The monitor may do its own gamma correction to match the CRT gamma to that used by the video system. Coordinating the components via standard interfaces with default standard gamma values makes it possible to get such system properly configured.\nSimple monitor tests.\nThis procedure is useful for making a monitor display images approximately correctly, on systems in which profiles are not used (for example, the Firefox browser prior to version 3.0 and many others) or in systems that assume untagged source images are in the sRGB colorspace.\nIn the test pattern, the intensity of each solid color bar is intended to be the average of the intensities in the surrounding dotted dither; therefore, ideally, the solid areas and the dithers should appear equally bright in a system properly adjusted to the indicated gamma.\nNormally a graphics card has contrast and brightness control and a transmissive LCD monitor has contrast, brightness, and backlight control. Graphics card and monitor contrast and brightness have an influence on effective gamma, and should not be changed after gamma correction is completed.\nThe top two bars of the test image help to set correct contrast and brightness values. There are eight three-digit numbers in each bar. A good monitor with proper calibration shows the six numbers on the right in both bars; a cheap monitor shows only four numbers.\nGiven a desired display-system gamma, if the observer sees the same brightness in the checkered part and in the homogeneous part of every colored area, then the gamma correction is approximately correct. In many cases the gamma correction values for the primary colors are slightly different.\nSetting the color temperature or white point is the next step in monitor adjustment.\nBefore gamma correction the desired gamma and color temperature should be set using the monitor controls. Using the controls for gamma, contrast and brightness, the gamma correction on an LCD can only be done for one specific vertical viewing angle, which implies one specific horizontal line on the monitor, at one specific brightness and contrast level. An ICC profile allows one to adjust the monitor for several brightness levels. The quality (and price) of the monitor determines how much deviation of this operating point still gives a satisfactory gamma correction. Twisted nematic (TN) displays with 6-bit color depth per primary color have lowest quality. In-plane switching (IPS) displays with typically 8-bit color depth are better. Good monitors have 10-bit color depth, have hardware color management and allow hardware calibration with a tristimulus colorimeter. Often a 6bit plus FRC panel is sold as 8bit and a 8bit plus FRC panel is sold as 10bit. FRC is no true replacement for more bits. The 24-bit and 32-bit color depth formats have 8 bits per primary color.\nWith Microsoft Windows 7 and above the user can set the gamma correction through the display color calibration tool dccw.exe or other programs. These programs create an ICC profile file and load it as default. This makes color management easy. Increase the gamma slider in the dccw program until the last colored area, often the green color, has the same brightness in checkered and homogeneous area. Use the color balance or individual colors gamma correction sliders in the gamma correction programs to adjust the two other colors. Some old graphics card drivers do not load the color Look Up Table correctly after waking up from standby or hibernate mode and show wrong gamma. In this case update the graphics card driver.\nOn some operating systems running the X Window System, one can set the gamma correction factor (applied to the existing gamma value) by issuing the command codice_1 for setting gamma correction factor to 0.9, and codice_2 for querying current value of that factor (the default is 1.0). In macOS systems, the gamma and other related screen calibrations are made through the System Preferences.\nScaling and blending.\n\"Generally,\" operations on pixel values should be performed in \"linear light\" (gamma 1). Eric Brasseur discusses the issue at length and provides test images. They serve to point out a widespread problem: Many programs perform scaling in a color space with gamma, instead of a physically correct linear space. The test images are constructed so as to have a drastically different appearance when downsampled incorrectly. Jonas Berlin has created a \"your scaling software sucks/rules\" image based on this principle.\nIn addition to scaling, the problem also applies to other forms of downsampling (scaling down), such as chroma subsampling in JPEG's gamma-enabled Y\u2032CbCr. WebP solves this problem by calculating the chroma averages in linear space then converting back to a gamma-enabled space; an iterative solution is used for larger images. The same \"sharp YUV\" (formerly \"smart YUV\") code is used in sjpeg and optionally in AVIF. Kornelski provides a simpler approximation by luma-based weighted average. Alpha compositing, color gradients, and 3D rendering are also affected by this issue.\nParadoxically, when upsampling (scaling up) an image, the result processed in a \"wrong\" (non-physical) gamma color space is often more aesthetically pleasing. This is because resampling filters with negative lobes like Mitchell\u2013Netravali and Lanczos create ringing artifacts linearly even though human perception is non-linear and better approximated by gamma. (Emulating \"stepping back,\" which motivates downsampling in linear light (gamma=1), does not apply when upsampling.) A related method of reducing the visibility of ringing artifacts consists of using a sigmoidal light transfer function as pioneered by ImageMagick and GIMP's LoHalo filter and adapted to video upsampling by madVR, AviSynth and Mpv.\nTerminology.\nThe term intensity refers strictly to the amount of light that is emitted per unit of time and per unit of surface, in units of lux. Note, however, that in many fields of science this quantity is called luminous exitance, as opposed to luminous intensity, which is a different quantity. These distinctions, however, are largely irrelevant to gamma compression, which is applicable to any sort of normalized linear intensity-like scale.\n\"Luminance\" can mean several things even within the context of video and imaging:\nOne contrasts relative luminance in the sense of color (no gamma compression) with luma in the sense of video (with gamma compression), and denote relative luminance by \"Y\" and luma by \"Y\"\u2032, the prime symbol (\u2032) denoting gamma compression. Note that luma is not directly calculated from luminance, it is the (somewhat arbitrary) weighted sum of gamma-compressed RGB components.\nLikewise, \"brightness\" is sometimes applied to various measures, including light levels, though it more properly applies to a subjective visual attribute.\nGamma correction is a type of power-law function whose exponent is the Greek letter gamma (\"\u03b3\"). It should not be confused with the mathematical Gamma function. The lower case gamma, \"\u03b3\", is a parameter of the former; the upper case letter, \u0393, is the name of (and symbol used for) the latter (as in \u0393(\"x\")). To use the word \"function\" in conjunction with gamma correction, one may avoid confusion by saying \"generalized power-law function\".\nWithout context, a value labeled gamma might be either the encoding or the decoding value. Caution must be taken to correctly interpret the value as that to be applied-to-compensate or to be compensated-by-applying its inverse. In common parlance, in many occasions the decoding value (as 2.2) is employed as if it were the encoding value, instead of its inverse (1/2.2 in this case), which is the \"real\" value that must be applied to encode gamma.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68468", "revid": "42342156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68468", "title": "Dune buggy", "text": "Off-road vehicle\nA dune buggy, also known as a beach buggy, is a recreational off-road vehicle with large wheels, and wide tires, designed for use on sand dunes, beaches, off-road or desert recreation. The design is usually a topless vehicle with a rear-mounted engine. A dune buggy can be created by modifying an existing vehicle or custom-building a new vehicle.\nDesign.\nDune buggies are typically created by modifying an existing road vehicle, while sandrails are built from the ground up as a custom vehicle.\nBeetle-based buggies.\nFor dune buggies built on the chassis of a rear-engined existing vehicle, the Volkswagen Beetle has been most commonly used as the basis for the buggy, though conversions were made from other rear-engined cars (such as the Corvair and Renault Dauphine). The model is nicknamed Bug, lending partial inspiration to the term \"buggy.\" The Beetle platform chassis was used because the rear engine layout improves traction, the air-cooled engine avoids the complexities and failure points associated with a water-cooled engine, the Beetle's front torsion bar suspension was not only considered cheap and robust, but it was also extremely easy to alter and adjust its ride-height. Furthermore, spare parts \u2014 and donor vehicles themselves \u2014 were cheap and readily available. While early dune buggy conversions were left with no body, or featured custom bodies of sheet metal (such as the EMPI Sportsters and similar buggies), glass-reinforced plastic (fiberglass) bodies, developed in the 1960s, have become the standard image of the modern buggy, and come in many shapes and sizes.\nThe original fiberglass dune buggy was the 1964 \"Meyers Manx\" built by Bruce Meyers. Bruce Meyers designed his fiberglass bodies as a \"kit car\", using the Volkswagen Beetle chassis. Many other companies worldwide have been inspired by the Manx, making similar bodies and kits. These types of dune buggies are known as \"clones\".\nSandrail.\nA sandrail is a lightweight vehicle similar to a dune buggy, but designed specifically for operation on open sand.\nSandrails are usually built as a spaceframe by welding steel tubes together. The name sandrail is due to the frame \"rails\" present. The advantage of this method is that the fabricator can change fundamental parts of the vehicle (usually the suspension and addition of a built-in roll cage). Sandrails, as per dune buggies, often have the engine located behind the driver. Sizes can vary from a small-engine one-seat size to four-seat vehicles with eight or more cylinders.\nA similar, more recent generation of off-road vehicle, often similar in appearance to a sandrail, but designed for a different use, is the \"off road go-kart\". The difference may be little more than fitting all-terrain tires instead of sand tires and the much smaller size of the engine.\nMilitary use.\nBecause of the advantages a buggy can afford on some terrain, they are also used by the military.\nThe buggies built for the United States military used to be called Desert Patrol Vehicles (DPV) or Fast Attack Vehicles (FAV), and with the latest improvements are known as Light Strike Vehicles (LSV). They are used by United States Navy SEALs, the SAS, and other forces. Among the dune buggies used by the United States military is the Chenowth Advanced Light Strike Vehicle. The US Border Patrol also uses this (although it is not a military organization).\nIn the United Kingdom, the SAS have used cut-down, light-weight all terrain vehicles for secret special operations \"behind the lines\" since early in World War II. A buggy was used by the British Special Air Service (SAS) forces during the Gulf War. A long-range special desert operations vehicle was developed in 1992 and nicknamed \"pink panthers\" because of their color, but these were only modified Land Rovers. Cuba has been known to use Dune Buggies for military use.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68469", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68469", "title": "Laparoscopy", "text": "Minimally invasive operation within the abdominal or pelvic cavities\nLaparoscopy (from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'flank, side' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'to see') is an operation performed in the abdomen or pelvis using small incisions (usually 0.5\u20131.5\u00a0cm) with the aid of a camera. The laparoscope aids diagnosis or therapeutic interventions with a few small cuts in the abdomen.\nLaparoscopic surgery, also called minimally invasive procedure, bandaid surgery, or keyhole surgery, is a modern surgical technique. There are a number of advantages to the patient with laparoscopic surgery versus an exploratory laparotomy. These include reduced pain due to smaller incisions, reduced hemorrhaging, and shorter recovery time. The key element is the use of a laparoscope, a long fiber optic cable system that allows viewing of the affected area by snaking the cable from a more distant, but more easily accessible location.\nLaparoscopic surgery includes operations within the abdominal or pelvic cavities, whereas keyhole surgery performed on the thoracic or chest cavity is called thoracoscopic surgery. Specific surgical instruments used in laparoscopic surgery include obstetrical forceps, scissors, probes, dissectors, hooks, and retractors. Laparoscopic and thoracoscopic surgery belong to the broader field of endoscopy. The first laparoscopic procedure was performed by German surgeon Georg Kelling in 1901.\nTypes of laparoscopes.\nThere are two types of laparoscope:\nThe mechanism mentioned in the second type is mainly used to improve the image quality of flexible endoscopes, replacing conventional fiberscopes. Nevertheless, laparoscopes are rigid endoscopes. Rigidity is required in clinical practice. The rod-lens-based laparoscopes dominate overwhelmingly in practice, due to their fine optical resolution (50\u00a0\u03bcm typically, dependent on the aperture size used in the objective lens), and the image quality can be better than that of the digital camera if necessary. The second type of laparoscope is very rare in the laparoscope market and in hospitals.\nAlso attached is a fiber optic cable system connected to a \"cold\" light source (halogen or xenon) to illuminate the operative field, which is inserted through a 5\u00a0mm or 10\u00a0mm cannula or trocar. The abdomen is usually insufflated with carbon dioxide gas as the safety, harms, and benefits of other gasses (e.g., helium, argon, nitrogen, nitrous oxide, and room air) is uncertain. This elevates the abdominal wall above the internal organs to create a working and viewing space. CO2 is used because it is common to the human body and can be absorbed by tissue and removed by the respiratory system. It is also non-flammable, which is important because electrosurgical devices are commonly used in laparoscopic procedures.\nProcedures.\nPatient position.\nDuring the laparoscopic procedure, the position of the patient is either in Trendelenburg position or in reverse Trendelenburg. These positions have an effect on cardiopulmonary function. In Trendelenburg's position, there is an increased preload due to an increase in the venous return from lower extremities. This position results in cephalic shifting of the viscera, which accentuates the pressure on the diaphragm. In the case of reverse Trendelenburg position, pulmonary function tends to improve as there is a caudal shifting of viscera, which improves tidal volume by a decrease in the pressure on the diaphragm. This position also decreases the preload on the heart and causes a decrease in the venous return leading to hypotension. The pooling of blood in the lower extremities increases the stasis and predisposes the patient to develop deep vein thrombosis (DVT).\nGallbladder.\nRather than a minimum 20\u00a0cm incision as in traditional (open) cholecystectomy, four incisions of 0.5\u20131.0\u00a0cm, or, beginning in the second decade of the 21st century, a single incision of 1.5\u20132.0\u00a0cm, will be sufficient to perform a laparoscopic removal of a gallbladder.\nSince the gallbladder is similar to a small balloon that stores and releases bile, it can usually be removed from the abdomen by suctioning out the bile and then removing the deflated gallbladder through the 1\u00a0cm incision at the patient's navel.\nThe length of postoperative stay in the hospital is minimal,\nand most patients can be safely discharged from the hospital the same day.\nColon and kidney.\nIn certain advanced laparoscopic procedures, where the specimen removed is too large to pull through a trocar site (as is done with gallbladders), an incision larger than 10\u00a0mm must be made. The most common of these procedures are removal of all or part of the colon (colectomy), or removal of the kidney (nephrectomy). Some surgeons perform these procedures completely laparoscopically, making the larger incision toward the end of the procedure for specimen removal, or, in the case of a colectomy, to also prepare the remaining healthy bowel to be reconnected (create an anastomosis). Many other surgeons feel that since they will have to make a larger incision for specimen removal anyway, they might as well use this incision to have their hand in the operative field during the procedure to aid as a retractor, dissector, and to be able to feel differing tissue densities (palpate), as they would in open surgery. This technique is called hand-assist laparoscopy. Since they will still be working with scopes and other laparoscopic instruments, CO2 will have to be maintained in the patient's abdomen, so a device known as a hand access port (a sleeve with a seal that allows passage of the hand) must be used. Surgeons who choose this hand-assist technique feel it reduces operative time significantly versus the straight laparoscopic approach. It also gives them more options in dealing with unexpected adverse events (e.g., uncontrolled bleeding) that may otherwise require creating a much larger incision and converting to a fully open surgical procedure.\nConceptually, the laparoscopic approach is intended to minimise post-operative pain and speed up recovery times, while maintaining an enhanced visual field for surgeons. Due to improved patient outcomes in the early 21st century, laparoscopic surgery has been adopted by various surgical sub-specialties, including gastrointestinal surgery (including bariatric procedures for morbid obesity), gynecologic surgery, and urology. Based on numerous prospective randomized controlled trials, the approach has proven to be beneficial in reducing post-operative morbidities such as wound infections and incisional hernias (especially in morbidly obese patients), and is now deemed safe when applied to surgery for cancers such as cancer of colon.\nThe restricted vision, the difficulty in handling of the instruments (new hand-eye coordination skills are needed), the lack of tactile perception, and the limited working area are factors adding to the technical complexity of this surgical approach. For these reasons, minimally invasive surgery has emerged as a highly competitive new sub-specialty within various fields of surgery. Surgical residents who wish to focus on this area of surgery gain additional laparoscopic surgery training during one or two years of fellowship after completing their basic surgical residency. In OB-GYN residency programs, the average laparoscopy-to-laparotomy quotient (LPQ) is 0.55.\nIn veterinary medicine.\nLaparoscopic techniques have also been developed in the field of veterinary medicine. Due to the relatively high cost of the equipment required, it has not become commonplace in most traditional practices today but rather limited to specialty practices. Many of the same surgeries performed in humans can be applied to animal cases\u00a0\u2013 everything from an egg-bound tortoise to a German Shepherd can benefit from MIS. A paper published in JAVMA (Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association) in 2005 showed that dogs spayed laparoscopically experienced significantly less pain (65%) than those that were spayed with traditional \"open\" methods. Arthroscopy, thoracoscopy, and cystoscopy are all performed in veterinary medicine today.\nAdvantages.\nThere are a number of advantages to the patient with laparoscopic surgery versus an open procedure. These include:\nAlthough laparoscopy in adults is widely accepted, its advantages in children are questioned. Benefits of laparoscopy appear to recede with younger age. Efficacy of laparoscopy is inferior to open surgery in certain conditions such as pyloromyotomy for infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. Although laparoscopic appendectomy has less wound problems than open surgery, the former is associated with more intra-abdominal abscesses.\nDisadvantages.\nWhile laparoscopic surgery is clearly advantageous in terms of patient outcomes, the procedure is more difficult from the surgeon's perspective when compared to conventional, open surgery:\nRisks.\nSome of the risks are briefly described below:\nRobotic laparoscopic surgery.\nIn recent years, electronic tools have been developed to aid surgeons. Some of the features include:\nRobotic surgery has been touted as a solution to underdeveloped nations, whereby a single central hospital can operate several remote machines at distant locations. The potential for robotic surgery has had a strong military interest as well, with the intention of providing mobile medical care while keeping trained doctors safe from battle. \nIn January 2022, a robot performed the first ever successful laparoscopic surgery without the help of a human. The robot performed the surgery on the soft tissue of a pig. It succeeded at intestinal anastomosis, a procedure that involves connecting two ends of an intestine. The robot, named the Smart Tissue Autonomous Robot (STAR), was designed by a team of Johns Hopkins University researchers.\nNon-robotic hand-guided assistance systems.\nThere are also user-friendly nonrobotic assistance systems that are single-hand guided devices with a high potential to save time and money. These assistance devices are not bound by the restrictions of common medical robotic systems. The systems enhance the manual possibilities of the surgeon and his/her team, regarding the need of replacing static holding force during the intervention.\nWith laparoscopy providing tissue diagnosis and helping to achieve the final diagnosis without any significant complication and less operative time, it can be safely concluded that diagnostic laparoscopy is a safe, quick, and effective adjunct to non\u2011surgical diagnostic modalities, for establishing a conclusive diagnosis, but whether it will replace imaging studies as a primary modality for diagnosis needs more evidence.\nHistory.\nIt is difficult to credit one individual with the pioneering of the laparoscopic approach. In 1901, Georg Kelling of Dresden, Germany, performed the first laparoscopic procedure in dogs, and, in 1910, Hans Christian Jacobaeus of Sweden performed the first laparoscopic operation in humans.\nIn the ensuing several decades, numerous individuals refined and popularized the approach further for laparoscopy. The advent of computer chip-based television cameras was a seminal event in the field of laparoscopy. This technological innovation provided the means to project a magnified view of the operative field onto a monitor and, at the same time, freed both the operating surgeon's hands, thereby facilitating performance of complex laparoscopic procedures.\nThe first publication on modern diagnostic laparoscopy by Raoul Palmer appeared in 1947, followed by the publication of Hans Frangenheim and Kurt Semm, who both practised CO2 hysteroscopy from the mid-1970s.\nPatrick Steptoe, one of the pioneers of IVF, was important in popularizing laparoscopy in the UK. He published a textbook, \"Laparoscopy in Gynaecology,\" in 1967.\nIn 1972, H. Courtenay Clarke invented, published, patented, presented, and recorded on film laparoscopic surgery, with instruments he invented and were marketed by the Ven Instrument Company of Buffalo, New York. He was the first to perform a surgical laparoscopic process with standard sutures and simple instruments. This was meant to facilitate the application of laparoscopic surgery to all economic sectors by avoiding expensive materials and devices.\nIn 1975, Tarasconi, from the Department of Ob-Gyn of the University of Passo Fundo Medical School (Passo Fundo, RS, Brazil), started his experience with organ resection by laparoscopy (Salpingectomy), first reported in the Third AAGL Meeting, Hyatt Regency Atlanta, November 1976 and later published in The Journal of Reproductive Medicine in 1981.\nThis laparoscopic surgical procedure was the first laparoscopic organ resection reported in medical literature.\nIn 1981, Semm, from the gynecological clinic of Kiel University, Germany, performed the first laparoscopic appendectomy. Following his lecture on laparoscopic appendectomy, the president of the German Surgical Society wrote to the Board of Directors of the German Gynecological Society suggesting suspension of Semm from medical practice. Subsequently, Semm submitted a paper on laparoscopic appendectomy to the \"American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology\", at first rejected as unacceptable for publication on the grounds that the technique reported on was \"unethical,\" but finally published in the journal \"Endoscopy\". The abstract of his paper on endoscopic appendectomy can be found at the journal site.\nSemm established several standard procedures that were regularly performed, such as ovarian cyst enucleation, myomectomy, treatment of ectopic pregnancy and finally laparoscopic-assisted vaginal hysterectomy (also termed cervical intra-fascial Semm hysterectomy). He also developed a medical instrument company Wisap in Munich, Germany, which still produces various endoscopic instruments. In 1985, he constructed the pelvi-trainer = laparo-trainer, a practical surgical model whereby colleagues could practice laparoscopic techniques. Semm published over 1000 papers in various journals. He also produced over 30 endoscopic films and more than 20,000 colored slides to teach and inform interested colleagues about his technique. His first atlas, \"More Details on Pelviscopy and Hysteroscopy\" was published in 1976, a slide atlas on pelviscopy, hysteroscopy, and fetoscopy in 1979, and his books on gynecological endoscopic surgery in German, English, and many other languages in 1984, 1987, and 2002.\nIn 1985, Erich M\u00fche, professor of surgery in Germany, performed the first laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Afterward, laparoscopy gained rapid acceptance for non-gynecologic applications. The first video-assisted laparoscopic surgery was performed in 1987, a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Before this time, the operating field was visualised by surgeons directly via a laparoscope.\nIn 1987, Alfred Cuschieri performed the first minimally invasive surgery in the UK with his team at Ninewells Hospital after working with multiple researchers from across the world, including Patrick Steptoe. Cuschieri took advantage of smaller cameras to perform operations with smaller cuts and shorter recovery times. After some controversy and patient deaths, new laparoscopic training centres were set up as most surgeons lacked the necessary specialised training to perform laparoscopic surgery. The first opened in Dundee in 1991 and became the Cuschieri Skills Centre at Ninewells Hospital in 2004. As of 2008, 40 specialist centres around the world base their laparoscopic training on the Cuschieri Skills Centre.\nPrior to M\u00fche, the only specialty performing laparoscopy on a widespread basis was gynecology, mostly for relatively short, simple procedures such as a diagnostic laparoscopy or tubal ligation. The introduction in 1990 of a laparoscopic clip applier with twenty automatically advancing clips (rather than a single load clip applier that would have to be taken out, reloaded and reintroduced for each clip application) made general surgeons more comfortable with making the leap to laparoscopic cholecystectomies ( gall bladder removal). On the other hand, some surgeons continue to use the single clip appliers as they save as much as $200 per case for the patient, detract nothing from the quality of the clip ligation, and add only seconds to case lengths. Both laparoscopy tubal ligations and cholecystectomies may be performed using suturing and tying, thus further reducing the expensive cost of single and multiclips (when compared to suture). Once again this may increase case lengths but costs are greatly reduced (ideal for developing countries) and widespread accidents of loose clips are eliminated.\nThe first transatlantic surgery performed was a laparoscopic gallbladder removal in 2001. The first robotic advanced pediatric surgery series were performed overseas in Egypt at Cairo University. Remote surgeries and robotic surgeries have since become more common and are typically laparoscopic procedures.\nSurgical associations.\nThere are many International and American Surgical Associations involved in surgical education and training for laparoscopy, thoracoscopy and many minimally invasive procedures for both adults and pediatrics. These societies include:\nGynecological diagnosis.\nIn gynecology, diagnostic laparoscopy may be used to inspect the outside of the uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes, as, for example, in the diagnosis of female infertility. Usually, one incision is placed near the navel and a second near the pubic hairline. A special type of laparoscope called a fertiloscope, which is modified for transvaginal application, can be used. A dye test may be performed to detect any blockage in the reproductive tract, wherein a dark blue dye is passed up through the cervix and is followed with the laparoscope through its passage out into the fallopian tubes to the ovaries.\nLaparoscopy is considered the \u201cgolden standard\u201d for the diagnosis of endometriosis, although there have been recent developments in the use of imaging, primarily ultrasound, in the diagnostic process. When endometriosis is confirmed during diagnostic laparoscopy, the surgery will then also often involve treatment through the removal of endometrial tissue. Samples are sometimes collected for biopsy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68473", "revid": "19839598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68473", "title": "Singleton", "text": "Singleton may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68476", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68476", "title": "Domain of definition", "text": ""}
{"id": "68478", "revid": "310173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68478", "title": "Stone Cech compactification", "text": ""}
{"id": "68479", "revid": "37843193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68479", "title": "Eurovision Song Contest 1959", "text": "International song competition\nThe Eurovision Song Contest 1959, originally known as the (), was the fourth edition of the Eurovision Song Contest, held on Wednesday 11 March 1959 at the in Cannes, France, and presented by Jacqueline Joubert. It was organised by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) and host broadcaster (RTF), who staged the event after winning the 1958 contest for France with the song \", performed by Andr\u00e9 Claveau.\nBroadcasters from eleven countries participated in the contest, with Monaco making its first appearance and the United Kingdom returning after its absence the previous year. Luxembourg, however, decided not to participate after competing in all former editions.\nThe winner was the Netherlands with the song \", performed by Teddy Scholten, composed by Dick Schallies and written by Willy van Hemert. This was the Netherlands' second victory in the contest, having also won in 1957, and also marked the first time a country had won the contest more than once. Van Hemert also became the first individual to win twice, having also written the first Dutch winning song from 1957, \". The United Kingdom placed second, marking the first of a record sixteen times that the country would go on to finish as contest runners-up, while France placed third.\nLocation.\nThe event took place in Cannes, France, following the nation's victory at the 1958 edition in Hilversum, Netherlands, with the song \", performed by Andr\u00e9 Claveau. The selected venue was the , built in 1949 to host the Cannes Film Festival and located on the along the shore of the Mediterranean Sea. Due to the growth in the film festival a new building bearing the same name was opened in 1982, with the original building renamed as the .\nThis marked the second occasion in which the previous year's winning country organised the event, and the first time in which the winning country was given first choice at hosting the following year's event, as the rights to host the 1958 contest were only awarded to the Netherlands after all other countries declined.\nA garden space with plants from Southern France was installed in front of the building for the contest, and the flags of the participating nations were raised on the roof. The audience comprised 1,500 invited guests.\nAdditional events during the contest week included a supper for the participating delegations on behalf of the city of Cannes held on the evening following the contest in the of the city's Casino municipal.\nParticipants.\nA total of eleven countries competed in the contest, with Monaco making its first appearance and the United Kingdom returning after a one year absence. The United Kingdom's absence from the 1958 contest is generally reported to have been due to the country's poor result in 1957, but its return coincided with the international success of \"\", the Italian entry from the previous year's contest, and the appointment of Eric Maschwitz as Head of Light Entertainment at the BBC. Beginning with this event the United Kingdom holds the record for the longest string of consecutive appearances in the Eurovision Song Contest, appearing in every subsequent contest final as of 2025[ [update]]. Luxembourg was absent from the event, having participated in all previous contests, with management at the Luxembourgish broadcaster (CLT) rejecting the proposed entry and leaving no sufficient time to find a replacement. This decision appears to have occurred late in the preparations for the contest as the country was listed among the participants in several radio and television listings.\nAmong this year's participants, two artists had previously competed in the contest. Birthe Wilke had placed third for Denmark in 1957, performing \" alongside Gustav Winckler, and Domenico Modugno had placed third for Italy in 1958 with \".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction and format.\nThe contest was organised and broadcast by the French public broadcaster (RTF), with Marcel Cravenne serving as producer and director, G\u00e9rard Dubois serving as designer, and Franck Pourcel serving as musical director and leading the . Each participating delegation was allowed to nominate its own musical director to lead the orchestra during the performance of its country's entry, with the host musical director also conducting for those countries which did not nominate their own conductor.\nAs in the 1957 and 1958 contests, each country, participating through a single EBU member broadcaster, was represented by one song performed by up to two people on stage. The results of the event were determined through jury voting, with each country's jury containing ten individuals who each gave one vote to their favourite song, with no abstentions allowed and with jurors unable to vote for their own country. One rule change implemented for this contest specified that individuals employed in the music industry were no longer allowed to be included among the national juries.\nDubois' stage design was inspired by the era of Louis XIV. The stage featured three revolving platforms, each of which was segmented into four, similar to a revolving door, to include various backdrops. These backdrops were specific to each of the participating countries and featured scenery or objects associated with that country.\nThe draw to determine the running order took place on 9 March 1959. A few days prior to the contest, hotel and shop owners in Cannes complained that the contest was covered and advertised too sparsely by RTF and subsequently feared that too few tourists would come to Cannes. In contrast, the Cannes , which was involved in the organisation of the contest, believed that the broadcast of images from Cannes to many European households would have a significant impact on tourism in the weeks to follow.\nContest overview.\nThe contest was held on 11 March 1959 at 21:00 (CET) and lasted 1 hour and 12 minutes. The event was hosted by French television presenter Jacqueline Joubert.\nThe prelude of Charpentier's \"Te Deum\", the theme music of Eurovision broadcasts, was played as opening act by the orchestra under the direction of Franck Pourcel.\nThe winner was the Netherlands represented by the song \", composed by Dick Schallies, written by Willy van Hemert and performed by Teddy Scholten. The Netherlands became the first country to achieve two victories in the event, and Van Hemert became the first individual to win the contest twice, after previously providing lyrics for the Netherlands' winner in 1957, \". The United Kingdom's result was the first of sixteen British entries to finish in second place, a contest record as of 2025[ [update]].\nAlongside the traditional reprise performance of the winning song, the second- and third-placed songs were also performed again, for the first and only time at the contest. The prize awarded to the winning songwriters, taking the form of an engraved medallion, was to be handed over during the delegations' supper following the event, but instead was presented by RTF's director of programming Jean d'Arcy to Teddy Scholten at the end of the show.\nSpokespersons.\nEach participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson who was responsible for announcing the votes for its respective country via telephone. Known spokespersons at the 1959 contest are listed below.\nDetailed voting results.\nThe announcement of the results from each country was conducted in reverse order to that which each country performed.\nBroadcasts.\nEach participating broadcaster was required to relay the contest via its television network. No official accounts of the viewing figures are known to exist. An estimate given in the press was at least 20 million viewers.\nBroadcasters were able to send commentators to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language and to relay information about the artists and songs to their television viewers. Twelve commentator boxes were installed on the balconies of the auditorium. Known details on the broadcasts in each country, including the specific broadcasting stations and commentators are shown in the table below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68481", "revid": "87355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68481", "title": "Converge (topology)", "text": ""}
{"id": "68482", "revid": "1315769634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68482", "title": "Karl Verner", "text": "Danish linguist (1846\u20131896)\nKarl Adolph Verner (; 7 March 1846 \u2013 5 November 1896) was a Danish linguist. He is remembered best for Verner's law, which he published in 1876.\nBiography.\nVerner's interest in languages was stimulated by reading about the work of Rasmus Christian Rask. He began his university studies in 1864 in Oriental, Germanic, and Slavic languages, and then he served in the army before resuming his studies. He traveled to Russia in December 1871, spending nearly a year learning the Russian language. His first scientific paper was \"Nogle Raskiana\" (1874). He began to study the accent of Danish and Slavic languages, and he was puzzled by the fact that the Gothic words \"fadar\" and \"bro\u00fear\" have different consonants after the root vowel. He was preoccupied with the study of accent at the time, so he sought the explanation in that direction which resulted in the formation of Verner's Law. He finished the relevant paper and sent it to Vilhelm Thomsen in 1875; he published it a year later.\nDespite his achievement, Verner considered himself only an amateur in Germanic philology. He long refused offers of professorship, contenting himself to be a librarian in Halle. He was taught by August Leskien, a pioneer of research into principles of sound changes, and he applied for the Bopp prize, which he received in 1877. He became a professor in 1888 when he was also elected a member of the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68483", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68483", "title": "Net (topology)", "text": ""}
{"id": "68484", "revid": "20530117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68484", "title": "Filter (topology)", "text": ""}
{"id": "68485", "revid": "47496986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68485", "title": "Jurassic Park", "text": "1993 film by Steven Spielberg\nJurassic Park is a 1993 American science fiction adventure film directed by Steven Spielberg and written by Michael Crichton and David Koepp, based on Crichton's 1990 novel. Starring Sam Neill, Laura Dern, Jeff Goldblum, and Richard Attenborough, the film is set on the fictional island of Isla Nublar near Costa Rica, where wealthy businessman John Hammond (Attenborough) and a team of genetic scientists have created a wildlife park of de-extinct dinosaurs. When industrial sabotage leads to a catastrophic shutdown of the park's power facilities and security precautions, a small group of visitors struggle to survive and escape the now perilous island.\nBefore Crichton's novel was published, four studios put in bids for its film rights. With the backing of Universal Pictures, Spielberg acquired the rights for $1.5\u00a0million. Crichton was hired for an additional $500,000 to adapt the novel for the screen. Koepp wrote the final draft, which left out much of the novel's exposition and violence, while making numerous changes to the characters. Filming took place in California and Hawaii from August to November 1992, and post-production lasted until May 1993, supervised by Spielberg in Poland as he filmed \"Schindler's List\". The dinosaurs were created with groundbreaking computer-generated imagery by Industrial Light &amp; Magic, and with life-sized animatronic dinosaurs built by Stan Winston's team. To showcase the film's sound design, which included a mixture of various animal noises for the dinosaur sounds, Spielberg invested in the creation of DTS, a company specializing in digital surround sound formats. The film was backed by an extensive $65\u00a0million marketing campaign, which included licensing deals with over 100 companies.\n\"Jurassic Park\" premiered on June 9, 1993, at the Uptown Theater in Washington, D.C., and was released two days later throughout the United States. It was a blockbuster hit and went on to gross over $914\u00a0million worldwide in its original theatrical run, surpassing Spielberg's own \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" to become the highest-grossing film of all time until the release of \"Titanic\" (1997), surpassing it in early 1998. The film received critical acclaim, with praise to its special effects, sound design, action sequences, John Williams's score, and Spielberg's direction. The film won 20 awards, including three Academy Awards for technical achievements in visual effects and sound design. Following its 20th anniversary re-release in 2013, \"Jurassic Park\" became the oldest film in history to surpass $1billion in ticket sales and the 17th overall.\nSince its release, many film critics and industry professionals have regarded \"Jurassic Park\" as one of the greatest summer blockbusters ever made. Its groundbreaking use of computer-generated imagery is widely seen as a turning point that shaped the visual effects techniques used in modern cinema. In 2018, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The film spawned a multimedia franchise that includes six sequels, video games, theme park attractions, comic books, and various merchandise.\nPlot.\nIndustrialist John Hammond has created Jurassic Park, a theme park of de-extincted dinosaurs, on the tropical island Isla Nublar 120 miles west of Costa Rica. After a \"Velociraptor\" kills a dinosaur handler, the park's investors, represented by lawyer Donald Gennaro, threaten to pull funding unless experts certify the island's safety. Gennaro invites chaotician Ian Malcolm, and Hammond invites paleontologist Alan Grant and paleobotanist Ellie Sattler. Upon arrival, the group is shocked to see living \"Brachiosaurus\" and \"Parasaurolophus\". At the park's visitor center, the group learns that the cloning was accomplished by extracting dinosaur DNA from prehistoric mosquitoes preserved in amber. DNA from frogs, among other animals, was used to fill in gaps in the dinosaurs' genome.\nTo prevent breeding, the dinosaurs were made female by direct chromosome manipulation. The group witnesses the hatching of a baby \"Velociraptor\" and visits the raptor enclosure. During lunch, the group debates the ethics of cloning and the park's creation. Malcolm warns of the implications of genetic engineering while Grant and Sattler express uncertainty over the ability of humans and dinosaurs to coexist. Hammond's grandchildren, Lex and Tim, join the others for a park tour in two self-driving electric Ford Explorer tour vehicles, while Hammond oversees them from the control room. Most of the dinosaurs fail to appear, and the group encounters a sick \"Triceratops\". The tour is cut short as a tropical storm approaches. The park employees leave for the mainland on a boat while the visitors return to their railed-electric tour vehicles, except Sattler, who stays behind with the park's veterinarian, Dr. Harding, to study the \"Triceratops\".\nJurassic Park's disgruntled lead computer programmer, Dennis Nedry, was previously bribed by Lewis Dodgson, a man working for Hammond's corporate rival, to steal frozen dinosaur embryos. He deactivates the park's security system to access the embryo storage room and stores them inside a container disguised as a Barbasol shaving cream can.\nNedry's sabotage cuts power to the tour vehicles, stranding them as they near the park's \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" paddock. Most of the park's electric fences have also been deactivated, allowing the \"Tyrannosaurus\" to escape and attack the group. After the \"Tyrannosaurus\" overturns a tour vehicle, it injures Malcolm and devours Gennaro while Grant, Lex, and Tim escape. On his way to deliver the embryos to the island's docks, Nedry gets lost in the rain, crashes his Jeep Wrangler, and is killed by a venom-spitting \"Dilophosaurus\". Sattler helps the game warden Robert Muldoon search for survivors; they find Malcolm just before the \"Tyrannosaurus\" returns and chases them away. Grant, Tim, and Lex take shelter in a treetop and encounter a \"Brachiosaurus\" herd. They discover the broken shells of dinosaur eggs the following morning. Grant concludes that the dinosaurs are breeding, which is possible because of amphibian DNA\u2014animals like West African frogs can change their sex in a single-sex environment, enabling the dinosaurs to breed. The three later encounter a \"Gallimimus\" stampede being hunted by the \"Tyrannosaurus.\"\nUnable to decipher Nedry's code to reactivate the security system, Hammond and chief engineer Ray Arnold decide to reboot the park's systems manually. The team shuts down the park's power grid and retreats to an emergency bunker, while Arnold heads to a maintenance shed to complete the reboot. When Arnold fails to return, Sattler and Muldoon go to check on him, only to discover that the shutdown has released the Velociraptors. Muldoon distracts two of the predators while Sattler restores power, but she is attacked by a third raptor and finds Arnold's severed arm. Sattler narrowly escapes, while Muldoon is caught off guard and killed by a Velociraptor.\nGrant, Tim, and Lex reach the visitor center. Grant heads out to look for Sattler, leaving Tim and Lex inside. The raptors appear and pursue Tim and Lex throughout a kitchen, but they escape, locking one in a freezer before joining Grant and Sattler. The group reaches the control room, and Lex restores the park's systems, allowing them to contact Hammond, who calls for help. As they try to leave, they are cornered by the two remaining raptors, but the \"Tyrannosaurus\" appears and kills the raptors while the group flees. Hammond arrives in a jeep with Malcolm, and they board a helicopter to leave the island. Grant and Hammond agree not to endorse the park.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Sam Neill as Alan Grant: A paleontologist \nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nMichael Crichton's 1990 novel \"Jurassic Park\" was originally conceived as a screenplay in the 1980s, and went through numerous changes before being published as a book. In the late 1970s, a bidding war began for the film rights to Crichton's then-upcoming novel \"Congo\", which would not be made into a film until 1995. With \"Jurassic Park\", Crichton hoped to avoid another bidding war and the same protracted outcome by offering the film rights at a fixed price of $1.5 million, as he was primarily concerned with ensuring that a film actually be produced; he was less interested in receiving a top offer.\nCrichton submitted the \"Jurassic Park\" manuscript to his publisher in May 1990. Director Steven Spielberg learned of the novel that month while he was discussing a screenplay with Crichton that would become the television series \"ER\". Spielberg, who had a life-long fascination with dinosaurs and had long admired the work of Ray Harryhausen, expressed interest in \"Jurassic Park\". After reading the galleys, he committed to direct the film adaptation. He liked the novel's sense of adventure and its scientific explanation for dinosaur resurrection, saying it provided \"a really credible look at how dinosaurs might someday be brought back alongside modern mankind\".\nCrichton was represented by an agent at Creative Artists Agency. Spielberg recalled that \"the agency got ahold of it; and they, of course, encouraged a bidding war, even though Michael had kind of promised me the book privately.\" Major studios bid for the film rights, each with a director in mind. This included Warner Bros. and Tim Burton, Columbia Pictures and Richard Donner, and 20th Century Fox and Joe Dante. Crichton spoke with each director and endorsed Spielberg as the most likely candidate to get the film made, noting it would be \"a very difficult picture\" and calling Spielberg \"arguably the most experienced and most successful director of these kinds of movies\". Universal Pictures, also backing Spielberg as director, acquired the rights in May 1990, less than a week after they were offered for sale and six months before the novel's publication.\nJames Cameron revealed in 2012 that he had tried to purchase the rights, only to discover that Spielberg had acquired them a few hours prior. Cameron said his version of \"Jurassic Park\" would have been \"much nastier\", comparing it with his 1986 film \"Aliens\". He realized he was not the right director for \"Jurassic Park\" after seeing the finished product, commending Spielberg for making a film which could be enjoyed by children. Dante also praised it, but disagreed with Spielberg's decision to make Hammond more of a protagonist, a departure from the novel.\nStoryboards and sketches were already being produced weeks after the rights were acquired. In order to ensure the scenes would work in 3D space, the storyboards were later expanded by Amblin employee Stephan Dechant into simple animatics made with an Amiga 2000 and the Video Toaster. Because of the island setting and abundance of dinosaurs, Spielberg believed it would be advantageous to hire a production designer as soon as possible, choosing Rick Carter about two years before the start of filming. They both read the galleys and held many meetings to discuss which scenes would work best in the film adaptation. Spielberg, who, as a child, had been fascinated with dinosaurs and imagined what it would be like to meet one, felt that it was important to channel that childlike sense of wonder for the film. Spielberg said that with \"Jurassic Park\", he \"was really just trying to make a good sequel to \"Jaws\", on land.\" He was also heavily inspired by the 1933 film \"King Kong\", calling it the \"high-water mark\" for special effects and for imagining \"what it would be like to do a \"King Kong\" of today.\" He cited the 1962 film \"Hatari!\" as another inspiration, calling it \"the high-water mark of man versus the natural in a feature film.\" Spielberg described the 1956 film \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\" as the most masterful dinosaur film of his youth, stating that it made him and viewers believe it was really happening. Although he did not set out to make a dinosaur film better than any others, he did want \"Jurassic Park\" to be \"the most realistic of them all.\"\nIt eventually became clear to Spielberg that \"Jurassic Park\" would require more time in development, in order to determine the effects needed to create the dinosaurs. He shifted focus to his 1991 film \"Hook\", while continuing to monitor progress on \"Jurassic Park\", including script revisions. The art department went on an eight-month hiatus from \"Jurassic Park\" to work on the 1992 film \"Death Becomes Her\", another Universal film. After completing \"Hook\", Spielberg wanted \"Schindler's List\" to be his next film. Sid Sheinberg, president of Music Corporation of America (Universal's parent company at the time) gave the greenlight to \"Schindler's List\" on the condition that Spielberg make \"Jurassic Park\" first. Set designs began to be finalized in January 1992; a hotel was among locations at the fictional park that would be cut from the film. The film's budget is disputed; some sources place it at $63 million, while others, including Spielberg, have stated that the budget was $56 million.\nKathleen Kennedy, who co-founded Amblin Entertainment with Spielberg, would serve as a producer on \"Jurassic Park\" alongside Gerald Molen, who had worked with Amblin in the past. Kennedy handled the creative aspects of the project, while Molen managed production-related elements. Dean Cundey, the cinematographer for \"Hook\", would rejoin Spielberg for \"Jurassic Park\", signing on to the project relatively late in pre-production. However, he had followed the film's progress through an association with Carter; both had worked on \"Death Becomes Her\". Cundey described his cinematography as \"a realistic, crisp, color-saturated look,\" aligning with Spielberg's vision for the film. He described the look of the film as \"heightened reality\", with unrealistically dramatic lighting and imagery, but without diffusion or camera filters. He explained that one of his largest challenges working on the film was balancing the necessity of the effects crew of placing dinosaurs primarily in shadow, Spielberg's penchant for dramatic imagery, and the audience's expectation of realism. Michael Kahn, Spielberg's longtime film editor, would also return for \"Jurassic Park\".\nWriting.\nCrichton had mixed feelings about being offered a further $500,000 to write the film adaptation: \"I was \"so\" tired of the whole area that I didn't really want to do the screenplay. I was sick of Malcolm and I was sick of Grant\u2013and I was even sick of the dinosaurs. But I really felt that I knew the dimensions of the story.\" Crichton recognized that, by writing the screenplay himself, the project could avoid the same issues he experienced while developing the novel.\nBefore writing the film, he met several times with Spielberg to discuss which aspects of the book he liked and disliked. Crichton completed his first draft later in 1990, but said \"nobody was happy with it at all\"; the draft skipped ahead to action rather than building up to it, as in the novel. At Spielberg's suggestion, Crichton rewrote the script in 40-page increments, with the first batch being better received. Crichton was aided by existing storyboards and sketches as he continued to rework the script, with the remaining 80 pages completed in early 1991.\nNew writers.\nCrichton had agreed only to write a preliminary version of the film: \"I told Steven, 'I'll do a draft for you and cut it down to budgetable size; but then you're going to want somebody else to polish the characters.' I think that sort of surprised him, because writers never say, 'Get somebody else.'\" Crichton finished his draft as Spielberg was filming \"Hook\", the latter co-written by Malia Scotch Marmo and produced by Kennedy. While on the set of \"Hook\", Scotch Marmo was reading the \"Jurassic Park\" novel and learned from Kennedy about the film adaptation, accepting an offer to work on its screenplay. Scotch Marmo began writing \"Jurassic Park\" in October 1991. She chose to start from scratch, with the novel as her basis, although she did read Crichton's screenplay and consulted with him. Spielberg also agreed to provide her with his own copy of the novel, which contained highlighted aspects of the book that he enjoyed. In addition, she looked at the numerous storyboards produced up to that point.\nScotch Marmo focused on building up the characters \"to give them more life and more purpose\" than in Crichton's novel and screenplay. She removed Malcolm from the story and tried to incorporate his characteristics into Grant, whom she found to be underdeveloped. She also sought to emphasize the major themes of the novel, specifically the \"fatal flaw of trying to control nature,\" for instance by showing jungle vegetation creeping into the park's unfinished visitor center: \"The idea was that nature was always in the way, always pushing hard against the intrusion.\" In the novel, Hammond is killed by a group of \"Procompsognathus\". Crichton's draft had also included a death scene, with Hammond killed by a \"Velociraptor\" at the visitor center. In Scotch Marmo's draft, Hammond would choose to stay behind on Isla Nublar, and the other characters would escape after surviving a \"T. rex\" attack on their helicopter. Hammond would then fall down a hill and drown in a puddle, with the film's final shot being a mosquito landing on his arm.\nScotch Marmo spent five months writing her draft and worked closely with Spielberg, noting that their collaboration was unlike most films in which writers \"get an assignment, go home, write it and turn it in.\" She would send him 15 pages at a time, and then would rework them to his liking, sending the revised pages back along with the next 15. She completed her draft in March 1992; Spielberg read it twice and was dissatisfied. She recalled later, \"As a writer, that's a terrible feeling. The natural urge is to say: 'Give me another week. I can work it out. I know I can.' But the truth is, sometimes you do hit and sometimes you miss. It's just a shame that it takes so long to find out.\"\nSpielberg immediately began searching for a new writer, and Universal president Casey Silver recommended David Koepp, who co-wrote \"Death Becomes Her\". Koepp had not read the novel, but quickly obtained a copy, and later discussed the book with Spielberg. Koepp disliked doing rewrites because \"it's very hard to get into the mind of somebody else and try to follow what they were doing.\" Spielberg told Koepp he could start from scratch, allowing his own ideas to fully develop. He read through the novel four times before he began writing the screenplay, and chose not to read the earlier drafts until he finished his own. Two sequences from the novel were mandated: the \"T. rex\" attack on a tour vehicle, and the raptors in the kitchen. Otherwise, Koepp was generally allowed to make his own creative choices. Spielberg instructed Koepp to be unconcerned with what technology allowed, so Koepp wrote sequences without knowing if they would be possible to film.\nKoepp found it difficult to condense the novel's scientific exposition, especially the dialogue that explains how the dinosaurs were created. Spielberg devised an idea to easily convey the cloning process through a short, animated film shown to the park visitors, inspired by the 1957 educational television special \"Hemo the Magnificent\". Koepp named the film's cartoon narrator \"Mr. DNA\", after Spielberg jokingly referred to the character as such. Like Scotch Marmo, Koepp also sought to flesh out the characters of the novel while merging Malcolm's traits into Grant; he found Malcolm too difficult to write due to the character's dialogue being heavy on math and chaos theory.\nAfter Koepp finished his first draft, Spielberg sent it to Scotch Marmo for her opinion, and she replied with 12 pages of input; these were forwarded to Koepp, who found them helpful. He continued to work closely with Spielberg and with additional feedback from Scotch Marmo. Malcolm was written in at Spielberg's insistence, after Jeff Goldblum auditioned for the film and was deemed perfect for the role. Koepp tried to make the characters interesting, with moments such as Malcolm flirting with Sattler, leading to Grant's jealousy. He also tried to avoid excessive character detail because \"whenever they started talking about their personal lives, you couldn't care less.\" Koepp described one scene, in which Sattler and Hammond discuss the park while eating ice cream, as the hardest in the film to write; the scene was rewritten 27 times. Koepp, drawing inspiration from Spielberg's earlier film \"Jaws\", kept the \"T. rex\" offscreen prior to its breakout scene, instead implying the violence it caused, in order to increase tension. Spielberg suggested modifying that scene so that the \"T. rex\" pursues the characters in a Jeep; originally, it only depicted them driving away after hearing the dinosaur's footsteps.\nRewrites continued until just before the start of filming. Crichton noted that the final draft differed drastically from his earlier script, but praised the changes and said the new screenplay \"seems very compatible with my way of thinking\u2014it fits in my mind.\" Scotch Marmo did not receive credit for her work.\nChanges from the novel.\nCrichton said that because the novel was \"fairly long,\" at nearly 400 pages, the film adaptation would only have about 10-20% of its content; scenes were dropped for budgetary and practical reasons, and the violence was toned down. Spielberg said, \"What I wanted to do was boil the book down and choose my seven or eight favorite scenes and base the script around those.\" In a departure from the novel, Spielberg sought to reduce the number of dinosaurs, believing it would not be \"physically possible\" to make the film otherwise. Koepp said the novel was written \"more or less like a movie,\" making it one of the easier book-to-film adaptations he had worked on. He commented that, like with any adaptation, the most difficult part of his writing assignment was to determine the overall structure of the story. The film was also considerably less graphically violent than the novel. Crichton explained that he had made the novel graphic to force readers to take the dinosaurs seriously, which the film was able to naturally accomplish through the appearance of the dinosaurs, rendering the novel's gore unnecessary. He additionally attributed the film's reduced violence to his view that onscreen graphic violence breaks the audience's suspension of disbelief. Crichton was accepting of changes to his novel, stating that because novels and films were different mediums, changes to the novel sometimes improved the film, and that his goal was not accuracy to the source material, but rather creating the best film possible.\nSpielberg removed an early scene in the novel, in which a pack of \"Procompsognathus\" kill a baby, as he found it too horrific. Another scene set in a pterosaur aviary was also removed, as it did not move the plot along. A major sequence, present in the novel and the two earlier screenplays, involved the \"T. rex\" chasing Grant and Hammond's grandchildren in a raft down a river. Koepp chose not to include this in his script: \"I never wanted the raft sequence. It seemed to me that at certain points in the book we were being taken on sort of an obligatory tour past every dinosaur the park had to offer.\" He said the omission was an easy choice, calling the sequence redundant and noting that it would have been \"monstrously expensive\" to shoot. Computer-generated imagery would be used to create some of the film's dinosaurs, and the technology's limitations at that time were another factor in removing the raft sequence. Koepp said that \"making a \"T. rex\", period, was going to be this enormous challenge. In the early '90s, water was still a big challenge for CG, and so the idea of making a \"T. rex\" and then having it swim was a bridge too far.\" Scenes from the novel that were cut from the film adaptation would gradually be included in sequels, with the raft sequence being featured in the 2025 film \"Jurassic World Rebirth\".\nSeveral characters were modified for the film. Hammond was originally a ruthless and greedy businessman in the novel, he was rewritten to be sympathetic, as Spielberg related to the character's obsession with showmanship. The ages of Tim and Lex were switched; Spielberg did this because he wanted to work with the younger Joseph Mazzello, and it allowed him to introduce the subplot of Lex's adolescent crush on Grant. For the film, Lex would also take on Tim's interest in computers. In another change, Grant and Sattler are made a couple for the film, adding subtle romance. Koepp changed Grant's relationship with the children, making him initially hostile to them to allow for more character development. This is partly reflected through his relationship with Sattler, who wants them to have children of their own. Removed from the film was Ed Regis, the park's public relations chief, whose cowardly traits were merged into Donald Gennaro. Several other characters were reduced to one scene each, including Henry Wu, Dr. Harding, and Dodgson. The name of InGen's corporate rival and Dodgson's employer, Biosyn, is also omitted and was eventually featured in the 2022 film \"Jurassic World Dominion\".\nCasting.\nBecause much of the film's budget was going toward its dinosaur effects, Spielberg sought to cast relatively unknown actors, saying: \"Basically, I wanted good, solid actors who weren't going to charge outrageous prices. I didn't want to spend three to five million dollars apiece on actors\". Kurt Russell and Richard Dreyfuss were considered for the role of Alan Grant, but were deemed too expensive. William Hurt, Harrison Ford, and Tim Robbins turned down the role, which eventually went to Sam Neill. Laura Dern was cast as Ellie Sattler, after Robin Wright and Juliette Binoche turned down offers to play the character. Embeth Davidtz, Gwyneth Paltrow, and Helen Hunt had also auditioned for the role. Despite a 20-year age difference between Neill and Dern, they found their onscreen romance appropriate for the time. Upon reuniting for \"Jurassic World Dominion\", Dern said she was surprised to realize how much of an age gap there is between them.\nCasting director Janet Hirshenson felt that Jeff Goldblum was right to play Ian Malcolm after reading the novel, although Jim Carrey also auditioned for the role. According to Hirshenson, Carrey \"was terrific, too, but I think pretty quickly we all loved the idea of Jeff\". Richard Attenborough was cast as John Hammond, but was initially hesitant to join the project, which marked his first acting role in 14 years. He eventually signed on at the insistence of Spielberg, who told him, \"I can't see anyone else playing it but you\". Sean Connery, who Crichton had previously worked with on \"The First Great Train Robbery\", was also a top choice for Hammond, but Connery's fee was too high. Neill, Dern, Goldblum, and Attenborough were cast late in pre-production, with only a few weeks to prepare for their roles. According to Neill, the process \"all happened real quick. I hadn't read the book, knew nothing about it, hadn't heard anything about it, and in a matter of weeks I'm working with Spielberg\". The start of filming was delayed a month to accommodate Neill's schedule.\nAriana Richards, who plays Lex Murphy, said: \"I was called into a casting office, and they just wanted me to scream. I heard later on that Steven had watched a few girls on tape that day, and I was the only one who ended up waking his sleeping wife off the couch, and she came running through the hallway to see if the kids were all right\". Christina Ricci also auditioned to play Lex. Joseph Mazzello had screen-tested for a role in \"Hook\", but was deemed too young. Spielberg promised him they would work together on a future film, subsequently casting him for the role of Tim.\nHirshenson, who previously cast Whoopi Goldberg in the 1990 film \"Ghost\", had Samuel L. Jackson audition as Ray Arnold after Goldberg noted his performance in the 1991 film \"Jungle Fever\". Spielberg and Hirshenson were instantly impressed with Jackson and gave him the role. Spielberg chose Wayne Knight to play Dennis Nedry after seeing him in the 1992 film \"Basic Instinct\". BD Wong was cast as Dr. Henry Wu, both of Asian descent. He was disappointed by how small the role turned out to be compared with the novel, believing the character's reduced screentime to be the result of racism. Cameron Thor had worked with Spielberg on \"Hook\", and initially auditioned to play Malcolm, before being cast as Dodgson. Molen took on the small role of Dr. Harding. In the novel, Richard Kiley provides the voice of the guide for the park's tour vehicles. For the film, Kiley was cast in the same role.\nDesign.\nProduction designer Rick Carter did not want the fictional theme park to have \"a lot of commercialized edifices that feel shallow and overly bright and overly energetic. Even though that is something that the park would probably evolve into if it were finished, I thought as a film it would feel shallow. This is, after all, not Disneyland.\" Carter designed the theme park to incorporate building designs characteristic of the film's setting of Costa Rica. The exterior design of the park's visitor center was loosely based on a Jerusalem temple. The interior design featured a dinosaur theme, including skeletons and a mural, the latter by artist Doug Henderson. For the control room, set designer Lauren Cory referred to computer environments at several theme parks as well as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The set included a wall-mounted screen and numerous computers, lent by Apple, Silicon Graphics, UMAX Technologies, and Thinking Machines Corporation. \"Jurassic Park\" was the first film to have computer screens running on-camera in real time. In previous films, CRT monitors failed to display correctly on film due to technical issues, resulting in computer screens needing to be inserted in post-production. The film crew solved this issue by dropping the refresh rate in the screens displayed in the film to 48 hertz.\nThe park's vehicles were designed by art director John Bell. The novel has electric-powered Toyota Land Cruisers as the tour vehicles, but Spielberg made a deal with the Ford Motor Company, which provided seven Ford Explorers. They received a custom paint job and a plexiglass roof. Like in the novel, the vehicles are presented as autonomous cars. They travel on a track that, in reality, was non-functional. Industrial Light &amp; Magic, along with veteran customizer George Barris, modified the Explorers to be controlled by drivers hidden in the trunk of the vehicles, with front-mounted cameras allowing them to see the road. Barris also customized the Jeep Wranglers used by the park's workers. For the sequence in which the Explorers are attacked by the \"T. rex\", special effects supervisor Michael Lantieri used a complicated system of cables, winches, and rams to rig the vehicles to essentially crush themselves.\nIn the film, Dodgson gives Nedry a container, disguised as a can of shaving cream, which is used to transport the stolen dinosaur embryos. According to Bell, the script did not specify a brand of shaving cream, so he browsed at a drug store and eventually chose Barbasol for its distinctive design. In addition, Bell designed prop night vision goggles used by Tim prior to the \"T. rex\" breakout, which were in reality nonfunctional.\nThe decision was made to forgo a costume designer. Instead, Molen brought on the costume supervisors from \"Hook\", who selected ready-to-wear clothing for the cast from various retailers. Malcolm's all-black outfit was an aspect lifted from the novel, and Goldblum added to it by wearing a black leather jacket. Hammond's all-white outfit was meant to evoke him as a sort of religious figure or deity. Their outfits are meant to form a dichotomy, with Malcolm and his dark clothing symbolizing Crichton's cynicism and Hammond and his white clothing symbolizing Spielberg's optimism.\nFilming.\nHawaii.\nThe film's fictional setting of Isla Nublar is located near Costa Rica, which was briefly considered as a filming location early on; this idea was scrapped as production would have occurred during the country's rainy season. Puerto Rico was seriously considered as well, until Spielberg settled on Kaua\u02bbi, Hawaii. He attributed this decision to his age: \"Had I been twenty-six instead of forty-five, I might have gone to Yucatan or the Philippines or Costa Rica\u2013someplace really rugged.\" He also liked the idea of \"staying in a nice Hawaiian hotel with room service and a pool\", while stating that the tropical landscapes were as good as, or better than, the alternative sites. In addition, Spielberg was familiar with Hawaii, having filmed there in the past, and was concerned about infrastructure and accessibility at the other locations. Set construction began in early June 1992, nearly three months before the start of filming. Some of the locations were remote and only accessible with off-road vehicles.\nAfter 25 months of pre-production, filming began on August 24, 1992, at Olokele Canyon. Richards and Mazzello attended school during filming, and Spielberg would sometimes pull Mazzello, who had expressed interest in directing, out of classes to give him lessons about the profession. The three-week Kaua\u02bbi shoot was focused on exterior scenes, many of them set on Isla Nublar during daytime. Spontaneous cloud coverage occurred frequently, necessitating the use of lighting and film exposure tricks in order to match with previously shot footage. Scenes of the park's visitors arriving and departing Isla Nublar, via helicopter, were filmed at M\u0101n\u0101waiopuna Falls, which became commonly known as Jurassic Falls after the film's release. Ke\u014dpuka Rock, alternatively known as Jurassic Rock, was used for an early shot of the helicopter as it approaches Isla Nublar. The rock is located near the island of Maui, but filming otherwise continued on Kaua\u02bbi.\nThe exterior of the Jurassic Park visitor center was built on the grounds of the Valley House Plantation Estate. It was constructed as a -high facade, nearly in length. A Jurassic Park gate, marking the start of the theme park tour, was built at the base of Mount Wai\u02bbale\u02bbale.\nAn early scene, set at an amber mine in the Dominican Republic, was filmed near Ho\u02bbopi\u02bbi Falls. A meeting between Nedry and Dodgson was shot in Kapa\u02bba, standing in for San Jos\u00e9, Costa Rica. The raptor enclosure set was built at Limahuli Garden and Preserve, operated by the National Tropical Botanical Garden (NTBG). Allerton Garden, another NTBG property, was used in two instances: a set depicting the maintenance shed exterior, and a scene in which Grant discovers a dinosaur nest and realizes the animals are breeding.\nTowering fences, standing , were among the on-site construction work, representing the electrified perimeters of the \"T. rex\" enclosure during daytime scenes. Despite the simple design of the fencing, the project proved to be one of the most difficult for the production crew, as one of the filming sites was the remote Olokele Canyon. Lantieri said the crew \"had to haul all of this steel up there, drill holes like you would for telephone poles, pour concrete, and then pull all of the cables, which were three-quarter-inch aluminum with steel in the middle.\"\nThe longest stretch of fence measured over , and more than of cable were used in total. Spielberg wanted to avoid sagging in the cables, so the crew hired workers from a local company that was experienced with power lines. Lantieri called the project \"an enormous job\u2014and for very little payoff. People will look at the movie and say, 'Oh, there's a fence,' never realizing what it took to get it there.\" The canyon location was used for a scene in which Grant and the children, on their way to the visitor center, must climb over the fence to proceed.\nOn September 11, 1992, the last scheduled day of the Kaua\u02bbi shoot, Hurricane Iniki passed directly over the island. The cast and crew found out too late about the impending hurricane and took shelter at their hotel. Spielberg and a small crew ventured outside during the hurricane to capture brief footage, used in the film to depict the storm that hits Isla Nublar. A scene depicting a \"Gallimimus\" herd was to be shot on Kaua\u02bbi, but the island was ravaged by the hurricane. The scene was instead filmed two weeks later at Kualoa Ranch, located on the island of O\u02bbahu. With its high cliffs, the ranch was considered more attractive than the empty plain that was originally planned for the scene. The hurricane also prevented an onscreen death for Ray Arnold, who was supposed to be chased down and killed by a \"Velociraptor\"; in the final film, he dies offscreen. Despite the hurricane, the Hawaiian shoot came in essentially on budget and on schedule.\nCalifornia.\nBy September 15, 1992, the cast and crew had moved to California, where the remainder of filming was scheduled to take place, primarily on sound stages. The majority of stage shooting occurred at the Universal Studios Lot in the Los Angeles area. Among the first sets to be used there was an industrial-sized kitchen, which was built on Stage 24, for when the raptors stalk Lex and Tim. The sequence was filmed over two weeks. Because the kitchen was filled with reflective surfaces, Cundey had to carefully plan the illumination while also using black cloths to hide the light reflections.\nFilming moved to Stage 23 for scenes involving the maintenance shed interior, before moving to Red Rock Canyon, which stood in as Grant's paleontological dig site. The filmmakers originally planned to shoot in Montana, where the scene is set, but this was scrapped to save time and money. Jack Horner, the film's paleontological advisor, was consulted to ensure an accurate representation of a dig site, although other paleontologists have found the scene to be overly simplified and unrealistic.\nFilming continued to progress ahead of schedule, with Spielberg crediting the project's extensive use of storyboards; every action sequence in the film had been storyboarded almost two years prior to the start of filming, and Spielberg tightly followed the storyboards when shooting the sequences. Back at Universal, Stage 27 was decorated with real and synthetic jungle vegetation for various scenes. The stage was used initially to depict Grant helping Tim out of a tour vehicle, after it has been shoved over a cliff by the \"T. rex\" and into a tree. Upon retrieving Tim, the vehicle begins to drop through the tree foliage, forcing the humans to quickly descend before being crushed. This was one of the most challenging scenes to shoot and required the creation of a artificial tree, made of steel, with the vehicle dropped down the tree multiple times to acquire the needed footage. Spielberg wanted the tree to appear three times taller than it actually was, so three sides were each decorated to represent a different portion of the vehicle drop. The same steel structure was then redressed to serve as a different tree, for a scene in which Grant and the children take refuge and encounter a \"Brachiosaurus\". Stage 28 was used for scenes taking place in the park's control room and laboratory. Over the course of a day, Wong shot his scene on the latter set.\nUniversal lacked a stage large enough to accommodate the \"T. rex\" breakout set, which was instead filmed on Stage 16 at Warner Bros. Studios, located nearby. Filming began there on October 27, 1992, with the stage decorated to match the Hawaii footage. The sequence is set at night during a storm, and the stage included rain machines and mud, making the shoot wet and messy for the cast and crew. Spielberg anticipated that the sequence could be the most difficult of the film, due to the rain machines and the logistics of using a life-sized \"T. rex\" animatronic. Complications arose when the \"T. rex\" began to shake and quiver from extra weight, as the dinosaur's foam rubber skin had absorbed a significant amount of the rainwater. Crew members had to dry the model with shammies between takes. The animatronic was so heavy that it was effectively impossible to move, so when the \"T. rex\" was supposed to move within the scene, the crew instead shifted the whole set around the animatronic to give the appearance that the \"T. rex\" was in a different place. During the scene where the \"T. rex\" attacks a tour vehicle, the animatronic hit the vehicle's plexiglass roof with more force than intended, and one of its teeth came out; it was so difficult to reinsert that Spielberg decided to continue shooting without it, resulting in the \"T. rex\" having a missing tooth in the final film. The sequence in the novel had included the \"T. rex\" lifting a vehicle in its mouth and then throwing it, which was removed because \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" was not large enough for such a thing to be possible. Instead, Spielberg had the \"T. rex\" headbutt the vehicle, which was inspired by the film \"Hatari!\". Unlike in monster films such as \"Godzilla\", where the camera tends to be higher to show off the monster, the sequence was shot entirely at ground level, as Spielberg wanted the audience to see the \"T. rex\" from the point of view of the characters.\nAn early shot in the sequence focuses on the dashboard of one of the vehicles, with ripples forming in a glass of water, caused by the footsteps of the approaching \"T. rex\". This was inspired by Spielberg listening to Earth, Wind &amp; Fire in his car, and the vibrations the bass rhythm caused. Lantieri was unsure how to create the shot until the night before filming when he put a glass of water on his guitar, which achieved the concentric circles in the water that Spielberg wanted. The next morning, guitar strings were run through the car, and a man on the floor plucked them to achieve the effect. Like Gennaro, Malcolm was originally scripted to flee in fear from the \"T. rex\". This was changed with an on-set suggestion by Goldblum, who felt that heroic action was better. Instead, the scene features Malcolm using a flare to distract the dinosaur, allowing Grant to retrieve the children from the wrecked tour vehicle.\nThe Warner Bros. set included the cliff that the \"T. rex\" shoves the vehicle over. Koepp questioned the set design, which created an apparent plot hole, as the cliff would appear seemingly where the dinosaur had broken out: \"I asked Steven, 'Don't you think people are going to notice that suddenly there's this cliff?' And he looked at me like I was from another planet and pointed at the great big robot of the \"T. rex\" and said, 'There's a \"T. rex\"! They're not gonna notice anything else but that!' And he was right.\" Also filmed at Warner Bros. was the \"T. rex\"'s pursuit of a Jeep. Returning to Universal, the filmmakers shot scenes involving the deaths of Nedry and Muldoon, both on Stage 27; this location and Stage 16 were the only sound stages used for exterior scenes.\nThe film was initially written to end with Grant using a platform machine to maneuver one raptor into the jaws of a fossil tyrannosaur and Hammond shooting the other one, while the \"T. rex\" was set to be killed off earlier in the film. However, the \"T. rex\" sequence at Warner Bros., shot weeks before the end of filming, made Spielberg realize the dinosaur was the main star of \"Jurassic Park\". He felt that audiences would be disappointed if the \"T. rex\" did not make a final appearance, and had the ending changed so the dinosaur faces off against multiple raptors in the visitor center, inadvertently saving the humans. Afterward, the \"T. rex\" makes what Spielberg described as a \"King Kong-esque roar\" while a banner reading \"When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth\" falls. Because the \"T. rex\" animatronic was enormously heavy, and the visitor center set had not been built to accommodate it, the \"T. rex\" in the ending sequence had to be digitally rendered. The visitor center interior was constructed on Stage 12 at Universal. Cundey shot the finale with wide lenses to show off as much of the set as possible, but this also made the placing of on-set lights a \"painstaking\" process. According to assistant director John T. Kretchmer, the final scene to be filmed was a retake of a shot in the scene where Hammond meets Grant and Sattler. Spielberg, who rarely used more than seven takes, retook that shot about sixteen times, explaining to Kretchmer that he loved filming the movie and did not want to stop. \"Jurassic Park\" wrapped under budget and 12 days ahead of schedule on November 30, 1992.\nDinosaurs on screen.\nFor \"Jurassic Park\", Spielberg sought to go beyond a simple monster movie, with Carter stating that they \"tried to find the animal in the dinosaur as opposed to the monster in the dinosaur. The idea was not to make them any less threatening, but rather to keep them from doing as much 'monster schtick.'\" Underscoring this point, Spielberg banned the words \"monster\" and \"creature\" on set, forcing the crew to refer to the dinosaurs as \"animals\" instead. Spielberg hired paleontologist Jack Horner to ensure that the dinosaurs would be designed and portrayed accurately, based on then-current knowledge of the animals. Certain concepts about dinosaurs were followed, like the theory that they evolved into birds and had very little in common with lizards. This prompted the removal of the raptors' flicking tongues in early animatics, as Horner complained it was implausible. \nDespite the film title's referencing the Jurassic period, \"Brachiosaurus\" and \"Dilophosaurus\" are the only dinosaurs featured that lived during that time; the other species in the film did not exist until the Cretaceous. The latter period is mentioned early in the film when Grant describes the ferocity of \"Velociraptor\" to a young boy, saying: \"Try to imagine yourself in the Cretaceous period\".\nEffects.\nThe dinosaurs were created through various methods, including animatronics and computer-generated imagery (CGI). Spielberg sought to use full-scale dinosaurs on-set as much as possible, rather than relying on stop motion, a post-production method commonly used in dinosaur films up to that point. He knew, early on, that stop motion would still be needed for wide shots of the dinosaurs. To help create the dinosaurs, Spielberg consulted and worked closely with Dennis Muren, an effects supervisor at Industrial Light &amp; Magic (ILM), which had already provided effects for several of his films. Spielberg hired Phil Tippett, who had previously created stop-motion dinosaur effects for the short film \"Prehistoric Beast\" and the documentary film \"Dinosaur!\", to create the dinosaur wide shots using go motion, a variation of stop motion, with ILM set to refine his work through compositing and adding motion blur. Tippett was hired very early in production, prior to the publication of Crichton's novel, and gave input to Spielberg and Koepp during the development of the script, providing them with guidance on dinosaur accuracy as well as what was possible to film based upon his effects experience and knowledge of dinosaurs. Also hired early in production was special effects supervisor Michael Lantieri, who was heavily involved with determining how to create full-sized dinosaurs.\nEarly on, Spielberg thought of hiring ride designer Bob Gurr to create the full-scale dinosaurs, having been impressed by his work on a giant mechanical King Kong, made for the King Kong Encounter at Universal Studios Hollywood. Upon reflection, Spielberg felt that Gurr's life-sized robots would be too expensive and unconvincing. The crew also considered Dinamation, as well as Jim Henson's Creature Shop, for the creation of full-size dinosaurs. Spielberg then contacted effects artist Stan Winston, having seen his work on the Alien Queen in the 1986 film \"Aliens\". Winston said the Queen was easy compared to a dinosaur animatronic, because it was lightweight and did not have to look like a real animal. A decade earlier, Winston had declined to work on Spielberg's \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\", which was a decision he regretted. As a result, despite not having any idea if it was possible for his team to build animatronic dinosaurs, Winston agreed to work on the film. This was not an official contract, however, as Universal had not yet greenlit \"Jurassic Park\".\nMark \"Crash\" McCreery, one of Winston's artists, created numerous dinosaur sketches over the course of about a year, focusing particularly on scientific accuracy. These impressed Universal, which eventually hired Winston's team to make the film's on-set dinosaurs. Winston and ILM also worked together on the 1991 film \"\". As with previous films, Winston's workers consisted of two groups: the art department, responsible in this case for the dinosaurs' outer appearance; and the mechanical department, which would handle the technical inner workings. The design for the appearance of the dinosaurs was most strongly influenced by the artwork of paleoartist John Gurche. Every dinosaur in the film was designed by Winston's crew, including the ones that were not filmed with animatronics. Animatronics were created of the \"Brachiosaurus\", \"Dilophosaurus\", \"Triceratops\", \"T. rex\", and \"Velociraptor\", as well as the \"Velociraptor\" hatchling. Winston's crew created fully detailed fifth-scale models of the dinosaurs and cut them into cross-sections, then expanded each cross-section to full size versions made of plywood, fiberglass, Roma clay, and hardware cloth, which were then assembled onto a robotic frame. The animatronics then underwent final sculpting, and latex skin was fitted on. Sound stages were considered the most ideal filming environment for the animatronics, allowing sets to be built on elevated platforms with the mechanics of the dinosaurs concealed underneath. Those mechanics, described as \"dinosaur interfaces,\" were built by Lantieri's team to allow for the creatures to have a broad range of movement, with rigs that would accommodate Winston's puppeteers, pneumatics, and underground cranes and dollies. Lantieri's team quickly discovered that jungle sets were comparatively easy to hide interfaces in, as foliage was able to conceal equipment, while indoor sets had fewer hiding spots. The most difficult set to incorporate dinosaur interfaces into was the kitchen set, as so much of the set was visible in the shots; the problem was eventually solved by hiding rods in the floor and countertops, as well as a building a harness system for the \"Velociraptors\" and a dolly system underneath the floor. As Winston's crew had to be on set during filming in order to operate the animatronics, they were classified as actors and joined the Screen Actors Guild.\nIn addition to wide shots, Tippett was tasked with creating go-motion animatics early on to help develop two major sequences: one depicting the \"T. rex\" breakout, and the other involving the raptors in the kitchen. His team built the dinosaur puppets out of foam rubber and based their design on maquettes made by Winston. Despite go motion's attempts at motion blurs, Spielberg found the end results unsatisfactory for a live-action feature film. He wanted to include a stampede of dinosaur herds, but was unsure how to achieve this. After breaking new ground with the CGI effects in \"Terminator 2\", Muren thought ILM could handle the stampede rather than Tippett: \"Creating herds of animals with puppets would be very difficult, so I thought maybe that was something we might be able to do with computer graphics.\"\nILM animator Steve Williams believed that more could be done with CGI than just the stampede: \"All of us wanted a crack at the \"T-rex\", but we thought we could never get it because Stan was already in there, and so was Phil. But the attraction was strong, so I secretly started building some \"T-rex\" bones in the computer.\" Williams scanned the schematics of a \"T. rex\" skeleton at the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology to create his virtual skeleton and then animated a walk cycle for it. Fellow animator Mark Dipp\u00e9 also believed that CGI could be used for the film on a large scale, pushing Muren for months to consider the possibility. Muren was hesitant to commit to creating additional CGI dinosaurs because he was concerned about ILM's ability to produce the unprecedented effects within the film's production timeline, and because the production had already committed to the use of animatronics and stop motion. Muren, Kennedy and Molen were impressed when Williams unveiled his skeleton animation, and Muren was given approval to explore the use of CGI for the herd shots.\nThe \"T. rex\" animation was examined further. Winston's fifth-scale prototype of the dinosaur was scanned by Cyberware, and the data was refined with various computer programs to fit over the skeleton, creating a digital \"T. rex\". The model was lit by Stefen Fangmeier and animated by Williams using programs such as Sock, with the finished result impressing Spielberg so much that he scrapped the go-motion method, instead tasking ILM with creating digital dinosaurs for full-body shots. Upon seeing the \"T. rex\" animation, Tippett had declared, \"I think I'm extinct.\" Spielberg had this incorporated into the script: Grant, impressed by Jurassic Park's living dinosaurs, says to Sattler, \"We're out of a job,\" to which Malcolm replies, \"Don't you mean extinct?\"\nTippett had assembled a 30-person crew to prepare for the go-motion segments; Spielberg did not wish to lose his expertise, and Muren sought to keep him involved with the project as an advisor to ILM's animators. Muren later noted that \"this is the first generation of computer animators, and they are struggling with hardware and software limitations that make the process excruciatingly painful and slow.\" Although Tippett disliked computers, Muren eventually convinced him to remain involved on \"Jurassic Park\". Tippett and the ILM team spent approximately a month learning each other's respective fields.\nTippett, who was also an amateur paleontologist, acted as a consultant for dinosaur anatomy and movement, and his animatics were used, along with storyboards, as a reference for what would be shot during the action sequences, as a guide for the movements of Winston's animatronics, and to help the actors visualize the dinosaurs that would be in the sequence. ILM's artists were sent on private tours to zoos, marine exhibits, and a local animal park, so they could study large animals \u2013 rhinos, elephants, alligators, and giraffes \u2013 up close. They also took classes in mime, dance, movement, and stop-motion to aid in understanding movements. The design team also watched previous films that featured dinosaurs, including \"King Kong\", \"Fantasia\", and the work of Ray Harryhausen in order to see how dinosaurs had been portrayed in the past and determine what they wanted to improve upon. A \"movement bible\" was developed, which contained information about the dinosaurs' movements and character traits. \nIn an effects test, the \"T. rex\" model displayed an issue with unusually jerky movement, which ILM's animators were unable to fix. To solve this, Tippett Studio artist Craig Hayes, in conjunction with ILM and Pixar's Rick Sayre, created Dinosaur Input Devices, which were armatures with motion encoders that fed information into computers, allowing Tippett Studio artists Randal M. Dutra and Tom St. Amand to animate wire-frame models of the dinosaurs like stop-motion puppets. The encoders logged the movement as key frames through Pixar's RenderMan software, which ILM animators then smoothed and refined to make the movement more realistic. The movement was then applied to a full digital dinosaur model, which was created by laser scanning Winston's fifth-scale models. About a quarter of the CGI shots, predominantly some of the shots in the \"T. rex\" escape sequence and the kitchen sequence, made use of the devices, while the rest were animated directly on the dinosaur model using Softimage 3D. The artists then used a newly developed program called Viewpaint to paint texture maps onto the models, providing color and texture to the dinosaurs. Enveloping, a program ILM built for the purpose of enhancing the dinosaur animation, allowed the animators to realistically simulate the movement of skin over the underlying bones and muscles. The dinosaurs were incorporated into the live-action footage using multiple tools, including placing green tennis balls and glow sticks as reference points for match moving through SoftImage to allow free camera movement, digital rotoscoping using Matador, and compositing, which included inserting digital blur, film grain, camera movement, camera bounce, and various environmental effects, all in order to create the impression that the dinosaurs were recorded in-camera and were not digital effects. Finally, imperfections and filming tools such as cables and winches were painted out using Matador and Photoshop. Rather than using quick shots of dinosaurs, which were customary for effects shots of the time, Muren and Tippett used longer shots to mimic the style of a nature documentary. Determining which dinosaur shots would be rendered through Winston's animatronics and which would be rendered through CGI depended upon multiple factors, including how much movement the dinosaur would perform within the shot, as walking shots required CGI, as well as the extent to which the dinosaur would interact with the environment, because physical interaction was easier with animatronics.\nBecause the film was on the forefront of photorealistic CGI development, numerous challenges arose for the cast and crew as they filmed while attempting to account for dinosaurs that had not yet been rendered. The production staff employed a variety of tools in order to establish line-of-sight references for the actors, including holding up boards in locations where a dinosaur would later be composited on, which would be marked with the letter \"X\", or have dinosaur heads sketched on them. During the \"Gallimimus\" sequence, the ILM animators simply inserted a dinosaur wherever the actors happened to look. In order to provide audio cues and help the actors emote, Spielberg roared into a megaphone, attempting to mimic dinosaur vocalizations. Cundey had difficulty in constructing shots with computer-generated dinosaurs, including framing the camera for creatures that had not yet been composited in, as well as creating the optimal lighting for CGI realism. He credited his prior experience working on \"Who Framed Roger Rabbit\" for helping him solve these problems.\nThe CGI dinosaurs by ILM, based on Winston's designs, took nearly a year to complete. Compositing the animals onto the live action scenes took around an hour. Rendering the dinosaurs often took two to four hours per frame, while the \"T. rex\" in the rain required six hours per frame. \"Jurassic Park\" has 52 CGI shots, with the end fight between the \"T. rex\" and raptors using all-CGI dinosaurs, something that made Spielberg nervous until he saw the finished result. The 127-minute film has 15 minutes of total screen time for the dinosaurs, including nine minutes of animatronics and six minutes of CGI.\nList.\nVarious dinosaurs are featured throughout the film:\nPost-production.\nEditing had already started during filming, and within days of wrapping, Kahn had a rough cut ready, allowing Spielberg to start filming \"Schindler's List\". During this time, Spielberg left Kennedy in charge of the day-to-day post-production responsibilities on \"Jurassic Park\". He was sent effects shots through satellite and encrypted fiber-optic cable, through which he monitored the progress while filming in Poland. Four times a week, he and Kahn, who was also in Poland for \"Schindler's List\", had teleconferences with Kennedy and ILM's crew. Spielberg estimated that 40 percent of the post-production process was done through this long-distance arrangement. He said working simultaneously on two vastly different productions was \"a bipolar experience\", where he used \"every ounce of intuition on \"Schindler's List\" and every ounce of craft on \"Jurassic Park\"\".\nAlong with the digital effects, Spielberg wanted the film to be the first with digital sound. He funded the creation of DTS (Digital Theater Systems) to allow audiences to \"really hear the movie the way it was intended to be heard\". Rather than the audio track being directly contained on the 35mm film, the film's audio was played onto a CD-ROM disc, with a backup analog soundtrack in case of problems. The sound effects crew was supervised by Spielberg's friend and ILM founder George Lucas. Spielberg flew on weekends from Poland to Paris, where he met with sound designer Gary Rydstrom for updates. Rydstrom initially asked scientists what dinosaurs had sounded like, but paleontologists had not yet determined the answer to his question, so he began from scratch. He chose to use only organic sounds for dinosaur vocalizations, and built a library of animal sounds to draw from, all of which were recorded for the film, with no stock sound effects. Rydstrom considered the sound process fun, given the film had all kinds of noise\u2014animal sounds, rain, gunshots, car crashes\u2014and at times no music. The process was finished by the end of April 1993.\nIn addition to the CGI dinosaurs, ILM also created elements such as water splashing and, for the first time ever in a film, digital face replacement. In total, a small team of six animators and 40 artists in the computer graphics department at ILM worked on the film. The technology for the effects dramatically improved through the course of production, as shots that ILM initially believed to be impossible became achievable by the end of production. \"Jurassic Park\" was completed on May 28, 1993, after ILM concluded its CGI work.\nMusic.\nJohn Williams, a frequent composer of Spielberg's films, began scoring \"Jurassic Park\" at the end of February 1993, and it was recorded a month later. Alexander Courage and John Neufeld provided the score's orchestrations. As with the 1977 Spielberg film \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\", Williams felt he needed to write \"pieces that would convey a sense of 'awe' and fascination\", given that the film dealt with the \"overwhelming happiness and excitement\" of seeing live dinosaurs. More suspenseful scenes such as the \"Tyrannosaurus\" attack required frightening themes. Unlike in all of their previous collaborations, Spielberg was unable to sit in on Williams's recording session, as he was busy filming \"Schindler's List\" in Poland, so Williams previewed his scores on a piano for Spielberg to listen to before he left. The first soundtrack album was released on May 25, 1993. For the 20th anniversary of the film's release, a new soundtrack was issued for digital download on April 9, 2013, including four bonus tracks selected by Williams.\nMarketing.\nUniversal took the lengthy pre-production period to carefully plan the \"Jurassic Park\" marketing campaign. It cost $65\u00a0million and included deals with 100 companies to market 1,000 products. These included several \"Jurassic Park\" video games, a toy line by Kenner distributed by Hasbro, McDonald's \"Dino-Sized meals\", and a novelization for young children. Universal spent about $20\u00a0million on television advertising, while an estimated $65\u00a0million was spent on television advertising for \"Jurassic Park\" tie-in products.\nMuch care was put into creating a logo that would serve to equally represent the fictional park and promote the movie and its tie-in products. Universal creative director Tom Martin teamed up with the design firm of Mike Salisbury, and out of 100 designs came one created by Sandy Collora, one of Winston's employees. The design took the \"T. rex\" skeleton drawn by Chip Kidd for the book's cover, put it into a circle, and added a rectangle with the title to create a badge-like structure. A jungle silhouette was added underneath for scale, and a Neuland typeface was used on the title. John Alvin was hired to design the film's poster; he went through many revisions, with the final design simply using the film's \"T. rex\" logo.\nNeill recalled that the film was essentially marketed by Universal with the idea that the studio \"could make huge blockbusters without 'movie stars\", stating, \"This was true enough, but I think it slightly irked us, the actors, to be reminded from time to time we were not real 'stars.'\" Universal would instead tease the film's dinosaurs as the primary attraction. A teaser trailer was released in December 1992, in which a mine worker discovers a piece of amber that would be used by the theme park. A full trailer debuted shortly thereafter, providing only a fleeting glimpse of the dinosaurs, a tactic described by journalist Josh Horowitz, in 2007, as \"that old Spielberg axiom of never revealing too much\". Due to a ruling by the British Board of Film Classification, the film's marketing in the United Kingdom was required to include a warning about disturbing content. This was only the second film to have such a content warning, after Spielberg's \"Jaws.\" The film was marketed with the tagline \"An Adventure 65 Million Years in the Making\". This was a joke Spielberg made on set about the genuine, thousands of years old mosquito in amber used for Hammond's walking stick. \"Jurassic Park\" was heavily marketed against its primary competitor, \"Last Action Hero\", which ultimately struggled at the box office and with critics.\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\n\"Jurassic Park\" premiered at the Uptown Theater in Washington, D.C. on June 9, 1993, in support of two children's charities. The film had previews on 1,412 screens starting at 9:30\u00a0pm EDT on Thursday, June 10, and officially opened on Friday in 2,404 theater locations and an estimated 3,400 screens. Following the film's release, a traveling exhibition called \"The Dinosaurs of Jurassic Park\" began, showcasing dinosaur skeletons and film props. The film began its international release on June 25, in Brazil before further openings in South America and then rolling out around most of the rest of the world from July 16 until October. The United Kingdom premiere helped save the Lyric Theatre in Carmarthen, Wales from closure, an event chronicled in the 2022 film \"Save the Cinema\".\nRe-releases.\nIn anticipation of the film's Blu-ray release, \"Jurassic Park\" had a digital print released in UK cinemas on September 23, 2011.\nTwo years later, for the 20th anniversary of \"Jurassic Park,\" a 3D version of the film was released in cinemas. Spielberg declared that he had produced the film with a sort of \"subconscious 3D\", as scenes feature animals walking toward the cameras and some effects of foreground and background overlay. In 2011, he stated that \"Jurassic Park\" was the only one of his works he had considered for a conversion. Once he saw the 3D version of the 1997 film \"Titanic\" in 2012, he liked the new look of the film so much that he hired the same retrofitting company, Stereo D. Stereo D executive Aaron Parry said the conversion was an evolution of what the company had done with \"Titanic\", \"being able to capitalize on everything we learned with Jim [James Cameron] on \"Titanic\" and take it into a different genre and movie, and one with so many technical achievements\". The studio had the help of ILM, which contributed some elements and updated effects shots for a better visual enhancement. It opened in the United States and seven other territories on April 5, 2013, with other countries receiving the re-release over the following six months. In 2018, the film was re-released in select theaters to celebrate its 25th anniversary. On August 25, 2023, the 3D version of the film was re-released in theaters to celebrate its 30th anniversary.\nHome media.\n\"Jurassic Park\" was first officially released on VHS by CIC Video on October 3, 1994, in the United Kingdom and Ireland, where it had an exclusive seven-week rental window before going on sale on November 21. In the rest of the world, it was officially released on VHS and LaserDisc on October 4, 1994 (by MCA/Universal Home Video in the United States). Despite the official release date, most US retailers decided not to wait that long and were selling it by 1 October. The film's home video release was accompanied by a $65\u00a0million advertising campaign. With 24 million units sold, \"Jurassic Park\" is the fourth-best-selling VHS tape ever. A THX certified Widescreen VHS was released on September 9, 1997.\nThe film was also first released as a Collector's Edition DVD and VHS on October 10, 2000, in both Widescreen (1.85:1) and Full Screen (1.33:1) versions, and as part of a box set with the sequel \"\" and both movies' soundtrack albums. It was the 13th-best-selling DVD of 2000 counting both versions, finishing the year with 910,000 units sold. Following the release of \"Jurassic Park III\", a new box set with all the films called \"Jurassic Park Trilogy\" was released on December 11, 2001. It was repackaged as \"Jurassic Park Adventure Pack\" on November 29, 2005.\nThe trilogy was released on Blu-ray on October 25, 2011, debuting at number five on the Blu-ray charts, and was nominated as the best release of the year by both the Las Vegas Film Critics Society and the Saturn Awards. In 2012, \"Jurassic Park\" was among twenty-five films chosen by Universal for a box set celebrating the studio's 100th anniversary, while also receiving a standalone 100th anniversary Blu-ray featuring an augmented reality cover. The following year, the 20th anniversary 3D conversion was issued on Blu-ray 3D.\nThe film, alongside \"The Lost World\", \"Jurassic Park III\" and \"Jurassic World\", was released as part of a 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on May 22, 2018, in honor of the original film's 25th anniversary.\nTelevision premiere.\n\"Jurassic Park\" was broadcast on television for the first time on NBC on May 7, 1995, following the April 26 airing of \"The Making of Jurassic Park\". Some 68.12\u00a0million people tuned in, garnering NBC a 36 percent share of all available viewers that night. \"Jurassic Park\" was the highest-rated theatrical film broadcast on television by any network compared to theatrical film ratings since April 1987. In June\u2013July 1995, the film aired a number of times on the Turner Network Television (TNT) network.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Jurassic Park\" became the highest-grossing film released worldwide up to that time, surpassing Spielberg's own 1982 film \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\". It grossed $3.1\u00a0million from Thursday night screenings in the United States and Canada on June 10, and $50.1\u00a0million in its first weekend from 2,404 theaters, breaking the opening weekend record set by \"Batman Returns\" the year before. \"Jurassic Park\" held that record until 1995 when \"Batman Forever\" took it. It grossed a record $81.7\u00a0million by the end of its first week, and reached $100 million in a record nine days, and remained at number one for three weeks. It eventually grossed $357\u00a0million in the US and Canada, ranking second of all-time behind \"E.T.\" Box Office Mojo estimates the film sold over 86.2\u00a0million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.\n\"Jurassic Park\" also did very well in international markets and was the first film to gross $500\u00a0million overseas, surpassing the record $280\u00a0million overseas gross of \"E.T.\" In Brazil, it also set an opening weekend record with a gross of $1,738,198 from 141 screens. It went on to break further opening records around the world including in the United Kingdom, Japan, India, South Korea, Mexico, Germany, Australia, Taiwan, Italy, Denmark, South Africa and France. In Japan, the film grossed $8.4\u00a0million from 237 screens in two days (including previews).\nIn the United Kingdom, \"Jurassic Park\" also beat the opening weekend record set by \"Batman Returns\" with a gross of \u00a34.875\u00a0million ($7.4\u00a0million) from 434 screens, including a record \u00a3443,000 from Thursday night previews, and also beat \"\"'s opening week record, with \u00a39.2\u00a0million. The film held the UK record until it was beaten by \"Independence Day\" in 1996. After 12 days of grossing over \u00a31 million a day, \"Jurassic Park\" was the eighth highest-grossing film of all time in the UK. After just three weeks, it became the highest-grossing, surpassing \"Ghost\" and eventually doubling the record with a gross of \u00a347.9\u00a0million. It spent a record eight consecutive weekends at the top of the UK box office. \"Jurassic Park\" would remain as Europe's box office leader before being surpassed by \"Aladdin\".\nIn Australia, the film had the widest release ever and was the first to open with a one-day gross of more than A$1\u00a0million, grossing A$5,447,000 (US$3.6\u00a0million) in its first four days from 192 screens, beating the opening record of \"Terminator 2\" and the weekly record set by \"The Bodyguard\" with a gross of A$6.8\u00a0million. In the same weekend, it also set an opening record in Germany with a gross of DM 16.8\u00a0million ($10.5\u00a0million) from 644 screens. In Italy, it had the widest release ever in 344 theaters and grossed a record Lire\u00a09.5\u00a0billion ($6.1\u00a0million). After 115 days of release, it surpassed \"E.T.\" as the highest-grossing film worldwide of all time. It eventually opened in France on October 20, 1993, and grossed a record 75\u00a0million\u00a0F ($13\u00a0million) in its opening week from over 515 screens. Its first week admissions in France of almost 2.3 million surpassed the previous record set by \"\" in 1985.\nThe film set all-time records in, among others, Germany, Hong Kong, Ireland, Israel, Japan (in US Dollars), Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, Spain, Thailand and the United Kingdom. Ultimately the film grossed $914\u00a0million worldwide in its initial release, with Spielberg reportedly earning over $250\u00a0million, the most a director or actor had earned from one film at the time. Its record gross was surpassed in 1998 by \"Titanic\", the first film to gross over $1billion.\nThe 2011 UK release grossed \u00a3245,422 ($786,021) from 276 theaters, finishing at eleventh on the weekend box office list. The 3D re-release in 2013 opened at fourth place in the US, with $18.6\u00a0million from 2,771 locations. IMAX showings accounted for over $6\u00a0million, with the 32 percent being the highest IMAX share ever for a nationwide release. The reissue grossed $45.4\u00a0million in the United States and Canada. The international release had its most successful weekend in late August, when it managed to climb to the top of the box office with a $28.8\u00a0million debut in China. This helped to bring the film's lifetime gross to $1.03\u00a0billion. \"Jurassic Park\" was the 17th, and oldest, film to surpass the $1billion mark, and the only film by Universal to achieve this until 2015, when the studio released \"Furious 7\", \"Minions\", and the fourth \"Jurassic Park\" installment \"Jurassic World\".\n\"Jurassic Park\" grossed an additional $374,238 in 2018 for its 25th anniversary re-release. In June 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic closing most theaters worldwide and limiting what films played, \"Jurassic Park\" returned to 230 theaters (mostly drive-ins). It grossed $517,600, finishing in first for the fourth time in its history. Following subsequent re-releases, the film has grossed over $1.058\u00a0billion worldwide. As of 2025, \"Jurassic Park\" remains among the 50 highest-grossing films of all time, both in the US and Canada (not adjusted for inflation) and worldwide. It also remains the highest-grossing film directed by Spielberg.\nCritical response.\nReview aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes retrospectively reported an approval rating of 91% based on 203 reviews, with an average rating of 8.50/10. The site's critical consensus reads: \"\"Jurassic Park\" is a spectacle of special effects and lifelike animatronics, with some of Spielberg's best sequences of sustained awe and sheer terror since \"Jaws\"\". Metacritic gave the film a weighted average score of 68 out of 100, based on reviews from 21 critics, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale.\nJanet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" called it \"a true movie milestone, presenting awe- and fear-inspiring sights never before seen on the screen [...] On paper, this story is tailor-made for Mr. Spielberg's talents [but] [i]t becomes less crisp on screen than it was on the page, with much of the enjoyable jargon either mumbled confusingly or otherwise thrown away\". In \"Rolling Stone\", Peter Travers called the film \"colossal entertainment\u2014the eye-popping, mind-bending, kick-out-the-jams thrill ride of summer and probably the year [...] Compared with the dinos, the characters are dry bones, indeed. Crichton and co-screenwriter David Koepp have flattened them into nonentities on the trip from page to screen\". Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four: \"The movie delivers all too well on its promise to show us dinosaurs. We see them early and often, and they are indeed a triumph of special effects artistry, but the movie is lacking other qualities that it needs even more, such as a sense of awe and wonderment, and strong human story values\". Henry Sheehan of \"Sight &amp; Sound\" argued: \"The complaints over \"Jurassic Park\"'s lack of story and character sound a little off the point\", noting the story arc of Grant learning to protect Hammond's grandchildren despite his initial dislike of them. Caroline Westbrook of \"Empire\" gave the film five stars, calling it \"quite simply one of the greatest blockbusters of all time\".\nLegacy.\nOver the years, film critics and industry professionals have often cited \"Jurassic Park\" as one of the greatest and most influential movies in history. In 2001, the American Film Institute named \"Jurassic Park\" the 35th-most thrilling film of all time. Two years later, \"Empire\" called the first encounter with a \"Brachiosaurus\" the 28th-most magical moment in cinema. In 2004, \"Empire\" judged \"Jurassic Park\" to be the sixth-most influential film in the magazine's 15-year lifetime. \"Film Review\", in 2005, declared the film to be one of the five most important in the magazine's 55-year history.\n\"Jurassic Park\" is included in the book \"1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die\", and in a 2007 list by \"The Guardian\" of \"1000 films to see before you die\". In 2008, an \"Empire\" poll of readers, filmmakers, and critics also rated it one of the 500 greatest films of all time. In a 2010 poll, the readers of \"Entertainment Weekly\" rated it the greatest summer movie of the previous 20 years. In 2014, it was ranked as one of the 50 greatest films of all time in an extensive poll undertaken by \"The Hollywood Reporter\", which balloted every studio, agency, publicity firm and production house in the Hollywood region. In 2018, \"Jurassic Park\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress, which deemed it \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nIn 2019, Mattel produced a line of new toys, including figures based on the film's characters. The film's 30th anniversary was marked with the release of various merchandise, including new toys from Mattel and Lego, as well as an event at San Diego Comic-Con.\nImpact.\n\"Jurassic Park\" had a wide-ranging impact, particularly as an influence on other films due to its breakthrough use of computer-generated imagery. The film is regarded as a landmark for visual effects. Film historian Tom Shone said of the film's innovation and influence, \"in its way, \"Jurassic Park\" heralded a revolution in movies as profound as the coming of sound in 1927\". Numerous filmmakers saw the effects as a realization that many of their visions, previously thought unfeasible or too expensive, were now possible. ILM owner George Lucas, realizing the success of creating realistic live dinosaurs by his own company, began work on the \"Star Wars\" prequel trilogy; Stanley Kubrick decided to invest in pet project \"A.I. Artificial Intelligence\", which he later got Spielberg to direct; and Peter Jackson began to re-explore his childhood love of fantasy films, a path that led him to \"The Lord of the Rings\" and \"King Kong\". A number of visual effects companies transitioned to creating CGI as a result of the film, including Tippett Studio and Pacific Title &amp; Art Studio. Winston, enthusiastic about the new technology pioneered by the film, joined with IBM and director James Cameron to form a new special effects company, Digital Domain. \"Jurassic Park\" also inspired films and documentaries with dinosaurs such as the American adaptation of \"Godzilla\", \"Carnosaur\" (in which Dern's mother Diane Ladd starred), and \"Walking with Dinosaurs\". \n\"Jurassic Park\" was praised for its modern portrayal of dinosaurs. Many of the findings of the dinosaur renaissance, such as dinosaurs being warm-blooded, active, intelligent, and genetically related to birds, were reflected in the film, which updated the general public's previous perception of dinosaurs as being sluggish, stupid, and entirely extinct. However, the public has also absorbed scientific inaccuracies in the film, such as the size of \"Velociraptor\", and the general view of dinosaurs has stuck with the way that they were portrayed in \"Jurassic Park\" ever since the film's release, without being updated to reflect decades of additional discoveries that have occurred since 1993. The film has been said to have given rise to a \"Jurassic Park\" generation: young people who were inspired to become paleontologists. Among the general public, the film also created an interest in dinosaurs, leading to increased funding for paleontology. This, combined with the rising number of paleontologists, resulted in a surge of dinosaur discoveries. Following the success of the film, Universal and Amblin started the Jurassic Foundation, a nonprofit organization that funds paleontological research. The film also popularized the concept of de-extinction among the public. As of 2025, Colossal Biosciences is attempting to use fragmented DNA to bring back extinct species such as the woolly mammoth, Tasmanian tiger, and dodo, prompting comparisons to the film. Film director Gareth Edwards visited its laboratories before the release of \"Jurassic World Rebirth\" and said, \"This is the real Jurassic Park, isn't it?\"\n\"Jurassic Park\"'s impact extended internationally. It started a trend of dubbing US films into Hindi for the Indian market and was the highest-grossing US film in India at the time with a gross of $3 million. In Canada, the Toronto Raptors, a National Basketball Association team founded in 1995, was named so as a result of the film's popularity. In addition, fans watch the team's playoff games on a large television at Maple Leaf Square, nicknamed Jurassic Park.\nFranchise.\n\"Jurassic Park\" was the beginning of a multimedia franchise. Following the film's success, Crichton wrote a sequel to his novel, titled \"The Lost World\" and released in 1995. Spielberg and Koepp returned respectively as director and writer for the 1997 film adaptation, '. Crichton did not write any further novels in the series, although additional films would be made, featuring previously unused elements from the two books. Spielberg has served as executive producer for subsequent films, which include \"Jurassic Park III\" (2001), \"Jurassic World\" (2015), ' (2018), \"Jurassic World Dominion\" (2022), and \"Jurassic World Rebirth\" (2025). The original film remains the highest rated among critics.\nTwo canonical spin-off animated series were also made, titled \"Jurassic World Camp Cretaceous\" (2020\u20132022) and its sequel \"\" (2024\u20132025).\nThe film's story was originally continued in numerous comics, starting in 1993. Two video game sequels, ' and ', would also be released in 1994. ', based on the film's concept of building a dinosaur theme park, was released in 2003. Two subsequent games are set shortly after the events of the film \u2013 ', released in 2011; and the upcoming \"\", announced in 2023.\nThe film's success also resulted in theme park attractions, with opening at Universal Studios Hollywood in 1996. Other Universal parks would subsequently add their own \"Jurassic Park\" rides. Universal Islands of Adventure, opened in Orlando, Florida in 1999, has an entire section dedicated to \"Jurassic Park\" that includes many rides and attractions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68489", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68489", "title": "Durham, England", "text": "City in County Durham, England\nDurham ( , locally ) is a cathedral city and civil parish in County Durham, England. It is the county town and contains the headquarters of Durham County Council, the unitary authority which governs the district of County Durham. The built-up area had a population of 50,510 at the 2021 Census.\nThe city was built on a meander of the River Wear, which surrounds the centre on three sides and creates a narrow neck on the fourth. The surrounding land is hilly, except along the Wear's floodplain to the north and southeast.\nDurham was founded in 995 by Anglo-Saxon monks seeking a place safe from Viking raids to house the relics of St Cuthbert. The church the monks built lasted only a century, as it was replaced by the present Durham Cathedral after the Norman Conquest; together with Durham Castle, it is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. From the 1070s until 1836 the city was part of the County Palatine of Durham, a semi-independent jurisdiction ruled by the prince bishops of Durham which acted as a geopolitical buffer between the kingdoms of England and Scotland. In 1346, the Battle of Neville's Cross was fought half a mile west of the city, resulting in an English victory. In 1650, the cathedral was used to house Scottish prisoners after their defeat at the Battle of Dunbar. During the Industrial Revolution, the Durham coalfield was heavily exploited, with dozens of collieries operating around the city and in nearby villages. Although these coal pits have now closed, the annual Durham Miners' Gala continues and is a major event for the city and region. Historically, Durham was also known for the manufacture of hosiery, carpets, and mustard.\nThe city is the home of Durham University, which was founded in 1832 and therefore has a claim to be the third-oldest university in England. The university is a significant employer in the region, alongside the local council and national government at the land registry and passport office. The University Hospital of North Durham and HM Prison Durham are also located close to the city centre. The city also has significant tourism and hospitality sectors.\nToponymy.\nThe name \"Durham\" comes from the Brythonic element , signifying a hill fort, and the Old Norse , which translates as island. The Lord Bishop of Durham uses a Latin variation of the city's name in his official signature, which is signed \"\"N.\" Dunelm\". Some attribute the city's name to the legend of the Dun Cow and the milkmaid who in legend guided the monks of Lindisfarne carrying the body of Saint Cuthbert to the site of the present city in 995 AD. Dun Cow Lane is said to be one of the first streets in Durham, being directly to the east of Durham Cathedral and taking its name from a depiction of the city's founding etched in masonry on the south side of the cathedral. The city has been known by a number of names throughout history. The original Nordic \"Dun Holm\" was changed to \"Duresme\" by the Normans and was known in Latin as . The modern form \"Durham\" came into use later in the city's history. The north-eastern historian Robert Surtees chronicled the name changes in his \"History and Antiquities of the County Palatine of Durham\" but states that it is an \"impossibility\" to tell when the city's modern name came into being.\nDurham is likely to be in Armes Prydein, derived from Brittonic \"cajr\" meaning \"an enclosed, defensible site, fort\" from Latin , \u201cfort, military settlement\u201d (\"cf.\" Carlisle; Welsh ) and the river-name \"Wear\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nArcheological evidence suggests a history of settlement in the area since roughly 2000 BC. The present city can clearly be traced back to AD 995, when a group of monks from Lindisfarne chose the strategic high peninsula as a place to settle with the body of Saint Cuthbert, that had previously lain in Chester-le-Street, founding a church there.\nCity origins, the Dun Cow story.\nLocal legend states that the city was founded in A.D. 995 by divine intervention. The 12th-century chronicler Symeon of Durham recounts that after wandering in the north, Saint Cuthbert's bier miraculously came to a halt at the hill of Warden Law and, despite the effort of the congregation, would not move. Aldhun, Bishop of Chester-le-Street and leader of the order, decreed a holy fast of three days, accompanied by prayers to the saint. During the fast, Saint Cuthbert appeared to a certain monk named Eadmer, with instructions that the coffin should be taken to Dun Holm. After Eadmer's revelation, Aldhun found that he was able to move the bier, but did not know where Dun Holm was.\nThe legend of the Dun Cow, which is first documented in \"The Rites of Durham\", an anonymous account about Durham Cathedral, published in 1593, builds on Symeon's account. According to this legend, by chance later that day, the monks came across a milkmaid at Mount Joy (southeast of present-day Durham). She stated that she was seeking her lost dun cow, which she had last seen at Dun Holm. The monks, realising that this was a sign from the saint, followed her. They settled at a wooded \"hill-island\"\u00a0\u2013 a high wooded rock surrounded on three sides by the River Wear. There they erected a shelter for the relics, on the spot where Durham Cathedral would later stand. Symeon states that a modest wooden building erected there shortly thereafter was the first building in the city. Bishop Aldhun subsequently had a stone church built, which was dedicated in September 998. This no longer remains, having been supplanted by the Norman structure.\nThe legend is interpreted by a Victorian relief stone carving on the north face of the cathedral and, more recently, by the bronze sculpture 'Durham Cow' (1997, Andrew Burton), which reclines by the River Wear in view of the cathedral.\nMedieval era.\nDuring the medieval period the city gained spiritual prominence as the final resting place of Saint Cuthbert and Saint Bede the Venerable. The shrine of Saint Cuthbert, situated behind the High Altar of Durham Cathedral, was the most important religious site in England until the martyrdom of St Thomas Becket at Canterbury in 1170.\nSaint Cuthbert became famous for two reasons. Firstly, the miraculous healing powers he had displayed in life continued after his death, with many stories of those visiting the saint's shrine being cured of all manner of diseases. This led to him being known as the \"wonder worker of England\". Secondly, after the first translation of his relics in 698 AD, his body was found to be incorruptible. Apart from a brief translation back to Holy Island during the Norman Invasion the saint's relics have remained enshrined to the present day. Saint Bede's bones are also entombed in the cathedral, and these also drew medieval pilgrims to the city.\nDurham's geographical position has always given it an important place in the defence of England against the Scots. The city played an important part in the defence of the north, and Durham Castle is the only Norman castle keep never to have suffered a breach. In 1314, the Bishopric of Durham paid the Scots a 'large sum of money' not to burn Durham. The Battle of Neville's Cross took place around half a mile west of the city on 17 October 1346 between the English and Scots and was a disastrous loss for the Scots.\nThe city suffered from plague outbreaks in 1544, 1589 and 1598.\nBishops of Durham.\nOwing to the divine providence evidenced in the city's legendary founding, the Bishop of Durham has always enjoyed the formal title \"Bishop by Divine Providence\", similar to the archbishops of Canterbury and York, as opposed to the style of \"Bishop by Divine Permission\" used by most bishops. However, as the north-east of England lay so far from Westminster, the bishops of Durham enjoyed extraordinary powers such as the ability to hold their own parliament, raise their own armies, appoint their own sheriffs and Justices, administer their own laws, levy taxes and customs duties, create fairs and markets, issue charters, salvage shipwrecks, collect revenue from mines, administer the forests and mint their own coins. So far-reaching were the bishop's powers that the steward of Bishop Antony Bek commented in 1299 AD: \"There are two kings in England, namely the Lord King of England, wearing a crown in sign of his regality and the Lord Bishop of Durham wearing a mitre in place of a crown, in sign of his regality in the diocese of Durham\". All this activity was administered from the castle and buildings surrounding the Palace Green. Many of the original buildings associated with these functions of the county palatine survive on the peninsula that constitutes the ancient city.\nFrom 1071 to 1836 the bishops of Durham ruled the county palatine of Durham. Although the term \"prince bishop\" has been used as a helpful tool in the understanding the functions of the bishops of Durham in this era, it is not a title they would have recognised. The last bishop to rule the palatinate, Bishop William Van Mildert, is credited with the foundation of Durham University in 1832. Henry VIII curtailed some of the bishop's powers and, in 1538, ordered the destruction of the shrine of Saint Cuthbert.\nA UNESCO site describes the role of the bishops in the \"buffer state between England and Scotland\":From 1075, the Bishop of Durham became a Prince-Bishop, with the right to raise an army, mint his own coins, and levy taxes. As long as he remained loyal to the king of England, he could govern as a virtually autonomous ruler, reaping the revenue from his territory, but also remaining mindful of his role of protecting England's northern frontier.\nLegal system.\nThe bishops had their own court system, including most notably the Court of Chancery of the County Palatine of Durham and Sadberge. The county also had its own attorney general, whose authority to bring an indictment for criminal matters was tested by central government in the case of \"R\" v \"Mary Ann Cotton\" (1873). \nCertain courts and judicial posts for the county were abolished by the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873. Section 2 of the Durham (County Palatine) Act 1836 and section 41 of the Courts Act 1971 abolished others.\nCivil War and Cromwell (1640 to 1660).\nThe city remained loyal to King Charles I in the English Civil War \u2013 from 1642 to the execution of the king in 1649. Charles I came to Durham three times during his reign of 1625\u20131649. Firstly, he came in 1633\nto the cathedral for a majestic service in which he was entertained by the Chapter and Bishop at great expense. He returned during preparations for the First Bishops' War (1639).\nHis final visit to the city came towards the end of the civil war; he escaped from the city as Oliver Cromwell's forces got closer.\nLocal legend\n stated that he escaped down the Bailey and through Old Elvet. Another local legend has it that Cromwell stayed in a room in the present Royal County Hotel on Old Elvet during the civil war. The room is reputed to be haunted by his ghost. Durham suffered greatly during the civil war (1642\u20131651) and Commonwealth (1649\u20131660). This was not due to direct assault by Cromwell or his allies, but to the abolition of the Church of England and the closure of religious institutions pertaining to it. The city has always relied upon the Dean and Chapter and cathedral as an economic force.\nThe castle suffered considerable damage and dilapidation during the Commonwealth due to the abolition of the office of bishop (whose residence it was). Cromwell confiscated the castle and sold it to the Lord Mayor of London shortly after taking it from the bishop. A similar fate befell the cathedral, it being closed in 1650 and used to incarcerate 3,000 Scottish prisoners, who were marched south after the Battle of Dunbar. Graffiti left by them can still be seen today etched into the interior stone.\nAt the Restoration in 1660, John Cosin (a former canon) was appointed bishop (in office: 1660\u20131672) and set about a major restoration project. This included the commissioning of the famous elaborate woodwork in the cathedral choir, the font cover and the Black Staircase in the castle. Bishop Cosin's successor Bishop Lord Nathaniel Crewe (in office: 1674\u20131721) carried out other renovations both to the city and to the cathedral.\n18th century.\nIn the 18th century a plan to turn Durham into a seaport through the digging of a canal north to join the River Team, a tributary of the River Tyne near Gateshead, was proposed by John Smeaton. Nothing came of the plan, but the statue of Neptune in the Market Place was a constant reminder of Durham's maritime possibilities.\nThe thought of ships docking at the Sands or Millburngate remained fresh in the minds of Durham merchants. In 1758, a new proposal hoped to make the Wear navigable from Durham to Sunderland by altering the river's course, but the increasing size of ships made this impractical. Moreover, Sunderland had grown as the north east's main port and centre for shipping.\nIn 1787, the Durham infirmary was founded.\nThe 18th century also saw the rise of the trade-union movement in the city.\n19th century.\nThe Municipal Corporations Act 1835 gave governing power of the town to an elected body. All other aspects of the Bishop's temporal powers were abolished by the Durham (County Palatine) Act 1836 and returned to the Crown.\nThe Representation of the People Act 2000 and is regarded as the second most senior bishop and fourth most senior clergyman in the Church of England. The Court of Claims of 1953 granted the traditional right of the bishop to accompany the sovereign at the coronation, reflecting his seniority.\nThe first census, conducted in 1801, states that Durham City had a population of 7,100. The Industrial Revolution mostly passed the city by. However, the city was well known for carpet making and weaving. Although most of the mediaeval weavers who thrived in the city had left by the 19th century, the city was the home of Hugh MacKay Carpets\u2019 factory, which produced the famous brands of axminster and tufted carpets until the factory went into administration in April 2005. Other important industries were the manufacture of mustard and coal extraction.\nThe Industrial Revolution also placed the city at the heart of the coalfields, the county's main industry until the 1970s. Practically every village around the city had a coal mine and, although these have since disappeared as part of the regional decline in heavy industry, the traditions, heritage and community spirit are still evident.\nThe 19th century also saw the founding of Durham University thanks to the benevolence of Bishop William Van Mildert and the Chapter in 1832. Durham Castle became the first college (University College, Durham) and the bishop moved to Auckland Castle as his only residence in the county. Bishop Hatfield's Hall (later Hatfield College, Durham) was added in 1846 specifically for the sons of poorer families, the Principal inaugurating a system new to English university life of advance fees to cover accommodation and communal dining.\nThe first Durham Miners' Gala was attended by 5,000 miners in 1871 in Wharton Park, and remains the largest socialist trade union event in the world.\n20th century.\nEarly in the 20th century, coal became depleted, with a particularly important seam worked out in 1927, and in the following Great Depression Durham was among those towns that suffered exceptionally severe hardship. However, the university expanded greatly. St John's College and St Cuthbert's Society were founded on the Bailey, completing the series of colleges in that area of the city. From the early 1950s to early 1970s, the university expanded to the south of the city centre. Trevelyan, Van Mildert, Collingwood, and Grey colleges were established, and new buildings for St Aidan's and St Mary's colleges for women, formerly housed on the Bailey, were created. The final 20th century collegiate addition came from the merger of the independent nineteenth-century colleges of the Venerable Bede and St Hild, which joined the university in 1979 as the College of St Hild and St Bede. The 1960s and 1970s also saw building on New Elvet. Dunelm House for the use of the students' union was built first, followed by Elvet Riverside, containing lecture theatres and staff offices. To the southeast of the city centre sports facilities were built at Maiden Castle, adjacent to the Iron Age fort of the same name, and the Mountjoy site was developed, starting in 1924, eventually containing the university library, administrative buildings, and facilities for the Faculty of Science.\nDurham was not bombed during World War II, though one raid on the night of 30 May 1942 did give rise to the local legend of 'St Cuthbert's Mist'. This states that the Luftwaffe attempted to target Durham, but was thwarted when Cuthbert created a mist that covered both the castle and cathedral, sparing them from bombing. The exact events of the night are disputed by contemporary eyewitnesses. The event continues to be referenced within the city, including inspiring the artwork 'Fogscape #03238' at Durham Lumiere 2015.\n'Durham Castle and Cathedral' was named a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1986. Among the reasons given for the decision were 'Durham Cathedral [being] the largest and most perfect monument of \"Norman\" style architecture in England', and the cathedral's vaulting being an early and experimental model of the gothic style. Other important UNESCO sites near Durham include Auckland Castle, North of England Lead Mining Museum and Beamish Museum.\nGeography.\nGeneral.\nThe River Wear flows north through the city, making an incised meander which encloses the centre on three sides to form Durham's peninsula.\nAt the base of the peninsula is the Market Place, which still hosts regular markets; a permanent indoor market, Durham Indoor Market, is also situated just off the Market Place. The Market Place and surrounding streets are one of the main commercial and shopping areas of the city. From the Market Place, the Bailey leads south past Palace Green; The Bailey is almost entirely owned and occupied by the university and the cathedral.\nDurham is a hilly city, claiming to be built upon the symbolic seven hills. Upon the most central and prominent position high above the Wear, the cathedral dominates the skyline. The steep riverbanks are densely wooded, adding to the picturesque beauty of the city. West of the city centre, another river, the River Browney, drains south to join the Wear to the south of the city.\nThere are three old roads out of the Market Place: Saddler Street heads south-east, towards Elvet Bridge, the Bailey and Prebends Bridge. Elvet Bridge leads to the Elvet area of the city, Durham Prison and the south; Prebends Bridge is smaller and provides access from the Bailey to south Durham. Heading west, Silver Street leads out of the Market Place towards Framwellgate Bridge and North Road, the other main shopping area of the city. From here, the city spreads out into the Framwelgate, Crossgate, Neville's Cross and viaduct districts, which are largely residential areas. Beyond the viaduct lie the outlying districts of Framwellgate Moor and Neville's Cross. Heading north from the Market Place leads to Claypath. The road curves back round to the east and beyond it lie Gilesgate, Gilesgate Moor and Dragonville.\nGreen belt.\nAs part of the wider Tyne and Wear Green Belt area, Durham's portion extends beyond its urban area extents of Framwellgate Moor/Pity Me, Elvet and Belmont, it being completely surrounded by green belt. This primarily helps to maintain separation from Chester-le-Street, and restrain expansion of the city and coalescence with nearby villages such as Bearpark, Great Lumley and Sherburn. Landscape features and facilities within the green belt area include Raintonpark Wood, Belmont Viaduct, Ramside Hall, Durham City Golf Course, the River Wear, Browney and Deerness basins, and Durham University Botanic Gardens. It was first drawn up in the 1990s.\nHistorical.\nThe historic city centre of Durham has changed little over 200 years. It is made up of the peninsula containing the cathedral, palace green, former administrative buildings for the palatine and Durham Castle. This was a strategic defensive decision by the city's founders and gives the cathedral a striking position. So much so that Symeon of Durham stated:\nTo see Durham is to see the English Sion and by doing so one may save oneself a trip to Jerusalem.\nSir Walter Scott was so inspired by the view of the cathedral from South Street that he wrote \"Harold the Dauntless\", a poem about Saxons and Vikings set in County Durham and published on 30 January 1817. The following lines from the poem are carved into a stone tablet on Prebends Bridge:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe old commercial section of the city encompasses the peninsula on three sides, following the River Wear. The peninsula was historically surrounded by the castle wall extending from the castle keep and broken by two gatehouses to the north and west of the enclosure. After extensive remodelling and \"much beautification\" by the Victorians the walls were removed with the exception of the gatehouse which is still standing on the Bailey.\nThe medieval city was made up of the cathedral, castle and administrative buildings on the peninsula. The outlying areas were known as the townships and owned by the bishop, the most famous of these being Gilesgate (which still contains the mediaeval St Giles Church), Claypath and Elvet.\nThe outlying commercial section of the city, especially around the North Road area, saw much change in the 1960s during a redevelopment spearheaded by Durham City Council; however, much of the original mediaeval street plan remains intact in the area close to the cathedral and market place. Most of the mediaeval buildings in the commercial area of the city have disappeared apart from the House of Correction and the Chapel of Saint Andrew, both under Elvet Bridge. Georgian buildings can still be found on the Bailey and Old Elvet most of which make up the colleges of Durham University.\nClimate.\nThe table below gives the average temperature, rainfall and sunshine figures taken between 1991 and 2020, and extreme temperatures back to 1850 for the weather station at Durham University Observatory:\nLike the rest of the United Kingdom, Durham has a temperate climate. At , the average annual rainfall is lower than the national average of . Equally there are only an average of 124.14 days where more than of rain falls compared with a national average of 159.08 days. The city sees an average of 1479.95 hours of sunshine per year, compared with a national average of 1402.61 hours. There is frost on 46.81 days compared with a national average of 53.36 days. Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures are compared with a national averages of respectively.\nDurham has the second longest weather record in England, with continuous daily records since August 1843. The coldest temperature recorded was in February 1895, falling to , and the hottest was in July 2022, reaching , beating the previous record from July 2019 by . The wettest day since homogeneous rainfall records began in 1876 was in September 1976, with falling in 24 hours.\nDemography.\nThe county town of County Durham, until 2009, Durham was located in the City of Durham local government district. This extended beyond the city, and had a total population of 87,656 in 2001, covering 186.68 square kilometres in 2007. In 2001, the unparished area of Durham had a population of 29,091, whilst the built-up area of Durham had a population of 42,939. Many of the inner city areas are now inhabited by students living in shared housing.\nGovernance.\nThe ancient borough covering Durham was Durham and Framwelgate, which was reformed by the Municipal Corporations Act 1835. In 1974 it was merged with Durham Rural District and Brandon and Byshottles Urban District to form the City of Durham district of County Durham. The district was abolished in 2009 with its responsibilities assumed by Durham County Council, a unitary authority.\nSince April 2009, city status has been held by charter trustees, who are the Durham county councillors for the area of the former district. The trustees appoint the Mayor of Durham. The creation of the new City of Durham Parish Council has not affected the charter trustees.\nDurham's Member of Parliament (MP) is Mary Foy (Labour).\nDurham Town Hall is located on the west side of the Market Place. The earliest part of the complex of buildings is the guildhall which dates from 1665. The town hall, at the rear, was opened in 1851 (at the same time as the indoor market, which extends beneath and either side of the hall).\nA local referendum was held on creating a parish council for unparished areas of Durham City in February and March 2017, in which 66% of voters supported the proposal. The County Council approved the plans in September 2017. The City of Durham Parish Council was created on 1 April 2018, with the first elections for the 15 council seats taking place on 3 May 2018. The parish council is divided into three electoral wards, electing a total of 15 councillors. One in Aykley Heads, 6 in Elvet and Gilesgate and 8 in Nevilles Cross. These councillors are responsible for burial grounds, allotments, play areas and some street lighting. Elections to the parish council are held every four years and the most recent elections were held in May 2025.\nEconomy.\nThis is a table of trend of regional gross value added of County Durham at current basic prices http:// (pp.\u00a0240\u2013253) by \"Office for National Statistics\" with figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling. .\nLandmarks.\nThe whole of the centre of Durham is designated a conservation area. The conservation area was first designated on 9 August 1968, and was extended on 25 November 1980. In addition to the Cathedral and Castle, Durham contains over 630 listed buildings, 569 of which are located within the city centre conservation area. Particularly notable properties include:\nGrade II listed.\nDurham has multiple grade II listed buildings, including:\nDurham Castle.\nThe castle was originally built in the 11th century as a projection of the Norman power in Northern England, as the population of England in the north remained rebellious following the disruption of the Norman Conquest in 1066. It is an excellent example of the early motte and bailey castles favoured by the Normans. The holder of the office of Bishop of Durham was appointed by the King to exercise royal authority on his behalf and the castle was the centre of his command.\nIt remained the Bishop's Palace for the Bishops of Durham until the Bishop William Van Mildert made Bishop Auckland their primary residence. A founder of Durham University, Van Mildert gave the castle as accommodation for the institution's first college, University College. The castle was famed for its vast Great Hall, created by Bishop Antony Bek in the early 14th century. It was the largest great hall in Britain until Bishop Richard Foxe shortened it at the end of the 15th century. However, it is still 46 feet high and over 33 yards long. The castle is still the home of University College, Durham (which is, as a result, known informally as \"Castle\"). It has been in continuous use for over 900 years.\nReligious buildings.\nThe Cathedral Church of Christ, Blessed Mary the Virgin and St Cuthbert of Durham, commonly referred to as Durham Cathedral was founded in its present form in AD 1093 and remains a centre for Christian worship today. It is generally regarded as one of the finest Romanesque cathedrals in Europe and the rib vaulting in the nave marks the beginning of Gothic ecclesiastical architecture. The cathedral has been designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site along with nearby Durham Castle, which faces it across Palace Green, high above the River Wear.\nThe cathedral houses the shrine and related treasures of Cuthbert of Lindisfarne, and these are on public view. It is also home to the head of St Oswald of Northumbria and the remains of the Venerable Bede.\nThe city also has other listed churches, some have been repurposed:\nEducation.\nResults relate to the 2008 examination series.\nPrimary.\nPrimary schools include:\nSecondary.\nDurham is served by four state secondary schools:\nCollege or sixth form.\nNew College Durham is the city's largest college of further education. It was founded in 1977 as a result of a merger between Neville's Cross College of Education and Durham Technical College. The college operated on two main sites near the city of Durham: Neville's Cross and Framwellgate Moor. The site at Framwellgate Moor opened in 1957 and has subsequently been rebuilt. The Neville's Cross centre is now home to Ustinov College, the postgraduate college of Durham University.\nDurham Sixth Form Centre specialises in sixth form courses, while East Durham College has a campus specialising in land-based education at Houghall on the eastern outskirts of the city.\nIndependent.\nThere are three independent schools:\nUniversity.\nDurham is home to Durham University. It was founded as the University of Durham (which remains its official and legal name) by Act of Parliament in 1832 and granted a Royal Charter in 1837. It was one of the first universities to open in England for more than 600 years, and is claimed to be England's third oldest after the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge. Durham University has an international reputation for excellence, as reflected by its ranking in the top 200 of the world's universities.\nLocal media.\nThe city's local radio stations are Durham On Air, Purple Radio which broadcasts from Durham University and Durham Hospitals Radio which has been broadcasting from the University Hospital of North Durham (previously Dryburn Hospital) since 1963.\nTransport.\nRailway.\nDurham railway station is a stop on the East Coast Main Line between Edinburgh Waverley and London King's Cross. From the south, trains enter Durham over a Victorian viaduct, high above the city.\nThe station is served by four train operating companies:\nA second station, Durham Elvet, also served the city. It opened in 1893, closing to passenger services in 1931 and to goods trains in 1954.\nRoad.\nBy road, the A1(M), the modern incarnation of the ancient Great North Road, passes just to the east of the city. The road's previous incarnation, now numbered A167, passes just to the west.\nDurham market place and its peninsula form the UK's first (albeit small) congestion charging area, which was introduced in 2002.\nBuses.\nThe city is served by Arriva North East and Go North East's local bus services, with routes running in and around the North East England region including to Bishop Auckland, Darlington and Sunderland.\nBus station.\nDurham bus station was located off North Road, a short walk from the cathedral, university and railway station; it was managed and owned by the county council. In February 2021, the bus station was demolished to make way for a \u00a310m redevelopment and originally was planned to reopen in Summer 2023 before being twice delayed to November 2023 and January 2024, when it finally reopened. During the time of the closure, scheduled buses ran from temporary stands on North Road and Milburngate.\nThe current bus station has increased space for passengers and new facilities including toilets, a changing places unit, improved information displays and additional seating in the passenger waiting area.\nPark and Ride.\nDurham City Park and Ride consists of three sites (Belmont, Howlands and Sniperley), which are located around the outskirts of the city centre. The Belmont site is closest to the A1(M). Frequent, direct bus services operate up to every 10 minutes between 7am and 7pm (Monday\u2013Saturday). Car parking is free, with a return bus journey costing \u00a32 per person (as of June 2020).\nAir.\nDurham's nearest airports are at Teesside, within the county to the south-east, and Newcastle to the north; both are located from the city by road.\nSport.\nArchery.\nDurham hosts several archery clubs who shoot at various locations in the city, members of these clubs shoot for the region and individually at national events, as well as many who shoot for recreation. In 2014, the regional Durham And Northumberland Archery Team won the National Intercounty Team Event at Lilleshall NSC, this event saw 260 archers from 19 counties competing over two days for the title.\nCricket.\nDurham City Cricket Club plays at Green Lane Cricket Ground near the River Wear. Formed in 1829, Durham City was one of the founder members of the Durham Senior Cricket League upon its creation in 1903 and the First XI have been champions on thirteen occasions.\nFootball.\nThe town's football club Durham City A.F.C. was a member the Football League between 1921 and 1928, but has long been a non-league club, currently playing in the Northern League. Their home ground was New Ferens Park. However, after a dispute with the landlord, Durham left New Ferens Park and made a deal to groundshare at Willington F.C.\nDurham is also home to FA Women's Championship team Durham Women's F.C., a team founded in 2014, they are a collaboration between South Durham and Cestria Girls and Durham University, the team are nicknamed The Wildcats, who are coached by Lee Sanders and play their Home games at Maiden Castle, part of Durham University.\nField hockey.\nDurham has two field hockey clubs that compete in the Men's England Hockey League, the Women's England Hockey League, the North Hockey League, the Yorkshire Hockey Association League and the BUCS leagues. These are Durham City Hockey Club and Durham University Hockey Club. \nIce.\nDurham Ice Rink was a central feature of the city for some 60 years until it closed in 1996. It was home to the Durham Wasps, one of the most successful British ice hockey clubs that competed in the National Ice Hockey League during the 1980s and early 1990s. Durham City Wasps was another club that disbanded following the closure of Durham Ice Rink.\nDurham Ice Rink's demolition began in May 2013. On the location of the former ice rink now stands Freemans Reach which houses the Durham Passport Office \nDurham Dragons play some fixutures at Billingham Forum. \nRowing.\nThe River Wear provides over of river that can be rowed on, stretching from Durham University Boat Club's boathouse at Maiden Castle in the east to the weir next to Durham School Boat Club's boathouse in the west. This includes the 'short course' straight used for most Durham Regatta races, the 'long course' that includes navigation through the arches of Elvet Bridge, reputed to be the narrowest row through bridge in Europe, and and measured distances. There is a path running alongside the river's south bank (i.e. the Cathedral side) for the entire length of the stretch available for rowing, the concrete section between Hatfield College boathouse and Elvet Bridge being completed in 1882.\nFor sport rowing there are a number of boating clubs operating on this stretch, Durham Amateur Rowing Club, Durham University Boat Club, the 16 college clubs of the university, Durham Constabulary and the school clubs \u2013 Durham School Boat Club and St Leonard's who row regularly in their own colours out of their own boathouses and Durham High School for Girls who may row out of Durham Amateur Rowing Club.\nDurham Amateur Rowing Club.\nDurham Amateur Rowing Club, DARC, operates out of a purpose-built community clubhouse on the River Wear which opened in 2007:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Durham Amateur Rowing Club is one of the country's oldest clubs (founded in 1860) and lies at the end of Green Lane in Durham, occupying a tranquil setting on the River Wear.\nThe club takes part in the government scheme playing for success where it uses sport to combine rowing, science, computers and video to help boost literacy and numeracy.\nDurham University rowing.\nDurham University rowing is divided into two sections: Durham University Boat Club and Durham College Rowing, the latter comprises 16 college boat clubs.\nRegattas and head races.\nThe River Wear is host to a number of regattas and head races throughout the year. These include:\nthe Novice Cup, Wear Long Distance Sculls and Senate Cup in November and December; Durham Small Boats Head in February; Durham City Regatta in May; Durham Regatta and Admiral's Regatta in June; and Durham Primary Regatta in September.\nDurham Regatta.\nDurham Regatta has been held on the River Wear in Durham since 1834. It is the second oldest regatta in Britain and is often referred to as 'the Henley of the North'.\nDurham Regatta in its current form dates back to 1834, when only a handful of trophies were competed for over a period of three days. Today, the regatta takes place over a period of two days, at which dozens of trophies are competed for. Durham University, Durham School and Durham Amateur Rowing Club have competed regularly since the early days.\nPleasure boats.\nIn addition to the competitive rowing and sculling of the boat clubs mentioned above, there is also hire of public pleasure boats from April to October.\nRugby.\nDurham City Rugby Club has its headquarters on Green Lane:\nDurham City RFC, the second oldest club in the county, was founded in 1872 with navy and gold playing colours and Durham Cathedral's sanctuary knocker as the club's crest.\nCity's Hollow Drift home has been developed into a facility which includes two floodlit pitches and a training area.\nAt present, City run four senior sides, a Veteran's XV, a Ladies' XV and mini and junior teams from aged 6 to 17.\nTwin towns.\nDurham has a number of twin towns:\nFollowing the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Durham County council revoked the twinning arrangements with the Russian city of Kostroma, which had been in place since 1968.\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Durham.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68490", "revid": "485429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68490", "title": "Algemeen Beschaafd Nederlands", "text": ""}
{"id": "68493", "revid": "8761551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68493", "title": "Roe v. Wade", "text": "1973 US Supreme Court decision on abortion\n1973 United States Supreme Court case\nRoe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled that the Constitution of the United States protected the right to have an abortion prior to the point of fetal viability. The decision struck down many State abortion laws, and it sparked an ongoing abortion debate in the United States about whether, or to what extent, abortion should be legal, who should decide the legality of abortion, and what the role of moral and religious views in the political sphere should be. The decision also shaped debate concerning which methods the Supreme Court should use in constitutional adjudication.\nThe case was brought by Norma McCorvey\u2014under the legal pseudonym \"Jane Roe\"\u2014who, in 1969, became pregnant with her third child. McCorvey wanted an abortion but lived in Texas where abortion was only legal when necessary to save the mother's life. Her lawyers, Sarah Weddington and Linda Coffee, filed a lawsuit on her behalf in U.S. federal court against her local district attorney, Henry Wade, alleging that Texas's abortion laws were unconstitutional. A special three-judge court of the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas heard the case and ruled in her favor. The parties appealed this ruling to the Supreme Court. In January 1973, the Supreme Court issued a 7\u20132 decision in McCorvey's favor holding that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides a fundamental \"right to privacy\", which protects a pregnant woman's right to an abortion. However, it also held that the right to abortion is not absolute and must be balanced against the government's interest in protecting both women's health and prenatal life. It resolved these competing interests by announcing a pregnancy trimester timetable to govern all abortion regulations in the United States. The Court also classified the right to abortion as \"fundamental\", which required courts to evaluate challenged abortion laws under the \"strict scrutiny\" standard, the most stringent level of judicial review in the United States.\nThe Supreme Court's decision in \"Roe\" was among the most controversial in U.S. history. \"Roe\" was criticized by many in the legal community, including some who thought that \"Roe\" reached the correct result but went about it the wrong way, and some called the decision a form of judicial activism. Others argued that \"Roe\" did not go far enough, as it was placed within the framework of civil rights rather than the broader human rights.\nThe decision radically reconfigured the voting coalitions of the Republican and Democratic parties in the following decades. Anti-abortion politicians and activists sought for decades to restrict abortion or overrule the decision; polls into the 21st century showed that a plurality and a majority, especially into the late 2010s to early 2020s, opposed overruling \"Roe\". Despite criticism of the decision, the Supreme Court reaffirmed \"Roe\"'s central holding in its 1992 decision, \"Planned Parenthood v. Casey.\" \"Casey\" overruled \"Roe\"'s trimester framework and abandoned its \"strict scrutiny\" standard in favor of an \"undue burden\" test.\nIn 2022, the Supreme Court overruled \"Roe\" in \"Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization\" on the grounds that the substantive right to abortion was not \"deeply rooted in this Nation's history or tradition\", nor considered a right when the Due Process Clause was ratified in 1868, and was unknown in U.S. law until \"Roe\".\nBackground.\nHistory of abortion laws in the United States.\nAbortion was a fairly common practice in the history of the United States, and was not always a public controversy. At a time when society was more concerned with the serious consequences of women becoming pregnant out of wedlock, family affairs were handled out of public view. The criminality of abortion at common law is a matter of debate by historians and legal scholars.\nIn 1821, Connecticut passed the first state statute legislating abortion in the United States; it forbade the use of poisons in abortion. After the 1840s, there was an upsurge in abortions. In the 19th century, the medical profession was generally opposed to abortion, which Mohr argues arose due to competition between men with medical degrees and women without one. The practice of abortion was one of the first medical specialties, and was practiced by unlicensed people; well-off people had abortions and paid well. The press played a key role in rallying support for anti-abortion laws. According to James S. Witherspoon, a former briefing attorney for the Court of Appeals for the Third Supreme Judicial District of Texas, abortion was not legal before quickening in 27 out of all 37 states in 1868; by the end of 1883, 30 of the 37 states, six of the ten U.S. territories, and the Kingdom of Hawai\u02bbi, where abortion had once been common, had codified laws that restricted abortion before quickening. More than 10 states allowed pre-quickening abortions, before the quickening distinction was eliminated, and every state had anti-abortion laws by 1900.\nIn the United States, before specific statutes were made against it, abortion was sometimes considered a common law offense, such as by William Blackstone and James Wilson. In all states throughout the 19th and early 20th century, pre-quickening abortions were always considered to be actions without a lawful purpose. This meant that if the mother died, the individual performing the abortion was guilty of murder. This aspect of common law regarded pre-quickening abortions as a type of inchoate offense. Negative liberty rights from common law do not apply in situations caused by consensual or voluntary behavior, which allowed for abortions of fetuses conceived in a consensual manner to be common law offenses. The majority opinion for \"Roe v. Wade\" authored in Justice Harry Blackmun's name would later state that the criminalization of abortion did not have \"roots in the English common-law tradition\", and was thought to return to the more permissive state of pre-1820s abortion laws. One purpose for banning abortion was to preserve the life of the fetus, another was to protect the life of the mother, another was to create deterrence against future abortions, and another was to avoid injuring the mother's ability to have children. Judges did not always distinguish between which purpose was more important. Rather than arresting the women having the abortions, legal officials were more likely to interrogate them to obtain evidence against the individual doing the abortions. This law enforcement strategy was a response to juries which refused to convict women prosecuted for abortion in the 19th century. In 1973, Justice Blackmun's opinion stated that \"the restrictive criminal abortion laws in effect in a majority of States today are of relatively recent vintage\".\nDuring the 1960s and early 1970s, opposition to abortion was concentrated among members of the political left and the Democratic Party, although feminists within predominately supported legalization. Most liberal Catholics and Mainline Protestants (both of which tended to vote for the Democratic Party) opposed liberalizing laws surrounding abortion while most other Protestants, including evangelicals, supported doing so as a matter of religious liberty, what they saw as a lack of biblical condemnation, and belief in non-intrusive government.\nBy 1971, elective abortion on demand was effectively available in Alaska, California, Hawaii, New York, Washington, and Washington, D.C. Some women traveled to jurisdictions where it was legal, although not all could afford to. In 1971, Shirley Wheeler was charged with manslaughter after Florida hospital staff reported her illegal abortion to the police. Wheeler was one of a few women who were prosecuted by their states for abortion. She received a sentence of two years probation, and as an option under her probation, chose to move back into her parents' house in North Carolina. The Playboy Foundation donated $3,500 to her defense fund and \"Playboy\" denounced her prosecution. The Boston Women's Abortion Coalition raised money and held a rally where attendees listened to speakers from the Women's National Abortion Action Coalition (WONAAC). Her conviction was overturned by the Supreme Court of Florida.\nHistory of the case.\nSarah Weddington recruited Linda Coffee to help her with abortion litigation. Their first plaintiffs were a married couple; they joined after the woman heard Coffee give a speech. The intended suit would state abortions were medically necessary for the woman. The woman had a neurochemical disorder and it was considered medically necessary that she not give birth or raise children, yet they did not want to abstain from sex, and contraception might fail. The attorneys were concerned about standing since the woman was not pregnant. Weddington later wrote that they \"needed to find a pregnant Texas woman who wanted an abortion and would be willing to be a plaintiff.\" They also wanted to increase the likelihood that the panel selection would help them win in court. They wanted to present their case to a three-judge panel which included a judge they thought would be sympathetic, which was a possibility only by filing a case in Dallas. If either of the two cases they filed in Dallas were assigned favorably, they intended to ask for the other one to be consolidated with it.\nAt first, Weddington was unsuccessful in finding a suitable pregnant woman. In June 1969, 21-year-old Norma McCorvey discovered she was pregnant with her third child. Ordinarily, lawyers are not allowed to directly solicit clients without any prior relationship, but McCorvey's situation qualified for an exception in the no solicitation rule which allows lawyers to solicit new clients for public interest cases. According to a sworn statement made in 2003, McCorvey asked if she had what was needed to be part of Weddington and Coffee's lawsuit. She recounted being told, \"Yes. You're white. You're young, pregnant, and you want an abortion.\" Both McCorvey's whiteness and her lower social class were crucial factors in the attorneys' choice to have her as their plaintiff.\nMcCorvey recounted that the lawyers asked if she thought abortion should be legal. McCorvey said she did not know. Weddington told her, \"It's just a piece of tissue. You just missed your period.\" This convinced McCorvey that abortion should be legal. She agreed to let them represent her under the impression that she would be able to eventually get a legal abortion. She smoked an illegal drug and drank wine so she would not have to think about her pregnancy. McCorvey gave birth to a daughter at Dallas Osteopathic Hospital on June 2, 1970; the baby, Shelley Lynn Thornton, was adopted by a couple in Texas.\nIn 1970, Coffee and Weddington filed \"Roe v. Wade\" as a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas on behalf of McCorvey under the legal pseudonym \"Jane Roe\", and they also filed \"Does v. Wade\" on behalf of the married couple. The defendant for both cases was Dallas County District Attorney, Henry Wade, who represented the State of Texas. Weddington later stated that she \"saw \"Roe\" as part of a much larger effort by many attorneys\" whose collective interests she represented. James H. Hallford was a physician who was in the process of being prosecuted for performing two abortions. The Court allowed him to join the suit as a physician-intervenor on behalf of Jane Roe.\nOne of the cases was assigned to a panel of judges which included Judge Sarah T. Hughes, who they thought would be sympathetic, and the cases were consolidated. In accordance with the Court's rules, two of the judges hearing the consolidated case were assigned on the basis of their judicial district, and the third judge on the panel was a circuit court judge chosen by the Chief Justice of the United States.\nThe consolidated lawsuit was heard by a three-judge panel consisting of district court judges Sarah T. Hughes and William McLaughlin Taylor Jr. and appellate judge Irving Loeb Goldberg of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. Hughes knew Coffee, who clerked for her from 1968 to 1969. Additionally, the backgrounds of two other judges also gave Weddington and Coffee hope they would be successful. On June 17, 1970, the three judges unanimously ruled in McCorvey's favor and declared the Texas law unconstitutional, finding that it violated the right to privacy found in the Ninth Amendment. The court relied on Justice Arthur Goldberg's 1965 concurrence in \"Griswold v. Connecticut\". Yet the Court also declined to grant an injunction against enforcing the law, and ruled against the married couple on the basis that they lacked standing. Since Wade said he would continue to prosecute people for performing abortions, the lack of an injunction meant that McCorvey could not get an abortion.\nHearing the case.\nPostponement.\n\"Roe v. Wade\" reached the Supreme Court when both sides appealed in 1970. It bypassed the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit because 28 USC \u00a7 1253 authorizes a direct appeal to the Supreme Court in cases concerning the granting or denial of a civil injunction decided by a three judge panel.\nThe case continued under the name \"Roe v. Wade\" instead of being switched to \"Wade v. Roe\". The justices delayed taking action on \"Roe\" and a closely related case, \"Doe v. Bolton\", until they had first decided certain other cases. One case they decided first was \"Younger v. Harris\". The justices felt the appeals raised difficult questions on judicial jurisdiction.\nAnother case was \"United States v. Vuitch\", in which they considered the constitutionality of a District of Columbia statute which banned abortion except when the mother's life or health was endangered. The Court upheld the statute on the grounds that the word \"health\" was not unconstitutionally vague and placed the burden of proof concerning dangers to the life or health of the mother on the prosecutor instead of on the person who had performed the abortion.\nJustice William O. Douglas wrote a lengthy dissenting opinion to this case. He argued that the right to marital privacy and the limitation of family size from \"Griswold v. Connecticut\" also applied here, although he acknowledged that \"on the other side is the belief of many that the fetus, once formed, is a member of the human family and that mere personal inconvenience cannot justify the fetus' destruction.\" He also challenged the majority opinion with a series of hypothetical questions asking whether \"health\" might also include the stigma of having an illegitimate child, anxiety from the pregnancy being unwanted, the physical work of raising a child, the financial drain from the added expense of another child, and far off health risks that may never actually materialize in a similar fashion to how risks were warded off with prophylactic appendectomy. Douglas' dissent made a similar legal argument to the one used two years later in \"Roe v. Wade\". The following day after their decision was announced, the court voted to hear both \"Roe\" and \"Doe\".\nAccording to Blackmun, Stewart felt the cases were a straightforward application of \"Younger v. Harris\", and enough justices agreed to hear the cases to review whether they would be suitable for federal as opposed to only state courts. This sort of review was not about the constitutionality of abortion and would not have required evidence, witnesses, or a record of facts. The oral argument was scheduled by the full Court for December 13, 1971. Before the Court could hear the oral argument, Justices Hugo Black and John Marshall Harlan II retired. Chief Justice Warren Burger asked Justice Potter Stewart and Justice Blackmun to determine whether \"Roe\" and \"Doe\", among others, should be heard as scheduled. They recommended that the Court continue on as scheduled.\nOral argument.\nAs she began speaking for the oral argument, Sarah Weddington was unaware that the Court had decided to hear the case to decide which courts had jurisdiction to hear it rather than as an attempt to overturn abortion laws in a broad ruling. She began by bringing up constitutional reasons why the Court should overturn Texas's abortion law, but Justice Stewart asked questions directed towards the jurisdiction question instead. Weddington replied that she saw no problem with jurisdiction and continued to talk about a constitutional right to abortion. Overall, she spent between 20 and 30 minutes discussing jurisdiction and procedure instead of constitutional issues.\nIn his opening argument in defense of the abortion restrictions, attorney Jay Floyd made what was later described as the \"worst joke in legal history\". Appearing against two female lawyers, Floyd began, \"Mr. Chief Justice and may it please the Court. It's an old joke, but when a man argues against two beautiful ladies like this, they are going to have the last word.\" His remark was met with cold silence; abortion rights lawyer Margie Pitts Hames thought that Chief Justice Burger \"was going to come right off the bench at him. He glared him down.\"\nMcCorvey did not attend either of the oral arguments along with her two lawyers. After talking McCorvey out of getting an illegal abortion and getting her name signed on an affidavit for the lawsuit, Weddington did not speak again with McCorvey until four months after \"Roe\" was decided.\nInitial discussions.\nAfter the first argument session, Burger assigned the task of writing the Court's opinions for both \"Roe\" and \"Doe\" to Blackmun. Douglas suggested to Blackmun that Burger assigned the opinions to him out of malicious intention, but Blackmun disagreed. He knew that Burger could not write it himself because the subject of abortion was too controversial, and his opinions might get rejected by the majority. He also understood why the other justices could not be assigned to write the opinions: Douglas was too liberal for the public to accept his word. Likewise, he might split the Court's vote by writing something radical. In addition, the quality of his opinions had suffered recently. Brennan was the only Catholic on the Court, and he would have to face Catholic political groups which were against abortion. If Marshall wrote the opinions, the ruling would be perceived as being directed towards African Americans, and he would have to face the displeasure of African American political groups. Stewart would have trouble going far enough in legalizing abortion.\nAt this point, Black and Harlan had been replaced by William Rehnquist and Lewis F. Powell Jr., but the first argument had already occurred before they became Supreme Court justices. Justice Blackmun worked on a preliminary opinion for \"Roe\" which argued that Texas's law was unconstitutionally vague. This approach accommodated the claims of some doctors who were concerned that prosecutors might disagree with them over what constituted \"life\". Blackmun thought this approach would be a good way to avoid controversy which would come with saying there was a fundamental right to abortion. Brennan and Douglas disagreed with Blackmun and wrote to him that instead he needed to focus on privacy. After communicating with the other justices, Blackmun felt that his opinion did not adequately reflect his liberal colleagues' views. In March 1972, the court issued a ruling in \"Eisenstadt v. Baird\", a landmark case which applied the earlier marital privacy right now also to unmarried individuals.\nDouglas wrote to Blackmun in May 1972 that he thought there were four judges who were definitely willing to rule in the majority\u2014himself, Brennan, Stewart, and Marshall. Blackmun at one point thought all seven justices wanted to vote in the majority.\nIn May 1972, Blackmun proposed that the case be reargued. Justice Douglas threatened to write a dissent from the reargument order because he and the other liberal justices were suspicious that Rehnquist and Powell would vote to uphold the Texas abortion statutes. He was coaxed out of the action by his colleagues, and instead his dissent was merely mentioned in the reargument order without further statement or opinion. The case was reargued on October 11, 1972. Weddington continued to represent the pseudonymous Jane Roe, and Texas Assistant Attorney General Robert C. Flowers replaced Jay Floyd for Texas.\nA June 1972 memo written by Douglas to his colleagues discussing the case was leaked to and published in \"The Washington Post\" before the decision was published.\nDrafting the opinion.\nBlackmun continued to work on his opinions in both cases over the summer recess, even though there was no guarantee that he would be assigned to write them again. Over the recess, he spent a week researching the history of abortion at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, where he had worked in the 1950s. He talked daily on the phone with George Frampton, his 28-year-old law clerk who stayed behind in Washington, D.C. Frampton researched the history of abortion using a book authored by Lawrence Lader, the founding chairman of what is now called NARAL Pro-Choice America. Blackmun's papers made available since his death contain at least seven citations for Lader's 1966 book, \"Abortion\". Chapter 16 of his book, \"A Blueprint for Changing U.S. Abortion Laws\" predicted that if abortion were to be legalized, \"the possibility of community opposition is slight\". Lader also predicted that \"If such a theoretical case was carried to a high court, perhaps even the U.S. Supreme Court, and the judges confirmed a broad interpretation of the meaning of a threat to life, undoubtedly a landmark in abortion decisions would be reached.\"\nThe historical survey for \"Roe\" also referenced two articles by Cyril Means, who served as counsel to NARAL. In the articles, Means misrepresented the common law tradition in ways that were helpful to the \"Roe\" side. Roy Lucas, the principal attorney assisting Weddington and Coffee, had previously received a memo from his colleague David M. Tundermann about Means's scholarship. The memo stated that the conclusions in Means's articles \"sometimes strain credibility.\" It also stated:\nWhere the important thing is to win the case no matter how, however, I suppose I agree with Means's technique: begin with a scholarly attempt at historical research; if it doesn't work, fudge it as necessary; write a piece so long that others will read only your introduction and conclusion; then keep citing it until courts begin picking it up. This preserves the guise of impartial scholarship while advancing the proper ideological goals.\nAfter the Court held the second argument session, Powell said he would agree with Blackmun's conclusion but pushed for \"Roe\" to be the lead of the two abortion cases being considered. Powell also suggested that the Court strike down the Texas law on privacy grounds. Byron White was unwilling to sign on to Blackmun's opinion, and Justice Rehnquist had already decided to dissent.\nDuring the drafting process, the justices discussed the trimester framework at great length. Powell had suggested that the point where the state could intervene be placed at viability, which Thurgood Marshall supported as well. In an internal memo to the other justices before the majority decision was published, Justice Blackmun wrote: \"You will observe that I have concluded that the end of the first trimester is critical. This is arbitrary, but perhaps any other selected point, such as quickening or viability, is equally arbitrary.\" In the same memo he suggested that the end of the first trimester seemed more likely to get support from other justices and allowed states the ability to adjust their statutes. He was of the impression that doctors were concerned that recovering abortion patients would take up too many hospital beds, and that abortion patients later than the first trimester were more likely to require hospital beds than those whose fetuses were aborted earlier. Contrary to the justices who preferred viability, Douglas preferred the first-trimester line. Stewart said the lines were \"legislative\" and wanted more flexibility and consideration paid to state legislatures, though he joined Blackmun's decision. William Brennan proposed abandoning frameworks based on the age of the fetus and instead allowing states to regulate the procedure based on its safety for the mother.\nSupreme Court decision.\nOn January 22, 1973, the Supreme Court issued a 7\u20132 decision in favor of \"Jane Roe\" (Norma McCorvey) holding that women in the United States had a fundamental right to choose to have an abortion without excessive government restriction and striking down Texas's abortion ban as unconstitutional. The decision was issued together with a decision in a companion case, \"Doe v. Bolton\", which involved a similar challenge to Georgia's abortion laws.\nLarry Hammond, a law clerk for Powell, gave a \"Time\" reporter a copy of the decision \"on background\", expecting that it would be issued by the court before the next issue of \"Time\" was published; however, due to a delay in the decision's release, the text of the decision appeared on newsstands a few hours before it was published by the court. Burger demanded a meeting with \"Time\"'s editors and punishment for the leaker. Powell refused Hammond's resignation, on the grounds that \"Hammond had been double-crossed\" by the reporter.\nOpinion of the Court.\nJustice Harry Blackmun authored the opinion of the Court\u2014the \"majority opinion\"\u2014and was joined by six other justices: Chief Justice Warren Burger and Justices Potter Stewart, William J. Brennan Jr., William O. Douglas, Thurgood Marshall, and Lewis F. Powell Jr.\nMootness.\nAfter reciting the facts of the case, the Court's opinion first addressed several legal questions involving procedure and justiciability. These included mootness, a legal doctrine that prevents American federal courts from hearing cases that have ceased to be \"live\" controversies because of intervening events. Under a normal application of the doctrine, McCorvey's appeal would have been considered moot because she had already given birth to her child and therefore no longer had a pregnancy to abort.\nThe Court concluded that an established exception to the mootness doctrine allows consideration of cases that are \"capable of repetition, yet evading review\". Blackmun noted that McCorvey might get pregnant again, and pregnancy would normally conclude more quickly than an appellate process: \"If that termination makes a case moot, pregnancy litigation seldom will survive much beyond the trial stage, and appellate review will be effectively denied.\"\nAbortion and right to privacy.\nAfter dealing with mootness and standing, the Court proceeded to the main issue of the case: the constitutionality of Texas's abortion law. The Court first surveyed the status of abortion throughout the history of Roman law and the English and early American common law. It also reviewed the developments of medical procedures and technology used in abortions.\nFollowing its historical surveys, the Court introduced the concept of a constitutional \"right to privacy\" that it said had been intimated in earlier decisions such as \"Meyer v. Nebraska\" and \"Pierce v. Society of Sisters\", which involved parental control over childrearing, and \"Griswold v. Connecticut\", which involved the use of contraception. Then, \"with virtually no further explanation of the privacy value\", the Court ruled that regardless of exactly which provisions were involved, the U.S. Constitution and its guarantees of liberty covered a right to privacy that protected a pregnant woman's decision whether to abort a pregnancy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This right of privacy, whether it be founded in the Fourteenth Amendment's concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon state action, as we feel it is, or, as the District Court determined, in the Ninth Amendment's reservation of rights to the people, is broad enough to encompass a woman's decision whether to terminate her pregnancy.\nThe Court reasoned that outlawing abortions would infringe a pregnant woman's right to privacy for several reasons: having unwanted children \"may force upon the woman a distressful life and future\"; it may bring imminent psychological harm; caring for the child may tax the mother's physical and mental health; and because there may be \"distress, for all concerned, associated with the unwanted child\". The Court, however, rejected the notion that this right to privacy was absolute. It held instead that a woman's right to have an abortion must be balanced against other government interests, such as protecting maternal health and protecting the life of the fetus. The Court held that these government interests were sufficiently compelling to permit states to impose some limits on the right of a pregnant woman to choose to have an abortion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A State may properly assert important interests in safeguarding health, maintaining medical standards, and in protecting potential life. At some point in pregnancy, these respective interests become sufficiently compelling to sustain regulation of the factors that govern the abortion decision. ... We, therefore, conclude that the right of personal privacy includes the abortion decision, but that this right is not unqualified and must be considered against important state interests in regulation.\u2014\u200a\nTexas's lawyers had argued that limiting abortion to situations where the mother's life was in danger was justified because life began at the moment of conception, and therefore the state's governmental interest in protecting prenatal life applied to all pregnancies regardless of their stage. The Court, however, said there was no indication that the uses of the word \"person\" in the Constitution were meant to include fetuses, and it rejected Texas's argument that a fetus should be considered a \"person\" with a legal and constitutional right to life. The Court observed that there was still great disagreement over when an unborn fetus becomes a living being.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We need not resolve the difficult question of when life begins. When those trained in the respective disciplines of medicine, philosophy, and theology are unable to arrive at any consensus, the judiciary, in this point in the development of man's knowledge, is not in a position to speculate as to the answer.\u2014\u200a\nTo balance women's rights to privacy and state governments' interests in protecting mothers' health and prenatal life, the Court created the trimester framework. During the first trimester, when it was believed that the procedure was safer than childbirth, the Court ruled that a state government could place no restrictions on women's ability to choose to abort pregnancies other than imposing minimal medical safeguards, such as requiring abortions to be performed by licensed physicians. From the second trimester on, the Court ruled that evidence of increasing risks to the mother's health gave states a compelling interest that allowed them to enact medical regulations on abortion procedures so long as they were reasonable and \"narrowly tailored\" to protecting mothers' health. From the beginning of the third trimester on\u2014the point at which a fetus became viable under the medical technology available in the early 1970s\u2014the Court ruled that a state's interest in protecting prenatal life became so compelling that it could legally prohibit all abortions except where necessary to protect the mother's life or health.\nHaving completed its analysis, the Court concluded that Texas's abortion statutes were unconstitutional and struck them down.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A state criminal abortion statute of the current Texas type, that excepts from criminality only a life-saving procedure on behalf of the mother, without regard to pregnancy stage and without recognition of the other interests involved, is violative of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.\u2014\u200a\nConcurrences.\nThree justices from the majority filed concurring opinions in the case. Justice Potter Stewart wrote a concurring opinion in which he said that even though the Constitution makes no mention of the right to choose to have an abortion without interference, he thought the Court's decision was a permissible interpretation of the doctrine of substantive due process, which says that the Due Process Clause's protection of liberty extends beyond simple procedures and protects certain fundamental rights. Justice William O. Douglas's concurring opinion described his view that although the Court was correct to find that the right to choose to have an abortion was a fundamental right, he thought it would have been better to derive it from the Ninth Amendment\u2014which states that the fact that a right is not specifically enumerated in the Constitution shall not be construed to mean that American people do not possess it\u2014rather than through the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause.\nChief Justice Warren Burger wrote a concurrence in which he wrote that he thought it would be permissible to allow a state to require two physicians to certify an abortion before it could be performed. His concurrence also states:I do not read the Court's holdings today as having the sweeping consequences attributed to them by the dissenting Justices; the dissenting views discount the reality that the vast majority of physicians observe the standards of their profession, and act only on the basis of carefully deliberated medical judgments relating to life and health. Plainly, the Court today rejects any claim that the Constitution requires abortions on demand.\nThis has been interpreted as Chief Justice Burger thinking that medical standards and judgment would restrict the number of abortions. Instead of the law restricting abortions to limited circumstances as pre-\"Roe\", now doctors would get to do the restricting.\nThis understanding of \"Roe\" appears to be related to several statements in the majority opinion. Justice Blackmun's majority opinion states, \"the attending physician, in consultation with his patient, is free to determine, without regulation by the state, that, in his medical judgment, the patient's pregnancy should be terminated.\" It also states, \"For the stage, prior to approximately the end of the first trimester, the abortion decision and its effectuation must be left to the medical judgment of the pregnant woman's attending physician.\" Six days prior to January 22, Justice Blackmun prepared \"a transcript of what I shall say, and there should be at least some reason for the press not going all the way off the deep end.\" The unissued news release stated:\n...the Court does not today hold that the Constitution compels abortion on demand. It does not today pronounce that a pregnant woman has an absolute right to abortion. It does, for the first trimester of pregnancy, cast the abortion decision and the responsibility for it upon the attending physician.\nThese statements appear to indicate that the justices voting in the majority thought that patients had personal physicians. Earlier in American history it was once common for people to have individual doctors, but the nature of doctor-patient relationship had already changed prior to \"Roe\".\nDissents.\nTwo justices, Byron White and William Rehnquist, dissented from the Court's decision. White's dissent, which was issued with \"Roe\"'s companion case, \"Doe v. Bolton\", argued that: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I find nothing in the language or history of the Constitution to support the Court's judgment. The Court simply fashions and announces a new constitutional right for pregnant women and, with scarcely any reason or authority for its action, invests that right with sufficient substance to override most existing state abortion statutes. The upshot is that the people and the legislatures of the 50 States are constitutionally disentitled to weigh the relative importance of the continued existence and development of the fetus, on the one hand, against a spectrum of possible impacts on the woman, on the other hand. As an exercise of raw judicial power, the Court perhaps has authority to do what it does today; but, in my view, its judgment is an improvident and extravagant exercise of the power of judicial review that the Constitution extends to this Court.\nWhite also argued that the legality of abortion, \"for the most part, should be left with the people and the political processes the people have devised to govern their affairs.\"\nRehnquist's dissent compared the majority's use of substantive due process to the Court's repudiated use of the doctrine in the 1905 case \"Lochner v. New York\". He elaborated on several of White's points and asserted that the Court's historical analysis was flawed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To reach its result, the Court necessarily has had to find within the scope of the Fourteenth Amendment a right that was apparently completely unknown to the drafters of the Amendment. As early as 1821, the first state law dealing directly with abortion was enacted by the Connecticut Legislature. By the time of the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868, there were at least 36 laws enacted by state or territorial legislatures limiting abortion. While many States have amended or updated their laws, 21 of the laws on the books in 1868 remain in effect today.\nFrom this historical record, Rehnquist wrote, \"There apparently was no question concerning the validity of this provision or of any of the other state statutes when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted.\" He concluded \"the drafters did not intend to have the Fourteenth Amendment withdraw from the States the power to legislate with respect to this matter.\"\nReception.\nThere was a strong response to the decision shortly after it was issued. The Catholic Church condemned the ruling. Prominent organized groups that responded to \"Roe\" include National Association for the Repeal of Abortion Laws, which became the National Abortion Rights Action League in late 1973 to reflect the Court's repeal of restrictive laws, and the National Right to Life Committee.\nThe legal scholar Ronald Dworkin described it as \"undoubtedly the best-known case the United States Supreme Court has ever decided.\"\nSupport for \"Roe\" and abortion rights.\n1960s\u20131970s.\nIn the 1960s, there was an alliance between the population control movement and the abortion-rights movement in the United States. Abortion rights were especially supported by younger women within the population control movement. The cooperation was mostly due to feminists who wanted some of the popularity already enjoyed by the population control movement. In addition, population control advocates thought that legalizing abortion would help solve the coming population crisis that demographers had projected.\nIn 1973, Hugh Moore's Population Crisis Committee and John D. Rockefeller III's Population Council both publicly supported abortion rights following \"Roe\". Previously, public support for abortion rights within the population control movement instead came from less established organizations such as Zero Population Growth. An exception was Planned Parenthood-World Population, which supported repealing all laws against abortion in 1969. Together, population control and abortion rights advocates voiced the benefits of legalized abortion such as smaller welfare costs, fewer illegitimate births, and slower population growth. At the same time, the use of these arguments put them at odds with civil-rights movement leaders and Black Power activists who were concerned that abortion would be used to eliminate non-whites. H. Rap Brown denounced abortion as \"black genocide\", and Dick Gregory said that his \"answer to genocide, quite simply, is eight Black kids and another one on the way.\"\nSoon after \"Roe\", the population control movement suffered setbacks, which caused the movement to lose political support and instead appear divisive. On June 27, 1973, a lawsuit was filed concerning the Relf sisters, 14-year-old Minnie Lee and her 12-year-old sister Alice Lee. A worker at a federally-funded family planning clinic lied to their illiterate mother, saying they would get birth control shots. Instead, the Relf sisters were sterilized without their knowledge or consent. During the next fifteen months, 80 additional women came forward about their forced sterilizations, all belonging to minority races. Concerns rose that abortions would also become compulsory. During the 1974 World Population Conference in Bucharest, Romania, most developing nations argued that the developed nations' focus on population growth was an attempt to avoid solving the deeper causes of underdevelopment, such as the unequal structure of international relations. Instead, they wanted more favorable terms under the New International Economic Order. A draft plan with fertility targets was strongly opposed by the developing countries, which surprised the delegations from the United States, Canada, and Great Britain. The final plan omitted fertility targets and instead stated, \"A population policy may have a certain success if it constitutes an integral part of socio-economic development.\"\nAs members questioned the political benefits of population control rhetoric, the abortion-rights movement distanced itself from the population control movement. In October 1973, Robin Elliott circulated a memo to other Planned Parenthood members concerning opposition to \"Planned Parenthood's credibility in its reference to the population problem\". Instead, she thought they should use \"Roe\" inspired rhetoric about \"the reaffirmation of commitment to freedom of choice in parenthood.\" By 1978, a NARAL handbook denounced population control.\n21st century.\nInto the 21st century, advocates of \"Roe\" describe it as vital to the preservation of women's rights, personal freedom, bodily integrity, and privacy. Advocates have also reasoned that access to safe abortion and reproductive freedom generally are fundamental rights. Supporters of \"Roe\" contend that even if abortion rights are also supported by another portion of the constitution, the decision in 1973 accurately founds the right in the Fourteenth Amendment. Others support \"Roe\" despite concern that the fundamental right to abortion is found elsewhere in the Constitution but not in the portions referenced in the 1973 decision. They also tend to believe that the power balance between men and women is unequal, and that issues like access to birth control and political representation affect women's equality.\nOpinion polls in late 2021 indicated that while a majority of Americans oppose overturning \"Roe\", a sizable minority opposed overturning \"Roe\" but also desired to make abortion illegal in ways that \"Roe\" would not permit. This was attributed to poll respondents misunderstanding \"Roe v. Wade\" or misinterpreting the poll question. 2018\u20132019 polls showed that while 60 percent of Americans generally support abortion in the first trimester, this drops to 20 percent for the second trimester, even though \"Roe\" protects the right to abortion until the last weeks of the second trimester, and at the same time 69 percent said they would not like to see \"Roe\" overturned, compared to 29 percent who said they would like to see \"Roe\" overturned. Another poll showed that 43 percent of those who said abortion should be illegal in most or all cases opposed overturning \"Roe\", while 26 percent of those who said abortion should be legal in most or all cases supported overturning \"Roe\". Polls also found that men and women have similar views on abortion, which are linked to how people think about motherhood, sex, and women's social roles; supporters of \"Roe\" and abortion rights tend to see women's ability to make decisions about their bodies as fundamental to gender equality.\nMost polls in the late 2010s and early 2020s showed overwhelming support, at between 85 and 90 percent, among Americans that abortion should be legal in at least some circumstances, which varies or drops depending on the specifics. A January 2022 CNN poll found a 59% majority of Americans want their state to have laws that are \"more permissive than restrictive\" on abortion if \"Roe\" is overturned, 20% want their state to ban abortion entirely, and another 20% want it to be restricted but not banned. In two March 2022 polls, between 61 and 64 percent of Americans said abortion should be legal in most or all cases, while between 35 and 37 percent said abortion should be illegal in most or all cases. A May 2022 Gallup poll showed that 50% of Americans thought abortions should be legal under certain circumstances, with 35% saying it should be legal under any circumstances, and 15% saying it should be illegal in all circumstances, as well as a record number of Americans who identify as \"pro-choice\".\nBefore \"Roe\" was overturned in \"Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization\", a majority of Americans thought that \"Roe\" was safe and would not be overturned. Since the draft's leaks showed \"Roe\" to be overturned in \"Dobbs\", as happened in June 2022, abortion became a concern and a very important issue for Democrats, who previously lagged behind Republicans on this; some Americans, in particular liberals but also a few conservatives, may have become more aware of the popular support for \"Roe\", which they had previously understated. In June 2022, Gallup reported that a 61% majority of Americans say abortion should be legal in all or most cases, while 37% say abortion should be illegal in all or most cases. It also recorded the highest partisan divide since 1995, compared to the mid-1970s and throughout the 1980s when both Democrats and Republicans were closer on the issue. That same month, the Congregation L'Dor Va-Dor filed a lawsuit against a new law in Florida that would outlaw abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy, including in cases of rape or incest. Unlike other legal challenges to abortion restrictions in the United States that generally rely on the right to privacy established by \"Roe\", the synagogue argued that Florida's abortion law violates religious freedom, as \"Jewish law says that life begins at birth, not at conception.\"\nOpposition to \"Roe\".\nCondemnation by Catholic Bishops.\nThe Catholic Church condemned the ruling by the Supreme Court. Blackmun wrote in his diary, \"Abortion flak\u20143 Cardinals\u2014Vatican\u2014Rochester wires!\"\nJohn Cardinal Krol, the archbishop of Philadelphia who was also the president of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops and Terence Cardinal Cooke, the archbishop of New York, both issued statements condemning the ruling. Krol called the ruling \"an unspeakable tragedy for this nation\" that \"sets in motion developments which are terrifying to contemplate.\" Cooke called the decision a \"horrifying action\" and added:\nHow many millions of children prior to their birth will never live to see the light of today because of the shocking action of the majority of the United States Supreme Court today?\nOpposition to \"Roe\" but support for abortion rights.\nSome supporters of abortion rights oppose \"Roe v. Wade\" on the grounds that it laid a foundation for abortion in civil rights rather than in human rights, which are broader and would require government entities to take active measures to ensure every woman has access to abortion. This particular position is indicated by the use of rhetoric concerning \"reproductive justice\", which replaces earlier rhetoric centered around \"choice\", such as the \"pro-choice\" label. Reproductive justice proponents contend that factors permitting choice are unequal, thus perpetuating oppression and serving to divide women. Reproductive justice advocates instead want abortion to be considered an affirmative right that the government would be obligated to guarantee equal access to, even if the women seeking abortions are nonwhite, poor, or live outside major metropolitan areas. With a broader interpretation of the right to an abortion, it would be possible to require all new obstetricians to be in favor of abortion rights, lest as professionals they employ conscience clauses and refuse to perform abortions. In the 1989 decision of \"Webster v. Reproductive Health Services\", the Supreme Court ruled against an affirmative right to nontherapeutic abortions and noted that states would not be required to pay for them.\nSome in academia have equated the denial of abortion rights to compulsory motherhood, and reason that because of this abortion bans violate the Thirteenth Amendment: \"When women are compelled to carry and bear children, they are subjected to 'involuntary servitude' in violation of the Thirteenth Amendment. Even if the woman has stipulated to have consented to the risk of pregnancy, that does not permit the state to force her to remain pregnant.\" In 1993, a district court rejected an attempt to justify abortion rights apart from \"Roe\" and instead upon the basis that pregnancy and childrearing constituted involuntary servitude.\nOpposition to both \"Roe\" and abortion rights.\nEvery year, on the anniversary of the decision, opponents of abortion march up Constitution Avenue to the Supreme Court Building in Washington, D.C., in the March for Life. Around 250,000 people attended the march until 2010. Estimates put the 2011 and 2012 attendances at 400,000 each, and the 2013 March for Life drew an estimated 650,000 people. The march was started in October 1973 by Nellie Gray and the first march took place on January 22, 1974, to mark the first anniversary of \"Roe v. Wade\".\nOpponents of \"Roe\" say that the decision lacks a valid constitutional foundation. Like the dissenters in \"Roe\", they maintain that the Constitution is silent on the issue, and that proper solutions to the question would best be found via state legislatures and the legislative process, rather than through an all-encompassing ruling from the Supreme Court. Another argument against the \"Roe\" decision, as articulated by former president Ronald Reagan, is that, in the absence of consensus about when meaningful life begins, it is best to avoid the risk of doing harm.\nIn response to \"Roe v. Wade\", most states enacted or attempted to enact laws limiting or regulating abortion, such as laws requiring parental consent or parental notification for minors to obtain abortions; spousal mutual consent laws; spousal notification laws; laws requiring abortions to be performed in hospitals, not clinics; laws barring state funding for abortions; laws banning intact dilation and extraction, also known as partial-birth abortion; laws requiring waiting periods before abortions; and laws mandating that women read certain types of literature and watch a fetal ultrasound before undergoing an abortion. In 1976, Congress passed the Hyde Amendment, barring the federal government from using Medicaid to fund abortions except in cases of rape, incest, or a threat to the life of the mother. The Supreme Court struck down some state restrictions in a long series of cases stretching from the mid-1970s to the late 1980s, but upheld restrictions on funding, including the Hyde Amendment, in the case of \"Harris v. McRae\" (1980). Some opponents of abortion maintain that personhood begins at fertilization or conception, and should therefore be protected by the Constitution; the dissenting justices in \"Roe\" instead wrote that decisions about abortion \"should be left with the people and to the political processes the people have devised to govern their affairs.\"\nResponses within the legal profession.\nLiberal and feminist legal scholars have had various reactions to \"Roe\", not always giving the decision unqualified support. One argument is that Justice Blackmun reached the correct result but went about it the wrong way. Another is that the end achieved by \"Roe\" does not justify its means of judicial fiat.\nDavid Garrow said that the decision in \"Roe\" and also \"Doe v. Bolton\" \"owed a great amount of their substance and language\" to Justice Blackmun's law clerks, George Frampton and Randall Bezanson. He thought the extent of their contributions were remarkable, and that the clerks exhibited an \"unusually assertive and forceful manner\" in voicing their views to Justice Blackmun. In his research, it was the earliest significant example he found of this behavior pattern, which grew more consistent later on. In Garrow's evaluation, the clerks' contributions were \"historically significant and perhaps decisive\" in shaping the two decisions.\nIn response to Garrow, Edward Lazarus said that Justice Blackmun's later clerks like himself did not need as much direction on reproductive rights since they had Justice Blackmun's prior opinions to draw from. Lazarus thought that on at least some occasions when legal formulations were created for opinions to be published in Justice Blackmun's name, the justice himself was not engaged in originating every significant thought pattern that they employed. Lazarus agreed that Garrow's depiction of how the trimester framework came about was an example of one of these occasions. He concluded: \"The problem of excessive clerk delegation was less serious in Blackmun's chambers than Garrow suggests but is also more commonplace among the justices. The modern Supreme Court has deep problems in its decisional culture and the overuse of law clerks is an aspect of this.\"\nJustice John Paul Stevens, while agreeing with the decision, suggested that it should have been more narrowly focused on the issue of privacy. According to Stevens, if the decision had avoided the trimester framework and simply stated that the right to privacy included a right to choose abortion, \"it might have been much more acceptable\" from a legal standpoint. Before joining the Court, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg criticized the decision for venturing \"too far in the change it ordered\". Had the decision been limited in scope to only permit abortion during certain circumstances, \"physicians might have been less pleased with the decision, but the legislative trend might have continued in the direction in which it was headed\". After becoming a Supreme Court justice, Ginsburg faulted the Court's approach for being \"about a doctor's freedom to practice his profession as he thinks best... It wasn't woman-centered. It was physician-centered.\" Justice Ginsburg thought that \"Roe\" was originally intended to complement Medicaid funding for abortions, but this did not happen. About \"Harris v. McRae\", which upheld restrictions on Medicaid abortion funding, she said:\nYes, the ruling about that surprised me. Frankly I had thought that at the time \"Roe\" was decided, there was concern about population growth and particularly growth in populations that we don't want to have too many of. So that \"Roe\" was going to be then set up for Medicaid funding for abortion. Which some people felt would risk coercing women into having abortions when they didn't really want them. But when the court decided \"McRae\", the case came out the other way. And then I realized that my perception of it had been altogether wrong.\nWatergate prosecutor Archibald Cox thought the \"failure to confront the issue in principled terms leaves the opinion to read like a set of hospital rules and regulations whose validity is good enough this week but will be destroyed with new statistics upon the medical risks of child birth and abortion or new advances in providing for the separate existence of a fetus. Neither historian, nor layman, nor lawyer will be persuaded that all the prescriptions of Justice Blackmun are part of the Constitution.\"\nIn a highly cited \"Yale Law Journal\" article published in the months after the decision, the American legal scholar John Hart Ely criticized \"Roe\" as a decision that was disconnected from American constitutional law. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What is frightening about \"Roe\" is that this super-protected right is not inferable from the language of the Constitution, the framers' thinking respecting the specific problem in issue, any general value derivable from the provisions they included, or the nation's governmental structure... The problem with \"Roe\" is not so much that it bungles the question it sets itself, but rather that it sets itself a question the Constitution has not made the Court's business... [\"Roe\"] is bad because it is bad constitutional law, or rather because it is \"not\" constitutional law and gives almost no sense of an obligation to try to be.\nAmerican constitutional law scholar Laurence Tribe said: \"One of the most curious things about \"Roe\" is that, behind its own verbal smokescreen, the substantive judgment on which it rests is nowhere to be found.\" Centrist-liberal law professors Alan Dershowitz, Cass Sunstein, and Kermit Roosevelt III have also expressed disappointment with \"Roe v. Wade\".\nJeffrey Rosen, as well as Michael Kinsley, echo Ginsburg, arguing that a legislative movement would have been the correct way to build a more durable consensus in support of abortion rights. William Saletan wrote, \"Blackmun's papers vindicate every indictment of \"Roe\": invention, overreach, arbitrariness, textual indifference.\" Benjamin Wittes argued that \"Roe\" \"disenfranchised millions of conservatives on an issue about which they care deeply.\" Edward Lazarus, a former Blackmun clerk who \"loved \"Roe\"'s author like a grandfather\", wrote: \"As a matter of constitutional interpretation and judicial method, \"Roe\" borders on the indefensible... Justice Blackmun's opinion provides essentially no reasoning in support of its holding. And in the almost 30 years since \"Roe\"'s announcement, no one has produced a convincing defense of \"Roe\" on its own terms.\"\nRichard Epstein thought that the majority opinion relied on a book written by William Lloyd Prosser about tort law when it stated that it \"is said\" recovery of damages was allowed \"only if the fetus was viable, or at least quick, when the injuries were sustained\". He compared this to what was in fact written in the book, which was that \"when actually faced with the issue for decision, almost all of the jurisdictions have allowed recovery even though the injury occurred during the early weeks of pregnancy, when the child was neither viable nor quick.\"\nMatt Bruenig, lawyer and founder of the People's Policy Project, criticized \"Roe\" as being \"weaker than normal\" and observed that similarly broad interpretations of the Constitution could be used to argue the opposite outcome, saying \"right now we have a constitutional right to an abortion\u2014you could also constitutionally ban abortion. If you wanted to, someone could bring a case, file it in a district court, hit the appeal button twice, and then if you get five judges together, the opinion would be the easiest thing in the world to write. You would say, 'the Fourteenth Amendment protects the right to life, liberty, and property without due process and all that shit. So we're looking at that, and we think that abortion takes a life and so we think that in fact states may not permit abortion'. So you could constitutionally ban it and say that no state or federal government is allowed to legalize abortion\".\nThe assertion that the Supreme Court was making a legislative decision is often repeated by opponents of the ruling. The \"viability\" criterion was still in effect, although the point of viability changed as medical science found ways to help premature babies survive.\nLater responses by those involved.\nHarry Blackmun.\nJustice Blackmun, who authored the \"Roe\" decision, subsequently had mixed feelings about his role in the case. During a 1974 television interview, he stated that \"Roe\" \"will be regarded as one of the worst mistakes in the court's history or one of its great decisions, a turning point.\"\nIn a 1983 interview for a newspaper journalist, he responded that he was \"mildly annoyed at those, law professors included, who personalize it\" because \"it was a decision of the court, not my decision. There were seven votes.\" As a Methodist, he felt hurt that Methodist pastors wrote condemning letters to him, but as time passed, the letters did not hurt \"as much anymore\". In defense he responded, \"People misunderstand. I am not for abortion. I hope my family never has to face such a decision\", noting that \"I still think it was a correct decision\" because \"we were deciding a constitutional issue, not a moral one.\" He described \"Roe\" as \"a no-win case\" and predicted that, \"fifty years from now, depending on the fate of the proposed constitutional amendment, abortion probably will not be as great a legal issue. I think it will continue to be a moral issue, however.\"\nHe reflected that his role in the decision meant he was most known as the \"author of the abortion decision\". His response was that \"we all pick up tags. I'll carry this one to my grave\" and \"so be it\".\nIn 1987, Justice Blackmun explained in a letter to Chief Justice Rehnquist:\nI remember that the old Chief appointed a screening committee, chaired by Potter, to select those cases that could (it was assumed) be adequately heard by a Court of seven. I was on that little committee. We did not do a good job. Potter pressed for \"Roe v. Wade\" and \"Doe v. Bolton\" to be heard and did so in the misapprehension that they involved nothing more than an application of \"Younger v. Harris\". How wrong we were.\nIn 1991, he regretted how the Court decided to hear \"Roe\" and \"Doe\" in a televised interview: \"It was a serious mistake... We did a poor job. I think the committee should have deferred them until we had a full Court.\"\nIn 1992, he stood by the analytical framework he established in \"Roe\" during the subsequent \"Casey\" case. He often gave speeches and lectures promoting \"Roe v. Wade\" and criticizing \"Roe\"'s critics.\nNorma McCorvey.\nA few years after the Supreme Court decided \"Roe\", Norma McCorvey made a claim\u2014which she recanted many years later\u2014that she had a nightmare about \"little babies lying around with daggers in their hearts\". She said this was the first of recurring nightmares that kept her awake at night. She became worried and wondered, \"What really, had I done?\" and \"Well, how do they kill a baby inside a mother's stomach anyway?\" McCorvey later claimed:\nI couldn't get the thought out of my mind. I realize it sounds very na\u00efve, especially for a woman who had already conceived and delivered three children. Though I had seen and experienced more than my share of the world, there were some things about which I still didn't have a clue\u2014and this was one of them. Ironically enough, Jane Roe may have known less about abortion than anyone else.\nMcCorvey joined with and accompanied others in the anti-abortion movement. During this time, McCorvey said that she had publicly lied about being raped and apologized for making the false claim. Norma McCorvey became part of the movement against abortion from 1995 until shortly before her death in 2017. In 1998, she testified to Congress:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was my pseudonym, Jane Roe, which had been used to create the \"right\" to abortion out of legal thin air. But Sarah Weddington and Linda Coffee never told me that what I was signing would allow women to come up to me 15, 20 years later and say, \"Thank you for allowing me to have my five or six abortions. Without you, it wouldn't have been possible.\" Sarah never mentioned women using abortions as a form of birth control. We talked about truly desperate and needy women, not women already wearing maternity clothes.\nIn 2002, along with Sandra Cano (Mary Doe) from \"Doe v. Bolton\" and Bernard Nathanson, a co-founder of NARAL Pro-Choice America, McCorvey appeared in a television advertisement intended to persuade the Bush administration to nominate Supreme Court Justices who would oppose abortion.\nAs a party to the original litigation, she sought to reopen the case in U.S. District Court in Texas to have \"Roe v. Wade\" overturned. However, the Fifth Circuit decided that her case was moot, in \"McCorvey v. Hill\". In a concurring opinion, Judge Edith Jones agreed that McCorvey was raising legitimate questions about emotional and other harm suffered by women who have had abortions, about increased resources available for the care of unwanted children, and about new scientific understanding of fetal development. However, Jones said she was compelled to agree that the case was moot. On February 22, 2005, the Supreme Court refused to grant a writ of certiorari, and McCorvey's appeal ended.\nIn an interview shortly before her death, McCorvey stated that she had taken an anti-abortion position because she had been paid to do so and that her campaign against abortion had been an act. She also stated that it did not matter to her if women wanted to have an abortion and they should be free to choose. Rob Schenck, a Methodist pastor and activist who once had anti-abortion views stated that he and others helped entice McCorvey to claim she changed sides and also stated that what they had done with her was \"highly unethical\" and he had \"profound regret\" over the matter.\nFrank Pavone, a priest with whom McCorvey talked after the interview, reflected after her death that \"There was no indication whatsoever, at the end of her life,\" that she had given up her pro-life positions. Pavone stated that following the interview, McCorvey talked positively with him about a message she wanted him to convey at the next March for Life. The message concerned encouraging young people to oppose abortion.\nSarah Weddington.\nAfter arguing in \"Roe v. Wade\" at the age of 26, Sarah Weddington was elected to the Texas House of Representatives for three terms. Weddington also was general counsel for the U.S. Department of Agriculture, an assistant to President Jimmy Carter, lecturer at the Texas Wesleyan University School of Law, and speaker and adjunct professor at the University of Texas at Austin.\nIn a 1993 speech for the Institute for Educational Ethics in Oklahoma, Weddington discussed her conduct during \"Roe\" and stated, \"My conduct may not have been totally ethical. But I did it for what I thought were good reasons.\"\nIn 1998, she said that the lack of doctors to abort fetuses could undermine \"Roe\": \"When I look back on the decision, I thought these words had been written in granite. But I've learned it was not granite. It was more like sandstone. The immediate problem is, where will the doctors come from?\" Weddington died on December 26, 2021.\nSubsequent judicial developments.\n\"Roe\" was embedded in a long line of cases concerning personal liberty in the realm of privacy, since \"Roe\" was based on individual liberty cases concerning privacy like \"Meyer v. Nebraska\" (1923), \"Griswold v. Connecticut\" (1965), \"Loving v. Virginia\" (1967) and \"Eisenstadt v. Baird\" (1972) and became a foundation for individual liberty cases concerning privacy like \"Lawrence v. Texas\" (2003) and \"Obergefell v. Hodges\" (2015).\nTwo months after the decision in \"Roe\", the Court issued a ruling about school funding in \"San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez\". The majority opinion cited \"Roe v. Wade\" to assert that privacy itself was a fundamental right, while procreation implicitly counted as \"among the rights of personal privacy protected under the Constitution.\" In his dissenting opinion, Justice Thurgood Marshall stated that \"Roe v. Wade\" \"reaffirmed its initial decision in \"Buck v. Bell\"\", and noted where \"Buck\" was cited in \"Roe\". He found \"Roe\" to be a continuation of the Court's practice of granting only a limited stature to the right to procreate, since the Court's decision treated procreation as less important than the right to privacy. He observed that although past decisions showed strong concern against the state discriminating against certain groups concerning procreation and certain other rights, the \"Court has never said or indicated that these are interests which independently enjoy full-blown constitutional protection.\" Instead, in \"Roe\", \"the importance of procreation has indeed been explained on the basis of its intimate relationship with the constitutional right of privacy...\" Justice Marshall thought that the method used in \"Rodriguez\" for determining which rights were more fundamental was wrong, and proposed a different method which would result in procreation receiving greater legal protection.\nThe legal interaction between \"Roe v Wade\", the Fourteenth Amendment as understood post-\"Roe\", and changing medical technology and standards caused the development of civil suits for wrongful birth and wrongful life claims. Not all states permit a parent to sue for wrongful birth or a child to sue for wrongful life. The constitutionality of wrongful life claims is controversial within the legal profession, even for states which currently allow them. Pre-\"Roe\", a state court dismissed a lawsuit making both a wrongful birth and life claim, which was unsuccessfully appealed to the Supreme Court of New Jersey.\nPrior to \"Roe\", the Chancery Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey found that a pregnant Jehovah's Witness woman could be ordered to submit to lifesaving blood transfusions due to the state's compelling interest \"to save her life and the life of her unborn child.\" The Court appointed a legal guardian to represent the unborn child, and ordered the guardian to consent to blood transfusions and to \"seek such other relief as may be necessary to preserve the lives of the mother and the child\". After \"Roe\", the Fifth District Appellate Court in Illinois ruled that medical professionals had wrongly transfused blood into a pregnant Jehovah's Witness woman on the basis from \"Roe\" that the \"state's important and legitimate interest becomes compelling at viability\" and her fetus was not yet viable.\nPresident Reagan, who supported legislative restrictions on abortion, began making federal judicial appointments in 1981. Reagan denied that there was any litmus test: \"I have never given a litmus test to anyone that I have appointed to the bench... . I feel very strongly about those social issues, but I also place my confidence in the fact that the one thing that I do seek are judges that will interpret the law and not write the law. We've had too many examples in recent years of courts and judges legislating.\"\nIn addition to Justices White and Rehnquist, Reagan-appointee Justice Sandra Day O'Connor began dissenting from the Court's abortion cases, arguing in 1983 that the trimester-based analysis devised by the \"Roe\" Court was \"unworkable.\" Shortly before his retirement, Chief Justice Warren Burger suggested in 1986 that \"Roe\" be \"reexamined\"; the associate justice who filled Burger's place on the Court\u2014Justice Antonin Scalia\u2014vigorously opposed \"Roe\". Concern about overturning \"Roe\" played a major role in the defeat of Robert Bork's nomination to the Court in 1987; the man eventually appointed to replace \"Roe\"-supporter Justice Lewis Powell was Justice Anthony Kennedy.\nThe justices voting in the majority on the Federal Constitutional Court in pre-unification West Germany rejected the trimester framework in the \"German Constitutional Court abortion decision, 1975\" on the basis that development during pregnancy is a continuous whole rather than made up of three trimesters. The Court found that the right to life extends also to the unborn and that life begins on the fourteenth day after conception. It also found that the liberties of pregnant mothers were qualified by the existence of another life inside them. The Court found that \"A compromise which guarantees the protection of the life of the one about to be born and permits the pregnant woman the freedom of abortion is not possible since the interruption of pregnancy always means the destruction of the unborn life.\" It ruled that the fetus must be protected, and the first responsibility for this lies with the mother, with a second responsibility in the hands of the legislature. The Court allowed for a balancing of rights between the mother and unborn child, but required that the rights of each be considered within a framework which acknowledged the supreme, fundamental value of human life. Legislation allowing abortion could be constitutional if the rights of the unborn persons were acknowledged in this manner.\nTwo minority justices in the ruling for the German Constitutional Court abortion decision in 1975 remarked that \"the Supreme Court of the United States has even regarded punishment for the interruption of pregnancy, performed by a physician with the consent of the pregnant woman in the first third of pregnancy, as a violation of fundamental rights. This would, according to German constitutional law, go too far indeed.\"\nIn 1988, the Supreme Court of Canada used the rulings in both \"Roe\" and \"Doe v. Bolton\" as grounds to find Canada's federal law limiting abortions to certified hospitals unconstitutional in \"R. v. Morgentaler\".\n\"Planned Parenthood v. Danforth\".\nIn \"Planned Parenthood v. Danforth\", 428 U.S. 52 (1976), the plaintiffs challenged a Missouri statute which regulated abortion. In the regulations for abortions on demand, the state required prior written consent from a parent if the patient was a minor or a spouse if the patient was married. For pregnancies at 12 weeks and later, the statute also banned saline abortions, in which chemicals are injected into the amniotic sac to burn the fetus. The portions of the statute involving parental or spousal consent and prohibiting saline abortions were struck down.\n\"Floyd v. Anders\".\nIn \"Floyd v. Anders\", 440 F. Supp. 535 (D.S.C. 1977), South Carolina attempted to prosecute a doctor for illegal abortion and murder after he attempted to abort an African American boy at 25 weeks. During the abortion, the boy was born alive and survived for 20 days before dying. His prosecution was blocked by Judge Clement Haynsworth, and shortly afterwards by a unanimous three judge panel for the U.S. District Court for the District of South Carolina. Judge Haynsworth, writing for the panel, stated \"Indeed, the Supreme Court declared the fetus in the womb is neither alive nor a person within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment.\" John T. Noonan criticized this from an anti-abortion perspective, stating that \"Judge Haynsworth had replaced the Supreme Court's test of potential ability to live with a new test of actual ability to live indefinitely. He also had spelled out what was implied in \"Roe v. Wade\" but never actually stated there. For the American legal systems the fetus in the womb was not alive.\" The standard in \"Roe\" for viability outside the womb required a \"capability of meaningful life\". Without this capability, the state had no compelling \"important and legitimate interest in potential life\".\n\"Webster v. Reproductive Health Services\".\nIn a 5\u20134 decision in 1989's \"Webster v. Reproductive Health Services\", Chief Justice Rehnquist, writing for the Court, declined to explicitly overrule \"Roe\", because \"none of the challenged provisions of the Missouri Act properly before us conflict with the Constitution.\" In particular, the Court found that the ability to have a nontherapeutic abortion was not an affirmative right of the sort that required the state to pay for it. In this case, the Court upheld several abortion restrictions, and modified the \"Roe\" trimester framework.\nIn concurring opinions, Justice O'Connor refused to reconsider \"Roe\", and Justice Antonin Scalia criticized the Court and Justice O'Connor for not overruling \"Roe\". Justice Blackmun stated in his dissent that Justices White, Kennedy and Rehnquist were \"callous\" and \"deceptive\", that they deserved to be charged with \"cowardice and illegitimacy\", and that their plurality opinion \"foments disregard for the law.\" White had recently opined that the majority reasoning in \"Roe v. Wade\" was \"warped.\"\n\"Planned Parenthood v. Casey\".\nDuring initial deliberations for \"Planned Parenthood v. Casey\" (1992), an initial majority of five justices (Rehnquist, White, Scalia, Kennedy, and Thomas) were willing to effectively overturn \"Roe\". Justice Kennedy changed his mind after the initial conference, and Justices O'Connor, Kennedy, and Souter joined Justices Blackmun and Stevens to reaffirm the central holding of \"Roe\", but instead of justifying the liberty to abort as being based on privacy as in \"Roe\", it justified the liberty in a broader manner. The opinion asserted an individual's liberty to choose concerning family life and also protection from legal enforcement intended to maintain traditional sex roles, writing, \"Our law affords constitutional protection to personal decisions relating to marriage, procreation, contraception, family relationships, child rearing, and education...\" and against the state insisting \"upon its own vision of the woman's role, however dominant that vision has been in the course of our history and our culture. The destiny of the woman must be shaped to a large extent on her own conception of her spiritual imperatives and her place in society.\"\nThe plurality of justices stated that abortion-related legislation should be reviewed based on the undue burden standard instead of the strict scrutiny standard from \"Roe\".\nThe plurality also found that a fetus was now viable at 23 or 24 weeks rather than at the 28-week line from 1973. They also felt that fetal viability was \"more workable\" than the trimester framework. They abandoned the trimester framework due to two basic flaws: \"in its formulation it misconceives the nature of the pregnant woman's interest; and in practice it undervalues the State's interest in potential life, as recognized in \"Roe\".\" Only Justice Blackmun wanted to retain \"Roe\" entirely and issue a decision completely in favor of Planned Parenthood. Prior to this, he had considered a Pennsylvania viability-based law to be unconstitutionally vague in his majority opinion for \"Colautti v. Franklin\".\nJustice Scalia's dissent asserted that abortion is not a liberty protected by the Constitution for the same reason bigamy was not protected either: because the Constitution does not mention it, and because longstanding traditions have permitted it to be legally proscribed. He also asked:\nPrecisely why is it that, at the magical second when machines currently in use (though not necessarily available to the particular woman) are able to keep an unborn child alive apart from its mother, the creature is suddenly able (under our Constitution) to be protected by law, whereas before that magical second it was not? That makes no more sense than according infants legal protection only after the point when they can feed themselves.\n\"Stenberg v. Carhart\".\nDuring the 1990s, Nebraska enacted a law banning partial-birth abortion. The law allowed another second-trimester abortion procedure known as dilation and evacuation. In 2000, the Supreme Court struck down the law by a 5\u20134 vote in \"Stenberg v. Carhart\", with Justice Stephen Breyer writing for the majority that sometimes partial-birth abortion \"would be the safest procedure\". Justice O'Connor wrote a concurrence stating Nebraska was actually banning both abortion methods. Justices Ginsburg and Stevens joined each other's concurrences. Justice Stevens stated that \"the notion that either of these two equally gruesome procedures performed at this late stage of gestation is more akin to infanticide than the other... is simply irrational.\" Justice Ginsburg stated that the \"law does not save any fetus from destruction, for it targets only 'a method of performing abortion'.\"\nJustice Thomas's dissent stated, \"The 'partial birth' gives the fetus an autonomy which separates it from the right of the woman to choose treatments for her own body.\" Justice Scalia joined Justice Thomas's dissent and also wrote his own, stating that partial-birth abortion is \"so horrible that the most clinical description of it evokes a shudder of revulsion\" and that this case proved \"Casey\" was \"unworkable\". Chief Justice Rehnquist joined the two dissents by Justices Scalia and Thomas.\nJustice Kennedy, who had co-authored \"Casey\", dissented in \"Stenberg\". He described in graphic detail exactly how a fetus dies while being dismembered during a dilation and evacuation procedure. He reasoned that since Nebraska was not seeking to prohibit it, the state was free to ban partial-birth abortion.\n\"Gonzales v. Carhart\".\nIn 2003, Congress passed the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act, which led to a lawsuit in the case of \"Gonzales v. Carhart\". The Court previously ruled in \"Stenberg v. Carhart\" that a state's ban on partial-birth abortion was unconstitutional because such a ban did not have an exception for the health of the woman. The membership of the Court changed after \"Stenberg\", with Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Samuel Alito replacing Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice O'Connor. The ban at issue in \"Gonzales v. Carhart\" was similar to the one in \"Stenberg\", but had been adjusted to comply with the Court's ruling.\nOn April 18, 2007, a 5 to 4 decision upheld the constitutionality of the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act. Justice Kennedy wrote the majority opinion that Congress was within its power to ban partial-birth abortion. The Court left the door open for as-applied challenges. The opinion did not address whether \"Casey\" remained valid. Instead it only assumed \"Casey\" was valid \"for the purposes of this opinion\".\nChief Justice John Roberts and Justices Scalia, Thomas, and Alito joined the majority. Justice Thomas filed a concurring opinion, joined by Justice Scalia, contending that the Court's prior decisions in \"Roe v. Wade\" and \"Planned Parenthood v. Casey\" should be reversed. They also noted that the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act may have exceeded the powers of Congress under the Commerce Clause but that the question was not raised.\nJustice Ginsburg, joined by Justices Stevens, Souter, and Breyer, dissented, contending that the ruling ignored precedent and that abortion rights should instead be justified by equality.\n\"Dubay v. Wells\".\n\"Dubay v. Wells\" was a 2006 paternity case where a man argued he should not have to pay child support for a child he did not want to parent. The case was billed as \"\"Roe v. Wade\" for men\".\nOn March 9, 2006, Dubay filed a lawsuit before the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan. Michigan's Attorney General, Joel D. McGormley, made a motion to have the case dismissed. On July 17, 2006, District Court Judge David Lawson agreed and dismissed Dubay's lawsuit. He appealed it once, to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, which also dismissed it, and stated:\nDubay's claim that a man's right to disclaim fatherhood would be analogous to a woman's right to abortion rests upon a false analogy. In the case of a father seeking to opt out of fatherhood and thereby avoid child support obligations, the child is already in existence and the state therefore has an important interest in providing for his or her support.\n\"Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt\".\nIn 2013, the Texas legislature enacted restrictions which required abortion doctors to have admitting privileges at a local hospital and required abortion clinics to have facilities equivalent to others which conducted outpatient surgery. On June 27, 2016, the Supreme Court in a 5\u20133 decision for \"Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt\" struck down these restrictions.\nThe majority opinion by Justice Breyer struck down these two provisions of Texas law in a facial manner\u2014that is, the very words of the provisions were invalid, no matter how they might be applied in any practical situation. The ruling also stated that the task of judging whether a law puts an undue burden on a woman's right to abortion belongs with the courts and not the legislatures.\n\"Box v. Planned Parenthood\".\nIn 2016, Indiana passed House Bill 1337, enacting a law which regulated what is done with fetal remains and banning abortion for sexist, racist, or ableist purposes. In its unsigned 2019 ruling for \"Box v. Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc.\", the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the regulations about fetal remains, but declined to hear the remainder of the law, which had been blocked by lower courts. Justice Ginsburg dissented from the part of the ruling about fetal remains on the basis that the regulations violated \"Casey\". She also criticized Justice Thomas over his use of the word \"mother\" in his concurrence.\nJustice Sotomayor stated that she wished the Court would not have heard the case at all. Justice Thomas wrote a concurring opinion which expressed concern that the theory presented in \"Freakonomics\" echoed the views of the eugenics movement. He warned that \"a constitutional right to an abortion based solely on the race, sex, or disability of an unborn child, as Planned Parenthood advocates, would constitutionalize the views of the 20th-century eugenics movement\". He predicted, \"Although the Court declines to wade into these issues today, we cannot avoid them forever.\"\n\"Whole Woman's Health v. Jackson\".\nIn 2021, the state of Texas devised a legal workaround to \"Roe\" that allowed it to successfully outlaw abortion at six weeks of pregnancy despite the continued existence of \"Roe\" and \"Casey\". In the Texas Heartbeat Act, the legislature created a novel enforcement mechanism that bars state officials from enforcing the statute and authorizes private individuals to sue anyone who performs or assists an illegal abortion. Because the Act is enforced by private citizens rather than government officials, there are no state officials that abortion providers can sue to stop the enforcement of the law, and they cannot obtain judicial relief that will stop private lawsuits from being initiated against them. This has produced an end-run around \"Roe\" because the threat of private civil-enforcement lawsuits has forced abortion providers to comply with the Act despite its incompatibility with the Supreme Court's abortion pronouncements. Other states have copied this enforcement mechanism to sidestep \"Roe\" and immunize their anti-abortion statutes from judicial review. This maneuver has weakened \"Roe\" and undercut the federal judiciary's ability to protect abortion rights from state legislation.\n\"Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization\".\n\"Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization\" is a case that was a legal challenge to Mississippi's 2018 Gestational Age Act, which had banned abortions after 15 weeks with exceptions only for medical emergencies or fetal abnormalities. Federal courts had enjoined the state from enforcing the law after the state's only abortion clinic, Jackson Women's Health Organization, filed suit immediately after passage; the federal courts stated that the law violated the previously established 24-week point of viability. Mississippi asked the Supreme Court to hear the case on June 15, 2020, and the Court certified the petition on May 17, 2021, limited to the question, \"Whether all pre-viability prohibitions on elective abortions are unconstitutional.\" The Court chose not to take up two other questions that Mississippi wanted to bring before the Court.\nOn May 2, 2022, \"Politico\" released a leaked first draft of a majority opinion written by Justice Samuel Alito, which had been circulated among the court in February 2022. Alito's draft wrote, \"We hold that \"Roe\" and \"Casey\" must be overruled. It is time to heed the Constitution and return the issue of abortion to the people's elected representatives.\" The release of a draft opinion for a pending case was unprecedented in recent Supreme Court history. The document was not a final decision, and the justices were still able to change their votes. The document was thought to reflect both the justices' preliminary voting and the outcome of the internal Court procedure for deciding who is assigned to write the majority opinion. A press release from the Supreme Court confirmed the leaked document's authenticity, and Chief Justice John Roberts in a statement described its release as a \"betrayal of the confidences of the Court\". The leaked draft regarding the decision sparked protests.\nOn June 24, 2022, the Supreme Court ruled 6\u20133 to uphold Mississippi's Gestational Age Act, and 5\u20134 to overrule \"Roe\" and \"Casey\". Similar to the leaked draft opinion, the opinion of the court written by Justice Alito stated that \"Roe\" was \"egregiously wrong from the start\" and its reasoning \"exceptionally weak\". It also stated that \"Roe\" has \"enflamed debate and deepened division\" and that overruling it would \"return the issue of abortion to the people's elected representatives\". The majority opinion relied on a constitutional historical view of abortion rights, saying, \"The Constitution makes no reference to abortion, and no such right is implicitly protected by any constitutional provision.\" The reasoning was that \"abortion couldn't be constitutionally protected. Until the latter part of the 20th century, such a right was entirely unknown in American law. Indeed, when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted, three quarters of the States made abortion a crime at all stages of pregnancy.\" Some historians argued that this view is incomplete, with Leslie J. Reagan saying that Alito \"speciously claims\" the truth of his assertions. In their dissent, Justices Stephen Breyer, Elena Kagan, and Sonia Sotomayor jointly wrote, \"The right \"Roe\" and \"Casey\" recognized does not stand alone. To the contrary, the Court has linked it for decades to other settled freedoms involving bodily integrity, familial relationships, and procreation. Most obviously, the right to terminate a pregnancy arose straight out of the right to purchase and use contraception. In turn, those rights led, more recently, to rights of same-sex intimacy and marriage. Either the mass of the majority's opinion is hypocrisy, or additional constitutional rights are under threat. It is one or the other.\"\nRole in politics.\nPresidential positions.\nGenerally, presidential opinions following \"Roe\" have been split along major party lines. The decision was opposed by presidents Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan, George W. Bush, and Donald Trump. President George H. W. Bush also opposed \"Roe\", though he had supported abortion rights earlier in his career.\nPresident Richard Nixon appointed Justices Burger, Blackmun, and Powell who voted with the majority, and Justice Rehnquist who dissented. President Nixon did not publicly comment about \"Roe v. Wade\".\nDuring his early career, President Jimmy Carter supported legalizing abortion in order to save the life of a woman or in the event of birth defects, or in other extreme circumstances. As president, he thought abortion was wrong, but stated that he \"accepted my the \"Roe v. Wade\" Supreme Court ruling, and at the same time attempted in every way possible to minimize the number of abortions.\" In 2012 he reflected, \"I never have believed that Jesus Christ would approve of abortions and that was one of the problems I had when I was president having to uphold \"Roe v. Wade\"...\" He urged the Democratic Party to take a position supporting pregnant mothers to minimize economic and social factors driving women to get abortions. He also wanted the party to take stand in favor of banning abortion except for those whose lives \"are in danger or who are pregnant as a result of rape or incest.\"\n\"Roe\" was supported by presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama. In 1981, then-Senator Joe Biden voted for a constitutional amendment allowing states to overturn \"Roe v. Wade\", which he voted against the following year. In a 2007 memoir, Biden expressed an opinion that although he was \"personally opposed to abortion\" he did not have the \"right to impose\" his personal opposition onto others. In 2021, he described himself to reporters as \"a strong supporter of \"Roe v. Wade\"\", and added, \"And I under\u2014 I respect people who think that\u2014who don't support \"Roe v. Wade\"; I respect their views. I respect them\u2014they\u2014those who believe life begins at the moment of conception and all. I respect that. Don't agree, but I respect that. I'm not going to impose that on people.\"\nFederal bills or laws regarding \"Roe\".\nFederal bills, amendments, or laws regarding \"Roe\" include the Women's Health Protection Act, Freedom of Choice Act, Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act, Born-Alive Infants Protection Act, Unborn Victims of Violence Act, Interstate Abortion Bill, No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act, Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 1995, Sanctity of Human Life Act, Sanctity of Life Act, Hyde Amendment, Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act, and the Baby Doe Law.\nFollowing the passage of the Texas Heartbeat Act and the Supreme Court's acceptance of the \"Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization\" case, and the threat the case poses to \"Roe\" in the eyes of \"Roe\" supporters, Neal Kumar Katyal, a law professor and former acting solicitor general of the United States, said that instead of abortion regulation by the judicial branch, Congress could \"codify the rights two generations have taken as part of American life\", and \"nullify the threat to reproductive health posed by the Mississippi case.\" Thomas Jipping of the Heritage Foundation wrote that the Women's Health Protection Act is unconstitutional because it regulates how state legislatures regulate abortion and abortion services rather than directly regulating abortion at the federal level. Views that the WHPA is unconstitutional or should otherwise be opposed were expressed during Senate Judiciary Committee hearings in 2014.\nState laws regarding \"Roe\".\nAt the state level, there have been many laws about abortion. In the decade after \"Roe\", most states passed laws protecting medical workers with a conscientious objection to abortion. Nine states which had legalized abortion or loosened abortion restrictions prior to \"Roe\" already had statutory protection for those who did not want to participate in or perform an abortion. As of 2011, forty-seven states and the District of Columbia had laws allowing certain people to decline to perform certain actions or provide information related to abortion or reproductive health. At the federal level, the Church Amendment of 1973 was proposed to protect private hospitals objecting to abortion from being deprived of funding. It first passed the Senate, 92\u20131, then a slightly modified version passed the House, 372\u20131, and the final bill which contained it passed the Senate 94\u20130. Justice Blackmun supported this and other regulations protecting individual physicians and entire hospitals operated by religious denominations.\nSome states have passed laws to maintain the legality of abortion if \"Roe v. Wade\" is overturned. Those states include California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Maine, Maryland, Nevada, and Washington. Other states have enacted so-called trigger laws that would take effect in the event that \"Roe v. Wade\" is overturned, with the effect of outlawing abortions on the state level. Those states include Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Dakota, and South Dakota. Additionally, many states did not repeal pre-1973 statutes against abortion, and some of those statutes could again be in force if \"Roe\" were reversed.\nOn April 16, 2012, Mississippi House Bill 1390 was signed into law. The law attempted to make abortion unfeasible without having to overturn \"Roe v. Wade\". Judge Daniel Porter Jordan III of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi granted an injunction against the law on July 13, 2012. On April 15, 2013, he issued another injunction which only applied to a part of the law which required the individual performing the abortions to have hospital admitting privileges. On July 29, 2014, a three-judge panel from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit upheld the injunction against part of the law, with Judge Emilio M. Garza dissenting. The ruling especially relied on a case unrelated to \"Roe\" which was decided \"nearly fifty years before the right to an abortion was found in the penumbras of the Constitution\". On February 18, 2015, Mississippi asked the Supreme Court to hear the case, but they declined to hear it on June 28, 2016.\nThe Human Life Protection Act was signed by Alabama governor Kay Ivey on May 14, 2019, in hopes of challenging \"Roe v. Wade\" in the Supreme Court. It includes exceptions for a serious health risk to the mother or a lethal fetal anomaly, but otherwise it will make abortion a felony for the abortion doctor if it goes into effect. Women subjected to an abortion will not be criminally culpable or civilly liable under the law. On October 29, 2019, Judge Myron Thompson for the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Alabama issued a preliminary injunction against the law.\nIn May 2021, Texas lawmakers passed Senate Bill 8, creating the Texas Heartbeat Act, banning abortions except in cases of medical emergency as soon as a fetal heartbeat can be detected. This is typically as early as six weeks into pregnancy and often before women know they are pregnant. The law established that any Texas resident who is not a state or local government employee or official can sue abortion clinics and doctors who are known to be \"aiding and abetting\" abortion procedures after six weeks. A clause forbids anyone who impregnated an abortion patient through rape, sexual assault, or incest to sue concerning the patient. The enactment date was September 1, 2021, and the U.S. Supreme Court, in a 5\u20134 decision, declined a request to block enforcement of the law that day. On October 22, 2021, the Court again did not block the law's enforcement, and agreed to hear arguments for \"United States v. Texas\" on November 1, 2021. They limited the question to a review of standing. On December 10, 2021, the Court dismissed the lawsuit on the basis that lower courts should not have accepted it. This decision allows lawsuits against the executive directors of Texas's medical, nursing, and pharmacy licensing boards and also against the executive commissioner of the Texas Health and Human Services Commission, but not certain other lawsuits seeking to overturn the law.\nLegacy.\nEffects of legalization.\n\"Roe v. Wade\" caused a 4.5% decline in births in states that had not previously legalized abortion. Although the legalization of abortion in the United States increased the labor supply of fertile-aged women in the workforce, it decreased the labor supply of older women. This is thought to be due to the fact they now had fewer opportunities to financially support grandchildren. Older women whose labors became less necessary for the family's financial wellbeing either left or stayed out of the workforce. Since \"Roe\", the risk of death due to legal abortion fell considerably due to increased physician skills, improved medical technology, and earlier termination of pregnancy. Various studies have shown that overturning \"Roe\" could have adverse socio-economic conditions, higher maternal mortality, and other negative impacts.\nThe Donohue\u2013Levitt hypothesis about the legalized abortion and crime effect proposed that legalized abortion was responsible for reductions in the crime rate. If there is a relationship between abortion and crime, there are several possibilities that could explain how abortion lowers crime. One possibility is that crime is disproportionally committed by young males, and legalizing abortion reduced the number of young males. Another possibility is that children born in the post-legalization era are less likely to commit crimes. If this is the case, it might be explained in two ways. One way is that the sort of women who have abortions are not representative of pregnant women as a whole; rather they are the sort who are most likely to give birth to children who grow up to be criminals. In this way, abortion serves to shape American family structure. Studies linking demographics to crime have found that children born to American teenagers, unmarried mothers, and mothers with lower incomes are more likely to engage in criminal activity as adolescents. Abortion rates are higher for these demographics. A second possible way to explain it is that women use abortion to prevent births until they are most able to provide a stable home environment. Factors involved in stability include the age, education, income, of the mother, her use of drugs and alcohol, the presence of a father, and wanted as opposed to unwanted pregnancies. Another hypothesis is the Roe effect, which tries to explain why the practice of abortion would eventually lead to abortion being restricted or outlawed. The hypothesis is that people in favor of abortion rights would not parent as many children when abortion is legal, and since children tend to have similar views to their parents eventually voters would not support abortion rights. Critics have argued that Donohue and Levitt's methodologies are flawed and that no statistically significant relationship between abortion and later crime rates can be proven.\nOpinion polls.\nInto the 21st century, polls of Americans' opinions about abortion indicated they are about equally divided. Several organizations, among them Gallup, Pew Research Center, and Harris Insights &amp; Analytics, conduct abortion or \"Roe v. Wade\"-related polls. Regarding the \"Roe\" decision as a whole, more Americans supported it than supported overturning it. In the 2000s, when pollsters describe various regulations that \"Roe\" prevented legislatures from enacting, support for \"Roe\" dropped.\nInto the 2010s, poll results relating to abortion indicated nuance and frequently do not directly match up with respondents' self-identified political affiliations. In 2021, an ABC News/\"Washington Post\" poll found that 58% of those with children living at home wanted to see \"Roe v. Wade\" upheld, compared to 62% of those without children at home. An All in Together poll found that only 36% with children living in their house opposed the Texas Heartbeat Act, compared to 54.9% without children. After the Supreme Court's decision in June 2022 to overturn \"Roe v. Wade\", a new CBC News/YouGov poll showed 59% disapprove of the decision, and of women polled, 67% disapprove. According to the same poll, 52% of the participants called the court's decision a \"step backward\" for America, 31% said it is a \"step forward\", and 17% say it was neither. A January 2023 Gallup poll found that nearly 7 in 10 Americans disapprove of the country's abortion policies, the highest rate in 23 years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdditional references\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nWritten opinions\n is available from: https:// https:// https:// https:// https:// https:// \nOral arguments\nOther court documents\nOther media"}
{"id": "68494", "revid": "1078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68494", "title": "Product space", "text": ""}
{"id": "68495", "revid": "1078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68495", "title": "Extension by continuity", "text": ""}
{"id": "68498", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68498", "title": "Ocean thermal energy conversion", "text": "Extracting energy from the ocean\nOcean thermal energy conversion (OTEC) is a renewable energy technology that harnesses the temperature difference between the warm surface waters of the ocean and the cold depths to run a heat engine to produce electricity. It is a unique form of clean energy generation that has the potential to provide a consistent and sustainable source of power. Although it has challenges to overcome, OTEC has the potential to provide a consistent and sustainable source of clean energy, particularly in tropical regions with access to deep ocean water.\nDescription.\nOTEC uses the ocean thermal gradient between cooler deep and warmer shallow or surface seawaters to run a heat engine and produce useful work, usually in the form of electricity. OTEC can operate with a very high capacity factor and so can operate in base load mode.\nThe denser cold water masses, formed by ocean surface water interaction with cold atmosphere in quite specific areas of the North Atlantic and the Southern Ocean, sink into the deep sea basins and spread in entire deep ocean by the thermohaline circulation. Upwelling of cold water from the deep ocean is replenished by the downwelling of cold surface sea water.\nAmong ocean energy sources, OTEC is one of the continuously available renewable energy resources that could contribute to base-load power supply. The resource potential for OTEC is considered to be much larger than for other ocean energy forms. Up to 10,000\u00a0TWh/yr of power could be generated from OTEC without affecting the ocean's thermal structure.\nSystems may be either closed-cycle or open-cycle. Closed-cycle OTEC uses working fluids that are typically thought of as refrigerants such as ammonia or R-134a. These fluids have low boiling points, and are therefore suitable for powering the system's generator to generate electricity. The most commonly used heat cycle for OTEC to date is the Rankine cycle, using a low-pressure turbine. Open-cycle engines use vapor from the seawater itself as the working fluid.\nOTEC can also supply quantities of cold water as a by-product. This can be used for air conditioning and refrigeration and the nutrient-rich deep ocean water can feed biological technologies. Another by-product is fresh water distilled from the sea.\nOTEC theory was first developed in the 1880s and the first bench size demonstration model was constructed in 1926. Currently operating pilot-scale OTEC plants are located in Japan, overseen by Saga University, and in Hawaii operated by https://.\nHistory.\nAttempts to develop and refine OTEC technology started in the 1880s. In 1881, Jacques Arsene d'Arsonval, a French physicist, proposed tapping the thermal energy of the ocean. D'Arsonval's student, Georges Claude, built the first OTEC plant, in Matanzas, Cuba in 1930. The system generated 22\u00a0kW of electricity with a low-pressure turbine. The plant was later destroyed in a storm.\nIn 1935, Claude constructed a plant aboard a 10,000-ton cargo vessel moored off the coast of Brazil. Weather and waves destroyed it before it could generate net power. (Net power is the amount of power generated after subtracting power needed to run the system).\nIn 1956, French scientists designed a 3\u00a0MW plant for Abidjan, Ivory Coast. The plant was never completed, because new finds of large amounts of cheap petroleum made it uneconomical.\nIn 1962, J. Hilbert Anderson and James H. Anderson, Jr. focused on increasing component efficiency. They patented their new \"closed cycle\" design in 1967. This design improved upon the original closed-cycle Rankine system, and included this in an outline for a plant that would produce power at lower cost than oil or coal. At the time, however, their research garnered little attention since coal and nuclear were considered the future of energy.\nJapan is a major contributor to the development of OTEC technology. Beginning in 1970 the Tokyo Electric Power Company successfully built and deployed a 100\u00a0kW closed-cycle OTEC plant on the island of Nauru. The plant became operational on 14 October 1981, producing about 120\u00a0kW of electricity; 90\u00a0kW was used to power the plant and the remaining electricity was used to power a school and other places. This set a world record for power output from an OTEC system where the power was sent to a real (as opposed to an experimental) power grid.\n1981 also saw a major development in OTEC technology when Russian engineer, Dr. Alexander Kalina, used a mixture of ammonia and water to produce electricity. This new ammonia-water mixture greatly improved the efficiency of the power cycle. In 1994, the Institute of Ocean Energy at Saga University designed and constructed a 4.5\u00a0kW plant for the purpose of testing a newly invented Uehara cycle, also named after its inventor Haruo Uehara. This cycle included absorption and extraction processes that allow this system to outperform the Kalina cycle by 1\u20132%.\nThe 1970s saw an uptick in OTEC research and development during the post 1973 Arab-Israeli War, which caused oil prices to triple. The U.S. federal government poured $260 million into OTEC research after President Carter signed a law that committed the US to a production goal of 10,000\u00a0MW of electricity from OTEC systems by 1999.\nIn 1974, The U.S. established the Natural Energy Laboratory of Hawaii Authority (NELHA) at Keahole Point on the Kona coast of Hawaii. Hawaii is the best US OTEC location, due to its warm surface water, access to very deep, very cold water, and high electricity costs. The laboratory has become a leading test facility for OTEC technology. In the same year, Lockheed received a grant from the U.S. National Science Foundation to study OTEC. This eventually led to an effort by Lockheed, the US Navy, Makai Ocean Engineering, Dillingham Construction, and other firms to build the world's first and only net-power producing OTEC plant, dubbed \"Mini-OTEC\" For three months in 1979, a small amount of electricity was generated. NELHA operated a 250\u00a0kW demonstration plant for six years in the 1990s. With funding from the United States Navy, a 105\u00a0kW plant at the site began supplying energy to the local power grid in 2015.\nA European initiative EUROCEAN - a privately funded joint venture of 9 European companies already active in offshore engineering - was active in promoting OTEC from 1979 to 1983. Initially a large scale offshore facility was studied. Later a 100\u00a0kW land based installation was studied combining land based OTEC with Desalination and Aquaculture nicknamed ODA. This was based on the results from a small scale aquaculture facility at the island of St Croix that used a deepwater supply line to feed the aquaculture basins. Also a shore based open cycle plant was investigated.\nThe location of the case of study was the Dutch Kingdom related island Cura\u00e7ao.\nResearch related to making open-cycle OTEC a reality began earnestly in 1979 at the Solar Energy Research Institute (SERI) with funding from the US Department of Energy. Evaporators and suitably configured direct-contact condensers were developed and patented by SERI (see). An original design for a power-producing experiment, then called the 165-kW experiment was described by Kreith and Bharathan and as the Max Jakob Memorial Award Lecture. The initial design used two parallel axial turbines, using last stage rotors taken from large steam turbines. Later, a team led by Dr. Bharathan at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) developed the initial conceptual design for up-dated 210\u00a0kW open-cycle OTEC experiment (). This design integrated all components of the cycle, namely, the evaporator, condenser and the turbine into one single vacuum vessel, with the turbine mounted on top to prevent any potential for water to reach it. The vessel was made of concrete as the first process vacuum vessel of its kind. Attempts to make all components using low-cost plastic material could not be fully achieved, as some conservatism was required for the turbine and the vacuum pumps developed as the first of their kind. Later Dr. Bharathan worked with a team of engineers at the Pacific Institute for High Technology Research (PICHTR) to further pursue this design through preliminary and final stages. It was renamed the Net Power Producing Experiment (NPPE) and was constructed at the Natural Energy Laboratory of Hawaii (NELH) by PICHTR by a team led by Chief Engineer Don Evans and the project was managed by Dr. Luis Vega.\nIn 2002, India tested a 1\u00a0MW floating OTEC pilot plant near Tamil Nadu. The plant was ultimately unsuccessful due to a failure of the deep sea cold water pipe. Its government continues to sponsor research.\nIn 2006, Makai Ocean Engineering was awarded a contract from the U.S. Office of Naval Research (ONR) to investigate the potential for OTEC to produce nationally significant quantities of hydrogen in at-sea floating plants located in warm, tropical waters. Realizing the need for larger partners to actually commercialize OTEC, Makai approached Lockheed Martin to renew their previous relationship and determine if the time was ready for OTEC. And so in 2007, Lockheed Martin resumed work in OTEC and became a subcontractor to Makai to support their SBIR, which was followed by other subsequent collaborations\nIn March 2011, Ocean Thermal Energy Corporation signed an Energy Services Agreement (ESA) with the Baha Mar resort, Nassau, Bahamas, for the world's first and largest seawater air conditioning (SWAC) system. In June 2015, the project was put on pause while the resort resolved financial and ownership issues. In August 2016, it was announced that the issues had been resolved and that the resort would open in March 2017. It is expected that the SWAC system's construction will resume at that time.\nIn July 2011, Makai Ocean Engineering completed the design and construction of an OTEC Heat Exchanger Test Facility at the Natural Energy Laboratory of Hawaii. The purpose of the facility is to arrive at an optimal design for OTEC heat exchangers, increasing performance and useful life while reducing cost (heat exchangers being the #1 cost driver for an OTEC plant). And in March 2013, Makai announced an award to install and operate a 105 kilowatt turbine on the OTEC Heat Exchanger Test Facility, this marked the first time that OTEC power was connected to the U.S. grid.\nIn July 2016, the Virgin Islands Public Services Commission approved Ocean Thermal Energy Corporation's application to become a Qualified Facility. The company is thus permitted to begin negotiations with the Virgin Islands Water and Power Authority (WAPA) for a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) pertaining to an Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) plant on the island of St. Croix. This would be the world's first commercial OTEC plant.\nA project is set to be installed in the African country of S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, which will be the first commercial-scale floating OTEC platform in the world. Developed by Global OTEC, the structure named Dominique will generate 1.5MW, with subsequent barges being installed to help supply the full demand of the country. In 2022, an MoU was signed between the government and British startup https://.\nCurrently operating OTEC plants.\nIn March 2013, Saga University with various Japanese industries completed the installation of a new OTEC plant. Okinawa Prefecture announced the start of the OTEC operation testing at Kume Island on April 15, 2013. The main aim is to prove the validity of computer models and demonstrate OTEC to the public. The testing and research will be conducted with the support of Saga University until the end of FY 2016. IHI Plant Construction Co. Ltd, Yokogawa Electric Corporation, and Xenesys Inc were entrusted with constructing the 100 kilowatt class plant within the grounds of the Okinawa Prefecture Deep Sea Water Research Center. The location was specifically chosen in order to utilize existing deep seawater and surface seawater intake pipes installed for the research center in 2000. The pipe is used for the intake of deep sea water for research, fishery, and agricultural use.\nThe plant consists of two 50\u00a0kW units in double Rankine configuration. The OTEC facility and deep seawater research center are open to free public tours by appointment in English and Japanese. Currently, this is one of only two fully operational OTEC plants in the world. This plant operates continuously when specific tests are not underway.\nIn 2011, Makai Ocean Engineering completed a heat exchanger test facility at NELHA. Used to test a variety of heat exchange technologies for use in OTEC, Makai has received funding to install a 105\u00a0kW turbine. Installation will make this facility the largest operational OTEC facility, though the record for largest power will remain with the Open Cycle plant also developed in Hawaii.\nIn July 2014, DCNS group partnered with Akuo Energy announced NER 300 funding for their NEMO project. If the project was successful, the 16\u00a0MW gross 10\u00a0MW net offshore plant would have been the largest OTEC facility to date. DCNS planned to have NEMO operational by 2020. Early in April 2018, Naval Energies shut down the project indefinitely due to technical difficulties relating to the main cold-water intake pipe.\nAn ocean thermal energy conversion power plant built by Makai Ocean Engineering went operational in Hawaii in August 2015. The governor of Hawaii, David Ige, \"flipped the switch\" to activate the plant. This is the first true closed-cycle ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) plant to be connected to a U.S. electrical grid. It is a demo plant capable of generating 105 kilowatts, enough to power about 120 homes.\nThermodynamic efficiency.\nA heat engine gives greater efficiency when run with a large temperature difference. In the oceans the temperature difference between surface and deep water is greatest in the tropics, although still a modest 20 to 25\u00a0\u00b0C. It is therefore in the tropics that OTEC offers the greatest possibilities. OTEC has the potential to offer global amounts of energy that are 10 to 100 times greater than other ocean energy options such as wave power.\nOTEC plants can operate continuously providing a base load supply for an electrical power generation system.\nThe main technical challenge of OTEC is to generate significant amounts of power efficiently from small temperature differences. It is still considered an emerging technology. Early OTEC systems were 1 to 3 percent thermally efficient, well below the theoretical maximum 6 and 7 percent for this temperature difference. Modern designs allow performance approaching the theoretical maximum Carnot efficiency.\nPower cycle types.\nCold seawater is an integral part of each of the three types of OTEC systems: closed-cycle, open-cycle, and hybrid. To operate, the cold seawater must be brought to the surface. The primary approaches are active pumping and desalination. Desalinating seawater near the sea floor lowers its density, which causes it to rise to the surface.\nThe alternative to costly pipes to bring condensing cold water to the surface is to pump vaporized low boiling point fluid into the depths to be condensed, thus reducing pumping volumes and reducing technical and environmental problems and lowering costs.\nClosed.\nClosed-cycle systems use fluid with a low boiling point, such as ammonia (having a boiling point around -33\u00a0\u00b0C at atmospheric pressure), to power a turbine to generate electricity. Warm surface seawater is pumped through a heat exchanger to vaporize the fluid. The expanding vapor turns the turbo-generator. Cold water, pumped through a second heat exchanger, condenses the vapor into a liquid, which is then recycled through the system.\nIn 1979, the Natural Energy Laboratory and several private-sector partners developed the \"mini OTEC\" experiment, which achieved the first successful at-sea production of net electrical power from closed-cycle OTEC. The mini OTEC vessel was moored off the Hawaiian coast and produced enough net electricity to illuminate the ship's light bulbs and run its computers and television.\nOpen.\nOpen-cycle OTEC uses warm surface water directly to make electricity. The warm seawater is first pumped into a low-pressure container, which causes it to boil. In some schemes, the expanding vapor drives a low-pressure turbine attached to an electrical generator. The vapor, which has left its salt and other contaminants in the low-pressure container, is pure fresh water. It is condensed into a liquid by exposure to cold temperatures from deep-ocean water. This method produces desalinized fresh water, suitable for drinking water, irrigation or aquaculture.\nIn other schemes, the rising vapor is used in a gas lift technique of lifting water to significant heights. Depending on the embodiment, such vapor lift pump techniques generate power from a hydroelectric turbine either before or after the pump is used.\nIn 1984, the \"Solar Energy Research Institute\" (now known as the National Renewable Energy Laboratory) developed a vertical-spout evaporator to convert warm seawater into low-pressure steam for open-cycle plants. Conversion efficiencies were as high as 97% for seawater-to-steam conversion (overall steam production would only be a few percent of the incoming water). In May 1993, an open-cycle OTEC plant at Keahole Point, Hawaii, produced close to 80\u00a0kW of electricity during a net power-producing experiment. This broke the record of 40\u00a0kW set by a Japanese system in 1982.\nHybrid.\nA hybrid cycle combines the features of the closed- and open-cycle systems. In a hybrid, warm seawater enters a vacuum chamber and is flash-evaporated, similar to the open-cycle evaporation process. The steam vaporizes the ammonia working fluid of a closed-cycle loop on the other side of an ammonia vaporizer. The vaporized fluid then drives a turbine to produce electricity. The steam condenses within the heat exchanger and provides desalinated water (see heat pipe).\nWorking fluids.\nA popular choice of working fluid is ammonia, which has superior transport properties, easy availability, and low cost. Ammonia, however, is toxic and flammable. Fluorinated carbons such as CFCs and HCFCs are not toxic or flammable, but they contribute to ozone layer depletion. Hydrocarbons too are good candidates, but they are highly flammable; in addition, this would create competition for use of them directly as fuels. The power plant size is dependent upon the vapor pressure of the working fluid. With increasing vapor pressure, the size of the turbine and heat exchangers decreases while the wall thickness of the pipe and heat exchangers increase to endure high pressure especially on the evaporator side.\nLand, shelf and floating sites.\nOTEC has the potential to produce gigawatts of electrical power, and in conjunction with electrolysis, could produce enough hydrogen to completely replace all projected global fossil fuel consumption. Reducing costs remains an unsolved challenge, however. OTEC plants require a long, large diameter intake pipe, which is submerged a kilometer or more into the ocean's depths, to bring cold water to the surface.\nLand-based.\nLand-based and near-shore facilities offer three main advantages over those located in deep water. Plants constructed on or near land do not require sophisticated mooring, lengthy power cables, or the more extensive maintenance associated with open-ocean environments. They can be installed in sheltered areas so that they are relatively safe from storms and heavy seas. Electricity, desalinated water, and cold, nutrient-rich seawater could be transmitted from near-shore facilities via trestle bridges or causeways. In addition, land-based or near-shore sites allow plants to operate with related industries such as mariculture or those that require desalinated water.\nFavored locations include those with narrow shelves (volcanic islands), steep (15\u201320 degrees) offshore slopes, and relatively smooth sea floors. These sites minimize the length of the intake pipe. A land-based plant could be built well inland from the shore, offering more protection from storms, or on the beach, where the pipes would be shorter. In either case, easy access for construction and operation helps lower costs.\nLand-based or near-shore sites can also support mariculture or chilled water agriculture. Tanks or lagoons built on shore allow workers to monitor and control miniature marine environments. Mariculture products can be delivered to market via standard transport.\nOne disadvantage of land-based facilities arises from the turbulent wave action in the surf zone. OTEC discharge pipes should be placed in protective trenches to prevent subjecting them to extreme stress during storms and prolonged periods of heavy seas. Also, the mixed discharge of cold and warm seawater may need to be carried several hundred meters offshore to reach the proper depth before it is released, requiring additional expense in construction and maintenance.\nOne way that OTEC systems can avoid some of the problems and expenses of operating in a surf zone is by building them just offshore in waters ranging from 10 to 30 meters deep (Ocean Thermal Corporation 1984). This type of plant would use shorter (and therefore less costly) intake and discharge pipes, which would avoid the dangers of turbulent surf. The plant itself, however, would require protection from the marine environment, such as breakwaters and erosion-resistant foundations, and the plant output would need to be transmitted to shore.\nShelf based.\nTo avoid the turbulent surf zone as well as to move closer to the cold-water resource, OTEC plants can be mounted to the continental shelf at depths up to . A shelf-mounted plant could be towed to the site and affixed to the sea bottom. This type of construction is already used for offshore oil rigs. The complexities of operating an OTEC plant in deeper water may make them more expensive than land-based approaches. Problems include the stress of open-ocean conditions and more difficult product delivery. Addressing strong ocean currents and large waves adds engineering and construction expense. Platforms require extensive pilings to maintain a stable base. Power delivery can require long underwater cables to reach land. For these reasons, shelf-mounted plants are less attractive. \nFloating.\nFloating OTEC facilities operate off-shore. Although potentially optimal for large systems, floating facilities present several difficulties. The difficulty of mooring plants in very deep water complicates power delivery. Cables attached to floating platforms are more susceptible to damage, especially during storms. Cables at depths greater than 1000 meters are difficult to maintain and repair. Riser cables, which connect the sea bed and the plant, need to be constructed to resist entanglement.\nAs with shelf-mounted plants, floating plants need a stable base for continuous operation. Major storms and heavy seas can break the vertically suspended cold-water pipe and interrupt warm water intake as well. To help prevent these problems, pipes can be made of flexible polyethylene attached to the bottom of the platform and gimballed with joints or collars. Pipes may need to be uncoupled from the plant to prevent storm damage. As an alternative to a warm-water pipe, surface water can be drawn directly into the platform; however, it is necessary to prevent the intake flow from being damaged or interrupted during violent motions caused by heavy seas.\nConnecting a floating plant to power delivery cables requires the plant to remain relatively stationary. Mooring is an acceptable method, but current mooring technology is limited to depths of about . Even at shallower depths, the cost of mooring may be prohibitive.\nPolitical concerns.\nBecause OTEC facilities are more-or-less stationary surface platforms, their exact location and legal status may be affected by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea treaty (UNCLOS). This treaty grants coastal nations zones of varying legal authority from land, creating potential conflicts and regulatory barriers. OTEC plants and similar structures would be considered artificial islands under the treaty, giving them no independent legal status. OTEC plants could be perceived as either a threat or potential partner to fisheries or to seabed mining operations controlled by the International Seabed Authority.\nCost and economics.\nBecause OTEC systems have not yet been widely deployed, cost estimates are uncertain. A 2010 study by University of Hawaii estimated the cost of electricity for OTEC at 94.0 cents per kilowatt hour (kWh) for a 1.4\u00a0MW plant, 44.0 cents per kWh for a 10\u00a0MW plant, and 18.0 cents per kWh for a 100\u00a0MW plant. A 2015 report by the organization Ocean Energy Systems under the International Energy Agency gave an estimate of about 20.0 cents per kWh for 100\u00a0MW plants. Another study estimated power generation costs as low as 7.0 cents per kWh. Comparing to other energy sources, a 2019 study by Lazard estimated the unsubsidized cost of electricity to 3.2 to 4.2 cents per kWh for Solar PV at utility scale and 2.8 to 5.4 cents per kWh for wind power.\nA report published by IRENA in 2014 claimed that commercial use of OTEC technology can be scaled in a variety of ways. \"...small-scale OTEC plants can be made to accommodate the electricity production of small communities (5,000\u201350,000 residents), but would require the production of valuable by-products \u2013 like fresh water or cooling \u2013 to be economically viable\". Larger scaled OTEC plants would have a much higher overhead and installation costs.\nBeneficial factors that should be taken into account include OTEC's lack of waste products and fuel consumption, the area in which it is available (often within 20\u00b0 of the equator), the geopolitical effects of petroleum dependence, compatibility with alternate forms of ocean power such as wave energy, tidal energy and methane hydrates, and supplemental uses for the seawater.\nSome proposed projects.\nOTEC projects under consideration include a small plant for the U.S. Navy base on the British overseas territory island of Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean. Ocean Thermal Energy Corporation (formerly OCEES International, Inc.) is working with the U.S. Navy on a design for a proposed 13-MW OTEC plant, to replace the current diesel generators. The OTEC plant would also provide 1.25 million gallons per day of potable water. This project is currently waiting for changes in US military contract policies. OTE has proposed building a 10-MW OTEC plant on Guam.\nBahamas.\nhttp:// currently has plans to install two 10\u00a0MW OTEC plants in the US Virgin Islands and a 5\u201310\u00a0MW OTEC facility in The Bahamas. OTE has also designed the world's largest Seawater Air Conditioning (SWAC) plant for a resort in The Bahamas, which will use cold deep seawater as a method of air-conditioning. In mid-2015, the 95%-complete project was temporarily put on hold while the resort resolved financial and ownership issues. On August 22, 2016, the government of the Bahamas announced that a new agreement had been signed under which the Baha Mar resort will be completed. On September 27, 2016, Bahamian Prime Minister Perry Christie announced that construction had resumed on Baha Mar, and that the resort was slated to open in March 2017.\nThis is on hold, and may never resume.\nHawaii.\nLockheed Martin's Alternative Energy Development team has partnered with Makai Ocean Engineering\nto complete the final design phase of a 10-MW closed cycle OTEC pilot system which planned to become operational in Hawaii in the 2012\u20132013 time frame. This system was designed to expand to 100-MW commercial systems in the near future. In November, 2010 the U.S. Naval Facilities Engineering Command (NAVFAC) awarded Lockheed Martin a US$4.4 million contract modification to develop critical system components and designs for the plant, adding to the 2009 $8.1 million contract and two Department of Energy grants totaling over $1 million in 2008 and March 2010.\nA small but operational ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC) plant was inaugurated in Hawaii in August 2015. The opening of the research and development 100-kilowatt facility marked the first time a closed-cycle OTEC plant was connected to the U.S. grid.\nHainan.\nOn April 13, 2013, Lockheed contracted with the Reignwood Group to build a 10 megawatt plant off the coast of southern China to provide power for a planned resort on Hainan island. A plant of that size would power several thousand homes. The Reignwood Group acquired Opus Offshore in 2011 which forms its Reignwood Ocean Engineering division which also is engaged in development of deepwater drilling.\nJapan.\nCurrently the only continuously operating OTEC system is located in Okinawa Prefecture, Japan. The Governmental support, local community support, and advanced research carried out by Saga University were key for the contractors, IHI Plant Construction Co. Ltd, Yokogawa Electric Corporation, and Xenesys Inc, to succeed with this project. Work is being conducted to develop a 1MW facility on Kume Island requiring new pipelines. In July 2014, more than 50 members formed the Global Ocean reSource and Energy Association (https://) an international organization formed to promote the development of the Kumejima Model and work towards the installation of larger deep seawater pipelines and a 1MW OTEC Facility. The companies involved in the current OTEC projects, along with other interested parties have developed plans for offshore OTEC systems as well. - For more details, see \"Currently Operating OTEC Plants\" above.\nUnited States Virgin Islands.\nOn March 5, 2014, Ocean Thermal Energy Corporation (OTEC) and the 30th Legislature of the United States Virgin Islands (USVI) signed a Memorandum of Understanding to move forward with a study to evaluate the feasibility and potential benefits to the USVI of installing on-shore Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) renewable energy power plants and Seawater Air Conditioning (SWAC) facilities. The benefits to be assessed in the USVI study include both the baseload (24/7) clean electricity generated by OTEC, as well as the various related products associated with OTEC and SWAC, including abundant fresh drinking water, energy-saving air conditioning, sustainable aquaculture and mariculture, and agricultural enhancement projects for the Islands of St Thomas and St Croix.\nOn July 18, 2016, OTE's application to be a Qualifying Facility was approved by the Virgin Islands Public Services Commission. OTE also received permission to begin negotiating contracts associated with this project.\nKiribati.\nSouth Korea's Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO) received approval in principle from Bureau Veritas for their 1MW offshore OTEC design. No timeline was given for the project which will be located 6\u00a0km offshore of the Republic of Kiribati.\nMartinique.\nAkuo Energy and DCNS were awarded NER300 funding on July 8, 2014 for their NEMO (New Energy for Martinique and Overseas) project which is expected to be a 10.7MW-net offshore facility completed in 2020. The award to help with development totaled 72 million Euro.\nMaldives.\nOn February 16, 2018, Global OTEC Resources announced plans to build a 150\u00a0kW plant in the Maldives, designed bespoke for hotels and resorts. \"All these resorts draw their power from diesel generators. Moreover, some individual resorts consume 7,000 litres of diesel a day to meet demands which equates to over 6,000 tonnes of CO2 annually,\" said Director Dan Grech. The EU awarded a grant and Global OTEC resources launched a crowdfunding campaign for the rest.\nRelated activities.\nOTEC has uses other than power production.\nDesalination.\nDesalinated water can be produced in open- or hybrid-cycle plants using surface condensers to turn evaporated seawater into potable water. System analysis indicates that a 2-megawatt plant could produce about of desalinated water each day. Another system patented by Richard Bailey creates condensate water by regulating deep ocean water flow through surface condensers correlating with fluctuating dew-point temperatures. This condensation system uses no incremental energy and has no moving parts.\nOn March 22, 2015, Saga University opened a Flash-type desalination demonstration facility on Kumejima. This satellite of their Institute of Ocean Energy uses post-OTEC deep seawater from the Okinawa OTEC Demonstration Facility and raw surface seawater to produce desalinated water. Air is extracted from the closed system with a vacuum pump. When raw sea water is pumped into the flash chamber it boils, allowing pure steam to rise and the salt and remaining seawater to be removed. The steam is returned to liquid in a heat exchanger with cold post-OTEC deep seawater. The desalinated water can be used in hydrogen production or drinking water (if minerals are added).\nThe NELHA plant established in 1993 produced an average of 7,000 gallons of freshwater per day. KOYO USA was established in 2002 to capitalize on this new economic opportunity. KOYO bottles the water produced by the NELHA plant in Hawaii. With the capacity to produce one million bottles of water every day, KOYO is now Hawaii's biggest exporter with $140 million in sales.[81]\nAir conditioning.\nThe cold seawater made available by an OTEC system creates an opportunity to provide large amounts of cooling to industries and homes near the plant. The water can be used in chilled-water coils to provide air conditioning for buildings. It is estimated that a pipe in diameter can deliver 4,700 gallons of water per minute. Water at could provide more than enough air conditioning for a large building. Operating 8,000 hours per year in lieu of electrical conditioning selling for 5\u201310\u00a2 per kilowatt-hour, it would save $200,000-$400,000 in energy bills annually.\nThe InterContinental Resort and Thalasso-Spa on the island of Bora Bora uses an SWAC system to air-condition its buildings. The system passes seawater through a heat exchanger where it cools freshwater in a closed loop system. This freshwater is then pumped to buildings and directly cools the air.\nIn 2010, Copenhagen Energy opened a district cooling plant in Copenhagen, Denmark. The plant delivers cold seawater to commercial and industrial buildings, and has reduced electricity consumption by 80 percent. Ocean Thermal Energy Corporation (OTE) has designed a 9800-ton SDC system for a vacation resort in The Bahamas.\nChilled-soil agriculture.\nOTEC technology supports chilled-soil agriculture. When cold seawater flows through underground pipes, it chills the surrounding soil. The temperature difference between roots in the cool soil and leaves in the warm air allows plants that evolved in temperate climates to be grown in the subtropics. Dr. John P. Craven, Dr. Jack Davidson and Richard Bailey patented this process and demonstrated it at a research facility at the Natural Energy Laboratory of Hawaii Authority (NELHA). The research facility demonstrated that more than 100 different crops can be grown using this system. Many normally could not survive in Hawaii or at Keahole Point.\nJapan has also been researching agricultural uses of Deep Sea Water since 2000 at the Okinawa Deep Sea Water Research Institute on Kume Island. The Kume Island facilities use regular water cooled by Deep Sea Water in a heat exchanger run through pipes in the ground to cool soil. Their techniques have developed an important resource for the island community as they now produce spinach, a winter vegetable, commercially year round. An expansion of the deep seawater agriculture facility was completed by Kumejima Town next to the OTEC Demonstration Facility in 2014. The new facility is for researching the economic practicality of chilled-soil agriculture on a larger scale.\nAquaculture.\nAquaculture is the best-known byproduct, because it reduces the financial and energy costs of pumping large volumes of water from the deep ocean. Deep ocean water contains high concentrations of essential nutrients that are depleted in surface waters due to biological consumption. This artificial upwelling mimics the natural upwellings that are responsible for fertilizing and supporting the world's largest marine ecosystems, and the largest densities of life on the planet.\nCold-water sea animals, such as salmon and lobster, thrive in this nutrient-rich, deep seawater. Microalgae such as \"Spirulina\", a health food supplement, also can be cultivated. Deep-ocean water can be combined with surface water to deliver water at an optimal temperature.\nNon-native species such as salmon, lobster, abalone, trout, oysters, and clams can be raised in pools supplied by OTEC-pumped water. This extends the variety of fresh seafood products available for nearby markets. Such low-cost refrigeration can be used to maintain the quality of harvested fish, which deteriorate quickly in warm tropical regions. In Kona, Hawaii, aquaculture companies working with NELHA generate about $40 million annually, a significant portion of Hawaii's GDP.\nHydrogen production.\nHydrogen can be produced via electrolysis using OTEC electricity. Generated steam with electrolyte compounds added to improve efficiency is a relatively pure medium for hydrogen production. OTEC can be scaled to generate large quantities of hydrogen. The main challenge is cost relative to other energy sources and fuels.\nMineral extraction.\nThe ocean contains 57 trace elements in salts and other forms and dissolved in solution. In the past, most economic analyses concluded that mining the ocean for trace elements would be unprofitable, in part because of the energy required to pump the water. Mining generally targets minerals that occur in high concentrations, and can be extracted easily, such as magnesium. With OTEC plants supplying water, the only cost is for extraction.\nThe Japanese investigated the possibility of extracting uranium and found developments in other technologies (especially materials sciences) were improving the prospects.\nClimate control.\nOcean thermal gradient can be used to enhance rainfall and moderate the high ambient summer temperatures in tropics to benefit enormously the mankind and the flora and fauna. When sea surface temperatures are relatively high on an area, lower atmospheric pressure area is formed compared to atmospheric pressure prevailing on the nearby land mass inducing winds from the landmass towards the ocean. Oceanward winds are dry and warm which would not contribute to good rainfall on the landmass compared to landward moist winds. For adequate rainfall and comfortable summer ambient temperatures (below 35\u00a0\u00b0C) on the landmass, it is preferred to have landward moist winds from the ocean. Creating high pressure zones by artificial upwelling on sea area selectively can also be used to deflect / guide the normal monsoon global winds towards the landmass. Artificial upwelling of nutrient-rich deep ocean water to the surface also enhances fisheries growth in areas with tropical and temperate weather. It would also lead to enhanced carbon sequestration by the oceans from improved algae growth and mass gain by glaciers from the extra snow fall mitigating sea level rise or global warming process. Tropical cyclones also do not pass through the high pressure zones as they intensify by gaining energy from the warm surface waters of the sea.\nThe cold deep sea water (&lt;10\u00a0\u00b0C) is pumped to the sea surface area to suppress the sea surface temperature (&gt;26\u00a0\u00b0C) by artificial means using electricity produced by mega scale floating wind turbine plants on the deep sea. The lower sea water surface temperature would enhance the local ambient pressure so that atmospheric landward winds are created. For upwelling the cold sea water, a stationary hydraulically driven propeller (\u224850 m diameter) is located on the deep sea floor at 500 to 1000 m depth with a flexible draft tube extending up to the sea surface. The draft tube is anchored to the sea bed at its bottom side and top side to floating pontoons at the sea surface. The flexible draft tube would not collapse as its inside pressure is more compared to outside pressure when the colder water is pumped to the sea surface. Middle east, north east Africa, Indian subcontinent and Australia can get relief from hot and dry weather in summer season, also prone to erratic rainfall, by pumping deep sea water to the sea surface from the Persian gulf, Red sea, Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean respectively.\nThermodynamics.\nA rigorous treatment of OTEC reveals that a 20\u00a0\u00b0C temperature difference will provide as much energy as a hydroelectric plant with 34\u00a0m head for the same volume of water flow.\nThe low temperature difference means that water volumes must be very large to extract useful amounts of heat. A 100MW power plant would be expected to pump on the order of 12 million gallons (44,400 tonnes) per minute. For comparison, pumps must move a mass of water greater than the weight of the \"battleship Bismarck\", which weighed 41,700 tonnes, every minute. This makes pumping a substantial parasitic drain on energy production in OTEC systems, with one Lockheed design consuming 19.55\u00a0MW in pumping costs for every 49.8\u00a0MW net electricity generated. For OTEC schemes using heat exchangers, to handle this volume of water the exchangers need to be enormous compared to those used in conventional thermal power generation plants, making them one of the most critical components due to their impact on overall efficiency. A 100\u00a0MW OTEC power plant would require 200 exchangers each larger than a 20-foot shipping container making them the single most expensive component.\nVariation of ocean temperature with depth.\nThe total insolation received by the oceans (covering 70% of the earth's surface, with clearness index of 0.5 and average energy retention of 15%) is: 5.45\u00d71018 MJ/yr \u00d7 0.7 \u00d7 0.5 \u00d7 0.15 \n 2.87\u00d71017 MJ/yr\nWe can use Beer\u2013Lambert\u2013Bouguer's law to quantify the solar energy absorption by water,\nformula_1\nwhere, \"y\" is the depth of water, \"I\" is intensity and \"\u03bc\" is the absorption coefficient.\nSolving the above differential equation,\nformula_2\nThe absorption coefficient \"\u03bc\" may range from 0.05 m\u22121 for very clear fresh water to 0.5 m\u22121 for very salty water.\nSince the intensity falls exponentially with depth \"y\", heat absorption is concentrated at the top layers. Typically in the tropics, surface temperature values are in excess of , while at , the temperature is about . The warmer (and hence lighter) waters at the surface means there are no thermal convection currents. Due to the small temperature gradients, heat transfer by conduction is too low to equalize the temperatures. The ocean is thus both a practically infinite heat source and a practically infinite heat sink.\nThis temperature difference varies with latitude and season, with the maximum in tropical, subtropical and equatorial waters. Hence the tropics are generally the best OTEC locations.\nOpen/Claude cycle.\nIn this scheme, warm surface water at around enters an evaporator at pressure slightly below the saturation pressures causing it to vaporize.\nformula_3\nWhere \"Hf\" is enthalpy of liquid water at the inlet temperature, \"T\"1.\nThis temporarily superheated water undergoes volume boiling as opposed to pool boiling in conventional boilers where the heating surface is in contact. Thus the water partially flashes to steam with two-phase equilibrium prevailing. Suppose that the pressure inside the evaporator is maintained at the saturation pressure, \"T\"2.\nformula_4\nHere, \"x\"2 is the fraction of water by mass that vaporizes. The warm water mass flow rate per unit turbine mass flow rate is 1/\"x\"2.\nThe low pressure in the evaporator is maintained by a vacuum pump that also removes the dissolved non-condensable gases from the evaporator. The evaporator now contains a mixture of water and steam of very low vapor quality (steam content). The steam is separated from the water as saturated vapor. The remaining water is saturated and is discharged to the ocean in the open cycle. The steam is a low pressure/high specific volume working fluid. It expands in a special low pressure turbine.\nformula_5\nHere, \"Hg\" corresponds to \"T\"2. For an ideal isentropic (reversible adiabatic) turbine,\nformula_6\nThe above equation corresponds to the temperature at the exhaust of the turbine, \"T\"5. \"x\"5,\"s\" is the mass fraction of vapor at state 5.\nThe enthalpy at \"T\"5 is,\nformula_7\nThis enthalpy is lower. The adiabatic reversible turbine work = \"H\"3-\"H\"5,\"s\".\nActual turbine work \"W\"T = (\"H\"3-\"H\"5,\"s\") x \"polytropic efficiency\"\nformula_8\nThe condenser temperature and pressure are lower. Since the turbine exhaust is to be discharged back into the ocean, a direct contact condenser is used to mix the exhaust with cold water, which results in a near-saturated water. That water is now discharged back to the ocean.\n\"H\"6=\"Hf\", at \"T\"5. \"T\"7 is the temperature of the exhaust mixed with cold sea water, as the vapor content now is negligible,\nformula_9\nThe temperature differences between stages include that between warm surface water and working steam, that between exhaust steam and cooling water, and that between cooling water reaching the condenser and deep water. These represent external irreversibilities that reduce the overall temperature difference.\nThe cold water flow rate per unit turbine mass flow rate,\nformula_10\nTurbine mass flow rate, formula_11\nWarm water mass flow rate, formula_12\nCold water mass flow rate formula_13\nClosed Anderson cycle.\nAs developed starting in the 1960s by J. Hilbert Anderson of Sea Solar Power, Inc., in this cycle, \"QH\" is the heat transferred in the evaporator from the warm sea water to the working fluid. The working fluid exits the evaporator as a gas near its dew point.\nThe high-pressure, high-temperature gas then is expanded in the turbine to yield turbine work, \"WT\". The working fluid is slightly superheated at the turbine exit and the turbine typically has an efficiency of 90% based on reversible, adiabatic expansion.\nFrom the turbine exit, the working fluid enters the condenser where it rejects heat, \"-QC\", to the cold sea water. The condensate is then compressed to the highest pressure in the cycle, requiring condensate pump work, \"WC\". Thus, the Anderson closed cycle is a Rankine-type cycle similar to the conventional power plant steam cycle except that in the Anderson cycle the working fluid is never superheated more than a few degrees Fahrenheit. Owing to viscosity effects, working fluid pressure drops in both the evaporator and the condenser. This pressure drop, which depends on the types of heat exchangers used, must be considered in final design calculations but is ignored here to simplify the analysis. Thus, the parasitic condensate pump work, \"WC\", computed here will be lower than if the heat exchanger pressure drop was included. The major additional parasitic energy requirements in the OTEC plant are the cold water pump work, \"WCT\", and the warm water pump work, \"WHT\". Denoting all other parasitic energy requirements by \"WA\", the net work from the OTEC plant, \"WNP\" is\nformula_14\nThe thermodynamic cycle undergone by the working fluid can be analyzed without detailed consideration of the parasitic energy requirements. From the first law of thermodynamics, the energy balance for the working fluid as the system is\nformula_15\nwhere \"WN\" = \"WT\" + \"WC\" is the net work for the thermodynamic cycle. For the idealized case in which there is no working fluid pressure drop in the heat exchangers,\nformula_16\nand\nformula_17\nso that the net thermodynamic cycle work becomes\nformula_18\nSubcooled liquid enters the evaporator. Due to the heat exchange with warm sea water, evaporation takes place and usually superheated vapor leaves the evaporator. This vapor drives the turbine and the 2-phase mixture enters the condenser. Usually, the subcooled liquid leaves the condenser and finally, this liquid is pumped to the evaporator completing a cycle.\nEnvironmental impact.\nCarbon dioxide dissolved in deep cold and high pressure layers is brought up to the surface and released as the water warms. \nMixing of deep ocean water with shallower water brings up nutrients and makes them available to shallow water life. This may be an advantage for aquaculture of commercially important species, but may also unbalance the ecological system around the power plant.\nOTEC plants use very large flows of warm surface seawater and cold deep seawater to generate constant renewable power. The deep seawater is oxygen deficient and generally 20\u201340 times more nutrient rich (in nitrate and nitrite) than shallow seawater. When these plumes are mixed, they are slightly denser than the ambient seawater. Though no large scale physical environmental testing of OTEC has been done, computer models have been developed to simulate the effect of OTEC plants.\nHydrodynamic modeling.\nIn 2010, a computer model was developed to simulate the physical oceanographic effects of one or several 100 megawatt OTEC plant(s). The model suggests that OTEC plants can be configured such that the plant can conduct continuous operations, with resulting temperature and nutrient variations that are within naturally occurring levels. Studies to date suggest that by discharging the OTEC flows downwards at a depth below 70 meters, the dilution is adequate and nutrient enrichment is small enough so that 100-megawatt OTEC plants could be operated in a sustainable manner on a continuous basis.\nBiological modeling.\nThe nutrients from an OTEC discharge could potentially cause increased biological activity if they accumulate in large quantities in the photic zone. In 2011 a biological component was added to the hydrodynamic computer model to simulate the biological response to plumes from 100 megawatt OTEC plants. In all cases modeled (discharge at 70 meters depth or more), no unnatural variations occurs in the upper 40 meters of the ocean's surface. The picoplankton response in the 110 - 70 meter depth layer is approximately a 10\u201325% increase, which is well within naturally occurring variability. The nanoplankton response is negligible. The enhanced productivity of diatoms (microplankton) is small. The subtle phytoplankton increase of the baseline OTEC plant suggests that higher-order biochemical effects will be very small.\nStudies.\nA previous Final Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the United States' NOAA from 1981 is available, but needs to be brought up to current oceanographic and engineering standards. Studies have been done to propose the best environmental baseline monitoring practices, focusing on a set of ten chemical oceanographic parameters relevant to OTEC. Most recently, NOAA held an OTEC Workshop in 2010 and 2012 seeking to assess the physical, chemical, and biological impacts and risks, and identify information gaps or needs.\nThe Tethys database provides access to scientific literature and general information on the potential environmental effects of OTEC.\nTechnical difficulties.\nDissolved gases.\nThe performance of direct contact heat exchangers operating at typical OTEC boundary conditions is important to the Claude cycle. Many early Claude cycle designs used a surface condenser since their performance was well understood. However, direct contact condensers offer significant disadvantages. As cold water rises in the intake pipe, the pressure decreases to the point where gas begins to evolve. If a significant amount of gas comes out of solution, placing a gas trap before the direct contact heat exchangers may be justified. Experiments simulating conditions in the warm water intake pipe indicated about 30% of the dissolved gas evolves in the top of the tube. The trade-off between pre-deaeration of the seawater and expulsion of non-condensable gases from the condenser is dependent on the gas evolution dynamics, deaerator efficiency, head loss, vent compressor efficiency and parasitic power. Experimental results indicate vertical spout condensers perform some 30% better than falling jet types.\nMicrobial fouling.\nBecause raw seawater must pass through the heat exchanger, care must be taken to maintain good thermal conductivity. Biofouling layers as thin as can degrade heat exchanger performance by as much as 50%. A 1977 study in which mock heat exchangers were exposed to seawater for ten weeks concluded that although the level of microbial fouling was low, the thermal conductivity of the system was significantly impaired. The apparent discrepancy between the level of fouling and the heat transfer impairment is the result of a thin layer of water trapped by the microbial growth on the surface of the heat exchanger.\nAnother study concluded that fouling degrades performance over time, and determined that although regular brushing was able to remove most of the microbial layer, over time a tougher layer formed that could not be removed through simple brushing. The study passed sponge rubber balls through the system. It concluded that although the ball treatment decreased the fouling rate it was not enough to completely halt growth and brushing was occasionally necessary to restore capacity. The microbes regrew more quickly later in the experiment (i.e. brushing became necessary more often) replicating the results of a previous study. The increased growth rate after subsequent cleanings appears to result from selection pressure on the microbial colony.\nContinuous use of 1 hour per day and intermittent periods of free fouling and then chlorination periods (again 1 hour per day) were studied. Chlorination slowed but did not stop microbial growth; however chlorination levels of 0.1\u00a0mg per liter for 1 hour per day may prove effective for long term operation of a plant. The study concluded that although microbial fouling was an issue for the warm surface water heat exchanger, the cold water heat exchanger suffered little or no biofouling and only minimal inorganic fouling.\nBesides water temperature, microbial fouling also depends on nutrient levels, with growth occurring faster in nutrient rich water. The fouling rate also depends on the material used to construct the heat exchanger. Aluminium tubing slows the growth of microbial life, although the oxide layer which forms on the inside of the pipes complicates cleaning and leads to larger efficiency losses. In contrast, titanium tubing allows biofouling to occur faster but cleaning is more effective than with aluminium.\nSealing.\nThe evaporator, turbine, and condenser operate in partial vacuum ranging from 3% to 1% of atmospheric pressure. The system must be carefully sealed to prevent in-leakage of atmospheric air that can degrade or shut down operation. In closed-cycle OTEC, the specific volume of low-pressure steam is very large compared to that of the pressurized working fluid. Components must have large flow areas to ensure steam velocities do not attain excessively high values.\nParasitic power consumption by exhaust compressor.\nAn approach for reducing the exhaust compressor parasitic power loss is as follows. After most of the steam has been condensed by spout condensers, the non-condensible gas steam mixture is passed through a counter current region which increases the gas-steam reaction by a factor of five. The result is an 80% reduction in the exhaust pumping power requirements.\nCold air/warm water conversion.\nIn winter in coastal Arctic locations, the temperature difference between the seawater and ambient air can be as high as 40\u00a0\u00b0C (72\u00a0\u00b0F). Closed-cycle systems could exploit the air-water temperature difference. Eliminating seawater extraction pipes might make a system based on this concept less expensive than OTEC. This technology is due to H. Barjot, who suggested butane as cryogen, because of its boiling point of and its non-solubility in water. Assuming a realistic level of efficiency of 4%, calculations show that the amount of energy generated with one cubic meter water at a temperature of in a place with an air temperature of equals the amount of energy generated by letting this cubic meter water run through a hydroelectric plant of 4000 feet (1,200 m) height.\nBarjot Polar Power Plants could be located on islands in the polar region or designed as swimming barges or platforms attached to the ice cap. The weather station Myggbuka at Greenlands east coast for example, which is only 2,100\u00a0km away from Glasgow, detects monthly mean temperatures below during 6 winter months in the year.\nApplication of the thermoelectric effect.\nIn 1979 SERI proposed using the Seebeck effect to produce power with a total conversion efficiency of 2%.\nIn 2014 Liping Liu, Associate Professor at Rutgers University, envisioned an OTEC system that utilises the solid state thermoelectric effect rather than the fluid cycles traditionally used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "68499", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68499", "title": "Brain aneurysm", "text": ""}
{"id": "68501", "revid": "1360214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68501", "title": "McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller", "text": "1971 film by Robert Altman\nMcCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller is a 1971 American revisionist Western film directed by Robert Altman and starring Warren Beatty and Julie Christie. The screenplay by Altman and Brian McKay is based on the 1959 novel \"McCabe\" by Edmund Naughton. Set in Washington State during the early 1900s, the film follows a mysterious gambler and alleged shootist (Beatty) who recruits a British madam (Christie) to run a boomtown brothel, later running afoul of powerful business interests.\nAltman referred to it as an \"anti-Western\" film because it ignores or subverts a number of Western conventions. The film is also noted for its cinematography by Vilmos Zsigmond, and its soundtrack, which features several songs by Leonard Cohen. Filming took place in British Columbia, Canada in the fall and winter of 1970, and the film was released by Warner Bros. on June 24, 1971.\n\"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" has received critical acclaim in the years since its release and earned an Oscar nomination for Christie in the Best Actress category. The film was deemed the 8th greatest Western of all time by the American Film Institute in its AFI's 10 Top 10 list in 2008 and, in 2010, was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn 1902, a mysterious gambler named John McCabe (Beatty) arrives in the unincorporated boomtown of Presbyterian Church, Washington, named after its only substantial building, a tall but mostly unused chapel. McCabe quickly takes a dominant position over the town's simple-minded and lethargic inhabitants, thanks to his aggressive personality and persistent rumors that he is actually a notorious gunfighter known as \"Pudgy\" McCabe.\nTo support himself, McCabe establishes a makeshift brothel, consisting of three prostitutes purchased for $200 from a pimp in the nearby town of Bearpaw. British cockney madam Constance Miller (Christie) arrives and persuades McCabe to let her manage his brothel while he focuses on running a gambling hall. The two become financially successful business partners, turning their small business into the largest in town, and a romantic relationship develops between the two, though she charges him for sex.\nAs the town becomes richer, Sears and Hollander, a pair of agents from the Harrison Shaughnessy Mining Company in Bearpaw, arrive to buy out McCabe's business, as well as the surrounding zinc mines. Harrison Shaughnessy is notorious for having people killed when they refuse to sell. McCabe does not want to sell at their initial price of $5,500 but overplays his hand in negotiations by demanding too high an asking price. The agents leave in disgust, and Miller warns him that they will not return to negotiate and that his life is in danger.\nHired guns Butler, Breed and the Kid arrive in town with a contract to kill McCabe. Appearing fearful, McCabe relents and agrees to sell. Butler refuses to parlay, declaring that McCabe is a fraud and has never killed anyone in his life. McCabe goes back to Bearpaw to find the agents, but after learning that neither are still around, he visits a lawyer, Clement Samuels, in the hopes of resolving the dispute peacefully. The lawyer, an aspiring politician, boosts McCabe's confidence and convinces him not to give in by arguing that he can set an example by standing up to Harrison Shaughnessy.\nMcCabe returns to town and tries to hide in the chapel, but the pastor grabs his shotgun and chases him out before being fatally shot by Butler. A broken lantern starts a fire in the church and the townspeople rush to help extinguish it. McCabe manages to kill Breed and the Kid in ambushes, but the Kid is able to wound him before dying. As the townsfolk mobilize to fight the chapel fire, McCabe is gunned down by Butler, using a hunting rifle; as Butler attempts to verify the kill, McCabe pulls a derringer and kills him. As the townspeople celebrate extinguishing the fire, McCabe dies alone in the snow, while Mrs. Miller lies sedated in an opium den.\nCast.\nCredits from \"AFI Catalog of Feature Films\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Warren Beatty as John McCabe\nThemes.\nFilm historian James Bernardoni in his book \"The New Hollywood\" (1991) locates the central theme of the picture within an inherent conflict between human individuality and the requirements of community in a capitalist society. Bernardoni maintains that Robert Altman delivers these personal and social struggles relentlessly \u2014 \"in every sequence, virtually every frame\"\u2014 through his handling of Mise-en-sc\u00e8ne.\nThe denouement depicts the mortally wounded McCabe dying alone in a snowbank, and Mrs. Miller, unaware of this demise, descending into a death-like opium trance. As such, \"a nuanced, compelling, iconoclastic meditation on the great western theme of the reconciliation of the individual and the community, comes to the end.\"\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\n\"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" is based on Edmund Naughton's 1959 novel \"McCabe\". David Foster, one of the film's producers, had purchased the film rights to the novel in 1968; he'd learned of the novel while negotiating with Ellen Wright (the widow of novelist Richard Wright) over the rights to \"The Mandarins\", a novel by Simone de Beauvoir. Wright was acting as the agent for Naughton, who was then living in Paris and working for the \"International Herald Tribune\". With his partner, Mitchell Broward, Foster then negotiated a deal with the Fox studio for two films. By October, 1968, Foster had commissioned a screenplay from Ben Maddow, a well-known poet and screenwriter.\nIn 1969, Altman was in post-production on \"M*A*S*H\" and snuck Foster into the screening; Foster liked the film and signed Altman to direct a film based on \"McCabe\". They agreed to wait until \"M*A*S*H\" became a box-office hit to take the pitch for \"McCabe\" to a studio for funding. A second screenplay \u2013 independent of Maddow's \u2013 was commissioned from Brian McKay, who completed it in only five weeks. A revised version of that screenplay dated July 1970 became the \"shooting script\" for the film. Altman and McKay are listed in the film's credits as its screenwriters; Maddow went uncredited.\nAltman offered the lead to Elliott Gould who turned it down to make \"I Love My Wife\". \"Bob said, 'You're making the mistake of your life',\" said Gould. \"There was a part of me that was not developed at all and that had no real understanding about what the woman is. Bob wanted to cast Patricia Quinn as Mrs. Miller, and I hadn't seen \"Alice's Restaurant\" and I hadn't met her. I had some misconceptions because I wanted her to have the same relationship with Altman as I had. I recently watched \"Alice's Restaurant\" and she's great. Altman was so right.\"\nFoster called Warren Beatty in England, about the film; Beatty flew to New York City to see \"M*A*S*H\" and then flew to Los Angeles, California to sign for \"McCabe\".\nThe film was originally called \"The Presbyterian Church Wager\", after a bet placed among the church's few attendees, about whether McCabe would survive his refusal of the offer to buy his property. Altman reported that an official in the Presbyterian Church called Warner Bros., to complain about having its church mentioned in a film about brothels and gambling. The complaint prompted a name change to \"John Mac Cabe\" but it was released as \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\".\nFilming.\nThe film was shot in West Vancouver and in Squamish, almost in sequential order, a rarity for film makers. The crew found a suitable location for the filming and built up the \"set\", as McCabe built up the town in the film. Mrs. Miller is brought into town on a J. I. Case 80 HP steam engine from 1912; the steam engine is genuine and functioning and the crew used it to power the lumbermill after its arrival. Carpenters for the film were locals and young men from the United States, fleeing conscription into the Vietnam War; they were dressed in period costume and used tools of the period, so that they could go about their business in the background, while the plot advanced in the foreground.\nThe crew ran buried hoses throughout the town, placed so they could create the appearance of rain. Since the city of Vancouver generally receives a great deal of rain, it was usually only necessary to turn on the hoses to make scenes shot on the rare days when it didn't rain, to match those shot on days when it did.\nIt began snowing near the end of shooting, when the church fire and the standoff were the only scenes left. Beatty did not want to start shooting in the snow, as it was financially risky to do so: to preserve continuity, the rest of the film would have to be shot in snow. Altman countered that since those were the only scenes left to film, it was best to start since there was nothing else to do. The \"standoff\" scene\u2014which is in fact more a \"cat and mouse\" scene involving shooting one's enemy in the back\u2014and its concurrent church fire scene, were shot over nine days. The heavy snow, with the exception of a few \"fill-in\" patches on the ground, was genuine; the crew members built snowmen and had snowball fights between takes.\nThe film, especially the final scene, is atypical of the western genre. The showdown between a reluctant protagonist and his enemies takes place ungracefully in the snow during the early hours, rather than at \"high noon\". Instead of hiding indoors and watching the battle unfold outside, the townsfolk are bustling in the streets and largely unaware of the gunfight taking place in their midst. For a distinctive look, Altman and Zsigmond chose to \"flash\" (pre-fog) the film negative before its eventual exposure, as well as use a number of filters on the cameras, rather than manipulate the film in post-production; in this way the studio could not force him to change the film's look to something less distinctive.\nEditing.\nThe editing of \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" took much longer than its filming. Altman and Lou Lombardo, the editor and second unit director, spent nine months editing the film in North Vancouver, close to the location of the filming itself. The editing was an innovation in its time because the principal storyline about John McCabe and Constance Miller occupies relatively little of the film's running time, especially in the first half of the film. Pauline Kael emphasized this in her 1971 review of the film. She wrote,\nThe classical story is only a thread in the story that Altman is telling ... The people who drop in and out of the place\u2014a primitive mining town\u2014are not just background for McCabe and Mrs. Miller; McCabe and Mrs. Miller are simply the two most interesting people in the town, and we catch their stories in glimpses, as they interact with the other characters and each other ... Lives are picked up and let go, and the sense of how little we know about them becomes part of the texture; we generally know little about the characters in movies, but since we're assured that that little is all we need to know, and thus all there is to know, we're not bothered by it. Here we seem to be witnesses to a vision of the past ...\nThis aspect of the film's editing also carried through into the film's unusual sound editing, which can blend many conversations and noises and does not emphasize the principal characters. In his textbook on film production, Bruce Mamer wrote,\nRobert Altman was famous for using this style of layered dialogue cutting. The frontier barroom scene that opens his \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" (Louis Lombardo, editor) has snippets of conversations underlying the foreground action.\nKen Dancyger describes the effect in terms of its undermining of dialogue as an element in the film,\nMany characters speak simultaneously, and we are aware of the discreteness of their conversations, but as their comments bleed into those of others, the effect is to undermine the dialogue. The scene moves dialogue from the informational status it usually occupies to the category of noise. Language becomes a sound effect. When we do hear the dialogue, it is the speaker who is important rather than what is being said.\nSimilarly, Jay Beck writes\n\"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" represents the full-scale launch of the practice of overlapping dialogue in Altman's cinema. The visual and acoustic strategies in the film avoid foregrounding the main characters in the narrative and the audience has to work to follow the story, or stories, as they unfold.\nLeonard Cohen's songs.\nOther than the music occurring in the ordinary life of Presbyterian Church, the only music for the film is from three songs composed and performed by Leonard Cohen, a Canadian poet who had released his first album of songs in 1967. Their importance is emphasized by Scott Tobias, who wrote in 2014 that \"The film is unimaginable to me without the Cohen songs, which function as these mournful interstitials that unify the entire movie.\"\nAltman had liked Cohen's debut album, \"Songs of Leonard Cohen\" (1967), immensely, buying additional copies of it after wearing out each vinyl record. He had then forgotten about the album. A few years later, Altman visited Paris, just after finishing shooting \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\", and rediscovered Cohen's album. He had Lou Lombardo, the film's editor, use the music to maintain a rhythm for the film (in effect using it as a \"temp\" track). He later said, \"I think the reason they worked was because those lyrics were etched in my subconscious, so when I shot the scenes I fitted them to the songs, as if they were written for them.\"\nAltman didn't expect to be able to procure rights for Cohen's music since \"McCabe\" was a Warner Brothers film and Cohen's album was released through Columbia Records. He called Cohen, expecting to trade off his recent success with \"M*A*S*H\", but found that Cohen had no knowledge of it. Instead, Cohen had loved Altman's less popular follow-up film \"Brewster McCloud\". Cohen arranged for his record company to license the music cheaply, even writing into the contract that sales of that album after the release of \"McCabe\" would turn some of the royalties to Altman (an arrangement which at the time was quite unusual). The three Cohen songs used in the film were \"The Stranger Song\", \"Sisters of Mercy\" and \"Winter Lady\". They were released together on a 7-inch single in France in 1971, and other European countries during 1972.\nRelease.\nBox office.\nWith poor initial reviews, the film did not perform well at the box office in New York, but it was more successful in other parts of the country. Warner Bros., encouraged by Beatty, rereleased the film at the Coronet Theatre in New York in August 1971 along with a new advertising campaign, and its box-office performance improved upon that of the original release.\nThe film earned an estimated $4 million in theatrical rentals in the United States and Canada.\nHome media.\nWarner Home Video released a Region 1 DVD in 2002. The Criterion Collection released a 4K digital transfer of the film on Blu-ray and DVD on October 11, 2016. A new 4K UHD physical release from Criterion was released in February, 2024.https://\nReception.\nContemporary U.S. reviews.\nThe film opened without advance screenings at the Criterion and Loew's Cine theaters in New York City and received mostly negative reviews from the New York daily newspapers including one from Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\", who wrote that the film dragged its storyline out with such \"tired symbolism\" \"that the effect is to undercut its narrative drive and the dignity of its fiction.\" It was also panned by Rex Reed, who called it \"an incoherent, amateurish, simple-minded, boring and totally worthless piece of garbage\" and \"an insult to the intelligence of anyone stupid or masochistic enough to sit through it\"; he added that \"at the screening I attended Wednesday night, there were so many boos and hisses and programs thrown at the screen I thought the enraged audience was going to burn down the theater. I wouldn't have blamed them.\" However, the weekly critics raved about the film including Judith Crist and Pauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" who called it \"a beautiful pipe dream of a movie\u2014a fleeting, almost vision of what frontier life might have been,\" adding, \"The movie is so affecting it leaves one rather dazed.\" Kael goes on to laud Altman, saying he has a \"gift for creating and atmosphere of living interrelationships and doing it so obliquely that the viewer can't quite believe it.\"\nAs well, Kathleen Carroll of the New York \"Daily News\" gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and said that \"again Altman never states or explains. He suggests the passing of time and one has to catch his clues. His concern is not to unravel a plot, but to capture an atmosphere or a feeling and this he does beautifully even to the point of softening the color so that the film has a faded, antique look to it.\"\nRoger Ebert gave the film four stars out of four and wrote that it \"is like no other Western ever made, and with it, Robert Altman earns his place as one of the best contemporary directors.\" He later added the film to his \"Great Movies\" list, where he said \"Robert Altman has made a dozen films that can be called great in one way or another, but one of them is perfect, and that one is \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" (1971).\" Gene Siskel also awarded it four stars and called it \"a brilliant film, not because of the story, but because of the way in which it is told ... To construct such delicate scenes is the hallmark of fine film making and Altman is clearly a master.\" Charles Champlin of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called the film \"interesting\" but \"as uneven as the stare of a cheap mirror.\" Gary Arnold of \"The Washington Post\" wrote, \"Once again Altman brings a special way of life casually but vibrantly alive. 'McCabe' is an imaginative triumph partly in a visible, technical sense\u2014a meticulous, conventionally authentic reconstruction of a frontier town\u2014but principally in an emotional sense\u2014a deeply felt and stirring romantic vision of frontier society.\"\nContemporary Canadian reviews.\nLes Wedman of the \"Vancouver Sun\" noted that \"locally, the initial interest is that the movie was shot last winter in West Vancouver and Squamish, but it is going to take more than the stunning and scenic photography of Vilmos [Zsigmond] and the presence of local actors on the screen to sustain audiences even here. And unfortunately, even with varying degrees of performance and the drawing power of stars Warren Beatty and Julie Christie, \"McCabe and Mrs. Miller\" doesn't have much else.\" James Spears, however, wrote in \"The Province\" that the film \"is a beautiful dream, and an important part of the dream of Vancouver.\" Daniel Stoffman of \"The Toronto Star\" called it \"an hour and a half of Warren Beatty mumbling, Julie Christie scowling, and Leonard Cohen droning on the sound track. It's not much else.\" Dave Lanken of the Montreal \"Gazette\" said that \"for director Robert Altman, \"McCabe\" must be a source of satisfaction. So different from his \"M*A*S*H\" or his \"Brewster [McCloud]\", but another little masterpiece.\" A critic in the \"Montreal Star\" called the film \"a beautiful but sometimes pretentious outdoors saga.\"\nRetrospective reviews.\nOn review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 85% based on 60 reviews, with an average score of 8.70/10. The website's critical consensus reads, \"\"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" offers revisionist Western fans a landmark early addition to the genre while marking an early apogee for director Robert Altman.\" On Metacritic, the film received a score of 93 based on 17 reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim\". \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" received five votes in the British Film Institute's 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls, and in a later BBC poll was voted the 16th greatest American film ever made. In a 2009 interview, the film critic A.O. Scott named it one of his five favorite films.\nAccolades.\nIn 2010, \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nIn June 2008, the American Film Institute revealed its AFI's 10 Top 10\u2014the best ten films in ten \"classic\" American film genres\u2014after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" was acknowledged as the eighth best film in the Western genre.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68502", "revid": "50778214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68502", "title": "Fox hunting", "text": "Traditional equestrian hunting activity\nFox hunting is an activity involving the tracking, chase and, if caught, the killing of a fox, normally a red fox, by trained foxhounds or other scent hounds. A group of unarmed followers, led by a \"master of foxhounds\" (or \"master of hounds\"), follow the hounds on foot or on horseback.\nFox hunting with hounds, as a formalised activity, originated in England in the sixteenth century, in a form very similar to that practised until February 2005, when a law banning the activity in England and Wales came into force. A ban on hunting in Scotland had been passed in 2002, but it continues to be within the law in Northern Ireland and several other jurisdictions, including Australia, Canada, France, Ireland and the United States.\nThe sport is controversial, particularly in the United Kingdom. Proponents of fox hunting view it as an important part of rural culture and useful for reasons of conservation and pest control, while opponents argue it is cruel and unnecessary.\nHistory.\nThe use of scenthounds to track prey dates back to Assyrian, Babylonian, and ancient Egyptian times, and was known as venery.\nEurope.\nMany Greek- and Roman-influenced countries have long traditions of hunting with hounds. Hunting with Agassaei hounds was popular in Celtic Britain, even before the Romans arrived, introducing the Castorian and Fulpine hound breeds which they used to hunt. Norman hunting traditions were brought to Britain when William the Conqueror arrived, along with the Gascon and Talbot hounds.\nFoxes were referred to as \"beasts of the chase\" by medieval times, along with the red deer (hart &amp; hind), martens, and roes, but the earliest known attempt to hunt a fox with hounds was in Norfolk, England, in 1534, where farmers began chasing foxes down with their dogs for the purpose of pest control. The last wolf in England was killed in the late 15th century during the reign of Henry VII, leaving the English fox with no threat from larger predators. The first use of packs specifically trained to hunt foxes was in the late 1600s, with the oldest fox hunt being, probably, the Bilsdale in Yorkshire.\nBy the end of the seventeenth century, deer hunting was in decline. The inclosure acts brought fences to separate formerly open land into many smaller fields, deer forests were being cut down, and arable land was increasing. With the onset of the Industrial Revolution, people began to move out of the country and into towns and cities to find work. Roads, railway lines, and canals all split hunting countries, but at the same time they made hunting accessible to more people. Shotguns were improved during the nineteenth century and the shooting of gamebirds became more popular. Fox hunting developed further in the eighteenth century when Hugo Meynell developed breeds of hound and horse to address the new geography of rural England.\nIn Germany, hunting with hounds (which tended to be deer or boar hunting) was first banned on the initiative of Hermann G\u00f6ring on 3 July 1934. In 1939, the ban was extended to cover Austria after Germany's annexation of the country. Bernd Ergert, the director of Germany's hunting museum in Munich, said of the ban, \"The aristocrats were understandably furious, but they could do nothing about the ban given the totalitarian nature of the regime.\"\nUnited States.\nAccording to the Masters of Foxhounds Association of America, Englishman Robert Brooke was the first man to import hunting hounds to what is now the United States, bringing his pack of foxhounds to Maryland in 1650, along with his horses. Also around this time, numbers of European red foxes were introduced into the Eastern seaboard of North America for hunting. The first organised hunt for the benefit of a group (rather than a single patron) was started by Thomas, sixth Lord Fairfax in 1747. In the United States, George Washington and Thomas Jefferson both kept packs of foxhounds before and after the American Revolutionary War.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, the European red fox was introduced solely for the purpose of fox hunting in 1855. Native animal populations have been very badly affected, with the extinction of at least 10 species attributed to the spread of foxes. Fox hunting with hounds is mainly practised in the east of Australia. In the state of Victoria there are thirteen hunts, with more than 1000 members between them. Fox hunting with hounds results in around 650 foxes being killed annually in Victoria, compared with over 90,000 shot over a similar period in response to a State government bounty.\nThe Adelaide Hunt Club traces its origins to 1840, just a few years after the colonization of South Australia.\nCurrent status.\nUnited Kingdom.\nFox hunting is prohibited in Great Britain by the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Act 2002 and the Hunting Act 2004 (England and Wales), passed under the ministry of Tony Blair, but remains legal in Northern Ireland. \nThe passing of the Hunting Act was notable in that it was implemented through the use of the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, after the House of Lords refused to pass the legislation, despite the Commons passing it by a majority of 356 to 166.\nAfter the ban on fox hunting, hunts in Great Britain switched to legal alternatives, such as drag hunting and trail hunting. The Hunting Act 2004 also permits some previously unusual forms of hunting wild mammals with dogs to continue, such as \"hunting... for the purpose of enabling a bird of prey to hunt the wild mammal\".\nOpponents of hunting, such as the League Against Cruel Sports, claim that some of these alternatives are a smokescreen for illegal hunting or a means of circumventing the ban. Hunting support group Countryside Alliance said in 2006 that there was anecdotal evidence that the number of foxes killed by hunts (unintentionally) and farmers had increased since the Hunting Act came into force, both by the hunts (through lawful methods) and landowners, and that more people were hunting with hounds (although killing foxes had become illegal).\nTony Blair wrote in \"A Journey\", his memoirs published in 2010, that the Hunting Act of 2004 is 'one of the domestic legislative measures I most regret'.\nUnited States.\nIn America, fox hunting is also called \"fox chasing\", as it is the practice of many hunts not to actually kill the fox (the red fox is not regarded as a significant pest). Some hunts may go without catching a fox for several seasons, despite chasing two or more foxes in a single day's hunting. Foxes are not pursued once they have \"gone to ground\" (hidden in a hole). American fox hunters undertake stewardship of the land, and endeavour to maintain fox populations and habitats as much as possible. In many areas of the eastern United States the coyote, a natural predator of the red and grey fox, is becoming more prevalent and threatens fox populations in a hunt's given territory. In some areas, coyote are considered fair game when hunting with foxhounds, even if they are not the intended species being hunted.\nIn 2013, the Masters of Foxhounds Association of North America listed 163 registered packs in the US and Canada. This number does not include non-registered (also known as \"farmer\" or \"outlaw\") packs. Baily's Hunting Directory Lists 163 foxhound or draghound packs in the US and 11 in Canada In some arid parts of the Western United States, where foxes in general are more difficult to locate, coyotes are hunted and, in some cases, bobcats.\nOther countries.\nThe other main countries in which organized fox hunting with hounds is practised are Ireland (which has 42 registered packs), Australia, France (this hunting practice is also used for other animals such as deer, wild boar, fox, hare or rabbit), Canada and Italy. There is one pack of foxhounds in Portugal, and one in India. Although there are 32 packs for the hunting of foxes in France, hunting tends to take place mainly on a small scale and on foot, with mounted hunts tending to hunt red or roe deer, or wild boar.\nIn Portugal fox hunting is permitted (Decree-Law no. 202/2004) but there have been popular protests and initiatives to abolish it. A petition was handed over to the Assembly of the Republic on 18 May 2017 and the parliamentary hearing held in 2018.\nIn Canada, the Masters of Foxhounds Association of North America lists seven registered hunt clubs in the province of Ontario, one in Quebec, and one in Nova Scotia. Ontario issues licenses to registered hunt clubs, authorizing its members to pursue, chase or search for fox, although the primary target of the hunts is coyotes.\nQuarry animals.\nRed fox.\nThe red fox (\"Vulpes vulpes\") is the normal prey animal of a fox hunt in the US and Europe. A small omnivorous predator, the fox lives in burrows called earths, and is predominantly active around twilight (making it a crepuscular animal). Adult foxes tend to range around an area of between in good terrain, although in poor terrain, their range can be as much as . The red fox can run at up to . The fox is also variously known as a \"Tod\" (old English word for fox), \"Reynard\" (the name of an anthropomorphic character in European literature from the twelfth century), or \"Charlie\" (named for the Whig politician Charles James Fox). American red foxes tend to be larger than European forms, but according to foxhunters' accounts, they have less cunning, vigour and endurance in the chase than European foxes.\nCoyote, grey fox, and other quarry.\nOther species than the red fox may be the quarry for hounds in some areas. The choice of quarry depends on the region and numbers available.\nThe coyote (\"Canis latrans\") is a significant quarry for many Hunts in North America, particularly in the west and southwest, where there are large open spaces. The coyote is an indigenous predator that did not range east of the Mississippi River until the latter half of the twentieth century. The coyote is faster than a fox, running at and also wider ranging, with a territory of up to , so a much larger hunt territory is required to chase it. However, coyotes tend to be less challenging intellectually, as they offer a straight line hunt instead of the convoluted fox line. Coyotes can be challenging opponents for the dogs in physical confrontations, despite the size advantage of a large dog. Coyotes have larger canine teeth and are generally more practised in hostile encounters.\nThe grey fox (\"Urocyon cinereoargenteus\"), a distant relative of the European red fox, is also hunted in North America. It is an adept climber of trees, making it harder to hunt with hounds. The scent of the gray fox is not as strong as that of the red, therefore more time is needed for the hounds to take the scent. Unlike the red fox which, during the chase, will run far ahead from the pack, the gray fox will speed toward heavy brush, thus making it more difficult to pursue. Also unlike the red fox, which occurs more prominently in the northern United States, the more southern gray fox is rarely hunted on horseback, due to its densely covered habitat preferences.\nHunts in the southern United States sometimes pursue the bobcat (\"Lynx rufus\"). In countries such as India, and in other areas formerly under British influence, such as Iraq, the golden jackal (\"Canis aureus\") is often the quarry. During the British Raj, British sportsmen in India would hunt jackals on horseback with hounds as a substitute for the fox hunting of their native England. Unlike foxes, golden jackals were documented to be ferociously protective of their pack mates, and could seriously injure hounds. Jackals were not hunted often in this manner, as they were slower than foxes and could scarcely outrun greyhounds after .\nAlternatives to hunting live prey.\nFollowing the ban on fox hunting in Great Britain, hunts switched to legal alternatives in order to preserve their traditional practices, although some hunt supporters had previously claimed this would be impossible and that hound packs would have to be destroyed.\nMost hunts turned, primarily, to trail hunting, which anti-hunt organisations claim is just a smokescreen for illegal hunting. Some anti-hunting campaigners have urged hunts to switch to the established sport of drag hunting instead, as this involves significantly less risk of wild animals being accidentally caught and killed.\nTrail hunting.\nA controversial alternative to hunting animals with hounds. A trail of animal urine (most commonly fox) is laid in advance of the 'hunt', and then tracked by the hound pack and a group of followers; on foot, horseback, or both. Because the trail is laid using animal urine, and in areas where such animals naturally occur, hounds often pick up the scent of live animals; sometimes resulting in them being caught and killed.\nDrag hunting.\nAn established sport which dates back to the 19th century. Hounds follow an artificial scent, usually aniseed, laid along a set route which is already known to the huntsmen. A drag hunt course is set in a similar manner to a cross country course, following a route over jumps and obstacles. Because it is predetermined, the route can be tailored to keep hounds away from sensitive areas known to be populated by animals which could be confused for prey.\nHound trailing.\nSimilar to drag hunting, but in the form of a race; usually of around in length. Unlike other forms of hunting, the hounds are not followed by humans.\nClean boot hunting.\nClean boot hunting uses packs of bloodhounds to follow the natural trail of a human's scent.\nAnimals of the hunt.\nHounds and other dogs.\nFox hunting is usually undertaken with a pack of scent hounds, and, in most cases, these are specially bred \"foxhounds\".\nThese dogs are trained to pursue the fox based on its scent. The two main types of foxhound are the English Foxhound and the American Foxhound. It is possible to use a sight hound such as a Greyhound or lurcher to pursue foxes, though this practice is not common in organised hunting, and these dogs are more often used for coursing animals such as hares. There is also one pack of beagles in Virginia that hunt foxes. They are unique in that they are the only hunting beagle pack in the US to be followed on horseback. English Foxhounds are also used for hunting mink.\nHunts may also use terriers to flush or kill foxes that are hiding underground, as they are small enough to pursue the fox through narrow earth passages. This is not practised in the United States, as once the fox has gone to ground and is accounted for by the hounds, it is left alone.\nHorses.\nThe horses, called \"field hunters\" or \"hunters,\" ridden by members of the field, are a prominent feature of many hunts, although others are conducted on foot (and those hunts with a field of mounted riders will also have foot followers). Horses on hunts can range from specially bred and trained field hunters to casual hunt attendees riding a wide variety of horse and pony types. Draft and Thoroughbred crosses are commonly used as hunters, although purebred Thoroughbreds and horses of many different breeds are also used.\nSome hunts with unique territories favour certain traits in field hunters; for example, when hunting coyote in the western US, a faster horse with more stamina is required to keep up, as coyotes are faster than foxes and inhabit larger territories. Hunters must be well-mannered, have the athletic ability to clear large obstacles such as wide ditches, tall fences, and rock walls, and have the stamina to keep up with the hounds. In English foxhunting, the horses are often a cross of half or a quarter Irish Draught and the remainder English thoroughbred.\nDependent on terrain, and to accommodate different levels of ability, hunts generally have alternative routes that do not involve jumping. The field may be divided into two groups, with one group, the \"First Field,\" that takes a more direct but demanding route that involves jumps over obstacles while another group, the \"Second Field\" (also called \"Hilltoppers\" or \"Gaters\"), takes longer but less challenging routes that utilise gates or other types of access on the flat.\nBirds of prey.\nIn Great Britain, since the introduction of the hunting ban, a number of hunts have employed falconers to bring birds of prey to the hunt, due to the exemption in the Hunting Act for falconry. Many experts, such as the Hawk Board, deny that any bird of prey can reasonably be used in the British countryside to kill a fox which has been flushed by (and is being chased by) a pack of hounds.\nProcedure.\nMain hunting season.\nThe main hunting season usually begins in early November, in the northern hemisphere, and in May in the southern hemisphere.\nA hunt begins when the hounds are put, or \"cast\", into a patch of woods or brush where foxes are known to lay up during daylight hours; known as a \"covert\" (pronounced \"cover\"). If the pack manages to pick up the scent of a fox, they will track it for as long as they are able. Scenting can be affected by temperature, humidity, and other factors. If the hounds lose the scent, a \"check\" occurs.\nThe hounds pursue the trail of the fox and the riders follow, by the most direct route possible. This may involve very athletic skill on the part of horse and rider, and fox hunting has given birth to some traditional equestrian sports including steeplechase and point-to-point racing.\nThe hunt continues until either the fox \"goes to ground\" (evades the hounds and takes refuge in a burrow or den) or is overtaken and usually killed by the hounds.\nSocial rituals are important to hunts, although many have fallen into disuse. One of the most notable was the act of \"blooding\". In this ceremony, the master or huntsman would smear the blood of the fox onto the cheeks or forehead of a newly initiated hunt-follower, often a young child. Another practice of some hunts was to cut off the fox's tail (\"brush\"), the feet (\"pads\") and the head (\"mask\") as trophies, with the carcass then thrown to the hounds. Both of these practices were widely abandoned during the nineteenth century, although isolated cases may still have occurred to the modern day.\nCubbing.\nIn the autumn of each year, hunts accustom the young hounds, which by now are full-size, but not yet sexually mature, to hunt and kill foxes through the practice of \"cubbing\" (also called \"cub hunting\", \"autumn hunting\" and \"entering\"). Cubbing also aims to teach hounds to restrict their hunting to foxes, so that they do not hunt other species such as deer or hares.\nThe activity sometimes incorporates the practice of \"holding up\"; where hunt supporters, riders and foot followers surround a covert and drive back foxes attempting to escape, before then \"drawing\" the covert with the young hounds and some more experienced hounds, allowing them to find and kill foxes within the surrounded covert. A young hound is considered to be \"entered\" into the pack once they have successfully joined in a hunt of this fashion. Young hounds which do not show sufficient aptitude may be killed by their owners or drafted to other packs, including minkhound packs.\nThe Burns Inquiry, established in 1999, reported that an estimated 10,000 fox cubs were killed annually during the cub-hunting season in Great Britain. Cub hunting is now illegal in Great Britain,\nalthough anti-hunt associations maintain that the practice continues.\nPeople.\nHunt staff and officials.\nAs a social ritual, participants in a fox hunt fill specific roles, the most prominent of which is the master, who often number more than one and then are called masters or joint masters. These individuals typically take much of the financial responsibility for the overall management of the sporting activities of the hunt, along with the care and breeding of the hunt's foxhounds as well as control and direction of its paid staff.\nIn addition to members of the hunt staff, a committee may run the \"Hunt Supporters Club\" to organise fundraising and social events and in the United States many hunts are incorporated and have parallel lines of leadership.\nThe United Kingdom, Ireland, and the United States each have a \"Masters of Foxhounds Association\" (MFHA) which consists of current and past masters of foxhounds. This is the governing body for all foxhound packs and deals with disputes about boundaries between hunts, as well as regulating the activity.\nAttire.\nMounted hunt followers typically wear traditional hunting attire. A prominent feature of hunts operating during the formal hunt season (usually November to March in the northern hemisphere) is hunt members wearing 'colours'. This attire usually consists of the traditional red coats worn by huntsmen, masters, former masters, whippers-in (regardless of sex), other hunt staff members and male members who have been invited by masters to wear colours and hunt buttons as a mark of appreciation for their involvement in the organization and running of the hunt.\nSince the Hunting Act in England and Wales, only Masters and Hunt Servants tend to wear red coats or the hunt livery whilst out hunting. Gentleman subscribers tend to wear black coats, with or without hunt buttons. In some countries, women generally wear coloured collars on their black or navy coats. These help them stand out from the rest of the field.\nThe traditional red coats are often misleadingly called \"pinks\". Various theories about the derivation of this term have been given, ranging from the colour of a weathered scarlet coat to the name of a purportedly famous tailor.\nSome hunts, including most harrier and beagle packs, wear green rather than red jackets, and some hunts wear other colours such as mustard. The colour of breeches vary from hunt to hunt and are generally of one colour, though two or three colours throughout the year may be permitted. Riding boots are generally English dress boots (no laces). For the men they are black with brown leather tops (called tan tops), and for the women, black with a patent black leather top of similar proportion to the men. Additionally, the number of buttons is significant. The Master wears a scarlet coat with four brass buttons while the huntsman and other professional staff wear five. Amateur whippers-in also wear four buttons.\nAnother differentiation in dress between the amateur and professional staff is found in the ribbons at the back of the hunt cap. The professional staff wear their hat ribbons down, while amateur staff and members of the field wear their ribbons up.\nThose members not entitled to wear colours, dress in a black hunt coat and unadorned black buttons for both men and women, generally with pale breeches. Boots are all English dress boots and have no other distinctive look. Some hunts also further restrict the wear of formal attire to weekends and holidays and wear ratcatcher (tweed jacket and tan breeches), at all other times.\nOther members of the mounted field follow strict rules of clothing etiquette. For example, for some hunts, those under eighteen (or sixteen in some cases) will wear ratcatcher all season. Those over eighteen (or in the case of some hunts, all followers regardless of age) will wear ratcatcher during autumn hunting from late August until the Opening Meet, normally around 1 November. From the Opening Meet they will switch to formal hunting attire where entitled members will wear scarlet and the rest black or navy.\nThe highest honour is to be awarded the hunt button by the Hunt Master. This sometimes means one can then wear scarlet if male, or the hunt collar if female (colour varies from hunt to hunt) and buttons with the hunt crest on them. For non-mounted packs or non-mounted members where formal hunt uniform is not worn, the buttons are sometimes worn on a waistcoat. All members of the mounted field should carry a hunting whip (it should not be called a crop). These have a horn handle at the top and a long leather lash () ending in a piece of coloured cord. Generally all hunting whips are brown, except those of Hunt Servants, whose whips are white.\nControversy.\nThe nature of fox hunting, including the killing of the quarry animal, the pursuit's strong associations with tradition and social class, and its practice for sport have made it a source of great controversy within the United Kingdom. In December 1999, the then Home Secretary, Jack Straw MP, announced the establishment of a Government inquiry (the Burns Inquiry) into hunting with dogs, to be chaired by the retired senior civil servant Lord Burns. The inquiry was to examine the practical aspects of different types of hunting with dogs and its impact, how any ban might be implemented and the consequences of any such ban.\nAmongst its findings, the Burns Inquiry committee analysed opposition to hunting in the UK and reported that:\nThere are those who have a moral objection to hunting and who are fundamentally opposed to the idea of people gaining pleasure from what they regard as the causing of unnecessary suffering. There are also those who perceive hunting as representing a divisive social class system. Others, as we note below, resent the hunt trespassing on their land, especially when they have been told they are not welcome. They worry about the welfare of the pets and animals and the difficulty of moving around the roads where they live on hunt days. Finally there are those who are concerned about damage to the countryside and other animals, particularly badgers and otters.\nIn a later debate in the House of Lords, the inquiry chairman, Lord Burns, also stated that \"Naturally, people ask whether we were implying that hunting is cruel... The short answer to that question is no. There was not sufficient verifiable evidence or data safely to reach views about cruelty. It is a complex area.\"\nAnti-hunting activists who choose to take action in opposing fox hunting can do so through lawful means, such as campaigning for fox hunting legislation and monitoring hunts for cruelty. Some use unlawful means. Main anti-hunting campaign organisations include the RSPCA and the League Against Cruel Sports. In 2001, the RSPCA took high court action to prevent pro-hunt activists joining in large numbers to change the society's policy in opposing hunting.\nOutside of campaigning, some activists choose to engage in direct intervention such as sabotage of the hunt. Hunt sabotage is unlawful in a majority of the United States, and some tactics used in it (such as trespass and criminal damage) are offences there and in other countries.\nFox hunting with hounds has been happening in Europe since at least the sixteenth century, and strong traditions have built up around the activity, as have related businesses, rural activities, and hierarchies. For this reason, there are large numbers of people who support fox hunting and this can be for a variety of reasons.\nPest control.\nThe fox is referred to as vermin in some countries. Some farmers fear the loss of their smaller livestock, while others consider them an ally in controlling rabbits, voles, and other rodents, which eat crops. A key reason for dislike of the fox by pastoral farmers is their tendency to commit acts of surplus killing toward animals such as chickens, since having killed many they eat only one. Some anti-hunt campaigners maintain that provided it is not disturbed, the fox will remove all of the chickens it kills and conceal them in a safer place.\nOpponents of fox hunting claim that the activity is not necessary for fox control, arguing that the fox is not a pest species despite its classification and that hunting does not and cannot make a real difference to fox populations. They compare the number of foxes killed in the hunt to the many more killed on the roads. They also argue that wildlife management goals of the hunt can be met more effectively by other methods such as \"lamping\" (dazzling a fox with a bright light, then shooting by a competent shooter using an appropriate weapon and load).\nThere is scientific evidence that fox hunting has no effect on fox populations, at least in Britain, thereby calling into question the idea it is a successful method of culling. In 2001 there was a 1-year nationwide ban on fox-hunting because of an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. It was found this ban on hunting had no measurable impact on fox numbers in randomly selected areas. Prior to the fox hunting ban in the UK, hounds contributed to the deaths of 6.3% of the 400,000 foxes killed annually.\nThe hunts claim to provide and maintain a good habitat for foxes and other game, and, in the US, have fostered conservation legislation and put land into conservation easements. Anti-hunting campaigners cite the widespread existence of artificial earths and the historic practice by hunts of introducing foxes, as indicating that hunts do not believe foxes to be pests.\nIt is also argued that hunting with dogs has the advantage of weeding out old, sick, and weak animals because the strongest and healthiest foxes are those most likely to escape. Therefore, unlike other methods of controlling the fox population, it is argued that hunting with dogs resembles natural selection. The counter-argument is given that hunting cannot kill old foxes because foxes have a natural death rate of 65% per annum.\nIn Australia, where foxes have played a major role in the decline in the number of species of wild animals, the Government's Department of the Environment and Heritage concluded that \"hunting does not seem to have had a significant or lasting impact on fox numbers.\" Instead, control of foxes relies heavily on shooting, poisoning and fencing.\nEconomics.\nAs well as the economic defence of fox hunting that it is necessary to control the population of foxes, lest they cause economic cost to the farmers, it is also argued that fox hunting is a significant economic activity in its own right, providing recreation and jobs for those involved in the hunt and supporting it. The Burns Inquiry identified that between 6,000 and 8,000 full-time jobs depend on hunting in the UK, of which about 700 result from direct hunt employment and 1,500 to 3,000 result from direct employment on hunting-related activities.\nSince the ban in the UK, there has been no evidence of significant job losses, and hunts have continued to operate along limited lines, either trail hunting, or claiming to use exemptions in the legislation.\nAnimal welfare and animal rights.\nMany animal welfare groups, campaigners and activists believe that fox hunting is unfair and cruel to animals. They argue that the chase itself causes fear and distress and that the fox is not always killed instantly as is claimed. Animal rights campaigners also object to hunting (including fox hunting), on the grounds that animals should enjoy some basic rights (such as the right to freedom from exploitation and the right to life).\nIn the United States and Canada, pursuing quarry for the purpose of killing is strictly forbidden by the Masters of Foxhounds Association. According to article 2 of the organisation's code:\nThe sport of fox hunting as it is practised in North America places emphasis on the chase and not the kill. It is inevitable, however, that hounds will at times catch their game. Death is instantaneous. A pack of hounds will account for their quarry by running it to ground, treeing it, or bringing it to bay in some fashion. The Masters of Foxhounds Association has laid down detailed rules to govern the behaviour of Masters of Foxhounds and their packs of hounds.\nThere are times when a fox that is injured or sick is caught by the pursuing hounds, but hunts say that the occurrence of an actual kill of this is exceptionally rare.\nSupporters of hunting maintain that when foxes or other prey (such as coyotes in the western USA) are hunted, the quarry are either killed relatively quickly (instantly or in a matter of seconds) or escapes uninjured. Similarly, they say that the animal rarely endures hours of torment and pursuit by hounds, and research by Oxford University shows that the fox is normally killed after an average of 17\u00a0minutes of chase. They further argue that, while hunting with hounds may cause suffering, controlling fox numbers by other means is even more cruel. Depending on the skill of the shooter, the type of firearm used, the availability of good shooting positions and luck, shooting foxes can cause either an instant kill, or lengthy periods of agony for wounded animals which can die of the trauma within hours, or of secondary infection over a period of days or weeks. Research from wildlife hospitals, however, indicates that it is not uncommon for foxes with minor shot wounds to survive.\u00a0 Hunt supporters further say that it is a matter of humanity to kill foxes rather than allow them to suffer malnourishment and mange.\nOther methods include the use of snares, trapping and poisoning, all of which also cause considerable distress to the animals concerned, and may affect other species. This was considered in the Burns Inquiry (paras 6.60\u201311), whose tentative conclusion was that lamping using rifles fitted with telescopic sights, if carried out properly and in appropriate circumstances, had fewer adverse welfare implications than hunting. The committee believed that lamping was not possible without vehicular access, and hence said that the welfare of foxes in upland areas could be affected adversely by a ban on hunting with hounds, unless dogs could be used to flush foxes from cover (as is permitted in the Hunting Act 2004).\nSome opponents of hunting criticise the fact that the animal suffering in fox hunting takes place for sport, citing either that this makes such suffering unnecessary and therefore cruel, or else that killing or causing suffering for sport is immoral. The Court of Appeal, in considering the British Hunting Act, determined that the legislative aim of the Hunting Act was \"a composite one of preventing or reducing unnecessary suffering to wild mammals, overlaid by a moral viewpoint that causing suffering to animals for sport is unethical.\"\nAnti-hunting campaigners also criticised UK hunts of which the Burns Inquiry estimated that foxhound packs put down around 3,000 hounds, and the hare hunts killed around 900 hounds per year, in each case after the hounds' working life had come to an end.\nIn June 2016, three people associated with the South Herefordshire Hunt (UK) were arrested on suspicion of causing suffering to animals in response to claims that live fox cubs were used to train hounds to hunt and kill. The organisation Hunt Investigation Team supported by the League Against Cruel Sports, gained video footage of an individual carrying a fox cub into a large kennel where the hounds can clearly be heard baying. A dead fox was later found in a rubbish bin. The individuals arrested were suspended from Hunt membership. In August, two more people were arrested in connection with the investigation.\nCivil liberties.\nIt is argued by some hunt supporters that no law should curtail the right of a person to do as they wish, so long as it does not harm others. Philosopher Roger Scruton has said, \"To criminalise this activity would be to introduce legislation as illiberal as the laws which once deprived Jews and Catholics of political rights, or the laws which outlawed homosexuality\". In contrast, liberal philosopher, John Stuart Mill wrote, \"The reasons for legal intervention in favour of children apply not less strongly to the case of those unfortunate slaves and victims of the most brutal parts of mankind\u2014the lower animals.\" The UK's most senior court, the House of Lords, has decided that a ban on hunting, in the form of the Hunting Act 2004, does not contravene the European Convention on Human Rights, as did the European Court of Human Rights.\nTrespass.\nIn its submission to the Burns Inquiry, the League Against Cruel Sports presented evidence of over 1,000 cases of trespass by hunts. These included trespass on railway lines and into private gardens. Trespass can occur as the hounds cannot recognise human-created boundaries they are not allowed to cross, and may therefore follow their quarry wherever it goes unless successfully called off. However, in the United Kingdom, trespass is a largely civil matter when performed accidentally.\nNonetheless, in the UK, the criminal offence of 'aggravated trespass' was introduced in 1994 specifically to address the problems caused to fox hunts and other field sports by hunt saboteurs. Hunt saboteurs trespass on private land to monitor or disrupt the hunt, as this is where the hunting activity takes place. For this reason, the hunt saboteur \"tactics manual\" presents detailed information on legal issues affecting this activity, especially the Criminal Justice Act. Some hunt monitors also choose to trespass whilst they observe the hunts in progress.\nThe construction of the law means that hunt saboteurs' behaviour may result in charges of criminal aggravated trespass, rather than the less severe offence of civil trespass. Since the introduction of legislation to restrict hunting with hounds, there has been a level of confusion over the legal status of hunt monitors or saboteurs when trespassing, as if they disrupt the hunt whilst it is not committing an illegal act (as all the hunts claim to be hunting within the law) then they commit an offence; however, if the hunt was conducting an illegal act then the criminal offence of trespass may not have been committed.\nSocial life and class issues in Britain.\nIn Britain, and especially in England and Wales, supporters of fox hunting regard it as a distinctive part of British culture generally, the basis of traditional crafts and a key part of social life in rural areas, an activity and spectacle enjoyed not only by the riders but also by others such as the \"unmounted pack\" which may follow along on foot, bicycle or 4\u00d74 vehicles. They see the social aspects of hunting as reflecting the demographics of the area; the Home Counties packs, for example, are very different from those in North Wales and Cumbria, where the hunts are very much the activity of farmers and the working class. The Banwen Miners Hunt is such a working class club, founded in a small Welsh mining village, although its membership now is by no means limited to miners, with a more \"cosmopolitan\" make-up.\nOscar Wilde, in his play \"A Woman of No Importance\" (1893), once famously described \"the English country gentleman galloping after a fox\" as \"the unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable.\" Even before the time of Wilde, much of the criticism of fox hunting was couched in terms of social class. The argument was that while more \"working class\" blood sports such as cock fighting and badger baiting were long ago outlawed, fox hunting persists, although this argument can be countered with the fact that hare coursing, a more \"working-class\" sport, was outlawed at the same time as fox hunting with hounds in England and Wales. The philosopher Roger Scruton has said that the analogy with cockfighting and badger baiting is unfair, because these sports were more cruel and did not involve any element of pest control.\nA series of \"Mr. Briggs\" cartoons by John Leech appeared in the magazine \"Punch\" during the 1850s which illustrated class issues. More recently the British anarchist group Class War has argued explicitly for disruption of fox hunts on class warfare grounds and even published a book \"The Rich at Play\" examining the subject. Other groups with similar aims, such as \"Revolutions per minute\" have also published papers which disparage fox hunting on the basis of the social class of its participants.\nOpinion polls in the United Kingdom have shown that the population is equally divided as to whether or not the views of hunt objectors are based primarily on class grounds. Some people have pointed to evidence of class bias in the voting patterns in the House of Commons during the voting on the hunting bill between 2000 and 2001, with traditionally working-class Labour members voting the legislation through against the votes of normally middle- and upper-class Conservative members.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68503", "revid": "1297529329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68503", "title": "Pseudometric space", "text": "Generalization of metric spaces in mathematics\nIn mathematics, a pseudometric space is a generalization of a metric space in which the distance between two distinct points can be zero. Pseudometric spaces were introduced by \u0110uro Kurepa in 1934. In the same way as every normed space is a metric space, every seminormed space is a pseudometric space. Because of this analogy, the term semimetric space (which has a different meaning in topology) is sometimes used as a synonym, especially in functional analysis.\nWhen a topology is generated using a family of pseudometrics, the space is called a gauge space.\nDefinition.\nA pseudometric space formula_1 is a set formula_2 together with a non-negative real-valued function formula_3 called a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;pseudometric, such that for every formula_4\nUnlike a metric space, points in a pseudometric space need not be distinguishable; that is, one may have formula_8 for distinct values formula_9\nExamples.\nAny metric space is a pseudometric space. \nPseudometrics arise naturally in functional analysis. Consider the space formula_10 of real-valued functions formula_11 together with a special point formula_12 This point then induces a pseudometric on the space of functions, given by formula_13 for formula_14\nA seminorm formula_15 induces the pseudometric formula_16. This is a convex function of an affine function of formula_17 (in particular, a translation), and therefore convex in formula_17. (Likewise for formula_19.)\nConversely, a homogeneous, translation-invariant pseudometric induces a seminorm.\nPseudometrics also arise in the theory of hyperbolic complex manifolds: see Kobayashi metric. \nEvery measure space formula_20 can be viewed as a complete pseudometric space by defining formula_21 for all formula_22 where the triangle denotes symmetric difference.\nIf formula_23 is a function and \"d\"2 is a pseudometric on \"X\"2, then formula_24 gives a pseudometric on \"X\"1. If \"d\"2 is a metric and \"f\" is injective, then \"d\"1 is a metric.\nTopology.\nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;pseudometric topology is the topology generated by the open balls\nformula_25\nwhich form a basis for the topology. A topological space is said to be a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;pseudometrizable space if the space can be given a pseudometric such that the pseudometric topology coincides with the given topology on the space.\nThe difference between pseudometrics and metrics is entirely topological. That is, a pseudometric is a metric if and only if the topology it generates is T0 (that is, distinct points are topologically distinguishable).\nThe definitions of Cauchy sequences and metric completion for metric spaces carry over to pseudometric spaces unchanged.\nMetric identification.\nThe vanishing of the pseudometric induces an equivalence relation, called the metric identification, that converts the pseudometric space into a full-fledged metric space. This is done by defining formula_26 if formula_27. Let formula_28 be the quotient space of formula_2 by this equivalence relation and define\nformula_30\nThis is well defined because for any formula_31 we have that formula_32 and so formula_33 and vice versa. Then formula_34 is a metric on formula_35 and formula_36 is a well-defined metric space, called the metric space induced by the pseudometric space formula_37.\nThe metric identification preserves the induced topologies. That is, a subset formula_38 is open (or closed) in formula_37 if and only if formula_40 is open (or closed) in formula_41 and formula_42 is saturated. The topological identification is the Kolmogorov quotient.\nAn example of this construction is the completion of a metric space by its Cauchy sequences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68504", "revid": "14135516", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68504", "title": "Separated by a function", "text": ""}
{"id": "68510", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68510", "title": "Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949", "text": "United Kingdom legislation establishing the supremacy of the House of Commons\nThe Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949 are two Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which form part of the constitution of the United Kingdom. Section 2(2) of the Parliament Act 1949 provides that the two Acts are to be construed as one.\nThe Parliament Act 1911 (1 &amp; 2 Geo. 5. c. 13) asserted the supremacy of the House of Commons by limiting the legislation-blocking powers of the House of Lords (the \"suspensory veto\"). Provided the provisions of the Act are met, legislation can be passed without the approval of the House of Lords. Additionally, the 1911 Act amended the Septennial Act 1716 to reduce the maximum life of a Parliament from seven years to five years. The Parliament Act 1911 was amended by the Parliament Act 1949 (12, 13 &amp; 14 Geo. 6. c. 103), which further limited the power of the Lords by reducing the time that they could delay bills, from two years to one.\nThe Parliament Acts have been used to pass legislation against the wishes of the House of Lords on seven occasions since 1911, including the passing of the Parliament Act 1949. Some constitutional lawyers had questioned the validity of the 1949 Act. These doubts were rejected in 2005 when members of the Countryside Alliance unsuccessfully challenged the validity of the Hunting Act 2004, which had been passed under the auspices of the Act. In October 2005, the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords dismissed the Alliance's appeal against this decision, with an unusually large panel of nine Law Lords (out of then-existing twelve) holding that the 1949 Act was a valid Act of Parliament.\nParliament Act 1911.\nBackground.\nThe 1911 Act was a reaction to the clash between the Liberal government and the House of Lords, culminating in the so-called \"People's Budget\" of 1909. In this Budget, the Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George proposed the introduction of a land tax based on the ideas of the American tax reformer Henry George. This new tax would have had a major effect on large landowners, and was opposed by the Conservative opposition, many of whom were large landowners themselves. The Conservatives believed that money should be raised through the introduction of tariffs on imports, which they claimed would help British industry. Contrary to British constitutional convention, the Conservatives used their large majority in the Lords to vote down the Budget. The Liberals made reducing the power of the Lords an important issue of the January 1910 general election.\nThe Liberals returned in a hung parliament after the election: their call for action against the Lords had energised believers in hereditary principle to vote for the Conservatives, but had failed to generate much interest with the rest of the voting public. The Liberals formed a minority government with the support of the Labour and Irish nationalist MPs. The Lords subsequently accepted the Budget. However, as a result of the dispute over the Budget, the new government introduced resolutions (that would later form the Parliament Bill) to limit the power of the Lords. The Prime Minister, H. H. Asquith, asked King Edward VII to create sufficient new Liberal peers to pass the Bill if the Lords rejected it. The King said he would not be willing to do so unless Asquith obtained a clear mandate for such sweeping change by winning a second general election.\nThe Lords voted this 1910 Bill down. Edward VII had died in May 1910, but his son George V agreed to grant Asquith a second general election in December 1910 (this also resulted in a minority government), and at the time he agreed that, if necessary, he would create hundreds of new Liberal peers to neutralise the Conservative majority in the Lords. The Conservative Lords then backed down, and on 10 August 1911, the House of Lords passed the Parliament Act by a narrow 131\u2013114 vote, with the support of some two dozen Conservative peers and eleven of thirteen Lords Spiritual.\nThe Parliament Act was intended as a temporary measure. The preamble states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOne of the reasons for the Irish Parliamentary Party MPs' support for the Parliament Act, and the bitterness of the Unionist resistance, was that the loss of the Lords' veto would make possible Irish Home Rule (i.e. a devolved legislature). The previous Liberal government's attempt to initiate Irish Home Rule had been vetoed by the House of Lords in 1893: at the time of his retirement in 1894, William Ewart Gladstone had not attracted sufficient support from his colleagues for a battle with the House of Lords. The Parliament Act resulted in the eventual enactment of the Irish Home Rule Government of Ireland Act 1914. \nProvisions.\nThe Act abolished any power of the House of Lords to veto any public Bill introduced in the House of Commons other than a bill containing any provision to extend the maximum duration of Parliament beyond five years or a Bill for confirming a provisional order. The Act does not affect Bills introduced in the House of Lords, private bills, or delegated legislation.\nThe effect of the Act is that the House of Lords can delay those bills that it could formerly veto. If they have been sent up to the House of Lords at least one month before the end of the session, money bills can be delayed for up to one month after being sent up, and other bills can be delayed for up to one year after being sent up. The period for which bills other than money bills could be delayed was originally two years. The Speaker was given the power to certify which bills are classified as money bills.\nSection 1: Powers of House of Lords as to money bills.\nSection 1(1) provides:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If a Money Bill, having been passed by the House of Commons, and sent up to the House of Lords at least one month before the end of the session, is not passed by the House of Lords without amendment within one month after it is so sent up to that House, the Bill shall, unless the House of Commons direct to the contrary, be presented to His Majesty and become an Act of Parliament on royal assent being signified, notwithstanding that the House of Lords have not consented to the Bill.\nThe word \"month\" means calendar month.\nSection 1(2) defines the expression \"money bill\".\nSection 1(3) provides:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is sent up to the House of Lords and when it is presented to His Majesty for assent the certificate of the Speaker of the House of Commons signed by him that it is a Money Bill. Before giving his certificate the Speaker shall consult, if practicable, two members to be appointed from the Chairmen's Panel at the beginning of each Session by the Committee of Selection.\nSection 2: Restriction of the powers of the House of Lords as to bills other than money bills.\nThis section originally provided that a bill to which this section applied which was rejected by the House of Lords would be presented for royal assent if it was passed by the Commons in three successive sessions, provided that two years had elapsed between second reading of the bill and its final passing in the Commons, notwithstanding that the Lords had not consented to the bill.\nhttp:// of the Parliament Act 1949 provides that the Parliament Act 1911 has effect, and is deemed to have had effect from the beginning of the session in which the bill for the Parliament Act 1949 originated (save as regards that bill itself), as though sections 2(1) and (4), of Parliament Act 1911, read as they are printed in the following revised text of section 2 of that Act:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(1) If any Public Bill (other than a Money Bill or a Bill containing any provision to extend the maximum duration of Parliament beyond five years) is passed by the House of Commons [in two successive sessions] (whether of the same Parliament or not), and, having been sent up to the House of Lords at least one month before the end of the session, is rejected by the House of Lords in each of those sessions, that Bill shall, on its rejection [for the second time] by the House of Lords, unless the House of Commons direct to the contrary, be presented to His Majesty and become an Act of Parliament on royal assent being signified thereto, notwithstanding that the House of Lords have not consented to the Bill:\nProvided that this provision shall not take effect unless [one year has elapsed] between the date of the second reading in the first of those sessions of the Bill in the House of Commons and the date on which it passes the House of Commons [in the second of these sessions.]\n(2) When a Bill is presented to His Majesty for assent in pursuance of the provisions of this section, there shall be endorsed on the Bill the certificate of the Speaker of the House of Commons signed by him that the provisions of this section have been duly complied with.\n(3) A Bill shall be deemed to be rejected by the House of Lords if it is not passed by the House of Lords either without amendment or with such amendments only as may be agreed to by both Houses.\n(4) A Bill shall be deemed to be the same Bill as a former Bill sent up to the House of Lords in the preceding session if, when it is sent up to the House of Lords, it is identical with the former Bill or contains only such alterations as are certified by the Speaker of the House of Commons to be necessary owing to the time which has elapsed since the date of the former Bill, or to represent any amendments which have been made by the House of Lords in the former Bill in the preceding session, and any amendments which are certified by the Speaker to have been made by the House of Lords [in the second session] and agreed to by the House of Commons shall be inserted in the Bill as presented for royal assent in pursuance of this section:\nProvided that the House of Commons may, if they think fit, on the passage of such a Bill through the House [in the second session,] suggest any further amendments without inserting the amendments in the Bill, and any such suggested amendments shall be considered by the House of Lords, and, if agreed to by that House, shall be treated as amendments made by the House of Lords and agreed to by the House of Commons; but the exercise of this power by the House of Commons shall not affect the operation of this section in the event of the Bill being rejected by the House of Lords.\nThe words in square brackets are those substituted by section 1 of the Parliament Act 1949.\nBefore it was repealed in 1986, the proviso to section 1 of the Parliament Act 1949 read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Provided that, if a Bill has been rejected for the second time by the House of Lords before the signification of the Royal Assent to the Bill for this Act, whether such rejection was in the same session as that in which the Royal Assent to the Bill for this Act was signified or in an earlier session, the requirement of the said section two that a Bill is to be presented to His Majesty on its rejection for the second time by the House of Lords shall have effect in relation to the Bill rejected as a requirement that it is to be presented to His Majesty as soon as the Royal Assent to the Bill for this Act has been signified, and, notwithstanding that such rejection was in an earlier session, the Royal Assent to the Bill rejected may be signified in the session in which the Royal Assent to the Bill for this Act was signified.\nThis proviso provided for the application of the Parliament Act 1911 to any bill rejected for the second time by the House of Lords before royal assent was given to the Parliament Act 1949 on 16 December 1949. In a report dated 27 September 1985, the Law Commission and the Scottish Law Commission said that this proviso had never been invoked and was, by that date, incapable of being invoked. They recommended that it be repealed.\nSection 6: Saving for existing rights and privileges of the House of Commons.\nThis section provides:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nothing in this Act shall diminish or qualify the existing rights and privileges of the House of Commons.\nThe prime minister, H. H. Asquith, said of the clause that became this section:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That is to enable us still, when the occasion arises, to approve of particular Amendments made by the House of Lords in regard to which this House may waive its privilege.\nSection 7: Duration of Parliament.\nThis section amended the Septennial Act 1715, reducing the maximum duration of any parliament from seven years to five.\nThe President of the Board of Education, Walter Runciman, said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The period of five years is chosen with the deliberate object of striking a compromise between, the old triennial Parliament advocated in Chartist days and the seven years' Parliament. Our object in limiting the period to five years is that there may be no risk run of the perils which have been enunciated with great vigour by right hon. and hon. Gentlemen opposite of a Government taking advantage of the powers granted to it under the second Resolution, outliving its welcome, getting completely out of touch with the country, and using its extended period of life, say of six years, for carrying through legislation of which the country does not approve. The five years named in the Resolution will in almost every case mean a four years' Parliament. It means therefore that if a Parliament divided its time in the manner described by the Leader of the Opposition, in the first two years doing the work for which it was returned, and in the second two years looking forward to the election about to come upon it, it would have filled up the whole of the four years' period for which this Resolution provides. Our only object in limiting the period of the duration of Parliament is that the House of Commons shall not get out of touch with the opinion of the electorate.\nThis section was repealed by the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011 for the United Kingdom on 15 September 2011, when parliament was given a fixed five-year term.\nRepeal in Ireland.\nThis Act was repealed for the Republic of Ireland on 16 May 1983 by section 1 of, and http:// of the Schedule to, the Statute Law Revision Act 1983 (No.11).\nParliament Act 1949.\nImmediately after the Second World War, the Labour government of Clement Attlee decided to amend the 1911 Act to reduce further the power of the Lords, as a result of their fears that their radical programme of nationalisation would be delayed by the Lords and hence would not be completed within the life of the parliament. The House of Lords did not interfere with nationalisations in 1945 or 1946, but it was feared that the proposed nationalisation of the iron and steel industry would be a bridge too far, so a bill was introduced in 1947 to reduce the time that the Lords could delay bills, from three sessions over two years to two sessions over one year. The Lords attempted to block this change. The Bill was reintroduced in 1948 and again in 1949, before the 1911 Act was finally used to force it through. Since the 1911 Act required a delay over three \"sessions\", a special short \"session\" of parliament was introduced in 1948, with a King's Speech on 14 September 1948, and prorogation on 25 October.\nThe amended Parliament Act was never used in the 1940s or 1950s, possibly because the mere threat of it was enough. The Salisbury convention that the Lords would not block government bills that were mentioned in the government's manifesto dates from this time. Salisbury believed that since, in being returned to power, the Government was given a clear mandate for the policies proposed in its manifesto, it would be improper for the Lords to frustrate such legislation.\nIn every Bill presented to the Sovereign under sections 1 to 3 of the Parliament Act 1911 (as amended) the words of enactment are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;BE IT ENACTED by The King's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, and by the authority of the same, as follows\nThe usual enacting formula, used on other Acts, also refers to the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and omits the reference to the Parliament Acts.\nUse of the Parliament Acts.\nThe original form of the 1911 Act was used three times. These were:\nThe amended form of the 1911 Act has been used four times. These were:\nThe Welsh Church Act and the Government of Ireland Act were both given royal assent on the same day as the Suspensory Act 1914, which meant that neither would come into force until after the War.\nAfter the Labour government came to power in 1997, there was repeated speculation that it would rely on the Parliament Acts to reverse a check from the Lords, but it did not prove necessary. The Parliament Acts were not required to enact, for example, the Criminal Justice (Mode of Trial) (No 2) Bill in 2000 (which originally proposed to give magistrates, not defendants, the choice of where an \"either way\" offence would be tried) because the government abandoned the bill after a wrecking amendment in the House of Lords. The Parliament Act was threatened to be used to get the Identity Cards Act 2006 passed through the Lords. This was backed up by a threat of an immediate introduction of a compulsory ID Card scheme. The Lords had no option but to accept a compromise of a delay in the introduction of the scheme. The Parliament Acts cannot be used to force through legislation that originated in the House of Lords, so they could not have been used to enact the Civil Partnerships Act 2004 or the Constitutional Reform Act 2005.\nThe first three measures for which the Act has been used since 1949 were not mentioned in manifestos, and hence in trying to veto them the Lords were not breaking the Salisbury convention. The Hunting Bill was mentioned in the Labour Party manifesto for the 2001 general election, so, depending upon how the convention is interpreted, the attempt to block it could be taken as a breach. However, as conventions are merely convention and not law, the House of Lords would not be taking illegal action if they were to act otherwise.\nThe Government of Ireland Act 1914 was repealed in entirety by the Government of Ireland Act 1920, the European Parliamentary Elections Act 1999 was repealed in entirety by the European Parliamentary Elections Act 2002 and most provisions of the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 2000 were repealed by the Sexual Offences Act 2003. While the War Crimes Act 1991 remains in force, to date only Anthony Sawoniuk has been convicted under it.\nThe threat of the Parliament Acts has been employed by several British governments to force the Lords to accept its legislation. In at least three cases, the procedure authorised by the Parliament Act 1911, or by the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, was started, but the legislation was approved by the House of Lords as a result of the government making concessions. These were:\nValidity of the 1949 Act.\nSince the 1949 Act became law, doubts were raised by some legal academics as to whether the use of the 1911 Act to pass the 1949 Act, which amended the 1911 Act itself, was valid. Three main concerns were raised:\nTo address these concerns, a Law Lord, Lord Donaldson of Lymington, presented a private member's bill in House of Lords in the 2000\u20132001 session of Parliament (the Parliament Acts (Amendment) Bill), which would have had the effect of confirming the legitimacy of the 1949 Act, but prohibiting any further such uses of the Parliament Act to amend itself, or use of it to further modify or curtail the powers of the House of Lords. Another Parliament Acts (Amendment) Bill was introduced independently by Lord Renton of Mount Harry in the next session, but neither of these bills proceeded to a third reading.\nThe first legal challenge to the 1949 Act is believed to have been made during the first prosecution for war crimes under the War Crimes Act 1991, \"R v Serafinowicz\", but (according to the Court of Appeal in \"R (Jackson) v Attorney General\") no record of the legal arguments remains. Because a second defendant was successfully prosecuted under the War Crimes Act and sentenced to life imprisonment, and since the War Crimes Act was later amended by both two further acts (the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 and the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996), which were passed by both Houses and received royal assent, the validity of the War Crimes Act is not under question.\nThe 1949 Act and the validity of acts made under it were not questioned in court again until the Parliament Acts were used to pass the Hunting Act 2004. Early in 2005, the Countryside Alliance took a case to court to challenge the validity of the 1949 act. In the High Court, the wording of the 1911 act was held not to imply any entrenchment. Support for this conclusion can be drawn from the parliamentary debates on the 1911 act, in which an entrenchment clause was considered but rejected, the government clearly displaying the intention to be able to make such amendments if necessary. However, the 2005 decision was made on other grounds, so the question of whether the courts could refer to the 1949 Act's parliamentary debates under the principle established in \"Pepper v Hart\" was not decided.\nThe High Court held that the 1949 Act was primary legislation, despite being unusual in that the courts can rule on whether the provisions of the 1911 Act are complied with. It was held that the 1911 Act clearly permits the procedures specified in the Parliament Acts to be used for \"any Public Bill\", and this was sufficient to dispose of the argument that the 1911 Act could not be used to amend itself. The court took the view that the 1911 Act was a 'remodelling' of the constitution rather than a delegation of power.\nThe subsequent Court of Appeal ruling agreed that the 1949 act itself was valid, but left open the question of whether the Commons could use the Parliament Act to make significant changes to the constitution (for example, repealing the Parliament Act's provision prohibiting the act from being used to extend the lifespan of Parliament). The Court of Appeal refused to give the Countryside Alliance permission to appeal their decision to the House of Lords; however, a petition for permission to appeal was submitted directly to the Law Lords and granted in July 2005. Argument in the case was heard on 13 and 14 July 2005 by a large committee of nine Law Lords, rather than the normal five. In a unanimous decision, the Law Lords upheld the validity of 1949 Act.\nFuture developments.\nAfter the \"first stage\" of reform of the House of Lords was implemented in the House of Lords Act 1999, the Wakeham Royal Commission on the proposal of a \"second stage\" of reform reported in January 2000. Subsequently, the government decided to take no action to change the legislative relationship between the House of Commons and the House of Lords.\nIn March 2006, it was reported that the then-Labour Government was considering removing the ability of the Lords to delay legislation that arises as a result of manifesto commitments (while the Lords still acted in accordance with a self-imposed restriction, the Salisbury Convention, which this legislation would have merely formalised), and reducing their ability to delay other legislation to a period of 60 days (although a compromise of 6 months has also been suggested). The Labour Government made no attempt to enact such changes before the 2010 general election, which Labour lost.\nIn May 2011, Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg announced the Coalition Government's plans to legislate for a mainly elected House of Lords. In the face of fierce opposition from the overwhelming majority of the Lords, he indicated that he would consider use of the Parliament Act. Ultimately this did not happen.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68511", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68511", "title": "General Strike", "text": ""}
{"id": "68513", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68513", "title": "Surface science", "text": "Study of physical and chemical phenomena that occur at the interface of two phases\nSurface science is the study of physical and chemical phenomena that occur at the interface of two phases, including solid\u2013liquid interfaces, solid\u2013gas interfaces, solid\u2013vacuum interfaces, and liquid\u2013gas interfaces. It includes the fields of \"surface chemistry\" and \"surface physics\". Some related practical applications are classed as surface engineering. The science encompasses concepts such as heterogeneous catalysis, semiconductor device fabrication, fuel cells, self-assembled monolayers, and adhesives. Surface science is closely related to interface and colloid science. Interfacial chemistry and physics are common subjects for both. The methods are different. In addition, interface and colloid science studies macroscopic phenomena that occur in heterogeneous systems due to peculiarities of interfaces.\nHistory.\nThe field of surface chemistry started with heterogeneous catalysis pioneered by Paul Sabatier on hydrogenation and Fritz Haber on the Haber process. Irving Langmuir was also one of the founders of this field, and the scientific journal on surface science, \"Langmuir\", bears his name. The Langmuir adsorption equation is used to model monolayer adsorption where all surface adsorption sites have the same affinity for the adsorbing species and do not interact with each other. Gerhard Ertl in 1974 described for the first time the adsorption of hydrogen on a palladium surface using a novel technique called LEED. Similar studies with platinum, nickel, and iron followed. Most recent developments in surface sciences include the 2007 Nobel prize of Chemistry winner Gerhard Ertl's advancements in surface chemistry, specifically\nhis investigation of the interaction between carbon monoxide molecules and platinum surfaces.\nChemistry.\nSurface chemistry can be roughly defined as the study of chemical reactions at interfaces. It is closely related to surface engineering, which aims at modifying the chemical composition of a surface by incorporation of selected elements or functional groups that produce various desired effects or improvements in the properties of the surface or interface. Surface science is of particular importance to the fields of heterogeneous catalysis, electrochemistry, and geochemistry.\nCatalysis.\nThe adhesion of gas or liquid molecules to the surface is known as adsorption. This can be due to either chemisorption or physisorption, and the strength of molecular adsorption to a catalyst surface is critically important to the catalyst's performance (see Sabatier principle). However, it is difficult to study these phenomena in real catalyst particles, which have complex structures. Instead, well-defined single crystal surfaces of catalytically active materials such as platinum are often used as model catalysts. Multi-component materials systems are used to study interactions between catalytically active metal particles and supporting oxides; these are produced by growing ultra-thin films or particles on a single crystal surface.\nRelationships between the composition, structure, and chemical behavior of these surfaces are studied using ultra-high vacuum techniques, including adsorption and temperature-programmed desorption of molecules, scanning tunneling microscopy, low energy electron diffraction, and Auger electron spectroscopy. Results can be fed into chemical models or used toward the rational design of new catalysts. Reaction mechanisms can also be clarified due to the atomic-scale precision of surface science measurements.\nElectrochemistry.\nElectrochemistry is the study of processes driven through an applied potential at a solid\u2013liquid or liquid\u2013liquid interface. The behavior of an electrode\u2013electrolyte interface is affected by the distribution of ions in the liquid phase next to the interface forming the electrical double layer. Adsorption and desorption events can be studied at atomically flat single-crystal surfaces as a function of applied potential, time and solution conditions using spectroscopy, scanning probe microscopy and surface X-ray scattering. These studies link traditional electrochemical techniques such as cyclic voltammetry to direct observations of interfacial processes.\nGeochemistry.\nGeological phenomena such as iron cycling and soil contamination are controlled by the interfaces between minerals and their environment. The atomic-scale structure and chemical properties of mineral\u2013solution interfaces are studied using \"in situ\" synchrotron X-ray techniques such as X-ray reflectivity, X-ray standing waves, and X-ray absorption spectroscopy as well as scanning probe microscopy. For example, studies of heavy metal or actinide adsorption onto mineral surfaces reveal molecular-scale details of adsorption, enabling more accurate predictions of how these contaminants travel through soils or disrupt natural dissolution\u2013precipitation cycles.\nPhysics.\nSurface physics can be roughly defined as the study of physical interactions that occur at interfaces. It overlaps with surface chemistry. Some of the topics investigated in surface physics include friction, surface states, surface diffusion, surface reconstruction, surface phonons and plasmons, epitaxy, the emission and tunneling of electrons, spintronics, and the self-assembly of nanostructures on surfaces. Techniques to investigate processes at surfaces include surface X-ray scattering, scanning probe microscopy, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.\nAnalysis techniques.\nThe study and analysis of surfaces involves both physical and chemical analysis techniques.\nSeveral modern methods probe the topmost 1\u201310\u00a0nm of surfaces exposed to vacuum. These include angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), low-energy electron diffraction (LEED), electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), thermal desorption spectroscopy (TPD), ion scattering spectroscopy (ISS), secondary ion mass spectrometry, dual-polarization interferometry, and other surface analysis methods included in the list of materials analysis methods. Many of these techniques require vacuum as they rely on the detection of electrons or ions emitted from the surface under study. Moreover, in general ultra-high vacuum, in the range of 10\u22127 pascal pressure or better, it is necessary to reduce surface contamination by residual gas, by reducing the number of molecules reaching the sample over a given time period. At 0.1 mPa (10\u22126 torr) partial pressure of a contaminant and standard temperature, it only takes on the order of 1 second to cover a surface with a one-to-one monolayer of contaminant to surface atoms, so much lower pressures are needed for measurements. This is found by an order of magnitude estimate for the (number) specific surface area of materials and the impingement rate formula from the kinetic theory of gases.\nPurely optical techniques can be used to study interfaces under a wide variety of conditions. Reflection-absorption infrared, dual polarisation interferometry, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and sum frequency generation spectroscopy can be used to probe solid\u2013vacuum as well as solid\u2013gas, solid\u2013liquid, and liquid\u2013gas surfaces. Multi-parametric surface plasmon resonance works in solid\u2013gas, solid\u2013liquid, liquid\u2013gas surfaces and can detect even sub-nanometer layers. It probes the interaction kinetics as well as dynamic structural changes such as liposome collapse or swelling of layers in different pH. Dual-polarization interferometry is used to quantify the order and disruption in birefringent thin films. This has been used, for example, to study the formation of lipid bilayers and their interaction with membrane proteins.\nAcoustic techniques, such as quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring, is used for time-resolved measurements of solid\u2013vacuum, solid\u2013gas and solid\u2013liquid interfaces. The method allows for analysis of molecule\u2013surface interactions as well as structural changes and viscoelastic properties of the adlayer.\nX-ray scattering and spectroscopy techniques are also used to characterize surfaces and interfaces. While some of these measurements can be performed using laboratory X-ray sources, many require the high intensity and energy tunability of synchrotron radiation. X-ray crystal truncation rods (CTR) and X-ray standing wave (XSW) measurements probe changes in surface and adsorbate structures with sub-\u00c5ngstr\u00f6m resolution. Surface-extended X-ray absorption fine structure (SEXAFS) measurements reveal the coordination structure and chemical state of adsorbates. Grazing-incidence small angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) yields the size, shape, and orientation of nanoparticles on surfaces. The crystal structure and texture of thin films can be investigated using grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD, GIXRD).\nX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a standard tool for measuring the chemical states of surface species and for detecting the presence of surface contamination. Surface sensitivity is achieved by detecting photoelectrons with kinetic energies of about 10\u20131000 eV, which have corresponding inelastic mean free paths of only a few nanometers. This technique has been extended to operate at near-ambient pressures (ambient pressure XPS, AP-XPS) to probe more realistic gas\u2013solid and liquid\u2013solid interfaces. Performing XPS with hard X-rays at synchrotron light sources yields photoelectrons with kinetic energies of several keV (hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, HAXPES), enabling access to chemical information from buried interfaces.\nModern physical analysis methods include scanning-tunneling microscopy (STM) and a family of methods descended from it, including atomic force microscopy (AFM). These microscopies have considerably increased the ability of surface scientists to measure the physical structure of many surfaces. For example, they make it possible to follow reactions at the solid\u2013gas interface in real space, if those proceed on a time scale accessible by the instrument.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68517", "revid": "1316960662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68517", "title": "Pedro de Valdivia", "text": "Spanish conquistador\nPedro Guti\u00e9rrez de Valdivia or Valdiva (; April 17, 1497 \u2013 December 25, 1553) was a Spanish \"conquistador\" and the first Governor of Colonial Chile. After having served with the Spanish army in Italy and Flanders, he was sent to South America in 1535, where he served as a soldier under the Pizarro brothers in Peru, gradually rising in power.\nIn 1540, Valdivia led an expedition of 150 Spaniards and 1,000 Peruvian Indians into Chile, where he defeated a large force of indigenous warriors and founded Santiago in 1541. He extended Spanish rule south to the Biob\u00edo River in 1546, fought again in Peru (1546\u20131548), and returned to Chile as Royal Governor in 1549. In 1550, he expanded Spanish rule further south into Araucan\u00eda, where he founded the city of Concepci\u00f3n and the eponymous city of Valdivia. He was captured and killed by Mapuche Indians during the Arauco War in 1553.\nEarly life as soldier in Europe and arrival in the Americas.\nPedro de Valdivia is believed to have been born in Villanueva de la Serena \n(some say Castuera) in Extremadura, Spain, around 1500 (some sources put his date of birth as early as 1497 or as late as 1505) to an impoverished hidalgo family. In 1520 a civil war broke out in Castile, the Revolt of the Comuneros, and Valdivia joined the royalist army of King Charles I. He later fought in Flanders in 1521 and Italy between 1522 and 1527, participating in the Battle of Pavia as part of the troops of the Marquis of Pescara. In May 1527, Valdivia was involved in the sack of Rome as a member of Charles I's mutinous mercenary army.\nValdivia sailed with a Spanish military force to South America in 1535. He first arrived in present-day Venezuela and stayed there for one year.During his time there, he likely fought against the Carib Indians, who were known for being warlike.\nValdivia traveled south to Peru in 1537. During this time, there was a civil war between the Spanish colonists in Peru, with one faction led by Francisco Pizarro and the other faction led by Diego de Almagro. Valdivia sided with Pizarro's faction and helped them defeat Almagro at the Battle of Las Salinas in 1538. Afterwards, Valdivia accompanied Hernando and Gonzalo Pizarro on an expedition to conquer High Peru (later known as Bolivia). As a reward for helping the Pizarro brothers, Valdivia was given an encomienda property with a silver mine in Potos\u00ed. This large silver mine that Valdivia owned made him a very rich man.\nValdivia had married Marina Ort\u00edz de Gaete in Spain. In Peru he became attached to In\u00e9s de Su\u00e1rez, a Spanish widow who accompanied him to Chile as his mistress.\nExpedition to Chile.\nAfter the failure of the expedition of Diego de Almagro in 1536, the lands to the south of Peru (then known as \"Nueva Toledo\", extending from the 14\u00b0 \u2014 close to modern day Pisco, Peru \u2014 to the 25\u00b0 latitude \u2014 close to Taltal, Chile) had remained unexplored. Valdivia asked Governor Francisco Pizarro for permission to conquer and govern that territory. He got his permission but was appointed as Lieutenant Governor, rather than Governor as he had wanted.\nThe expedition was fraught with problems from the beginning. Valdivia had to sell the lands and the mine that had been assigned to him in order to finance the expedition. A shortage of soldiers and adventurers was also problematic; the men were not interested in conquering what they believed were extremely poor lands. While Valdivia was preparing the expedition, Pedro S\u00e1nchez de la Hoz arrived from Spain with a royal grant for the same territory. To avoid difficulties, Pizarro advised the two competitors to join their interests, and on December 28, 1539, they signed a contract of partnership.\nValdivia's expedition finally left Cuzco, Peru in January 1540, with Pizarro's permission and Pedro Sancho de Hoz as partner. They carried a plethora of seeds for planting, a herd of pigs, and some brood mares. The expedition was composed of 1,000 Peruvian Indian auxiliaries, 150 Spaniards, and a few African slaves. A Spanish woman was among the travelers, In\u00e9s de Su\u00e1rez, Valdivia's mistress. En route more Spaniards joined the expedition, attracted by Valdivia's fame as a brilliant leader.\nValdivia resolved to avoid the road over the Andes, which had proved fatal to Almagro's army, and set out resolutely through the Atacama Desert. On the way, Sancho de Hoz, seeking sole leadership, tried to murder Valdivia but failed. He was pardoned, but from then on had to accept subordinate status. The natives of the region were not pleased by the return of the Spaniards due to the maltreatment they had suffered under Almagro. With many promises, Valdivia was able to regain their trust. After a march of five months, and suffering great privations, the expedition arrived at the Copiapo valley. Valdivia officially took possession of the land in the name of the Spanish king.\nSoon thereafter they continued south and in December 1540, eleven months after they left Cuzco, Valdivia and his expedition reached the valley of the Mapocho river, where they established the capital of the territory. The valley was extensive and well populated with natives. Its soil was fertile and there was abundant fresh water. Two high hills provided defensive positions. Soon after their arrival, Valdivia tried to convince the native inhabitants of his good intentions, sending out delegations bearing gifts for the caciques.\nFinally on February 12, 1541, Valdivia officially founded the city of Santiago de la Nueva Extremadura (named after Saint James, \"Santiago\" in Spanish, and Valdivia's home region of Extremadura, Spain). The ceremony was held at the foot of the \"Huel\u00e9n\" hill (now known as \"Santa Lucia hill\").\nAfter arriving in Chile, Valdivia and his men worked to restore a positive relationship between the conquistadores and Indians, which had been greatly harmed by Almagro and his merciless ways. At first, Valdivia was successful in his efforts, but this peaceful coexistence did not last long. One of the first orders that Valdivia gave was to have a ship constructed at the mouth of the Aconcagua River to send to Peru for further supplies and to serve as a courier service. He then had to return in haste to Santiago to subdue a mutiny. The Spaniards' greed surfaced and overshadowed previous intentions when rumors of gold arose at the Marga Marga mines, in the vicinity of Valparaiso. The Spanish imposed slavery on the indigenous population to profit from the mines. \nColonization of Chile.\nOn learning of Francisco Pizarro's murder in 1541, Valdivia had himself appointed governor of the territory by the council of the new city, and removed Chile from Peruvian control, acknowledging only the royal authority, an arrangement the Crown found acceptable. Secure now in his own domain, he pushed exploration southward and aided the development of the country by dividing the land among his ablest followers and parceling out the Indians in encomiendas. Chile possessed minerals, but Valdivia definitely subordinated mining to agriculture and stock raising. Still, the colony was not prosperous; gold was scarce and the Araucanians warlike.\nDestruction of Santiago.\nAfter an apparent peaceful period the Natives began to resist the invaders. Valdivia marched against the tribes and defeated them at Cachapoal. While away, on September 11, 1541, local people led by Michimalonco attacked Santiago. The defense of the city was led by Pedro's mistress In\u00e9s de Su\u00e1rez. The Spaniards, desperate and willing to fight until death, were able to eventually push the Natives back; Valdivia and his troops made it back just in time to relieve the capital.\nBy the time the battle ended the entire town had been destroyed and burned to the ground, animals were killed and the fields and stores were decimated. Only a small amount of property was not destroyed, including a handful of seeds, two sows, one pig and a pair of chickens. Valdivia organized his men into groups to keep watch over the crops and protect the city against attack. For the next two years, there were men always saddled and armed, ready to fight in case the Natives posed a threat to Spanish authority.\nThis event meant a real setback for the conquest of the Chilean territory. The resistance of the Native people became stronger daily, and as the ship that he had constructed in Aconcagua was also destroyed by the natives, Valdivia sent in 1542 overland to Peru his lieutenant Alonso de Monroy with five followers to seek reinforcements, but, on account of the disturbance in that country in consequence of the defeat of El Mozo Almagro by Crist\u00f3bal Vaca de Castro, Monroy could not obtain much aid, and returned in September 1543, with only seventy horsemen, also sending by sea a vessel with provisions and ammunition to the port of Aconcagua.\nExpanding the colony.\nIn September 1543 new arms, clothes and other equipment arrived from Peru on the ship \"Santiaguillo\"; thanks to these new supplies, Valdivia was in the position to start the rebuilding of Santiago and to send an expedition, led by Juan Boh\u00f3n, to explore and populate the northern region of Chile. This expedition founded La Serena halfway between Santiago and the northern Atacama Desert, in the valley of \"Coquimbo\". Valpara\u00edso, though used as a port by the Spaniards from the start, had no considerable population until much later.\nIn 1544 Valdivia sent a naval expedition consisting of the barks \"San Pedro\" and \"Santiaguillo\", under the command of Juan Bautista Pastene, to reconnoiter the southwestern coast of South America, ordering him to reach the Strait of Magellan. The expedition set sail from Valpara\u00edso and although Pastene did not reach this goal, he explored much of the coast. He entered the bay of San Pedro, and made landings at what are now known as Concepci\u00f3n and at Valdivia, which was later named in honor of the commander. Encountering severe storms further south, he then returned to Valparaiso.\nIn February 1546 Valdivia himself set out, with sixty horsemen plus native guides and porters, and crossed the Itata River. He arrived as far as the B\u00edo-B\u00edo River where he intended to further efforts at colonization by founding another town. However, Mapuche warriors defended their territory at the Battle of Quilacura. Realizing that it would be impossible to proceed in such hostile territory with so limited a force, Valdivia wisely elected to return to Santiago shortly thereafter, after finding a site for a new city at what is now Penco and would become the first site of Concepci\u00f3n. Still, Valdivia managed to subdue the country between Santiago and the Maule River.\nReturn to Peru.\nTo secure additional aid and confirm his claims to the conquered territory, Valdivia returned in 1547 to Peru, leaving Francisco de Villagra as governor in his stead. There he tried to gather more resources and men to continue the conquest. When the Gonzalo Pizarro rebellion began in Peru, the insurgents attempted unsuccessfully to win Valdivia to their side. Nonetheless, early in 1548 Valdivia joined the royal army of Viceroy Pedro de la Gasca, and his military experience counted heavily in the victory of Xaquixahuana on April 9 of that year. In the battle, Valdivia met Francisco de Carvajal, who just like him had also fought in the Italian Wars, been at the Sack of Rome and helped to defeat Diego de Almagro.\nNonetheless, a discontented faction from Chile managed to have him tried in Lima, accused of tyranny, malfeasance of public funds and public immorality. One of the charges levelled against him was that he, being married, openly lived with In\u00e9s de Su\u00e1rez \"...in the manner of man and wife and they sleep in one bed and they eat in one dish...\". In exchange for being freed, and for his confirmation as Royal Governor, he agreed to relinquish her and to bring to Chile his wife, Marina Ort\u00edz de Gaete, who only arrived after Valdivia's death in 1554. He was also ordered to marry In\u00e9s off, which he did, upon his return to Chile in 1549, to one of his captains, Rodrigo de Quiroga. As recognition for his services Valdivia was finally appointed as \"adelantado\" and won the royal assent to his coveted title of Governor of Chile, returning to the settlement with his position and prestige considerably strengthened.\nArauco War.\nBetween 1549 and 1553, after his return to Santiago, Valdivia began to expand Spanish rule south of the Biob\u00edo River into Araucan\u00eda, but faced heavy resistance from the indigenous population. Valdivia had clashed with the Mapuche Indians and defeated them in several battles, but he was never able to permanently subdue them as they were determined to not surrender . In spite of the fierce resistance at the Battle of Penco, he founded Concepci\u00f3n on March 3, 1550. Later he founded more southern settlements such as La Imperial, Valdivia, Angol and Villarrica, in 1551 and 1552.\nThe 1553 uprising and the Battle of Tucapel.\nAfter a brief stay in Santiago, Valdivia returned to the south again in December 1552. To keep the route open between Concepci\u00f3n and the southern settlements, Valdivia built a number of forts in the Nahuelbuta Mountains. He moved against the Mapuche Indians again in 1553 and built a fort at Tucapel. By the advice of the cacique Colocolo, the Mapuches united their efforts choosing as Toqui (general-in-chief) the famous warrior Caupolic\u00e1n.\nValdivia's soldiers had earlier captured Lautaro, a Mapuche youth who became his page. Valdivia taught the use of European military tactics and weapons to Lautaro, as he hoped Lautaro would serve as an Indian auxiliary. Lautaro secretly remained loyal to his own people and rejoined them to show Caupolic\u00e1n a plan by which Valdivia could be defeated. Toward the end of 1553, the Mapuches under Lautaro revolted and attacked the over-extended Spanish forces in the south. One of the first actions of the rebellion was the attack on the fort at Tucapel, where they managed to destroy the fort on December 2, 1553. Valdivia was at Concepcion when he was informed of the attack, and he quickly left with his troops to go to Tucapel.\nValdivia and his army arrived at the ruins of Fort Tucapel, which had been burned down after its garrison retreated. A large Mapuche army led by Lautaro then suddenly emerged from the forests and attacked, which began the Battle of Tucapel. The Mapuche warriors attacked in several waves, which gradually wore down the Spaniards and their auxiliaries. Unlike in previous battles, the Spanish cavalry was unable to defeat their enemy, as the Mapuches had learned how to counter them by using pikes. After his army was routed, Valdivia attempted to escape with his horse, but he was captured by the victorious Mapuches, who planned to execute him.\nDeath.\nThere are many different accounts of how Valdivia's killing took place. According to Jer\u00f3nimo de Vivar, an author contemporary with the events, the execution of Valdivia was personally ordered by Caupolic\u00e1n, who had him killed with a lance, and later his head, and those of two of his bravest companions, were put on display. Alonso de G\u00f3ngora Marmolejo, another contemporary chronicler, writes that Valdivia offered as a ransom for his life the evacuation of all the Spanish settlements in the Mapuche lands and the gift of large herds of animals, but this offer was rejected. Alonso de Ercilla reported that Valdivia was killed with the blow of a club, and then with a knife a warrior cut open his breast and ripped out his heart.Another contemporary chronicler, Pedro Mari\u00f1o de Lobera, wrote that Valdivia offered to evacuate the lands of the Mapuche but says he was shortly thereafter killed with a large club by a vengeful warrior named Pilmaiquen, who said that Valdivia could not be trusted to keep his word once freed. Lobera says that a common story in Chile at the time was that Valdivia had been killed by being forced to drink molten gold, although this story was most likely apocryphal. \nThe most detailed and most likely accurate account of Valdivia's death was given by Diego de Rosales, a Spanish historian who spoke with several Mapuches. According to Rosales, the Mapuches ritualistically killed Valdivia as a form of human sacrifice. After the Battle of Tucapel, a large crowd of Mapuche people gathered to watch the execution of Valdivia. The Mapuche warriors placed their spears and arrows on the ground in the shape of a circle, and they planned to kill Valdivia in the middle of this circle. When Valdivia was taken to the circle, a Mapuche man walked up behind him and killed Valdivia by smashing his head with a wooden club. The Mapuche crowd then began to stomp and chant after he was killed, and Valdivia's heart was then cut out from his body. Valdivia's heart was then cut into pieces and eaten by the Mapuche chieftains, as they believed they would absorb Valdivia's spiritual power by eating it. The Mapuches also turned Valdivia's skull into a drinking cup for chicha, and they turned his leg bones into flutes. After Valdivia's execution, the Mapuches sang a victory song and held a long celebration.\nIn literature.\nValdivia was an educated man and wielded the pen as well as the sword. In 1552 Valdivia despatched Captain Jer\u00f3nimo de Alderete with a narrative of his exploits directly to the king Charles I. His twelve letters, addressed to the king and mostly preserved in the archives of the Indies, are models of a vigorous and fluent style, and of great historical interest.\nHis career and death are chronicled in the epic poem \"La Araucana\" by Alonso de Ercilla. He is also a major character in several historical novels, such as \"In\u00e9s y las ra\u00edces de la tierra\", by Mar\u00eda Correa Morande (1964); \"Ay Mam\u00e1 In\u00e9s - Cr\u00f3nica Testimonial\" (1993) by Jorge Guzm\u00e1n; \"Arauco: A Novel (2013)\", by John Caviglia; and \"In\u00e9s of My Soul\" () by Isabel Allende (2006), \"They sure did something for the history of Chile\" by Alvaro Espinoza.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68518", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68518", "title": "Chemisorption", "text": "Phenomenon of surface adhesion\nChemisorption is a kind of adsorption which involves a chemical reaction between the surface and the adsorbate. New chemical bonds are generated at the adsorbent surface. Examples include macroscopic phenomena that can be very obvious, like corrosion, and subtler effects associated with heterogeneous catalysis, where the catalyst and reactants are in different phases. The strong interaction between the adsorbate and the substrate surface creates new types of electronic bonds.\nIn contrast with chemisorption is physisorption, which leaves the chemical species of the adsorbate and surface intact. It is conventionally accepted that the energetic threshold separating the binding energy of \"physisorption\" from that of \"chemisorption\" is about 0.5 eV per adsorbed species.\nDue to specificity, the nature of chemisorption can greatly differ, depending on the chemical identity and the surface structural properties.\nThe bond between the adsorbate and adsorbent in chemisorption is either ionic or covalent.\nUses.\nAn important example of chemisorption is in heterogeneous catalysis which involves molecules reacting with each other via the formation of chemisorbed intermediates. After the chemisorbed species combine (by forming bonds with each other) the product desorbs from the surface.\nSelf-assembled monolayers.\nSelf-assembled monolayers (SAMs) are formed by chemisorbing reactive reagents with metal surfaces. A famous example involves thiols (RS-H) adsorbing onto the surface of gold. This process forms strong Au-SR bonds and releases H2. The densely packed SR groups protect the surface.\nGas-surface chemisorption.\nAdsorption kinetics.\nAs an instance of adsorption, chemisorption follows the adsorption process. The first stage is for the adsorbate particle to come into contact with the surface. The particle needs to be trapped onto the surface by not possessing enough energy to leave the gas-surface potential well. If it elastically collides with the surface, then it would return to the bulk gas. If it loses enough momentum through an inelastic collision, then it \"sticks\" onto the surface, forming a precursor state bonded to the surface by weak forces, similar to physisorption. The particle diffuses on the surface until it finds a deep chemisorption potential well. Then it reacts with the surface or simply desorbs after enough energy and time.\nThe reaction with the surface is dependent on the chemical species involved. Applying the Gibbs energy equation for reactions:\nformula_1\nGeneral thermodynamics states that for spontaneous reactions at constant temperature and pressure, the change in free energy should be negative. Since a free particle is restrained to a surface, and unless the surface atom is highly mobile, entropy is lowered. This means that the enthalpy term must be negative, implying an exothermic reaction.\nPhysisorption is given as a Lennard-Jones potential and chemisorption is given as a Morse potential. There exists a point of crossover between the physisorption and chemisorption, meaning a point of transfer. It can occur above or below the zero-energy line (with a difference in the Morse potential, a), representing an activation energy requirement or lack of. Most simple gases on clean metal surfaces lack the activation energy requirement.\nModeling.\nFor experimental setups of chemisorption, the amount of adsorption of a particular system is quantified by a sticking probability value.\nHowever, chemisorption is very difficult to theorize. A multidimensional potential energy surface (PES) derived from effective medium theory is used to describe the effect of the surface on absorption, but only certain parts of it are used depending on what is to be studied. A simple example of a PES, which takes the total of the energy as a function of location:\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3 is the energy eigenvalue of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for the electronic degrees of freedom and formula_4 is the ion interactions. This expression is without translational energy, rotational energy, vibrational excitations, and other such considerations.\nThere exist several models to describe surface reactions: the Langmuir\u2013Hinshelwood mechanism in which both reacting species are adsorbed, and the Eley\u2013Rideal mechanism in which one is adsorbed and the other reacts with it.\nReal systems have many irregularities, making theoretical calculations more difficult:\nCompared to physisorption where adsorbates are simply sitting on the surface, the adsorbates can change the surface, along with its structure. The structure can go through relaxation, where the first few layers change interplanar distances without changing the surface structure, or reconstruction where the surface structure is changed. A direct transition from physisorption to chemisorption has been observed by attaching a CO molecule to the tip of an atomic force microscope and measuring its interaction with a single iron atom.\nFor example, oxygen can form very strong bonds (~4 eV) with metals, such as Cu(110). This comes with the breaking apart of surface bonds in forming surface-adsorbate bonds. A large restructuring occurs by missing row.\nDissociative chemisorption.\nA particular brand of gas-surface chemisorption is the dissociation of diatomic gas molecules, such as hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. One model used to describe the process is precursor-mediation. The absorbed molecule is adsorbed onto a surface into a precursor state. The molecule then diffuses across the surface to the chemisorption sites. They break the molecular bond in favor of new bonds to the surface. The energy to overcome the activation potential of dissociation usually comes from translational energy and vibrational energy.\nAn example is the hydrogen and copper system, one that has been studied many times over. It has a large activation energy of 0.35 \u2013 0.85 eV. The vibrational excitation of the hydrogen molecule promotes dissociation on low index surfaces of copper.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68519", "revid": "11015197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68519", "title": "Nueva canci\u00f3n", "text": "Musical genre in Iberian America and the Iberian peninsula\n ( , ; 'new song') is a left-wing social movement and musical genre in Latin America and the Iberian Peninsula, characterized by folk-inspired styles and socially committed lyrics. is widely recognized to have played a profound role in the pro-democracy social upheavals in Portugal, Spain and Latin America during the 1970s and 1980s, and was popular amongst socialist organizations in the region.\nSongs reflecting conflict have a long history in Spanish, and in Latin America were particularly associated with the \"\"corrido\" songs of Mexico's War of Independence after 1810, and the early 20th century years of Revolution. then surfaced almost simultaneously during the 1960s in Argentina, Chile, Uruguay and Spain. The musical style emerged shortly afterwards in other areas of Latin America where it came to be known under similar names. renewed traditional Latin American folk music, and was soon associated with revolutionary movements, the Latin American New Left, liberation theology, hippie and human rights movements due to political lyrics. It would gain great popularity throughout Latin America, and left an imprint on several other genres like \"rock en espa\u00f1ol\", cumbia and Andean music.\n musicians often faced censorship, exile, torture, death, or forceful disappearances by the wave of right-wing military dictatorships that swept across Latin America and the Iberian peninsula in the Cold War era, e.g. in Francoist Spain, Pinochet's Chile, Salazar's Portugal and Videla and Galtieri's Argentina.\nDue to their strongly political messages, some songs have been used in later political campaigns, for example the Orange Revolution, which used Violeta Parra's \"Gracias a la vida\"\". has become part of Latin American and Iberian musical tradition, but is no longer a mainstream genre, and has given way to other genres, particularly \"rock en espa\u00f1ol\".\nCharacteristics.\n\"\" is a type of music which is committed to social good. Its musical and lyrical vernacular is rooted in the popular classes and often uses a popularly understood style of satire to advocate for sociopolitical change. The movement reacted against the dominance of American and European music in Latin America at the time by assuming an anti-imperial stance that was markedly less focused on the visual spectacle of commercial music and more focused on social and political messages. It characteristically talks about poverty, empowerment, imperialism, democracy, human rights, religion, and the Latin American identity.\n draws heavily upon Andean music, m\u00fasica negra, Spanish music, Cuban music and other Latin American folklore. Most songs feature the guitar, and often the quena, zampo\u00f1a, charango or caj\u00f3n. The lyrics are typically in Spanish, with some indigenous or local words mixed in, and frequently utilize the poetic forms of copla and d\u00e9cima.\n was explicitly related to leftist politics, advancing leftist ideals and flourishing within the structure of the Communist Party in Latin America. Cuban cultural organization Casa de las Am\u00e9ricas hosted many notable gatherings of musicians, including the 1967 Encuentro de la Canci\u00f3n Protesta.\nSongs of conflict in Spanish have a very long history, with elements to be found in the \"fronterizos\", songs concerning the Reconquest of Spain from the Moors in the 15th century. More immediately, some of the roots of may be seen in the Mexican \"corrido\", which took on a strongly political flavour during the War of Independence c.\u20091810, and then the Revolution after 1910. The modern developed in the historical context of the \"folklore boom\" that occurred in Latin America in the 1950s. Chilean Violeta Parra and Argentine Atahualpa Yupanqui were two transitional figures as their mastery of folk music and personal involvement in leftist political organizations aided the eventual union of the two in . The movement was also aided by legislation like Juan Per\u00f3n's Decreto 3371/1949 de Protecci\u00f3n de la M\u00fasica Nacional and Law No. 14,226, which required that half of the music played on the radio or performed live be of national origin.\nNational manifestations of began occurring in the late 1950s. The earliest were in Chile and Spain, where the movement promoted Catalan language and culture. The music quickly spread to Argentina and throughout Latin America during the 1960s and 1970s. Various national movements used their own terminology; however, the term \"\" was adopted at the 1967 Encuentro de la Canci\u00f3n Protesta and has thereafter been used as an all-encompassing term. Though is often considered a Pan-Latino phenomenon, national manifestations were varied and reacted to local political and cultural contexts.\nRegional manifestations.\nChile: \"Nueva Canci\u00f3n Chilena\" (New Chilean Song).\nSince 1952, Violeta Parra, together with her children, gathered a total of 3,000 songs of peasant origin, and also released a book known as \"Cantos Folkl\u00f3ricos Chilenos\" (Chilean Folk Songs). In addition, Violeta's children Isabel and \u00c1ngel founded the cultural center Pe\u00f1a de los Parra, an organization that functioned as an organizing center for leftist political activism, and welcomed almost all of the major figures associated with early , including Chileans: Patricio Manns, V\u00edctor Jara, Rolando Alarc\u00f3n, Payo Grondona, Patricio Castillo, Sergio Ortega, Homero Caro, Tito Fern\u00e1ndez, and Kiko \u00c1lvarez, as well as non-Chilean musicians, such as Atahualpa Yupanqui from Argentina and Paco Iba\u00f1\u00e9z of Spain.\n moved out of small gathering places like Pe\u00f1a de los Parra in 1968 when the Communist Youth Party of Chile pressed 1000 copies of the album \"Por Vietnam\" by Quilapay\u00fan to raise funds for the band's travel to the International Youth Festival in Bulgaria. The copies sold out unexpectedly, a strong demonstration of the popular demand for this new music. In response, La Jota (Juventudes Comunistas) created Discoteca de Canto Popular (DICAP), a socially-conscious record label that grew in its five years of operation from a 4,000 record operation in 1968 to pressing over 240,000 records in 1973. DICAP united the various groups of young people wishing to spread Nueva Cancion at a time when U.S. music dominated chiefly commercial radio fare. \"DICAP was a key counterhegemonic institution that broke through the censorship and silence imposed by the conservative cultural entities of the elite.\"\nIn 1969 the Universidad C\u00e1tolica in Santiago hosted the Primer Festival de la . Salvador Allende's 1970 presidential campaign was a major turning point in the history of . Many artists became involved in the campaign; songs like \"Venceremos\" by V\u00edctor Jara were widely used in Allende rallies. After Allende's election, artists were utilized as a pro-Allende public relations machine inside and outside of Chile. By 1971, groups like Inti-Illimani and Quilapay\u00fan were receiving financial support from the Allende government.\nIn 1973, the United States/CIA-backed right-wing military coup overthrew Allende's democratic government, bombing the presidential palace. Pinochet's forces then rounded up 5,000 civilians into a soccer stadium for interrogation, torture, and execution. Victor Jara was beaten, tortured, and his wrists were broken, after several days he was executed and shot 44 times. His wife Joan Jara writes, \"where his belly ought to have been was a gory, gaping void\". Because of his popularity and fame in the music world, Jara is the most well-known victim of a regime that killed or \"disappeared\" at least 3,065 people and tortured more than 38,000, bringing the number of victims to 40,018. Other musicians, such as Patricio Manns and groups Inti-Illimani and Quilapay\u00fan, found safety outside the country. Under Augusto Pinochet recordings were seized, burned, and banned from the airwaves and record stores. The military government exiled and imprisoned artists and went as far as to ban many traditional Andean instruments in order to suppress the movement. This period in Chilean history is known as the \"Apag\u00f3n Cultural\" (Cultural Blackout).\nBy late 1975, artists had begun to circumvent these restrictions through so-called \"Andean Baroque\" ensembles that performed standards of the Western classical repertoire on indigenous South American instruments. These performances took place in the politically neutral environments of churches, community centers, and the few remaining pe\u00f1as. For this reason, and because of the novelty of the concept, these performances were allowed to continue without government interference. Performers gradually grew bolder, incorporating some of old repertoire, though carefully avoiding overtly political topics. Artists began calling this music \"Canto Nuevo\", a term selected to both reference and distance the new movement from the former . Because of the precarious political circumstances in which it existed, canto nuevo is notable for its use of highly metaphorical language, allowing songs to evade censors by disguising political messages beneath layers of symbolism. Live performances often included spoken introductions or interludes that provided insight into the song's real meaning.\nAs the 1980s arrived, advances in recording technology allowed supporters to informally exchange cassettes outside of the governmental control. An economic crisis forced Chilean television stations to hire cheaper Chilean performers rather than international stars for broadcast bookings, while a relaxation in government restrictions allowed canto nuevo performers to participate in several major popular music festivals. Increasing public recognition of the movement facilitated the gathering of its participants at events such as the Congreso de Artistas y Trabajadores (Conference of Artists and Workers) in 1983. The canto nuevo repertoire began to diversify, incorporating cosmopolitan influences such as electronic instruments, classical harmonies, and jazz influences.\nThough the genre is not especially active today, the legacy of figures like Violeta Parra is enormous. Parra's music continues to be recorded by contemporary artists and her song \"Gracias a la Vida\" was recorded by supergroup Artists for Chile in an effort to raise relief funds in the wake of the 2010 Chilean earthquake. The protests that began in October 2019 showed a strong resurgence of as curfewed residents began performing the music of Violeta Parra and Victor Jara \n and soon major artists began adapting and writing politically motivated music backing the protests and critical of the Pi\u00f1era government.\nArgentina: \"Nuevo Cancionero\" (New Songbook).\nIn Argentina, the movement was founded under the name Nuevo Cancionero and formally codified on 11 February 1963 when fourteen artists met in Mendoza, Argentina to sign the Manifiesto Fundacional de Nuevo Cancionero. Present were both musical artists and poet writers. The Argentine movement especially was a musico-literal. Writers like Armando Tejada Gomez were highly influential and made substantial contributions to the movement in the form of original poetry. The Manifesto's introduction places the roots of Nuevo Cancionero in the rediscovery of folk music and indigenous traditions to the work of folklorists Atahualpa Yupanqui and Buenaventura Luna and the internal urban migration that brought rural Argentines to the capital of Buenos Aires. The body of the document outlines the goal of the movement: the development of a national song that overcome the dominance of tango-folklore in Argentine national music and the rejection of pure commercialism. Instead Nuevo Cancionero sought to embrace of institutions that encouraged critical thinking and the open exchange of ideas.\nNuevo Cancionero's most famous proponent was Mercedes Sosa. Her success at the 1965 Cosquin Folklore Festival introduced Nuevo Cancionero to new levels of public exposure after Argentine folk powerhouse Jorge Cafrune singled her out on stage as a budding talent. In 1967, Sosa completed her first international tour in the United States and Europe. Other notable Nuevo Cancionero artists of this time included Tito Francia, V\u00edctor Heredia, and C\u00e9sar Isella, who left the folk music group Los Fronterizos to pursue a solo career. In 1969 he set the poetry of Armando Tejada Gomez to produce \"Canci\u00f3n para todos\", an anthem later designated by UNESCO the hymn of Latin America.\nNuevo cancionero artists were among the approximately 30,000 victims of forced disappearances under Argentina's 1976\u20131983 military dictatorship. Additional censorship, intimidation, and persecution forced many artists into exile where they had more freedom to publicize and criticize the events unfolding in Latin America. Sosa, for example, participated in the first Amnesty International concert in London in 1979, and also performed in Israel, Canada, Colombia, and Brazil while continuing to record.\nAfter the fall of the dictatorship in 1983, Argentine artists returned and performed massive comeback concerts that regularly filled sports areas and public parks with tens of thousands of people. Influences from time spent in exile abroad were clear through sample of instruments like the harmonica, drum set, bass guitar, electric keyboard, brass ensembles, backup singers, string instruments (especially double bass and violin), and stylistic and harmonic influences from the soundscapes of classical, jazz, pop, rock, and punk. Collaborations became increasingly common, especially between proponents of Nuevo Cancionero and the ideologically similar Rock Nacional.\nNuevo Cancionero artists became symbols of a triumphant national identity. When Mercedes Sosa died, millions flooded the streets as her body lay in official state in the National Cathedral, an honor reserved for only the most prominent of national icons. While the community of musicians actively composing in the Nuevo Cancionero tradition is small, recordings and covers of Nuevo Cancionero classics remain popular in Argentina.\nCuba: \"Nueva Trova\" (New Trova).\nOf the regional manifestations of , is distinct because of its function within and support from the Castro government. While in other countries primarily functioned in opposition to existing regimes, emerged after the Cuban Revolution and enjoyed various degrees of state support throughout the late twentieth century. has its roots in the traditional , but differs from it because its content is, in the widest sense, political. It combines traditional folk music idioms with 'progressive' and often politicized lyrics that concentrate on socialism, injustice, sexism, colonialism, racism and similar 'serious' issues. Occasional examples of non-political styles in the movement can also be found, for example, Liuba Mar\u00eda Hevia, whose lyrics are focused on more traditional subjects such as love and solitude albeit in a highly poetical style. Later musicians were also influenced by rock and pop of that time.\nSilvio Rodr\u00edguez and Pablo Milan\u00e9s became the most important exponents of the style. Carlos Puebla and Jose\u00edto Fern\u00e1ndez were long-time singers who added their weight to the new regime, but of the two only Puebla wrote special pro-revolution songs.\nThe Castro administration gave plenty of support to musicians willing to write and sing anti-U.S. imperialism or pro-revolution songs, an asset in an era when many traditional musicians were finding it difficult or impossible to earn a living. In 1967 the Casa de las Am\u00e9ricas in Havana held a Festival de la canci\u00f3n de protesta (protest songs). Much of the effort was spent applauding anti-U.S. expressions. Tania Castellanos, a fil\u00edn singer and author, wrote \"\u00a1Por \u00c1ngela!\" in support of US political activist Angela Davis. C\u00e9sar Portillo de la Luz wrote \"Oh, valeroso Viet Nam\". Institutions like the Grupo de Experimentaci\u00f3n Sonora del ICAIC (GES) while not directly working in , provided valuable musical training to amateur Cuban artists.\nSpain and Catalonia: \"Nova Can\u00e7\u00f3\".\nThe Nova Can\u00e7\u00f3 was an artistic movement of the late 1950s that promoted Catalan music in Francoist Spain. The movement sought to normalize use of the Catalan language after public use of the language was forbidden when Catalonia fell in the Spanish Civil War. Artists used the Catalan language to assert Catalan identity in popular music and denounce the injustices of the Franco regime. Musically, it had roots in the French Chanson.\nIn 1957, the writer Josep Maria Espin\u00e0s gave lectures on the French singer-songwriter Georges Brassens, whom he called \"the troubadour of our times.\" Espin\u00e0s had begun to translate some of Brassens' songs into Catalan. In 1958, two EPs of songs in Catalan were released: \"Hermanas Serrano cantan en catal\u00e1n los \u00e9xitos internacionales\" (\"The Serrano Sisters Sing International Hits in Catalan\") and \"Jos\u00e9 Guardiola: canta en catal\u00e1n los \u00e9xitos internationales\". They are now considered the first recordings of modern music in the Catalan language. These singers, as well as others such as Font Sellabona and Rudy Ventura, form a prelude to the Nova Can\u00e7\u00f3.\nAt the suggestion of Josep Benet i de Joan and Maurici Serrahima, a group composed of Jaume Armengol, Llu\u00eds Serrahima and Miquel Porter started composing Catalan songs. In 1959, after an article by Llu\u00eds Serrahima, titled \"Ens calen can\u00e7ons d\u2019ara\" (\"We need songs for today\"), was published in \"Germin\u00e0bit\", more authors and singers were attracted to the movement. Miquel Porter, Josep Maria Espin\u00e0s and Remei Margarit founded the group \"Els Setze Jutges\" (The Sixteen Judges, in Catalan). Their first concert, although still not with this name, was on 19 December 1961, in Barcelona. Their first performance with the name of Els Setze Jutges was in Premi\u00e0 de Mar in 1962. New singers joined the group in the following years, until the number of sixteen (\"Setze\"), like Delf\u00ed Abella and Francesc Pi de la Serra. The first Nova Can\u00e7\u00f3 records appeared in 1962, and many musical bands, vocal groups, singer-songwriters, and interpreters picked up the trend.\nIn 1963, a professional Catalan artist, Salom\u00e9, and a Valencian, Raimon, were awarded the first prize of the Fifth Mediterranean Song Festival with the song \"Se\u2019n va anar\" (\"[She] left\"). Other important participants in the movement included Guillem d'Efak and N\u00faria Feliu, who received the Spanish Critics' Award in 1966, or other new members of Els Setze Jutges. Some of them were even well known abroad. Apart from Raimon, other former members of Els Setze Jutges continued their careers successfully, including Guillermina Motta, Francesc Pi de la Serra, Maria del Mar Bonet, Llu\u00eds Llach and Joan Manuel Serrat. Other significant figures appeared somewhat later, like the Valencian Ovidi Montllor.\nNicaragua.\nNicaragua (\"Nueva canci\u00f3n nicarag\u00fcense\") musicians are attributed with transmitting social and political messages, and aiding in the ideological mobilisation of the populace during the Sandinista revolution. Carlos Mej\u00eda Godoy y Los de Palacag\u00fcina were probably the best known proponents of this style.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68520", "revid": "50043158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68520", "title": "Physisorption", "text": "Process involving electronic structure\nPhysisorption, also called physical adsorption, is a process in which the electronic structure of the atom or molecule is barely perturbed upon adsorption.\nOverview.\nThe fundamental interacting force of physisorption is Van der Waals force. Even though the interaction energy is very weak (~10\u2013100\u00a0meV), physisorption plays an important role in nature. For instance, the van der Waals attraction between surfaces and foot-hairs of geckos (see Synthetic setae) provides the remarkable ability to climb up vertical walls. Van der Waals forces originate from the interactions between induced, permanent or transient electric dipoles.\nIn comparison with chemisorption, in which the electronic structure of bonding atoms or molecules is changed and covalent or ionic bonds form, physisorption does not result in changes to the chemical bonding structure. In practice, the categorisation of a particular adsorption as physisorption or chemisorption depends principally on the binding energy of the adsorbate to the substrate, with physisorption being far weaker on a per-atom basis than any type of connection involving a chemical bond.\nModeling by image charge.\nTo give a simple illustration of physisorption, we can first consider an adsorbed hydrogen atom in front of a perfect conductor, as shown in Fig. 1. A nucleus with positive charge is located at R\u00a0=\u00a0(0,\u00a00,\u00a0\"Z\"), and the position coordinate of its electron, r\u00a0=\u00a0(\"x\",\u00a0\"y\",\u00a0\"z\") is given with respect to the nucleus. The adsorption process can be viewed as the interaction between this hydrogen atom and its image charges of both the nucleus and electron in the conductor. As a result, the total electrostatic energy is the sum of attraction and repulsion terms:\nformula_1\nThe first term is the attractive interaction of the nucleus and its image charge, and the second term is due to the interaction of the electron and its image charge. The repulsive interaction is shown in the third and fourth terms arising from the interaction between the nucleus and the image electron, and, the interaction between the electron and the image nucleus, respectively.\nBy Taylor expansion in powers of |r|\u00a0/\u00a0|R|, this interaction energy can be further expressed as:\nformula_2\nOne can find from the first non-vanishing term that the physisorption potential depends on the distance \"Z\" between adsorbed atom and surface as \"Z\"\u22123, in contrast with the \"r\"\u22126 dependence of the molecular van der Waals potential, where \"r\" is the distance between two dipoles.\nModeling by quantum-mechanical oscillator.\nThe van der Waals binding energy can be analyzed by another simple physical picture: modeling the motion of an electron around its nucleus by a three-dimensional simple harmonic oscillator with a potential energy \"Va\":\nformula_3\nwhere \"me\" and \"\u03c9\" are the mass and vibrational frequency of the electron, respectively.\nAs this atom approaches the surface of a metal and forms adsorption, this potential energy \"Va\" will be modified due to the image charges by additional potential terms which are quadratic in the displacements:\nformula_4 (from the Taylor expansion above.)\nAssuming\nformula_5\nthe potential is well approximated as\nformula_6,\nwhere\nformula_7\nIf one assumes that the electron is in the ground state, then the van der Waals binding energy is essentially the change of the zero-point energy:\nformula_8\nThis expression also shows the nature of the \"Z\"\u22123 dependence of the van der Waals interaction.\nFurthermore, by introducing the atomic polarizability,\nformula_9\nthe van der Waals potential can be further simplified:\nformula_10\nwhere\nformula_11\nis the van der Waals constant which is related to the atomic polarizability.\nAlso, by expressing the fourth-order correction in the Taylor expansion above as (\"aCvZ\"0)\u00a0/\u00a0(Z4), where \"a\" is some constant, we can define \"Z\"0 as the position of the \"dynamical image plane\" and obtain\nformula_12\nThe origin of \"Z\"0 comes from the spilling of the electron wavefunction out of the surface. As a result, the position of the image plane representing the reference for the space coordinate is different from the substrate surface itself and modified by \"Z\"0.\nTable 1 shows the jellium model calculation for van der Waals constant \"Cv\" and dynamical image plane \"Z\"0 of rare gas atoms on various metal surfaces. The increasing of \"Cv\" from He to Xe for all metal substrates is caused by the larger atomic polarizability of the heavier rare gas atoms. For the position of the dynamical image plane, it decreases with increasing dielectric function and is typically on the order of 0.2\u00a0\u00c5.\nPhysisorption potential.\nEven though the van der Waals interaction is attractive, as the adsorbed atom moves closer to the surface the wavefunction of electron starts to overlap with that of the surface atoms. Further the energy of the system will increase due to the orthogonality of wavefunctions of the approaching atom and surface atoms.\nThis Pauli exclusion and repulsion are particularly strong for atoms with closed valence shells that dominate the surface interaction. As a result, the minimum energy of physisorption must be found by the balance between the long-range van der Waals attraction and short-range Pauli repulsion. For instance, by separating the total interaction of physisorption into two contributions\u2014a short-range term depicted by Hartree\u2013Fock theory and a long-range van der Waals attraction\u2014the equilibrium position of physisorption for rare gases adsorbed on jellium substrate can be determined. Fig. 2 shows the physisorption potential energy of He adsorbed on Ag, Cu, and Au substrates which are described by the jellium model with different densities of smear-out background positive charges. It can be found that the weak van der Waals interaction leads to shallow attractive energy wells (&lt;10\u00a0meV). One of the experimental methods for exploring physisorption potential energy is the scattering process, for instance, inert gas atoms scattered from metal surfaces. Certain specific features of the interaction potential between scattered atoms and surface can be extracted by analyzing the experimentally determined angular distribution and cross sections of the scattered particles.\nQuantum mechanical \u2013 thermodynamic modelling for surface area and porosity.\nSince 1980 two theories were worked on to explain adsorption and obtain equations that work. These two are referred to as the chi hypothesis, the quantum mechanical derivation, and excess surface work, ESW. Both these theories yield the same equation for flat surfaces:\nformula_13\nWhere \"U\" is the unit step function. The definitions of the other symbols is as follows:\nformula_14\nwhere \"ads\" stands for \"adsorbed\", \"m\" stands for \"monolayer equivalence\" and \"vap\" is reference to the vapor pressure (\"ads\" and \"vap\" are the latest IUPAC convention but \"m\" has no IUAPC equivalent notation) of the liquid adsorptive at the same temperature as the solid sample. The unit function creates the definition of the molar energy of adsorption for the first adsorbed molecule by:\nformula_15\nThe plot of formula_16 adsorbed versus formula_17 is referred to as the chi plot. For flat surfaces, the slope of the chi plot yields the surface area. Empirically, this plot was notice as being a very good fit to the isotherm by Polanyi and also by deBoer and Zwikker but not pursued. This was due to criticism in the former case by Einstein and in the latter case by Brunauer. This flat surface equation may be used as a \"standard curve\" in the normal tradition of comparison curves, with the exception that the porous sample's early portion of the plot of formula_16 versus formula_17 acts as a self-standard. Ultramicroporous, microporous and mesoporous conditions may be analyzed using this technique. Typical standard deviations for full isotherm fits including porous samples are typically less than 2%.\nA typical fit to good data on a homogeneous non-porous surface is shown in figure 3. The data is by Payne, Sing and Turk and was used to create the formula_20-s standard curve. Unlike the BET, which can only be at best fit over the range of 0.05 to 0.35 of \"P\"/\"P\", the range of the fit is the full isotherm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68521", "revid": "6511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68521", "title": "Perfectly normal space", "text": ""}
{"id": "68522", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68522", "title": "Perfectly T4 space", "text": ""}
{"id": "68523", "revid": "49434219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68523", "title": "Aenon", "text": "Site, mentioned in the Gospel of John (3:23) as the place where John the Baptist was baptizing\nAenon (, \"Ain\u1e53n\"), distinguished as Aenon near Salim, is the site mentioned by the Gospel of John ) as one of the places where John was baptising people, after baptizing Jesus in Bethany-beyond-the-Jordan.\nEtymology.\nAenon is the Hellenized form of the term for 'spring' or 'natural fountain' in many Semitic languages, including Hebrew \"ayn\" () and Arabic \"ain\" or \"ein\" (). In the water-poor Middle East, places owning a spring tend to be named after that water source, so that toponyms consisting of or containing the construct element are common. The particular site mentioned in the Gospel of John is therefore distinguished as \"Aenon near Salim\".\nThe name Aenon is commonly used amongst Baptist organizations and churches.\nIdentification attempts.\nInformation from the Gospel.\nNeither \"Aenon\" nor \"Salim\" is a unique name, and the Gospel text offers only two additional hints about where Aenon might be located: the most direct information is that \"there was plenty of water there\" (), and the second is that it was west of the River Jordan because at Aenon John's disciples talk of the site where John first encountered Jesus as being \"on the other side of the Jordan\" () which is taken to mean east of the river. We also know from that that first encounter happened at \"Bethany-beyond-the-Jordan\", named relative to the entrance of the Hebrews from the desert during the Exodus.\n'Ainun in Wadi Far'a.\nOne possible location is near the upper source of the Wadi Far'a, an open valley extending from Mount Ebal to the Jordan River, which is full of springs. There is a place called 'Ainun four miles north of the springs.\nEusebius: Saloumias south of Scythopolis.\nAnother possible location, which is by Eusebius' description in his \"Onomasticon\" (written before AD 324), is at \"a village in the (Jordan) valley, at the eighth milestone from Scythopolis (Beit She'an), ... called Salumias.\" This view was already supported by the 19th-century Smith's Bible Dictionary and the 1915 International Standard Bible Encyclopedia and is still favoured by some.\nMadaba Map: east of the Jordan near Jericho.\nIn addition to Aenon near Salem, the 6th-century Madaba Map shows a second Aenon right across the Jordan from Bethabara, near Jericho. In the Gospel of John, \"Bethany-beyond-the-Jordan\" is indicated as the place where Jesus was baptized by John; in some translations of the Bible, the name \"Bethany\" is instead transcribed as \"Bethabara\" (). On the Madaba Map, Bethabara is on the right bank of the Jordan, while this Aenon is on the left.\nReligious significance.\nAenon is the site mentioned by the Gospel of John (3:23) as one of the places where John was baptising people, after baptizing Jesus in Bethany-beyond-the-Jordan. Dale Allison finds the claim to perhaps be a true historical memory.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68524", "revid": "668752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68524", "title": "Aaronites", "text": ""}
{"id": "68525", "revid": "1291528866", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68525", "title": "Abarim", "text": "Mountain range in Jordan\nAbarim () is the Hebrew name used in the Bible for a mountain range \"across the Jordan\", understood as east of the Jordan Rift Valley, i.e. in Transjordan, to the east and south-east of the Dead Sea, extending from Mount Nebo \u2014 its highest point \u2014 in the north, perhaps to the Arabian desert in the south. \nEtymology and description.\nAccording to Cheyne and Black, its Hebrew meaning is \"'Those-on-the-other-side'\u2014i.e., of the Jordan.\" The Vulgate (Deuteronomy 32:49) gives its etymological meaning as \"passages\". Its northern part was called Pisgah, and the highest peak of Pisgah was Mount Nebo (Numbers 23:14; 27:12; 21:20; 32:47; Deuteronomy 3:27; 34:1; 32:49).\nThese mountains are mentioned several times in the Bible:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68526", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68526", "title": "Abba (disambiguation)", "text": "ABBA is a Swedish pop music group.\nAbba or ABBA may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68527", "revid": "19063039", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68527", "title": "Abda (biblical figure)", "text": "The name Abda (Hebrew \u05e2\u05b7\u05d1\u05b0\u05d3\u05b8\u05bc\u05d0) means \"servant,\" or perhaps is an abbreviated form of \"servant of YHWH\". There are two people by this name in the Hebrew Bible.\nWhere the Masoretic Text has \"Abda,\" the Septuagint, depending on the location and manuscript, has names such as \"Abao, Ephra, Edram, Ioreb, Obeb,\" and \"Abdias.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68528", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68528", "title": "Abdon", "text": "Abdon may refer to:\nPeople.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68529", "revid": "25751879", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68529", "title": "Abel-beth-maachah", "text": "Ruin with the remains of biblical town in northern Israel\nTel Abel Beth Maacah (; ) is a large archaeological tell with a small upper northern section and a large lower southern one, connected by a saddle. It is located on the northern border of present-day Israel, about 2\u00a0km south of the town of Metula and about 6.5\u00a0km west of Tel Dan.\nThe survey and excavations conducted in recent years have shown that the site had been inhabited during the Bronze and Iron Ages, as well as the Persian, Hellenistic, Byzantine, Early Islamic, Crusader, Mamluk and Ottoman periods. Since at least the early 13th century CE the mound was the location of the Arab village of Abil al-Qamh, depopulated in 1948. However, the lower mound was not occupied after the Iron Age I (late 11th/early 10th centuries BCE), when occupation seems to have concentrated on the upper mound.\nThe site was fortified by walls and a rampart in the Middle Bronze Age II. These fortifications were reused in the Late Bronze Age in the south of the mound, but went out of commission in the Iron Age I. A silver hoard in a jug, dating to the end of the Late Bronze Age, is one of the earliest such hoards found in the country. The Iron Age I sequence is one of the densest in this region and includes strata of cultic, domestic and public nature. Traces of metal-working were found in the latter. The Iron Age II is represented by a very large stone wall in the upper mound that might be part of a citadel. A well-built structure dating to the Persian-early Hellenistic period was built above this wall and other Iron Age remains.\nIn the later periods, the Palestinian village of Abil al-Qamh was located here until it became depopulated during the Nakba in 1948.\nThe site.\nThe site is approximately 100 dunams (10 hectares) in size and sits astride the narrow defile of Nahal Ayun, one of the four headwaters of the Jordan River. The Tanur Waterfall, fed by the Iyyon, is located just north of the site. From its strategic vantage point overlooking the narrow northern end of the fertile Hula Valley, the site commands roads leading north to the Lebanese Beqaa Valley, northeast to inland Syria (Damascus) and Mesopotamia, and west to the Lebanese/Phoenician coast.\nThe tell is identified with Abel Beth-Maacah mentioned in the Hebrew Bible and consists of an upper mound in the north and a larger lower mound in the south, with a moderately high saddle between them.\nThe location of the town in such a strategic spot points to it having played a major role in the interaction between the various national groups and political powers in the Bronze Age (Canaanites, Hurrians/Mitannians, Egyptians, and Hittites) and the Iron Age (Israelites, Arameans and Phoenicians). Abel Beth Maacah was a border town, and as such, was exposed to these influences at the same time that it fulfilled the role of buffering, or bearing the brunt of, foreign invasions. Its proximity to numerous water sources and a rich agricultural hinterland was yet another factor in making Abel Beth Maacah a large and prominent site in antiquity.\nEtymology.\nAbel Beth Maacah means \"the meadow of the house of Maacah\".\nThe biblical name is spelled variously as Abel-beth-maacah, Abel Beth Maacah, Abel Beth-Maacah, Avel Bet Ma'akha etc. The city is also called Abel Maim (\"meadow of water\") in 2 Chronicles 16:4.\nIdentification.\nThe tell was described by a number of prominent 19th-century and early 20th-century explorers, including Victor Gu\u00e9rin, F\u00e9lix-Marie Abel and Edward Robinson, who was the first to identify the mound with biblical Abel Beth Maacah (Avel Bet Macakha). The proposal has won scholarly acceptance, based largely on historical-geographical considerations.\nThe identification is based mainly on the appearance of the town in two geographic lists in the Bible. In 1 Kings 15:20, the Aramean king Ben-Hadad I was solicited in the 9th century BCE by King Asa of Judah to attack the northern kingdom. He did successfully, although apparently soon after this, control over this region returned to Israelite hands during the reign of Ahab. \"Ben-hadad listened to King Asa, and sent the commanders of his armies against the cities of Israel. He conquered Ijon, Tel Dan, Abel-beth-maacah, and all Chinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali\". A similar geographic list is noted in the story of the Assyrian conquest of the region in the late 8th century BCE in 2 Kings 15:29: \"In the days of King Pekah of Israel, King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria came and captured Ijon, Abel-beth-maacah, Janoah, Kedesh, Hazor, Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali; and carried the people captive to Assyria\".\nSecond millennium BCE and biblical references.\nA Hebrew inscription on the lid of a wine storage jar uncovered in the summer of 2019 reads \u201cleBenayau,\u201d meaning that the storage jar and its contents \u201cbelong to Benayau\u201d is dated to the 10th-9th century BCE. It was found together with other jars in what appears to have been the wine cellar of a man named Benayau. It is the first inscription found at the dig, and the lettering dates it to earlier than 2,900 years ago. The inscription is one of several artifacts that appear to support the idea first proposed by Avraham Biran that Abel-beth-maachah was an Israelite town during the reigns of David and Solomon.\nBronze Age references to the site include the early group of the Execration Texts (Middle Bronze IIA) and possibly Thutmose III's list of destroyed towns (Late Bronze I), as well as the Amarna letters (Late Bronze IIA; Dever 1984: 211\u2013213). After the Assyrian conquest, the site is not mentioned in any later sources.\nAside from the two geographic lists quoted above in relation to the conquest of the town by the Arameans and the Assyrians, the site is mentioned one other time in the Bible: 2 Samuel 20:14\u201322, which relates a call for revolt against David by a Benjaminite named Sheba ben Bichri. Sheba fled to Abel Beth Maacah, pursued by Joab and his army. Setting up a siege at the town, Joab threatened to destroy it, when the local \"wise woman\" (possibly an oracle) informed him that the city was loyal to David, calling it \"a city and a mother in Israel\" (2 Samuel 20:19) and arranged to have the rebel who took refuge there beheaded, and thus saving her town. This is the only time the phrase \"a city and a mother in Israel\" is mentioned in the Bible and might allude to its particular political and/or religious status. This narrative also emphasizes the town as the northernmost point of the Israelite state entity, although it is not clear to which time period this relates, since this narrative most likely reflects a time later in Iron Age II than the reign of David.\nThough speculative, some scholars have suggested that the conquest of Abel Beth Maacah by Ben-hadad I may be alluded to in the second line of the 'House of David' inscription found at nearby Tel Dan, where the letters aleph and bet have survived and might be the beginning of the name of the town \"Abel\" (Schneidewind 1996:77; Naaman 2012:95, note 10).\nExploration history.\nPast explorations.\nDespite its obvious historical importance and geographic prominence, Abel Beth Maacah was not excavated before 2012. Previous study of the site involved periodic visits by representatives of the British Mandatory Department of Antiquities and limited surveys carried out by the Israel Department of Antiquities in the 1950s, by Yehudah Dayan in the 1960s, and by Prof. William G. Dever of the University of Arizona in 1972, who summarily published the results, along with a detailed historical-geographical analysis (Dever 1986). Subsequently, a small salvage excavation conducted by the Israel Antiquities Authority (IAA) at the base of the southeastern slope revealed several Byzantine tombs, as well as a group of Middle Bronze IIB vessels that seemed typical of a tomb assemblage, although no tomb from this period was found (Stepansky 2005).\nCurrent project.\nThe excavation of Tel Abel Beth Maacah has been initiated and funded by Azusa Pacific University of Los Angeles, and is conducted as a joint project with the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, co-directed by Dr. Robert Mullins of the former institution and Dr. Naama Yahalom-Mack and Dr. Nava Panitz-Cohen of the latter. The surveyor and stratigraphic advisor is Ruhama Bonfil of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.\nThe project began in 2012 with a survey followed by four excavation seasons to date (2013\u20132016).\n2012 survey; habitation periods.\nIn May 2012, a four-day survey was conducted, combining an extensive walking survey with limited shallow (up to 10\u00a0cm) excavation in six areas spread around the site. \nThe survey showed that there was occupation in the Early Bronze [EB] II-III, Middle Bronze [MB] II, Late Bronze [LB]I-II, Iron Age I-II, Persian, Hellenistic, Byzantine, Early Islamic, Crusader, Mamluk and Ottoman periods. The survey also revealed that the lower part of the tell in the south has an outcropping of bedrock running through much of its center, indicating that the ancient remains in this part of the site should be sought around its perimeter.\nAn intact ring flask, apparently of Late Bronze Age date, was found in the survey in the vicinity of Area A.\nExcavation and findings.\nExcavation areas.\nFive areas had been excavated as of Winter 2021. Area A on the eastern slope of the middle saddle (remains of Middle Bronze IIB, Late Bronze IIB, Iron Age I, Iron Age II and Early Islamic), Area B on the eastern slope of the upper mound (remains of Middle Bronze IIB, Iron Age I, Iron Age II, Persian-early Hellenistic, Roman-Byzantine, Mamluk), Area F on the southern end of the lower mound (remains of MBIIB, LB I-II, Iron I), Area O on the western edge of the lower mound (remains of MBIIB, Iron I-II), and Area K on the eastern slope of a topographical depression between the lower and upper mounds (remains of Iron I-II). In wake of the survey and excavations to date, it was found that the lower mound was probably not occupied after the Iron Age I (late 11th/early 10th century BCE) and occupation was limited to the upper mound and the interim saddle.\nExcavation areas are marked on this 1945 aerial photo of the tell (Aerial Photographic Archive, Geography Department, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, taken by the Royal Air Force, Section 23, 1945); the houses visible on the photo belong to the Arab village of Abil al-Qamh.\nMiddle Bronze II.\nRemains of the Middle Bronze II have been revealed to date in three areas: F, O and B.\nArea F.\nA large structure was revealed just under topsoil. Its southern end continues down the slope and its western end was cut by later activity. This feature is composed of an outer 'lining' of very large, roughly worked stones in its northeastern corner and northern wall, which enclosed layers of small-medium roughly rounded stones.\nAdjoining the eastern face of the stones is a rampart, partly capped by stones and composed of layers of chalky white material and dark brown soil, of which only the top has so far been excavated. The stone structure and rampart are part of a fortification placed on the southern end of the site, overlooking the Huleh Valley and the main north\u2013south road that passed alongside it on the west.\nThe exact date of the tower and rampart cannot yet be determined, as no floors associated with them have been revealed to date. Against the northern face of the fortification are elements dating to the Late Bronze Age I-II, so that it the fortification should most likely be dated to the Middle Bronze II, though a more precise chronology cannot be fixed yet.\nArea O.\nOne, and possibly two strata, dated to the Middle Bronze IIB, were exposed underneath an eroded Late Bronze Age phase below topsoil.\nThe Middle Bronze Age remains consist a building with four consecutive rooms revealed to date, with entrances in two of them, showing that the rooms were part of one building that continues to the north. Traces of a violent end to this occupation were identified. The pottery can be dated to Middle Bronze IIB and included storage jars (some with baby burials) and pithoi. In the northeastern corner of the area, the skeleton of a large male was found lying on its stomach and partly covered by a pithos.\nThe lowest phase exposed consists of the top of a layer of stones on the western edge of the mound that might be part of an Early Bronze wall, judging by the pottery collected nearby.\nArea B.\nUnderneath remains dating to Iron Age I and IIA, a large rampart composed mainly of diagonal gravelly layers was revealed. An MBIIC grave that contained a Hyksos scarab was cut into this rampart and thus, it is tentatively dated to MBIIB. This rampart shows that the upper mound in the north was occupied and fortified during the Middle Bronze Age IIB, although the nature and direction of the rampart here is different from that found in the lower mound in the south (Areas F and possibly, K).\nLate Bronze Age.\nRemains of the Late Bronze Age were revealed in Areas F, O and A.\nArea F.\nThree architectural strata, debris layers, and floors from the Late Bronze Age were revealed, abutting the northern face of the MBII fortification. The incorporation of the fortification as part of the LB buildings indicates that it was still in use during this period. The earliest LB stratum, built on top of what seems to be the foundation of the tower, includes two nicely built north\u2013south walls; an earthen layer (floor?) with a well-built oven was found to the west of these walls; the pottery points to an LB I date. The third and latest LB stratum contained several walls (cut by Iron Age I silos and pits). On its earthen floor was a concentration of pottery and a small jug (a local imitation of a Cypriot bilbil) that contained a silver hoard. The 12 pieces found inside included earrings, an ingot, and hacksilver.\nThe latest LB layer in Area F can be dated to LBIIB (13th century BCE) and the remains exposed so far indicate that it did not end in a destruction, but was peacefully abandoned. These remains were later built over by an Iron I building and cut by Iron I silos and pits. \nArea O.\nRemains uncovered just below topsoil in Area O are attributed to the Late Bronze Age, since they rested on top of a building attributed to MBIIB and on the basis of the small amount of pottery found associated with them.\nArea A.\nThe lowest level reached in Area A included several large walls, built of stone and brick, with associated Late Bronze pottery. The Iron I walls were built directly over them, with no trace of destruction of the LB elements.\nIron Age I.\nRemains of Iron Age I have been revealed mainly in Area A on the eastern edge of the saddle between the lower and upper mounds, where five strata belonging to this period have been excavated, as well as in Area F. In both areas, the pottery included many collared-rim jars, wavy band pithoi, small hemispherical bowls, a variety of vertical cooking pot rims, pyxides, painted carinated kraters, and pear-shaped jugs.\nArea F.\nRemains of the Iron Age I were found just above the latest Late Bronze Age layer (dated to the 13th century BCE, LBIIB). These remains included a building with several rooms, as well numerous pits and silos. Some of these were cut into the LB walls, as well as into the top of the MBII fortification, indicating that the latter went out of use in this period. The pits contained pottery, a spindle whorl and an iron blade. One of these pits, cut deep against the wall of the MBII tower, contained a concentration of discarded cultic vessels. These remains were exposed just below topsoil. Aside from a large pit dug in the Persian period here, no later occupation was identified following the Iron Age I here. \nArea A.\nFour strata are attributed to Iron Age I in Area A. This is one of the densest stratigraphic sequences attributed to this period in this region. Above the uppermost Iron I stratum were several flimsy modern agricultural terrace walls, but no ancient remains later than the end of Iron I (late 11th/early 10th centuries BCE).\nThe earliest stratum revealed to date appears in a few probes and contains several well-built stone walls and related debris layers with stone collapse and much pottery. The stratum above this has a structure apparently of a cultic nature, with various installations, such as a pit with animal bones, massebot (standing stones), a small bamah (altar). This occupation was violently destroyed, leaving large amounts of pottery, including collar-rim jars, pyxides, carinated jugs and kraters. On the floor of one of the rooms were several jewelry items, including an amethyst scarab set in a gold ring that belongs to the time of the Egyptian Middle Kingdom. Replacing the destroyed cultic(?) area was a layer of domestic nature, with many ovens and earthen floors. Directly above this, a very finely constructed complex was built, comprising a courtyard-like building on the east, a building complex on the west with a large open space on the south and room(s) on the north. A wide passageway runs between them. The external walls of the buildings facing the passageway are lined with stone buttresses.\nIn the western hall/courtyard, a complete pot bellows was revealed in secondary use, with traces of bronze and iron working inside; an almost complete tuyere was found nearby. It seems that there was some metallurgical activity in this area, similar to that at nearby Tel Dan in Strata VI and V (and possibly IV).\nIron Age I, II and Persian\u2013Early Hellenistic period in Area B.\nA large well-built stone building with three phases and dating to the Persian-early Hellenistic period was exposed in Area B. Below this building are architectural remains and numerous pits attributed to Iron Age I, including a floor with vessels and traces of destruction. Cutting this activity is a massive east\u2013west stone wall that was partly covered by the Persian-early Hellenistic building and thus, it is presently attributed to Iron Age IIB. No floors associated with it have yet been excavated and it seems that it might be part of a citadel at this high point of the mound. Two large stone-lined silos were also attributed to Iron IIB; they contained much Iron II pottery, including red-slipped and hand burnished sherds, as well as the head of a Phoenician-style figurine.\nThe Iron I and II architecture and pits cut into and are built on the sloping layers of the Middle Bronze II rampart described above.\nArea K fortifications.\nLocated on the eastern slope of the northern end of the lower mound, in a spot whose moderate topography suggests the possibility of a gate here, a north\u2013south stone wall was revealed, ca. 4 m wide and abutted partially on its south side by a white chalky layer. This might represent a fortification system, although no date is possible at this point.\nField reports.\nField reports and additional references are posted online.\nSignificant discoveries.\nIn 2018, archaeologists led by Robert Mullins from the Azusa Pacific University announced the discovery of a 2,800-year-old carved head sculpture of a man. The well-crafted figurine was described with long, black hair, a beard and a painted headband. He also had almond-shaped eyes and a serious expression on his face. According to archeologists, the measurements of carved in a glazed ceramic called faience were approximately 2.2 \u00d7 2 inches, and the head was once part of a small figurine, now lost that was 8 to 10 inches. The sculpture is on display at the Israel Museum in Jerusalem.\nIn 2025, a Diocletian basalt boundary stone inscribed with the names of the Tetrarchs was discovered at the site, reused in a later Mamluk-period grave covering; the inscription also preserves the names of two villages, Tirthas and Golgol, otherwise unattested in historical sources.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68531", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68531", "title": "Abel-meholah", "text": "Abel-meholah (, \"Avel Mehola\") was an ancient city frequently mentioned in the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament of Christianity). It is best known for being the birthplace and residence of the prophet Elisha. It is traditionally located near the Jordan River, south of Beit-She'an.\nMentions in the Bible.\nWhen Gideon defeated the Midianites, some of them fled \"as far as the border of Abel-meholah\" (). The text indicates that Abel-meholah was seen as a region with a defined border, west of the Jordan River and south of Beit-She'an.\nAbel-meholah is mentioned the Book of Kings under the description of King Solomon's administration. Among Solomon's twelve governors, there is one Baana who is put in charge of several districts including the area \"from Beth-She'an to Abel-meholah\" ().\nLater in the Book of Kings, Elijah, who had fled fearing Queen Jezebel's wrath, is ordered by God at Mount Horeb to go back along the Jordan valley and \"anoint Elisha son of Shaphat from Abel-meholah\" to succeed him as prophet ().\nAdriel the Meholathite, the son-in-law of King Saul, was probably named after Abel-meholah (, ).\nLocation.\nThe site of Abel-meholah has not yet been identified with certainty. Jerome and Eusebius refer to it as both a town and an area in the Jordan Valley, about ten Roman miles south of Bethshean. Epiphanius of Salamis, mentioning the village, writes that in his day it was called Beth-meholah.\nIn the late 19th century, explorers were trying to identify the exact mound. Conder stated with some confidence that the site \"is now called 'Ain Helweh\". Noth and Ottosson identified Abel-meholah with Tell Abu el-Kharaz, east of the Jordan River.\nModern scholars generally agree that it has to be found in that area and west of the Jordan River, probably at the spot where Wadi al-Malih, a stream which might preserve the ancient name Meholah, merges into the Jordan. Two tells in that general area, Tell Abu Sifri and Tell Abu Sus, are suitable candidates with the latter being more likely. Tell Abu Sifri is situated at the confluence of Wadi al-Helweh and Wadi al-Malih, while Tell Abu Sus is closer to the Jordan. Neither of the two have yet been excavated.\nTwo Israeli settlements in the area, Mehola and nearby Shadmot Mehola, are named after the biblical city.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68532", "revid": "1260768690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68532", "title": "Abel-mizraim", "text": "Place mentioned in the Hebrew Bible\nAbel-mizraim (, \"\u2019\u0100\u1e07\u00eal-Mitsrayim,\"; the \"meadow of Egypt\", or \"mourning of Egypt\") is a place \"beyond,\" or east, of the Jordan River, at the \"threshing-floor of Atad(\u05d2\u05b9\u05bc\u05e8\u05b6\u05df \u05d4\u05b8\u05d0\u05b8\u05d8\u05b8\u05d3).\" Here Joseph and his 11 brothers (representing the future 12 tribes of Israel) and the Egyptians mourned seven days for Jacob (Genesis ). Its exact site is unknown.\nThe name Abel-mizraim is only mentioned once in the Hebrew Bible.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68533", "revid": "23407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68533", "title": "Abel-shittim", "text": ""}
{"id": "68534", "revid": "6417401", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68534", "title": "Ebez", "text": "Ebez ( meaning \"tin\", or \"white\") also rendered Abez, was a town in the allotment of the tribe of Issachar, at the north of the Jezreel Valley, or plain of Esdraelon. F. R. and C. R. Conder (1879), believed that it was probably the ruins of el-Beida, but William Robertson Smith (1899) expressed doubt about this identification. According to the 1915 \"International Standard Bible Encyclopedia\" (1915), the location is not known. It is mentioned only in , where various manuscripts of the Septuagint render it as \"Rebes\" (), \"Aeme\", or \"Aemis\". It is mentioned on the fa\u00e7ade of the Mortuary Temple of Ramesses III at Medinet Habu as Apijaa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68535", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68535", "title": "Abi-Albon", "text": ""}
{"id": "68537", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68537", "title": "Abiasaph", "text": ""}
{"id": "68538", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68538", "title": "Aviv", "text": "Hebrew word meaning \"spring (the season) \"\nAviv () means \"spring (season)\" in Hebrew. Aviv is the first month of the year in the Pentateuch, and is later called Nisan in the book of Esther and in subsequent post-exilic history up to the present day. These names are sometimes used interchangeably, although Aviv refers to the three-month season, and Nisan is called the \"first month of Aviv.\" Aviv is also used as a given name, surname, and place name, as in Tel Aviv. \nAs a name.\nAviv is a Hebrew male and female name. The feminine version of the name is Aviva. Aviv is also an old and uncommon Russian Christian male given name \"\" (\"Aviv\"), that possibly borrowed from Biblical Hebrew, where it derived from the word \"ab\u012bb\", meaning \"an ear\" or \"a time of year where grains come into ear\", also known as \"Aviv\" (or Nisan\u2014the first month of the Hebrew calendar). The diminutives of \"Aviv\" in Russian are Aviva () and Viva (). The patronymics derived from \"Aviv\" are \"\" (\"Avivovich\"; masculine) and \"\" (\"Avivovna\"; feminine).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68539", "revid": "4307181", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68539", "title": "Joseph Colaco", "text": "American structural engineer\nDr. Joseph Philip Colaco is an Indian structural engineer and author. Dr. Colaco, known as Joe, is noted for his contributions to the supertall skyscrapers in the United States and in Middle East. He received his PhD. in civil structural engineering from the University of Illinois in 1965.\nIn 1965, employed by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, he began working in Chicago, Illinois. In 1969 he joined Ellisor Engineers Inc., Houston, Texas. Dr. Colaco established his own company, CBM Engineers Inc. in 1975 and has been serving as the President of the company.\nDr. Colaco's design innovations improved the construction of high-rise buildings, enabling them to withstand enormous forces generated on these super structures. These new designs opened an economic door for contractors, engineers, architects, and investors, providing vast amounts of real estate space on minimal plots of land.\nDr. Colaco has three sons and seven grandchildren. \nHe is noted for his contributions to the designs for some of the multi-billion dollar projects in the United States, Middle East and India including Chicago's 100-story John Hancock Center, 75-story JPMorgan Chase Tower in Houston, 160-story Burj Khalifa Tower in Dubai (present tallest tower in the world) and The Imperial Twin Towers, Tardeo, Mumbai, India. He has also been consulted on the design of a bonfire at Texas A &amp; M University.\nMembership.\nNational Academy of Engineering, American Concrete Institute, American Society of Civil Engineers, American Institute of Steel Construction.\nAwards.\nHe received the Distinguished Alumni Award in 2002 from the College of Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.\nRegistrations.\nHe is a registered professional engineer in Illinois, Georgia, Texas, Missouri, Colorado, California (Civil) California (Structural Authority), Florida, Michigan, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia, North Carolina, Kentucky, Minnesota, Washington, D.C., United Kingdom and Singapore, Tennessee.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68540", "revid": "162756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68540", "title": "Abiezer", "text": "Abiezer or Abieezer or Abi-ezer is the name of three Biblical characters. The name means \"father of help\" i.e., helpful. The characters are:\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68542", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68542", "title": "Abihail", "text": "Abihail may refer to one of five different people mentioned in the Bible:\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "68543", "revid": "49836368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68543", "title": "Nadab and Abihu", "text": "Sons of Aaron\nIn the biblical books of Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers, Nadab (Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0, \"generous\") and Avihu (Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0, \"my father [is] he\") were the two oldest sons of Aaron. According to Leviticus 10, they offered a sacrifice with \"foreign fire\" before Yahweh, disobeying his instructions, and were immediately consumed by fire.\nMoses instructed Aaron and his family not to mourn, although the people at large were permitted.\nBackground.\nNadab and Abihu were the first two sons of Aaron by his marriage to Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab from the tribe of Judah. They had four sons in total; the younger two sons were Eleazar and Ithamar. During the Exodus journey, after the Israelites affirmed their covenant with Yahweh in Avihu and Nadav accompanied Moses, Aaron, and seventy elders up Biblical Mount Sinai. There they saw Yahweh with great clarity, walking on a pavement of sapphire stone, and shared a meal in God's presence, without being harmed.\nAaron and his four sons were the first Levites appointed as God established the priestly system. The Levites as a tribe were later ordained for the priestly service after answering a call to take Yahweh's side after the idolatry centered on the golden calf. After the death of Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar took their places as priests, because neither Nadab nor Abihu had any sons.\nViolation of God's law and punishment.\nIn Exodus 30 and Leviticus, God outlines a proper sacrifice to him. Aaron, the chief priest, was to present all offerings representing himself and the people. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then Moses said to Aaron: \u201cCome forward to the altar and sacrifice your sin offering and your burnt offering, making expiation for yourself and for the people; and sacrifice the people\u2019s offering and make expiation for them, as \u05d9\u05d4\u05d5\u05d4 has commanded.\u201d\u2014\u200a God would send his fire to consume the sacrifice as a sign of his presence.\nWhen the fire from God came and consumed the sacrifice, it was perceived as a token of God\u2019s glory and favor. And this sacred fire, which Yahweh had kindled, was to be used to burn the incense. But Nadab and Abihu, when they took their censers to burn fragrant incense, they used a different fire, a strange fire, not the fire which Yahweh kindled and commanded to be used for this purpose; a fire came from heaven and devoured them in front of the congregation.\nThe Jewish Study Bible notes that when Nadav and Avihu lit the offering in the censers, their fire was profane. They prepared an incense offering on kindling, not incense on the altar. This was seen as foreign or unholy fire ().\nThe exegesis of Adam Clarke (d. 1836) notes that anyone who altered the sacrificial system assumed a prerogative belonging to God alone.\nBurial and mourning.\nBurial.\nAfter the death of Nadab and Abihu, Moses dictated what was to be done with their bodies. He told Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel, Aaron's, his own and their sister Miriam's uncle, to carry the bodies away from the sanctuary to a place outside of the camp. He specified for Mishael and Elzaphan to be careful to only touch Nadab and Abihu's tunics, and not their bodies. The first concerns in burial were to prevent what is holy from being defiled and the service of God from being disrupted. The corpses had to be removed immediately, because to allow the uncleanliness of the bodies to remain in the sanctuary could invoke God's wrath again. The bodies were lifted up \"by their tunics\" to avoid direct physical contact. This did not prevent the carriers from becoming ritually unclean, but lessened the time and procedures needed to restore them to ritual purity.\nMourning.\nAaron and the other surviving priests were commanded not to mourn, participate in mourning rituals, or have contact with the dead. This was applicable not only in this case; but it was modified in an ongoing command. While priests could mourn, they could not have contact with the dead\u2014even a dead spouse, parent or child\u2014and they could not participate in public mourning rituals. As the representatives of the people, priests were to avoid anything that might disqualify them for God's service. They were to remain ready and able to act in God's service whenever the community needed them.\nThe command not to mourn also applied because the crime of Nadab and Abihu was so provoking to God and fully merited the punishment which God had inflicted. To mourn in this case could be seen by the people as accusing God of undue severity. Both the people and the priests needed to show submission to a righteous judgement. If the anointed priests were to sin in this manner, the blame would fall not only upon them but also upon the people. In addition, all Jews are prohibited from mourning on the Sabbath and during festivals of the Lord. These are days for celebration, no sorrow is permitted to impinge upon the joy of the days.\nHowever, the people in the community as a whole were allowed to mourn and display grief. The death of Nadab and Abihu was tragic yet deserved, and the people were to first recognize that it was deserved and then mourn their death.\nIn Judaism.\nThe sin of Nadab and Abihu was a serious violation of the duties reserved for their father, the high priest. However, their offense was not limited to just overstepping boundaries; it involved multiple transgressions. First, without authorization, they took it upon themselves to perform the incense service, the most sacred and important priestly responsibilities. Second, they collaborated in a task that only the high priest was allowed to carry out. Lastly, they assumed the responsibility of lighting the fire offering themselves. In doing so, they \"offered foreign fire before the Lord,\" demonstrating a presumptuous and unauthorized intrusion into a sacred role not rightfully theirs. In these actions, they showed carelessness, irreverence, and a want of faith\u2014especially grievous for those in the priestly service. A precedent of such evil tendency was dangerous, and it was imperatively necessary for the priests and the sacred items that God should give a punishment.\nIn Christianity.\nRoman Catholicism.\nWhether Nadab and Abihu neglected to follow God's outlined sacrificial system out of presumptuousness, or out of thoughtlessness and inattention, their fault was severely punished so that all might learn to comply exactly with God's commands, and not try to change them or explain them away. The mixing of falsehood with the word of God was a serious sin. Those in power, like priests, should be especially careful in their behavior, because they are examples to those they serve.\nReformation and Post-Reformation views.\nNadab and Abihu were in a great position to become honorable and respected priests. If Nadab and Abihu's deed had been done through ignorance, they would have been told to bring a sin-offering. But instead they did it presumptuously (deliberately and arrogantly), and in contempt of God's majesty and justice. They were therefore cut off, for the wages of sin is death. The sin and punishment of these priests showed the imperfection of that priesthood from the very beginning, and that it could not shelter any from the fire of God's wrath.\nSeventh-day Adventists views.\nNadab and Abihu were not trained in their formative years, to develop habits of self-control as well as respect and obedience to authority. They saw their father, Aaron, yielding to the pressure of the multitudes and making for them a golden calf against the will of the Lord. This is a call to parents, especially Godly parents to set a good example of strict and exemplary obedience to God\u2019s laws.\nNadab and Abihu are also believed to have been intoxicated at the time of their sin. Therefore, their minds were not as clear as they should have been in preparation to the service of the Lord. This is the reason that following their transgression, the Lord instructed Aaron and his remaining children to never drink wine or strong drink. The same obligation rests upon God\u2019s children today, to ensure that they avoid anything that may alter their state of mind and diminish their service to the Lord.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68544", "revid": "44667911", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68544", "title": "Abihud", "text": "There are two biblical characters named Abihud.\nThe name may also occasionally be romanized as Abioud (Greek) or 'Abiyhuwd (Hebrew).\nMeaning.\nThe name \"Abihud\" means \"the (divine) father is glory\", according to Cheyne and Black (1899). The name \"Ehud\" is probably a shorter form of \"Abihud.\"\nDescendants.\nIn the genealogy of Jesus, Abihud's male-line descendants are depicted:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68545", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68545", "title": "Abijah of Judah", "text": "Second King of Judah in the Hebrew Bible\nAbijam (; ; ) was, according to the Hebrew Bible, the fourth king of the House of David and the second of the Kingdom of Judah. He was the son of Rehoboam and the grandson of Solomon. The Books of Chronicles refer to him as Abijah.\nIn the Talmud.\nFamily.\nAbijam is reported in the books of Kings and Chronicles as being the son of Maacah or Micaiah and father of King Asa of Judah. Some scholars believe the biblical accounts of Abijam's family to be contradictory; however, a study of Hebrew linguistics may remove any seeming contradictions. One of the alleged contradictions is that Maacah is sometimes described as the daughter of Absalom, and elsewhere the daughter of Uriel. Absalom is described as only having one daughter, Tamar. Apologists have countered by arguing that in Hebrew, \"daughter\" and \"granddaughter\" are the same word. Similarly, Maacah is initially described as Abijah's mother, but subsequently described as the mother of his son Asa. Apologists argue similarly for the ambiguity of the term \"mother\". Abijah married fourteen wives, and had 22 sons and 16 daughters. No attempted harmonization has found acceptance with scholars.\nReign.\nFollowing the death of Rehoboam, his son Abijah succeeded the throne as King of Judah. He began his three-year reign (2 Chr. 12:16; 13:1, 2) with a strenuous but unsuccessful effort to bring back the ten tribes of the northern Kingdom of Israel to their allegiance, a path which in his father had chosen not to follow.\nFollowing Abijah's ascension to the throne in the 18th year of King Jeroboam\u00a0I of Israel, he marched north to win Israel back to the Davidic kingdom. Jeroboam surrounded Abijah's army, engaging in the Battle of Mount Zemaraim. Abijah rallied his troops there and went on to capture the Israelite cities of Jeshanah, Ephron (now Taybeh, Ramallah), and Bethel.\nCommentaries.\nNon-conformist minister Alexander Maclaren considers Abijah \"a wiser and better man than his father\".\nAccording to the Deuteronomist, \"Yet, for the sake of David, YHWH his God gave him a lamp in Jerusalem, by raising up his descendant after him and by preserving Jerusalem.\" (1 Kings 15:4). The wording in the Septuagint is \"the Lord gave him a remnant\". Thus the unconditional covenant blessing of God guaranteed his promise to King David to stabilize the kingdom despite its ruler. The Chronicler also emphasizes YHWH's promise as seen by Abijah's success against every effort by Jeroboam to defeat him according to 2 Chronicles 13:18.\nGod had given the Kingdom to David and his descendants according to 1 Chronicles 17:14 by a covenant of salt, meaning \"of permanence\" (cf. ).\nRabbinic literature.\nAlthough Abijah took up God's cause against Jeroboam, the idolatrous king of Israel, he was not permitted to enjoy the fruits of his victory over the latter for any considerable time, dying as he did shortly after his campaign (Josephus, \"Ant\". viii. 11, \u00a7 3). The rabbis recount many transgressions committed by Abijah against his fellow men, drawing God's vengeance upon him more speedily than upon Jeroboam's idolatries. It is stated that he mutilated the corpses of Jeroboam's soldiers and would not permit them to be interred until they had arrived at a state of putrefaction. Nor did Abijah show himself zealous in God's cause, for when, by the conquest of Bethel (II Chronicles xiii. 19), the golden calves came into his possession, he did not destroy them as the law (Deuteronomy vii. 25) enjoined. The rabbis also point out that it was improper for Abijah to accuse the whole of Israel of idolatry and to proclaim the appointment of Jeroboam as king to have been the work of \"vain men, the children of Belial\" (II Chronicles xiii. 7) since it was the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite who prophesied that Jeroboam would be king (I Kings, xi. 37). For these reasons Abijah's reign was a short one.\nIn Christianity.\nIn Matthew's gospel, Abijah appears in the genealogy of Jesus.\nChronological discrepancies.\nAccording to , Abijah became king of Judah in the 18th year of the reign of Jeroboam, and reigned for three years.\nWilliam F. Albright has dated his reign to 915\u2013913 BCE.\nE. R. Thiele offers the dates 914/913 \u2013 911/910 BCE. As explained in the Rehoboam article, Thiele's chronology for the first kings of Judah contained an internal inconsistency which later scholars corrected by dating these kings one year earlier, so that Abijah's dates are taken as 915/914 to 912/911\u00a0BCE in the present article.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68546", "revid": "20521343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68546", "title": "Abilene (ancient)", "text": "Abilene () or simply Abila () was a plain, a district in Coele-Syria, of which the chief town was Abila Lysaniou (\u1f0c\u03b2\u03b9\u03bb\u03b1 \u039b\u03c5\u03c3\u03b1\u03bd\u03af\u03bf\u03c5). The limits of this region are nowhere exactly defined, but it seems to have included the eastern slopes of the Anti-Lebanon range, and to have extended south and southeast of Damascus as far as the borders of Galilaea, Batanaea, and Trachonitis. According to Flavius Josephus, Abilene was a separate Iturean kingdom until 37 AD.\nHistory.\nAbilene, when first mentioned in history, was governed by a certain Ptolemaeus, son of Mennaeus, who was succeeded, about 40 BC, by a son named Lysanias. Lysanias was put to death in 33 BC, at the instigation of Cleopatra, and the principality passed, by a sort of purchase apparently, into the hands of one Zenodorus, from whom it was transferred (31 BC) to Herod the Great. At the death of the latter (4 BC) one portion of it was annexed to the tetrarchy of his son Philip, and the remainder bestowed upon that Lysanias who is named by Luke (Luke 3).\nImmediately after the death of Tiberius (37 AD), Caligula made over to Herod Agrippa, at that time a prisoner in Rome, the tetrarchy of Philip and the tetrarchy of Lysanias, while Claudius, upon his accession (41), not only confirmed the liberality of his predecessor towards Herod Agrippa, but added all that portion of Judaea and Samaria which had belonged to the kingdom of his grandfather Herod the Great, together (says Josephus) with Abila, which had appertained to Lysanias, and the adjoining region of Libanus. Lastly, in 53, Claudius granted to Herod Agrippa II the tetrarchy of Philip with Batanaea and Trachonitis and Abila (Joseph. \"Ant.\" xiv. 4. \u00a7 4, 7. \u00a7 4, xviii. 7. \u00a7 10, xix. 5. \u00a7 1, xx. 6. \u00a7 1, \"B. J.\" i. 13. \u00a7 1, xx. 4.)\nJosephus, at first sight, seems to contradict himself, in so far that in one passage (\"Ant.\" xviii. 7. \u00a7 10) he represents Caligula as bestowing upon Herod Agrippa the tetrarchy of Lysanias, while in another (\"Ant.\" xix. 5. \u00a7 1) he states that Abila Lysaniou was added by Claudius to the former dominions of Agrippa, but, in reality, these expressions must be explained as referring to the division of Abilene which took place on the death of Herod the Great. Abila is mentioned among the places captured by Placidus, one of Vespasian's generals, in 69 or 70 (Joseph. \"B. J.\" iv. 7. \u00a7 5), and from that time forward, it was permanently annexed to the province of Syria.\nBiblical reference.\nIn chapter 3 of the Gospel of Luke, the timeframe when John the Baptist began to preach his baptism of repentance in the wilderness is indicated by noting which rulers were ruling in certain areas:\n1 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius C\u00e6sar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Jud\u00e6a, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Itur\u00e6a and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene,\n2 Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests, the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68547", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68547", "title": "Abinadab", "text": ""}
{"id": "68548", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68548", "title": "Abiram", "text": "Abiram, also spelled Abiron ( \"my father is exalted\"), is the name of two people in the Old Testament.\nThe name \"Abram\" is thought to be the same name, etymologically; the name is attested in a 24th-century Babylonian form.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "68549", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68549", "title": "Abishag", "text": "Biblical figure, servant to King David\nIn the Hebrew Bible, Abishag (; ) was a beautiful young woman of Shunem chosen to be a helper and servant to King David in his old age. Among Abishag's duties was to lie next to David and pass along her body heat and vigor because \"they put covers on him, but he could not get warm\".\nBiblical narrative.\nWhen brought to David, she was a (), which indicates youth but not specifically a virgin. However, in the preceding verse (1 Kings 1:2), it specifies that they are looking for a () 'a virgin' to warm David. 1 Kings 1:4 states that David did not engage in sexual intercourse with her. Nonetheless, there are elements of Jewish exegetical tradition which maintain that David engaged in anal sex with Abishag and he was not totally impotent. It is speculated that King David engaged in a multicoital act of intercourse with his wife Bathsheba in his old age precisely to prove his continued virility.\nAfter David's death, Adonijah, David's fourth and eldest surviving son, persuaded Bathsheba, King Solomon's mother, to entreat the king to permit him to marry Abishag. Solomon suspected in this request an aspiration to the throne, since Abishag was considered David's concubine, and so ordered Adonijah's assassination in 1 Kings 2:17\u201325. In the earlier story of Absalom's rebellion, it is noted that having sexual relations with the former king's concubine is a way of proclaiming oneself to be the new king. Adonijah may have asked to marry her at the suggestion of his mother.\nSome scholars point to the possibility that Abishag is the female protagonist in the Song of Songs.\nLater Jewish midrashic and Christian traditions paid little attention to Abishag's role. Rashi refers to her as a \"me\u1e25omemet\", or \"warmer\". Modern commentaries and translators have variously described her as a \"housekeeper\", \"hot-water bottle\", \"heating pad\", \"attendant\" or \"bedfellow\", though she is twice referred to as a \"so\u1e35ene\u1e6f\" in the text of Kings. This term, when applied to a man (\"so\u1e35\u0113n\"), is often translated \"administrator\" or \"palace steward\", as in Isaiah 22:15, leading some to believe she may have had a broader role and responsibilities. Other commentaries describe her role as being a nurse to the frail King David.\nAbishag's experiences have provided inspiration for contemporary writers including Rainer Maria Rilke, Itzik Manger, Louise Gluck and Shirley Kaufman. The story is referred to allegorically at the end of the first part of the final volume (The Cross or in the original Norwegian, Korset) of Kristin Lavransdatter by Sigrid Undset. Abishag's name, although not her story, is invoked to begin Robert Frost's poem \"Provide, Provide.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68551", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68551", "title": "Urysohn's Lemma", "text": ""}
{"id": "68552", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68552", "title": "Abishua", "text": "High Priest of Israel\nAbishua ( \"\u02be\u0102\u1e07\u012b\u0161\u016ba\u02bf\", \"my father is rescue\") was an early High priest of Israel.\nAbishua is mentioned in the books 1 Chronicles (6:3-5) and Ezra (7:5) as the son of the High Priest Phinehas, son of Eleazar. As such, he is the great-grandson of Aaron, the brother of Moses and first High Priest. It is likely that Abishua was a contemporary of the Israelite judge Ehud and the Moabite king Eglon.\nAccording to Josephus and other extrabiblical sources, he succeeded his father as High Priest (Antiquities 5.11.5; 8.1.3).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68554", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68554", "title": "Ablution in Christianity", "text": "Prescribed washing\nIn Christianity, ablution is a prescribed washing of part or all of the body or possessions, such as clothing or ceremonial objects, with the intent of purification or dedication. In Christianity, both baptism and footwashing are forms of ablution. Prior to praying the canonical hours at seven fixed prayer times, Oriental Orthodox Christians wash their hands and face (cf. \"Agpeya\", \"Shehimo\"). In liturgical churches, ablution can refer to purifying fingers or vessels related to the Eucharist. In the New Testament, washing also occurs in reference to rites of Judaism part of the action of a healing by Jesus, the preparation of a body for burial, the washing of nets by fishermen, a person's personal washing of the face to appear in public, the cleansing of an injured person's wounds, Pontius Pilate's washing of his hands as a symbolic claim of innocence and foot washing, which is a rite within the Christian Churches. According to the Gospel of Matthew, Pontius Pilate declared himself innocent of the blood of Jesus by washing his hands. This act of Pilate may not, however, have been borrowed from the custom of the Jews. The same practice was common among the Greeks and Romans.\nAccording to Christian tradition, the Pharisees carried the practice of ablution to great excess. The Gospel of Mark refers to their ceremonial ablutions: \"For the Pharisees...wash their hands 'oft'\" or, more accurately, \"with the fist\" (R.V., \"diligently\"); or, as Theophylact of Bulgaria explains it, \"up to the elbow\", referring to the actual word used in the Greek New Testament, \u03c0\u03c5\u03b3\u03bc\u03ae \"pygm\u0113\", which refers to the arm from the elbow to the tips of the fingers. In the Book of Acts, Paul and other men performed ablution before entering the Temple in Jerusalem: \"Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them entered into the temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of them.\"\nIn the Old Testament, ablution was considered a prerequisite to approaching God, whether by means of sacrifice, prayer, or entering a holy place. Around the time of Tertullian, an early Church Father, it was customary for Christians to wash their hands (\"manulavium\"), head (\"capitilavium\") and feet (\"pedilavium\") before prayer, as well as before receiving Holy Communion. The rite of footwashing employed a basin of water and linen towels, done in the imitation of Christ (as recorded by the early Christian apologist Tertullian). Churches from the time of Constantine the Great were thus built with an exonarthex that included a cantharus where Christians would wash their hands, face and feet before entering the worship space. The practice of ablutions before prayer and worship in Christianity symbolizes \"separation from sins of the spirit and surrender to the Lord.\"\nThe Bible has many rituals of purification relating to menstruation, childbirth, sexual relations, nocturnal emission, unusual bodily fluids, skin disease, death, and animal sacrifices. The Biblical rituals of purification ranging in areas from the mundane private rituals of personal hygiene and toilet etiquette to the complex public rituals of social etiquette. John Chrysostom, a prominent Church Father of Christianity revered in the Orthodox, Nestorian, Catholic, Lutheran and Anglican traditions, taught that people should wash their hands before picking up a copy of the Bible (he enjoined women to wear a headcovering if they were not already veiled at home prior to touching the Bible). This is to show respect for the Bible and in the Middle East and in the Indian subcontinent, Christians place their copies of Scripture in a rehal to have it rest in an elevated position. The Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church prescribes several kinds of hand washing for example after leaving the latrine, lavatory or bathhouse, or before prayer, or after eating a meal. The women in the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church are prohibited from entering the church temple during menses; and the men do not enter a church the day after they have had intercourse with their wives. \nChristianity has always placed a strong emphasis on hygiene. The early Church denounced the mixed bathing prevalent in Roman pools, as well as the pagan custom of women naked bathing in front of men; as such the Didascalia Apostolorum, an early Christian manual, enjoined believing men and women to use baths that were separated by gender, which contributed to hygiene and good health according to the Church Father Clement of Alexandria. The Church also built public bathing facilities that were separate for both sexes near monasteries and pilgrimage sites; also, the popes situated baths within church basilicas and monasteries since the early Middle Ages. Pope Gregory the Great urged his followers on value of bathing as a bodily need. Contrary to popular belief bathing and sanitation were not lost in Europe with the collapse of the Roman Empire. Soapmaking first became an established trade during the so-called \"Dark Ages\". The Romans used scented oils (mostly from Egypt), among other alternatives. By the mid-19th century, the English urbanised middle classes had formed an ideology of cleanliness that ranked alongside typical Victorian concepts, such as Christianity, respectability and social progress. The Salvation Army has adopted movement of the deployment of the personal hygiene, and by providing personal hygiene products.\nAblution in the Bible.\nThe Bible has many rituals of purification relating to menstruation, childbirth, sexual relations, nocturnal emission, unusual bodily fluids, skin disease, death, and animal sacrifices. In the Old Testament, ablution was considered a prerequisite to approaching God, whether by means of sacrifice, prayer, or entering a holy place.\nThe Bible includes various regulations about bathing:\nAnd whoever he that hath issue (a \"zav\", ejaculant with an unusual discharge) touches without having rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.()\nA subsequent seven clean days are then required, culminating in a ritual and temple offering before the \"zav\" is clean of his malady:\nNow in case the one having a running discharge would become clean from his running discharge, he must then count for himself seven days for his purification, and he must wash his garments and bathe his flesh in running water; and he must be clean. And on the eighth day he should take for himself two turtledoves or two young pigeons, and he must come to the entrance of the tent of meeting and give them to the priest.()\nAnd also references to hand-washing:\nI will wash my hands in innocence; so will I compass Thine altar, O LORD ()\nThe Mikveh in the Bible is a bath used for the purpose of ritual immersion. The word is employed in its broader sense but generally means a collection of water. Several biblical regulations specify that full immersion in water is required to regain ritual purity after ritually impure incidents have occurred. A person was required to be ritually pure in order to enter the Temple. In this context, \"purity\" and \"impurity\" are imperfect translations of the Hebrew \"tahara\" and \"tumah\", respectively, in that the negative connotation of the word impurity is not intended; rather being \"impure\" is indicative of being in a state in which certain things are prohibited until one has become \"pure\" again by immersion in a mikveh.\nAfter the destruction of the Temple, the mikveh's main uses remained as follows:\nAblution in the Christian traditions.\nTraditionally, Christianity adhered to the biblical regulation requiring the purification of women after childbirth; this practice, was adapted into a special ritual known as the churching of women, for which there exists liturgy in the Church of England's Book of Common Prayer, but its use is now rare in Western Christianity. The churching of women is still performed in a number of Eastern Christian churches (Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Eastern Catholic churches).\nOriental Orthodox Churches such as the Coptic Orthodox, Ethiopian Orthodox, Eritrean Orthodox, places a heavier emphasis on Old Testament teachings, and its followers adhere to certain practices such as observing days of ritual purification. Before praying, they wash their hands and face in order to be clean before and present their best to God. The Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church prescribes several kinds of hand washing for example after leaving the latrine, lavatory or bathhouse, or before prayer, or after eating a meal. The women in the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church are prohibited from entering the church temple during menses; and the men do not enter a church the day after they have had intercourse with their wives.\nRoman Catholics, Eastern Orthodox, Lutherans and High church Anglicans are also traditionally required to regularly attend confession, as a form of ritual purification from sin, especially as preparation before receiving the Eucharist. For Catholics, this is required at least once a year and required for those who are guilty of unconfessed mortal sins.\nIn Reformed tradition, ritual purity is achieved through the Confession of Sins, and Assurance of Forgiveness, and Sanctification. Through the power of the Holy Spirit, believers offer their whole being and labor as a 'living sacrifice'; and cleanliness becomes a way of life (See Romans 12:1, and John 13:5\u201310 (the Washing of the Feet).\nIn Anabaptist Christianity (inclusive of Mennonites, Amish, Hutterites, Bruderhof, Schwarzenau Brethren, River Brethren and Apostolic Christians), footwashing is regularly practiced as an ordinance, in obedience to Jesus's command in .\nWashing before Christian prayer and worship.\nThe early Church practiced footwashing, in addition to the Holy Kiss, prior to reception of the Eucharist. The early Christian apologist Tertullian referenced a basin \"of water for the saints' feet\", and a \"linen towel\", used during their \"imitation of the feetwashing performed by Christ.\" The early Church Father Clement of Alexandria linked the new sandals given by to Prodigal Son with feetwashing, describing \"non-perishable shoes that are only fit to be worn by those who have had their feet washed by Jesus, the Teacher and Lord.\" The early Church thus saw footwashing to be connected to repentance, involving a spiritual cleansing by Jesus.\nA cantharus is a fountain used by Christians for ablution before entering a church. These ablutions involve the washing of the hands, head, and feet. The cantharus is traditionally located in the exonarthex of the church. The water emitted by a cantharus is to be running water. The practice of ablutions before prayer and worship in Christianity symbolizes \"separation from sins of the spirit and surrender to the Lord.\" Eusebius recorded this practice of canthari located in the courtyards of churches, for the faithful to wash themselves (especially the hands and feet) before entering a Christian house of worship. The practice has its origins Jewish practice of performing ablutions before entering into the presence of God (cf. ). Though canthari are not as prevalent anymore in Western Christianity, they are found in Eastern Christian and Oriental Christian churches.\nHistory.\nChristianity has always placed a strong emphasis on hygiene, and water plays a role in the Christian rituals. The early Christian Church denounced the practice of mixed bathing in Roman pools, as well as the pagan custom of women naked bathing in front of men; as such the Didascalia Apostolorum, an early Christian manual, enjoined believing men and women to go to bathing facilities separated by gender, which contributed to hygiene and good health according to the Church Fathers, including Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian. The Church also built public bathing facilities that were separate for both sexes near monasteries and pilgrimage sites; also, the popes situated baths within church basilicas and monasteries since the early Middle Ages. Pope Gregory the Great urged his followers on value of bathing as a bodily need.\nGreat bathhouses were built in Byzantine centers such as Constantinople and Antioch, and the popes allocated to the Romans bathing through \"diaconia\", or private Lateran baths, or even a myriad of monastic bath houses functioning in eighth and ninth centuries. Popes maintained their baths in their residences which described by scholar Paolo Squatriti as \" luxurious baths\", and bath houses including hot baths incorporated into Christian Church buildings or those of monasteries, which known as \"charity baths\" because they served both the clerics and needy poor people. Public bathing were common in medieval Christendom larger towns and cities such as Paris, Regensburg and Naples. Catholic religious orders of the Augustinians' and Benedictines' rules contained ritual purification, and inspired by Benedict of Nursia encouragement for the practice of therapeutic bathing; Benedictine monks played a role in the development and promotion of spas. Protestant Christianity also played a prominent role in the development of the British spas.\nIn circa 1454 pope Nicholas V commissioned building a bath palace in Viterbo, and the construction at the \"Bagno del Papa\" was continued on through the reigns of several popes after Nicholas V. The Vatican accounts mention of payments \"for building done at the bath palace of Viterbo\" during the reigns of Calixtus III, Paul II, and Sixtus IV. There also is evidence Pope Pius II was responsible for the addition of a western wing to the building.\nContrary to popular belief bathing and sanitation were not lost in Europe with the collapse of the Roman Empire, as the spread of the Black Death made \"Medieval people look for a link between health and hygiene\". Soapmaking first became an established trade during the so-called \"Dark Ages\". The Romans used scented oils (mostly from Egypt), among other alternatives. By the 15th century, the manufacture of soap in the Christendom had become virtually industrialized, with sources in Antwerp, Castile, Marseille, Naples and Venice. \nBy the mid-19th century, the English urbanised middle classes had formed an ideology of cleanliness that ranked alongside typical Victorian concepts, such as Christianity, respectability and social progress. The Salvation Army has adopted movement of the deployment of the personal hygiene, and by providing personal hygiene products, such as a toothbrush, toothpaste, and soap. A major contribution of the Christian missionaries in Africa, China, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Korea, and other places was better health care of the people through hygiene and introducing and distributing the soaps, and \"cleanliness and hygiene became an important marker of being identified as a Christian\".\nBelieving that on Epiphany day water becomes holy and is imbued with special powers, Eastern Orthodox cut holes in the ice of lakes and rivers, often in the shape of the cross, to bathe in the freezing water. Christianity strongly affected the development of holy wells in Europe and the Middle East, and its water are known for its healing properties.\nThe use of water in many Christian countries is due in part to the Biblical toilet etiquette which encourages washing after all instances of defecation. The bidet is common in predominantly Catholic countries where water is considered essential for anal cleansing, and in some traditionally Orthodox and Lutheran countries such as Greece and Finland respectively, where bidet showers are common.\nEucharistic ablutions.\nWestern Christian.\nIn the Roman Rite, the celebrant washes his hands before vesting for Mass, but with another prayer (\"Da, Domine, virtutem\"). This is said privately in the vestry. He will then wash his hands again after the offertory\u2014this is the ceremony that is known as the \"lavabo\" proper. This washing appears in both the Tridentine Mass, and in the Mass of Paul VI. The reason for this \"second\" washing of hands probably developed from the long ceremony of receiving the loaves and vessels of wine from the people at the offertory that was used in Rome. In the Gallican Rite the offerings were prepared before Mass began, as in the Eastern Liturgy of Preparation, so there was no long version of the offertory nor place for a lavabo before the Eucharistic Prayer. In the Middle Ages, the Roman Rite actually had two washing of hands, one before and one after the offertory. This first one has since disappeared, and the one which remains is the second.\nIn the Tridentine Mass, as well as in Lutheran Masses of Evangelical Catholic churchmanship and in Anglican Masses of Anglo-Catholic churchmanship, the term \"ablutions\" refers to when the priest rinses his hands first in wine and then in water following the Communion. It is to be distinguished from the lavabo, when the celebrant washes his hands with water only, reciting the words of (KJV\u2014in the Septuagint it is Psalm 25) at the offertory.\nIn the common Mass of Paul VI, the Lutheran Divine Service and the Anglican Eucharist the priest does not normally use wine to wash his hands at the ablution, although this is permitted, but only water.\nEastern and Oriental Christian.\nPrior to praying the canonical hours at seven fixed prayer times, Oriental Orthodox Christians wash their hands, face and feet (cf. \"Agpeya\", \"Shehimo\").\nIn the Eastern Orthodox and Greek-Catholic Churches, the term \"ablution\" refers to consuming the remainder of the Gifts (the Body and Blood of Christ) at the end of the Divine Liturgy. Holy Communion is always received in both Species (the Body and the Blood of Christ) not only by the clergy but also by the faithful. This is accomplished by placing the particles of the consecrated Lamb (bread) into the chalice, and distributing Communion to the faithful with a spoon. The portion which remains in the chalice afterwards must be consumed.\nThe ablutions will normally be performed by the deacon, but if no deacon is serving the priest will do them. After the Litany of Thanksgiving that follows Communion, the deacon will come into the sanctuary and kneel, placing his forehead on the Holy Table (Altar) and the priest will bless him to consume the Gifts, which is done at the Prothesis (Table of Oblation). First, using the liturgical spoon he will consume all of the Body and Blood of Christ which remain in the chalice. Then he will pour hot water on the diskos (paten), which is then poured into the chalice and consumed (this is to consume any particles that may remain on the diskos). Next the liturgical spear, spoon and chalice will be rinsed first with wine and then with hot water, which are then consumed. All of the sacred vessels are then wiped dry with a towel, wrapped in their cloth coverings and put away.\nBecause the ablutions necessarily require consuming the Holy Mysteries (the Body and Blood of Christ), a priest or deacon may only perform them after having fully prepared himself through fasting and the lengthy Preparation for Holy Communion.\nWhen a priest must take Holy Communion to the sick or homebound, if he has not prepared himself to receive the Holy Mysteries, he may ablute the chalice by pouring water into it and asking the one to whom he brought the Sacrament (or a Baptized child who because of their youth is not obliged to prepare for Communion) to consume the ablution.\nIf the Reserved Mysteries should become moldy, they must still be consumed in the same manner as the ablutions after Liturgy (normally, a fair amount of wine would be poured over them before consuming them, in order to soften and disinfect them). They should not be burned or buried. To prevent this, when the Mysteries are to be reserved for the sick, they should be thoroughly dried before being placed in the Tabernacle.\nBaptismal ablutions.\nIn Orthodox Christianity, there is also an ablution performed on the eighth day after Baptism. Immediately after being Baptized, every person, including an infant, is confirmed using the Mystery (Sacrament) of Chrismation. In the early church, the places where the person was anointed with Chrism were carefully bandaged, and were kept covered for eight days. During this period, the newly illumined (newly baptized person) would also wear his baptismal robe every day. At the end of the eight days, the priest would remove the bandages and baptismal garment and perform ablutions over him. While the bandaging no longer takes place, the ritual ablutions are still performed.\nThe newly illumined (newly baptized person) is brought back to the church by his Godparents for the ablutions. The priest stands him in the center of the church, in front of the Holy Doors, facing east. He loosens the belt of the baptismal robe and prays for him, that God may preserve the newly illumined in purity and illumine him by grace. He then dips a sponge in water and sprinkles him in the sign of the cross saying: \"Thou art justified. Thou art illumined. Thou art sanctified. Thou art washed: in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.\" Then, as he says the next prayer, he washes each of the places where he had been anointed with Chrism. Next he performs the Tonsure, symbolic of the life of self-sacrifice a Christian must lead. In modern practice, these ablutions are performed at the end of the baptism service, after the first reception of Holy Communion.\nWashing of feet.\nMany Christian churches practice a ceremony of the Washing of Feet, following the example of Jesus in the Gospel. Some interpret this as an ordinance which the church is obliged to practice, as with Anabaptist Christianity (inclusive of Mennonites, Amish, Hutterites, Bruderhof, Schwarzenau Brethren, River Brethren and Apostolic Christians).\nSt. Benedict of Nursia lays out in his Rule that the https:// to the monastery should be washed, and also that those who are assigned to serve in the kitchen that week should https:// of all the brethren. At one time, most of the European monarchs also performed the Washing of Feet in their royal courts on Maundy Thursday, a practice continued by the Austro-Hungarian Emperor and the King of Spain up to the beginning of the 20th century (see Royal Maundy).\nFoot washing is also observed by numerous traditions, including Anabaptists, Seventh-day Adventist, Pentecostal, and Radical Pietistic groups, and several types of Southern Baptists. \nFoot washing rites are also practiced by many Roman Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican and Methodist churches, whereby foot washing is most often experienced in connection with Maundy Thursday services and, sometimes, at ordination services where the Bishop may wash the feet of those who are to be ordained. Often in these services, the bishop will wash the feet of the clergy, and in monasteries the Abbot will wash the feet of the brethren. Though history shows that foot washing has at times been practiced in connection with baptism, and at times as a separate occasion, by far its most common practice has been in connection with the Lord's supper service. The Moravian Church practiced Foot Washing until 1818. There has been some revival of the practice as other liturgical churches have also rediscovered the practice.\nAblutions for the dead.\nWhen an Orthodox Christian dies, their body is washed and dressed before burial. Although this custom is not considered to impose any sort of ritual purity, it is an important aspect of charitable care for the departed. Ideally, this should not be deferred to an undertaker, but should be performed by family members or friends of the deceased.\nWhen an Orthodox priest or bishop dies, these ablutions and vesting are performed by the clergy, saying the same prayers for each vestment that are said when the departed bishop or priest vested for the Divine Liturgy. After the body of a Bishop is washed and vested, he is seated in a chair and the Dikirion and Trikirion are placed in his hands for the final time.\nWhen an Orthodox monk dies, his body is washed and clothed in his monastic habit by brethren of his monastery. Two significant differences are that when his mantle is placed on him, its hem is torn to form bands, with which his body is bound (like Lazarus in the tomb), and his klobuk is placed on his head backwards, so that the monastic veil covers his face (to show that he had already died to the world, even before his physical death). When an Orthodox nun dies, the sisterhood of her convent performs the same ministrations for her as are done for monks.\nIn the Roman Catholic Church, the Absoute (or \"absolution of the dead\") is a symbolic ablution of the deceased's body following the Requiem Mass. While specific prayers are said, the coffin is incensed and sprinkled with holy water. The absolution of the dead is only performed in context of the Tridentine Mass. Following the Second Vatican Council, the absolution of the dead was removed from the funeral liturgy of the Mass of Paul VI.\nWashing and anointing.\nWashing and anointing (also called the \"initiatory\") is a temple ordinance practiced by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) and Mormon fundamentalists as part of the faith's endowment ceremony. It is a purification ritual for adults, usually performed at least a year after baptism. The ordinance is performed by the authority of the Melchizedek priesthood by an officiator of the same sex as the participant.\nIn the ritual, a person is sprinkled with water to symbolically wash away the \"blood and sins of this generation\". After the washing, the person is then anointed to become a \"king and priest\" or a \"queen and priestess\" in the afterlife.\nOnce washed and anointed, the participant is dressed in the temple garment, a religious undergarment which the participant is instructed to wear throughout his or her life. (Since 2005, participants in the LDS Church version of the ritual already come clothed in this garment prior to the washing and anointing.) Finally, the participant is given a \"new name\" which he or she is instructed never to reveal except under certain conditions in the temple.\nMormons link the ritual to biblical washings and anointings. The temple garment symbolizes the skins of clothing given to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, and the \"new name\" is linked to Revelation 2:17, which states that God will give those who overcome \"a white stone with a new name written on it, known only to him who receives it\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68555", "revid": "599562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68555", "title": "Eunuch", "text": "Castrated male human\nA eunuch ( , ) is a boy or man who has been castrated. Throughout history, castration often served a specific social function. The earliest records for intentional castration to produce eunuchs are from the Sumerian city of Lagash in the 2nd millennium\u00a0BC. Over the millennia since, they have performed a wide variety of functions in many different cultures: courtiers or equivalent domestics, for espionage or clandestine operations, \"castrato\" singers, concubines or sexual partners, religious specialists, soldiers, royal guards, government officials, and guardians of women or harem servants.\nEunuchs would usually be servants or slaves who had been castrated to make them less threatening servants of a royal court where physical access to the ruler could wield great influence. Seemingly lowly domestic functions\u2014such as making the ruler's bed, bathing him, cutting his hair, carrying him in his litter, or even relaying messages\u2014could, in theory, give a eunuch \"the ruler's ear\" and impart \"de facto\" power to the formally humble but trusted servant.\nEunuchs supposedly did not generally have loyalties to the military, the aristocracy, or a family of their own (having neither offspring nor in-laws, at the very least). They were thus seen as more trustworthy and less interested in establishing a private dynasty. Because their condition usually lowered their social status, they could also be easily replaced or killed without repercussion.\nEunuchs have been documented in several ancient and medieval societies, including the Byzantine Empire, Imperial China, the Ottoman Empire, and various Middle Eastern cultures. They often held significant power and influence in these societies, particularly in royal courts and harems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\n\"Eunuch\" comes from the Ancient Greek word (), first attested in a fragment of Hipponax, the 6th century BCE comic poet and prolific inventor of compound words. The acerbic poet describes a particular lover of fine food having \"consumed his estate dining lavishly and at leisure every day on tuna and garlic-honey cheese pat\u00e9 like a Lampsacene \"\nThe earliest surviving etymology of the word is from late antiquity. The 5th century (CE) \"Etymologicon\" by Orion of Thebes offers two alternative origins for the word eunuch: first, , \"guarding the bed\", a derivation inferred from eunuchs' established role at the time as \"bedchamber attendants\" in the imperial palace, and second, , \"being good with respect to the mind\", which Orion explains based on their \"being deprived of intercourse (), the things that the ancients used to call irrational (, literally: 'mindless')\". Orion's second option reflects well-established idioms in Ancient Greek, as shown by entries for transl.\u2009grc\u00a0\u2013 transl.\u2009noos, and in Liddell and Scott's Greek-English Lexicon, while the first option is not listed as an idiom under in that standard reference work. However, the first option was cited by the late 9th century Byzantine emperor Leo VI in his New Constitution 98 banning the marriage of eunuchs, in which he noted eunuchs' reputation as trustworthy guardians of the marriage bed () and claimed that the very word eunuch attested to this kind of employment. The emperor also goes further than Orion by attributing eunuchs' lack of male\u2013female intercourse specifically to castration, which he said was performed with the intention \"that they will no longer do the things that males do, or at least to extinguish whatever has to do with desire for the female sex\". The 11th century Byzantine monk Nikon of the Black Mountain, opting instead for Orion's second alternative, stated that the word came from ( \"good\" + \"mind\"), thus meaning \"to be well-minded, well-inclined, well-disposed or favorable\", but unlike Orion he argued that this was due to the trust that certain jealous and suspicious foreign rulers placed in the loyalty of their eunuchized servants. Theophylact of Ohrid in a dialogue \"In Defence of Eunuchs\" also stated that the origin of the word was from \"eupnoeic\" and \"ekhein\", \"to have, hold\", since they were always \"well-disposed\" toward the master who \"held\" or owned them. The 12th century \"Etymologicum Magnum\" (s.v. \"eunoukhos\") essentially repeats the entry from Orion, but stands by the first option, while attributing the second option to what \"some say\". In the late 12th century, Eustathius of Thessalonica (\"Commentaries on Homer\" 1256.30, 1643.16) offered an original derivation of the word from \"eunis\" + \"okheuein\", \"deprived of mating\".\nIn translations of the Bible into modern European languages, such as the Luther Bible or the King James Bible, the word \"eunuchs\" as found in the Latin Vulgate is usually rendered as an officer, official or chamberlain, consistent with the idea that the original meaning of eunuch was bed-keeper (Orion's first option). Modern religious scholars have been disinclined to assume that the courts of Israel and Judah included castrated men, even though the original translation of the Bible into Greek used the word \"eunoukhos\"\nThe early 17th-century scholar and theologian Gerardus Vossius therefore explains that the word originally designated an office, and he affirms the view that it was derived from \"eun\u0113\" and \"ekhein\" (i.e. \"bed-keeper\"). He says the word came to be applied to castrated men in general because such men were the usual holders of that office. Still, Vossius notes the alternative etymologies offered by Eustathius (\"deprived of mating\") and others (\"having the mind in a good state\"), calling these analyses \"quite subtle\". Then, after having previously declared that eunuch designated an office (i.e., not a personal characteristic), Vossius ultimately sums up his argument in a different way, saying that the word \"originally signified continent men\" to whom the care of women was entrusted, and later came to refer to castration because \"among foreigners\" that role was performed \"by those with mutilated bodies\".\nModern etymologists have followed Orion's first option. In an influential 1925 essay on the word eunuch and related terms, Ernst Maass suggested that Eustathius's derivation \"can or must be laid to rest\", and he affirmed the derivation from \"eun\u0113\" and \"ekhein\" (\"guardian of the bed\"), without mentioning the other derivation from \"eunoos\" and \"ekhein\" (\"having a well-disposed state of mind\").\nIn Latin, the words \"eunuchus\", \"spado\" (Greek: \"spadon\"), and \"castratus\" were used to denote eunuchs.\nNon-castrated eunuchs.\nThe term \"eunuch\" has sometimes figuratively been used for a wide range of men who were seen to be physically unable to procreate. Hippocrates describes the Scythians as being afflicted with high rates of erectile dysfunction and thus \"the most eunuchoid of all nations\" (Airs Waters Places 22). In the \"Charlton T. Lewis, Charles Short, A Latin Dictionary\", the term literally used for impotent males is \"spado\" but may also be used for eunuchs\nSome men have falsified the status of their castration to gain entrance into the palace. Chinese eunuch Lao Ai, for instance, became the lover of the mother of Qin Shi Huang, who bore him two sons, before Lao Ai and his sons were executed after participating in a rebellion against Qin Shi Huang.\nAsia and Africa.\nIn Siam (modern Thailand), Indian Muslims from the Coromandel Coast served as eunuchs in the Thai palace and court. The Thai at times asked eunuchs from China to visit the court in Thailand and advise them on court ritual since they held them in high regard.\nIn Imperial China, eunuchs managed the imperial household and were involved in state affairs, often wielding significant political power.\nSir Henry Yule saw many Muslims serving as eunuchs during the Konbaung dynasty period of Burma (modern Myanmar) while on a diplomatic mission.\nChina.\nIn China, castration included removal of the penis as well as the testicles (see emasculation). Both organs were cut off with a knife at the same time.\nEunuchs existed in China from about 4,000 years ago, were imperial servants by 3,000 years ago, and were common as civil servants by the time of the Qin dynasty. From those ancient times until the Sui dynasty, castration was both a traditional punishment (one of the Five Punishments) and a means of gaining employment in the imperial service. Certain eunuchs, such as the Ming dynasty official Zheng He, gained immense power that occasionally superseded that of even the Grand Secretaries. Self-castration was a common practice, although it was not always performed completely, which led to it being made illegal.\nIt is said that the justification for the employment of eunuchs as high-ranking civil servants was that, since they were incapable of having children, they would not be tempted to seize power and start a dynasty. In many cases, eunuchs were considered more reliable than the scholar-officials. As a symbolic assignment of heavenly authority to the palace system, a constellation of stars was designated as the Emperor's, and, to the west of it, four stars were identified as his \"eunuchs.\"\nThe tension between eunuchs in the service of the emperor and virtuous Confucian officials is a familiar theme in Chinese history. In his \"History of Government\", Samuel Finer points out that reality was not always that clear-cut. There were instances of very capable eunuchs who were valuable advisers to their emperor, and the resistance of the \"virtuous\" officials often stemmed from jealousy on their part. Ray Huang argues that in reality, eunuchs represented the personal will of the Emperor, while the officials represented the alternative political will of the bureaucracy. The clash between them would thus have been a clash of ideologies or political agenda.\nThe number of eunuchs in imperial employ fell to 470 by 1912, when the practice of using them ceased. The last imperial eunuch, Sun Yaoting, died in December 1996.\nIndian subcontinent.\nEunuchs in Indian sultanates (before the Mughals).\nEunuchs were employed in imperial palaces by some Muslim rulers as servants for female royalty, as guards of the royal harem, and as sexual mates for the nobles. Some of them attained high-status positions in society. An early example of such a high-ranking eunuch was Malik Kafur. Eunuchs in imperial palaces were organized in a hierarchy, often with a senior or Chief Eunuch (Urdu: \"Khwaja Saras\"), directing junior eunuchs below him. Eunuchs were highly valued for their strength and trustworthiness, allowing them to live amongst women with fewer worries. This enabled eunuchs to serve as messengers, watchmen, attendants and guards for palaces. Often, eunuchs also doubled as part of the King's court of advisers.\nThe hijra of South Asia.\nHijra, a Hindi term traditionally translated into English as \"eunuch\", actually refers to what modern Westerners would call transvestites or transgender women (although some of them reportedly identify as belonging to a third gender). The history of this third sex is mentioned in the ancient \"Kama Sutra\", which refers to people of a \"third sex\" (\"tritiya-prakriti\"). Some of them undergo ritual castration, but the vast majority do not.\nThey usually dress in saris or shalwar kameez (traditional garbs worn by women in South Asia) and wear heavy make-up. They typically live on the margins of society and face discrimination. Hijra tend to have few options for earning a wage, with many turning to sex work and others performing ritualistic songs and dances. They are integral to several Hindu ceremonies, such as dance programs at marriage ceremonies. They may also earn a living by going uninvited to large ceremonies such as weddings, births, new shop openings and other major family events, and singing until they are paid or given gifts to go away. The ceremony is supposed to bring good luck and fertility, while the curse of an unappeased hijra is feared by many. Hijra often engage in prostitution and begging to earn money, with begging typically accompanied by singing and dancing. Some Indian provincial officials have used the assistance of hijras to collect taxes in the same fashion\u2014they knock on the doors of shopkeepers, while dancing and singing, embarrassing them into paying. Recently, hijras have started to found organizations to improve their social condition and fight discrimination, such as the Shemale Foundation Pakistan.\nKorea.\nThe eunuchs of Korea, called , were officials to the king and other royalty in traditional Korean society. The first recorded appearance of a Korean eunuch was in Goryeosa (\"History of Goryeo\"), a compilation about the Goryeo dynasty period. In 1392, with the founding of the Joseon dynasty, the \"naesi\" system was revised, and the department was renamed the \"Department of \"Naesi\"\".\nThe \"naesi\" system included two ranks, those of , who held the official title of senior second rank, and , both of which held rank as officers. A total of 140 \"naesi\" served the palace in the Joseon dynasty period. They also took the exam on Confucianism every month. The \"naesi\" system was repealed in 1894 following Gabo reform.\nDuring the Yuan dynasty of China, eunuchs became a desirable commodity for tributes.\nEunuchs were the only males outside the royal family allowed to stay inside the palace overnight. In one historical study of court records, going back to 1392, researchers surmised that the average lifespan of eunuchs appeared to have been 70.0 \u00b1 1.76 years, and that this was 14.4\u201319.1 years longer than the lifespan of non-castrated men of similar socioeconomic status. However, the quality of this evidence is lacking, and in a letter to the editor of the journal Gerontology, \u00c9ric Le Bourg notes that this single study should not be relied upon to conclude that eunuchs in fact lived longer than non-castrated men, even in this Korean case.\nVietnam.\nThe Vietnamese adopted the eunuch system and castration techniques from China. Records show that the Vietnamese performed castration in a painful procedure by removing the entire genitalia with both penis and testicles being cut off with a sharp knife or metal blade. The procedure was agonizing since the entire penis was cut off. The young man's thighs and abdomen would be tied and others would pin him down on a table. The genitals would be washed with pepper water and then cut off. A tube would be then inserted into the urethra to allow urination during healing. Many Vietnamese eunuchs were products of self castration to gain access to the palaces and power. In other cases they might be paid to become eunuchs. They served in many capacities, from supervising public works, to investigating crimes, to reading public proclamations.\nWest Asia and North Africa.\nAncient.\nThe four-thousand-year-old Egyptian Execration Texts threaten enemies in Nubia and Asia, specifically referencing \"all males, all eunuchs, all women.\"\nCastration was sometimes punitive; under Assyrian law, homosexual acts were punishable by castration.\nEunuchs were familiar figures in the Neo-Assyrian Empire ( \"the one who stands by the head of the king\", often abbreviated as ; c.\u2009850 until 622\u00a0BCE) and in the court of the Egyptian pharaohs (down to the Lagid dynasty known as Ptolemies, ending with Cleopatra VII, 30\u00a0BCE). Eunuchs sometimes were used as regents for underage heirs to the throne, as it seems to be the case for the Syro-Hittite state of Carchemish.\nPolitical eunuchism became a fully established institution among the Achaemenid Empire. Eunuchs (called , an Assyrian loanword) held powerful positions in the Achaemenid court. The eunuch Bagoas (not to be confused with Alexander's Bagoas) was the vizier of Artaxerxes III and Artaxerxes IV, and was the primary power behind the throne during their reigns until he was killed by Darius III.\nMarmon (1995) writes \"Mamluk biographies of the eunuchs often praise their appearance with adjectives such as \"jamil\" (beautiful), \"wasim\" (handsome), and \"ahsan\" (the best, most beautiful) or \"akmal\" (the most perfect).\"\nArabian Peninsula.\nThe custom of using eunuchs as servants for women inside the Islamic harems had a preceding example in the life of Muhammad himself, who used the eunuch Mabur as a servant in the house of his own slave concubine Maria al-Qibtiyya; both of them slaves from Egypt.\nEunuchs were for a long time used in relatively small numbers, exclusively inside harems, but the use of eunuchs expanded significantly when eunuchs started being used also for other offices within service and administration outside of the harem, a use which expanded gradually during the Umayyad Caliphate and had its breakthrough during the Abbasid Caliphate. During the Abbasid period, eunuchs became a permanent institution inside the Islamic harems after the model of the Abbasid harem, such as in the Fatimid harem, Safavid harem and the Qajar harem.\nFor several centuries, Muslim eunuchs were tasked with honored roles in Medina and Mecca. They are thought to have been instituted in their role there by Saladin, but perhaps earlier. Their tasks included caring for the Prophet's Tomb, maintaining borders between males and females where needed, and keeping order in the sacred spaces. They were highly respected in their time and remained there throughout the Ottoman Empire's control of the area and afterward. In the present day, it is reported that only a few remain.\nEunuchs were an active component in the slave market of the Islamic world until the early 20th-century for service in harem as well as in the corps of mostly African eunuchs, known as the Aghawat, who guarded the Prophet Muhammad's tomb in Medina and the Ka\u02bfba in Mecca.\nMost slaves trafficked to Hijaz came there via the Red Sea slave trade. Small African boys were castrated before they were trafficked to the Hijaz, where they were bought at the slave market by the Chief Agha to become eunuch novices.\nIt was noted that boys from Africa were still openly bought to become eunuch novices to serve at Medina in 1895.\nIn Medina, there was a part of town named Harat al-Aghawat (Neighborhood of the Aghas).\nThe Red Sea slave trade became gradually more suppressed during the 20th-century, and Slavery in Saudi Arabia was abolished in 1962. In 1979, the last Agha was appointed. In 1990, seventeen eunuchs remained.\nFatimid Caliphate.\nIn the Isma'ili Fatimid Caliphate (909\u20131171 CE), eunuchs played major roles in the politics of the caliphate's court within the institution of slavery in the Fatimid Caliphate. These eunuchs were normally purchased from slave auctions and typically came from a variety of Arab and non-Arab minority ethnic groups. In some cases, they were purchased from various noble families in the empire, which would then connect those families to the caliph. Generally, though, foreign slaves were preferred, described as the \"ideal servants\".\nOnce enslaved, eunuchs were often placed into positions of significant power in one of four areas: the service of the male members of the court; the service of the Fatimid harem, or female members of the court; administrative and clerical positions; and military service. For example, during the Fatimid occupation of Cairo, Egyptian eunuchs controlled military garrisons (\"shurta\") and marketplaces (\"hisba\"), two positions beneath only the city magistrate in power. However, the most influential Fatimid eunuchs were the ones in direct service to the caliph and the royal household as chamberlains, treasurers, governors, and attendants. Their direct proximity to the caliph and his household afforded them a great amount of political sway. One eunuch, Jawdhar, became \"hujja\" to Imam-Caliph al-Qa'im, a sacred role in Shia Islam entrusted with the imam's choice of successor upon his death.\nThere were several other eunuchs of high regard in Fatimid history, mainly being Abu'l-Fadi Rifq al-Khadim and Abu'l-Futuh Barjawan al-Ustadh. Rifq was an African eunuch general who served as governor of the Damascus until he led an army of 30,000 men in a campaign to expand Fatimid control northeast to the city of Aleppo, Syria. He was noted for being able to unite a diverse group of Africans, Arabs, Bedouins, Berbers, and Turks into one coherent fighting force which was able to successfully combat the Mirdasids, Bedouins, and Byzantines.\nBarjawan was a European eunuch during late Fatimid rule who gained power through his military and political savvy which brought peace between them and the Byzantine empire. Moreover, he squashed revolts in the Libya and the Levant. Given his reputation and power in the court and military he took the reins of the caliphate from his then student al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah; then ruled as the de facto Regent 997 CE. His usurpation of power from the caliph resulted in his assassination in 1000 CE on the orders of al-Hakim.\nSince imams during this period ruled over a majority non-Shi'a population, the court eunuchs served an important informal role as ambassadors of the caliph, promoting loyalty and devotion to the Shi'a sect and the imam-caliph himself. The multicultural, multilingual eunuchs were able to connect to the commoners through shared cultural ground.\nOttoman Empire.\nDuring the period of slavery in the Ottoman Empire, eunuchs were typically slaves imported from outside their domains. A fair proportion of male slaves were imported as eunuchs.\nThe Ottoman court harem\u2014within the Topkap\u0131 Palace (1465\u20131853) and later the Dolmabah\u00e7e Palace (1853\u20131909) in Istanbul\u2014was under the administration of the eunuchs. These were of two categories: black eunuchs and white eunuchs. Black eunuchs were slaves from sub-Saharan Africa via the Trans-Saharan slave trade, the Red Sea slave trade or the Indian Ocean slave trade, who served the concubines and officials in the Harem together with chamber maidens of low rank.\nThe white eunuchs were slaves from the Balkans or the Caucasus, either purchased in the slave markets or taken as boys from Christian families in the Balkans who were unable to pay the \"jizya\" tax. They served the recruits at the Palace School and were from 1582 prohibited from entering the Harem. An important figure in the Ottoman court was the Chief Black Eunuch (\"K\u0131zlar A\u011fas\u0131\" or \"Dar\u00fcssaade A\u011fas\u0131\"). In control of both the harem and a net of spies among the black eunuchs, the Chief Eunuch was involved in almost every palace intrigue and thereby could gain power over either the sultan or one of his viziers, ministers, or other court officials.\nOne of the most powerful Chief Eunuchs was Beshir Agha in the 1730s, who played a crucial role in establishing the Ottoman version of Hanafi Islam throughout the Empire by founding libraries and schools.\nAlgiers.\nIn the 16th century, an Englishman, Samson Rowlie, was captured and castrated to serve the Ottoman governor in Algiers.\nCoptic involvement.\nIn the 14th century, the Muslim Egyptian religious scholar Taj-al-Din Abu Nasr 'Abdal-Wahhab al-Subki discussed eunuchs in his book \"Kitab Mu'id al-Ni'am wa Mubid al-Niqam\" (), a title that has been translated as \"Book of the Guide to [Divine] Benefits and Averting of [Divine] Vengeance\" and also as \"Book of Tutor of Graces and Annihilator of Misfortunes\". In a chapter dedicated to eunuchs, Al-Subki made \"the clear implication that 'eunuchness' is itself an office,\" Shaun Marmon explained, adding that al-Subki had specified occupational subgroups for the \"tawashiya\" [eunuchs]: the \"zimam\" watched over women, and the \"muqaddam al-mamalik\" over adolescent boys.\nEdmund Andrews of Northwestern University, in an 1898 article called \"Oriental Eunuchs\" in \"The American Journal of Medicine\", refers to Coptic priests in \"Abou Gerh\u00e8 in Upper Egypt\" castrating slave boys.\nCoptic castration of slaves was discussed by Peter Charles Remondino, in his book \"History of Circumcision from the Earliest Times to the Present\", published in 1900. He refers to the \"Abou-Gergh\u00e8\" monastery in a place he calls \"Mount Ghebel-Eter\". He adds details not mentioned by Andrews such as the insertion of bamboo into the victim. Bamboo was used with Chinese eunuchs. Andrews states his information is derived from an earlier work, \"Les Femmes, les eunuques, et les guerriers du Soudan\", published by a French explorer, Count Raoul du Bisson, in 1868, though this detail does not appear in Du Bisson's book.\nRemondino's claims were repeated in similar form by Henry G. Spooner in 1919, in the \"American Journal of Urology and Sexology\". Spooner, an associate of William J. Robinson, referred to the monastery as \"Abou Gerbe in Upper Egypt\".\nAccording to Remondino, Spooner, and several later sources, the Coptic priests sliced the penis and testicles off Nubian or Abyssinian slave boys around the age of eight. The boys were captured from Abyssinia and other areas in Sudan like Darfur and Kordofan, then brought into Sudan and Egypt. During the operation, the Coptic clergyman chained the boys to tables, then, after slicing off their sexual organs, stuck a piece of bamboo into the urethra and submerged them in neck-high sand under the sun. The mortality rate was said to be high. Slave traders made especially large profits off eunuchs from this region.\nAncient Greece, Rome, and Byzantium.\nThe practice was also well established in other Mediterranean areas among the Greeks and Romans, although a role as court functionary does not arise until Byzantine times. The Galli or Priests of Cybele were eunuchs.\nIn the late period of the Roman Empire, after the adoption of the oriental royal court model by the Emperors Diocletian (r. 284\u2013305) and Constantine (r. 306\u2013337), emperors were surrounded by eunuchs for such functions as bathing, haircutting, dressing, and bureaucratic functions, in effect acting as a shield between the emperor and his administrators from physical contact, thus enjoying great influence in the imperial court (see Eusebius and Eutropius). Julian (r. 361\u2013363) released the eunuchs from service because he felt they were overpaid, and he subsequently realized how much they had contributed to palace operations.\nThe Roman poet Martial rails against a woman who had sex with partially castrated eunuchs (those whose testicles were removed or rendered inactive only) in the bitter epigram (VI, 67): \"Do you ask, Panychus, why your Caelia only consorts with eunuchs? Caelia wants the flowers of marriage \u2013 not the fruits.\" It is up for debate whether this passage is representative of any sort of widely practiced behavior, however.\nAt the Byzantine imperial court, there were a great number of eunuchs employed in domestic and administrative functions, actually organized as a separate hierarchy, following a parallel career of their own. Archieunuchs\u2014each in charge of a group of eunuchs\u2014were among the principal officers in Constantinople, under the emperors. Under Justinian in the 6th century, the eunuch Narses functioned as a successful general in a number of campaigns.\nAdvantages of eunuchs were that they prevented offices from becoming hereditary, allowing appointments to be made on merit; they were more dedicated to their jobs, not being distracted by family obligations; and they were ineligible for the throne, and for that reason thought by emperors to be safe. Those who had been deprived not only of their testicles but also their penises were known in Greek as \"carzimasia\", and were highly prized.\nReligious castration.\nCastration as part of religious practice, and eunuchs occupying religious roles, have been established prior to classical antiquity. Archaeological finds at \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck in Anatolia indicate worship of a 'Magna Mater' figure, a forerunner of the goddess Cybele found in later Anatolia and other parts of the near East. Later Roman followers of Cybele were called Galli, who practiced ritual self-castration, known as \"sanguinaria\". Eunuch priests also figured prominently in the Atargatis cult in Syria during the first centuries AD.\nThe practice of religious castration continued into the Christian era, with members of the early church practicing celibacy (including castration) for religious purposes, although the extent and even the existence of this practice among Christians is subject to debate. The early theologian Origen found evidence of the practice in : \"His disciples said to him, 'If such is the case of a man with his wife, it is better not to marry.' But he said to them, 'Not everyone can accept this teaching, but only those to whom it is given. For there are eunuchs who have been so from birth, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others, and there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Let anyone accept this who can.'\" \"(NRSV)\"\nTertullian, a 2nd-century Church Father, described Jesus himself and Paul of Tarsus as \"spadones\", which is translated as \"eunuchs\" in some contexts. Quoting from the cited book: \"Tertullian takes 'spado' to mean virgin\". The meaning of \"spado\" in late antiquity can be interpreted as a metaphor for celibacy. Tertullian even goes so far with the metaphor as to say St. Paul had been \"castrated\". Tertullian also ridiculed his theological opponent Marcion of Sinope as a eunuch who advocated for sexual abstinence.\nEunuch priests have served various goddesses from India for many centuries. Similar phenomena are exemplified by some modern Indian communities of the hijra, which are associated with a deity and with certain rituals and festivals \u2013 notably the devotees of Yellammadevi, or \"jogappas\", who are not castrated, and the Ali of southern India, of whom at least some are.\nThe 18th-century Russian Skoptzy (\"\u0441\u043a\u043e\u043f\u0446\u044b\") sect was an example of a castration cult, where its members regarded castration as a way of renouncing the sins of the flesh. Several members of the 20th-century Heaven's Gate cult were found to have been castrated, apparently voluntarily and for the same reasons.\nIn the Christian Bible.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[6] Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. [7] They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away? [8] He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so. [9] And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except [it be] for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery. [10] His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with [his] wife, it is not good to marry. [11] But he said unto them, All [men] cannot receive this saying, save [they] to whom it is given. [12] For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from [their] mother's womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive [it], let him receive [it].\u2014\u200a\nThe reference to \"eunuchs\" in Matthew 19:12 has yielded various interpretations.\nOne of the earliest converts to Christianity was an Ethiopian eunuch who was a high court official of Candace, the Queen of Ethiopia, but was already a eunuch at the time of conversion (Acts 8:27\u201339).\nIn the deuterocanonical Wisdom of Solomon, the eunuch who has done no lawless deed is praised and special favor is claimed to be shown to him.\nIn Judaism.\nEunuchs are mentioned many times in the Bible, such as in the Book of Isaiah (56:4) using the word \u05e1\u05e8\u05d9\u05e1 (\"saris\"). Although the Ancient Hebrews did not practice castration, eunuchs were common in other cultures featured in the Bible, such as ancient Egypt, Assyria and Babylonia, the Achaemenid Empire, and ancient Rome. In the Book of Esther, servants of the Persian harem of Ahasuerus, such as Hegai and Shashgaz, as well as other servants such as Hatach, Harbonah, Bigthan, and Teresh, are referred to as \"sarisim\". Being exposed to the consorts of the king, they would likely have been castrated.\nThe Hebrew word \"saris\" () derives from \"\u0161a-r\u0113\u0161i\", the Akkadian word for eunuch, and thus has been generally understood by scholars as referring to eunuchs. However, its technical meaning is a male who has not shown signs of typical sexual maturity by the age of 20. Per the Talmud, only one known as a \"saris adam\" \u2013 a castrated male; one made sterile intentionally or via accidental injury \u2013 might be considered a eunuch (a \"saris \u1e25ama\" is one who is congenitally sterile, and is not considered a eunuch).\nEnvironmental and social factors.\nThe role of eunuchs in society was often dictated by social and cultural norms, as well as political necessities. For instance, eunuchs were seen as reliable because they could not produce heirs and thus were considered less likely to establish rival power bases. The practice of castration was often a means of ensuring loyalty and controlling certain populations.\nCastrato singers.\nEunuchs castrated before puberty were also valued and trained in several cultures for their exceptional voices, which retained a childlike and other-worldly flexibility and treble pitch (an ability to sing in a high-pitched voice, akin to the pitch that a prepubescent boy can reach). Such eunuchs were known as castrati.\nAs women were sometimes forbidden to sing in Church, their place was taken by castrati. Castrati became very popular in 18th century opera seria. The practice, known as \"castratism\", remained popular until the 18th century and was known into the 19th century. The last famous Italian castrato, Giovanni Battista Velluti, died in 1861. The sole existing sound recording of a castrato singer documents the voice of Alessandro Moreschi, the last eunuch in the Sistine Chapel Choir, who died in 1922.\nThis Italian practice of castrating young males to maintain their soprano voices was ended by Pope Leo XIII (1878).\nNotable eunuchs.\nIn chronological order.\nReferences and bibliography.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68556", "revid": "43301109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68556", "title": "Abomination", "text": "Abomination may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68558", "revid": "2563820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68558", "title": "Abraham's bosom", "text": ""}
{"id": "68560", "revid": "47947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68560", "title": "Accho", "text": ""}
{"id": "68562", "revid": "917354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68562", "title": "Akeldama", "text": "Historic site in Jerusalem\nAkeldama (Aramaic: \u05d7\u05e7\u05dc \u05d3\u05de\u05d0 or \ud802\udc47\ud802\udc52\ud802\udc4b \ud802\udc43\ud802\udc4c\ud802\udc40 \"\u1e24aqel D'ma\", \"field of blood\"; Hebrew: \u05d7\u05e7\u05dc \u05d3\u05de\u05d0; Arabic: \u062d\u0642\u0644 \u0627\u0644\u062f\u0645, \"\u1e24aqel Ad-dam\") is the Aramaic name for a place in Jerusalem associated with Judas Iscariot, one of the original twelve apostles of Jesus.\nVariant transliterations.\nMost English-language versions of the Bible transliterate the term as \"Akeldama\" (e.g. American Standard Version (ASV), English Standard Version (ESV), Good News Translation (GNT), Modern English Version (MEV), and New International Version (NIV)) or as \"Akel Dama\" (New King James Version (NKJV) and 1599 Geneva Bible). \"Aceldama\" is used by the King James Version (KJV), Darby Bible and Wycliffe Bible. \"Hakeldama\" is used by the Common English Bible (CEB), New Revised Standard Version (NRSV) and Orthodox Jewish Bible (OJB), whilst the Complete Jewish Bible (CJB) uses \"Hakel-D'ma\". The Jerusalem Bible has \"Hakeldama\" but uses the English translation \"Bloody Acre\" in place of \"Field of Blood\", which is otherwise consistently used as the English translation. In Greek, it is called \u1f09\u03ba\u03b5\u03bb\u03b4\u03b1\u03bc\u03ac\u03c7 (\"Hakeldamach\"). \nNew Testament connection.\nChristian tradition connects the place with Judas Iscariot, who betrayed Jesus for thirty pieces of silver by kissing him. There are two accounts of his death.\nThe Gospel of Matthew describes how Judas returned the money to the Temple authorities before hanging himself. Deeming it as blood money, and therefore illegal to put into their treasury, they used it instead to buy a field as a burial ground for foreigners: thus the place gained the name \"the Field of Blood\" (, and possibly with allusions to and and ).\nAccording to the Acts of the Apostles () Judas \"acquired a field with the reward of his unjust deed, and falling headfirst he burst open in the middle and all his intestines gushed out. This became known to all who lived in Jerusalem, so that in their own language they called that field Hakeldama, that is, 'Field of Blood.'\"\nThe implication in Matthew is that the location name refers to the blood of Jesus, whereas in Acts the name refers to the blood of Judas. \nBarnabas Lindars holds the Acts narrative to be prior, and that although the incident is not created out of the Old Testament passages the text of Zechariah 11:12ff is \"freely used to fill up the gaps in the story ... to the early Christian exegetes a perfectly legitimate hermeneutical procedure\".\nAccording to Ian Howard Marshall, Acts may be recording the (inaccurate) story as told within Jerusalem.\nIdentification.\nIn his \"Onomasticon\" (ed. Klostermann, p.\u00a0102, 16), Eusebius says the \"field of Haceldama\" lies nearer to \"Thafeth of the Valley of Ennom\". But under the word \"Haceldama\" (p.\u00a038, 20) he says that this field was pointed out as being \"north of Mount Sion\". St. Jerome changed this to \"south of Mount Sion\" (p.\u00a039, 27).\nHistory.\nIt continued to be used as a burial place for non-Jews up to the early 19th century.\nCrusader period.\nDuring the era of the Crusades, it was used to bury the fifty or more patients who died each day in the hospital run by the Knights Hospitaller in Jerusalem.\nIn the 12th century, the crusaders erected beyond the field, on the south side of the valley of Hinnom, a large building now in a ruined condition, measuring seventy-eight feet in length from east to west, fifty-eight feet in width and thirty in height on the north. It is roofed and covers towards the southern end several natural grottoes, which were once used as sepulchres of the Jewish type, and a ditch is hollowed out at the northern end which is sixty-eight feet long, twenty-one feet wide and thirty feet deep. It is estimated that the bones and rubbish accumulated there form a bed from ten to fifteen feet thick.\nOttoman period.\nAkeldama has been the property of the Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem since the 16th century.\nIn 1892 the Greek Orthodox Church built a monastery at the site, named after Saint Onuphrius. Many burial caves have been identified in and around the monastery.\nThe Akeldama tombs.\nOne of Jerusalem's main cemeteries during the Second Temple period is a burial complex carved into dense limestone bedrock of a steep slope descending into the meeting point of the Hinnom and Kidron Valleys, 90 meters east of the monastery wall. They were first systematically studied in 1901. In 1989 a construction project was halted when bulldozers revealed the presence of burial caves cut into the rocks; construction was halted, and the Israel Antiquities Authority allowed archaeologists to investigate.\nThe \"Tomb of the Shroud\" in Akeldama is \"one of very few examples of a preserved shrouded human burial\" dating to the first century, with the bone samples yielding evidence of the pathogens \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" and \"Mycobacterium leprae\", the latter being \"the earliest case of leprosy with a confirmed date in which \"M. leprae\" DNA was detected\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68563", "revid": "23407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68563", "title": "Achaia", "text": ""}
{"id": "68565", "revid": "7162328", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68565", "title": "Achan", "text": "Achan may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68566", "revid": "1307393924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68566", "title": "Achbor", "text": "Hebrew name\nAchbor ( \"\u02bfA\u1e35b\u014dr\") is a name that means \"gnawing\" and is, by extension, used as the word for \"mouse\". There are at least two persons by this name in the Hebrew Bible.\nAchbor of Edom.\nIn the King Lists in the books of Genesis and 1 Chronicles Achbor is the father of Baal-hanan, a king of Edom, but is not actually listed as being king himself although some commentaries assume that he was. See Genesis 36:38; 1 Chronicles 1:49.\nAchbor of Judah.\nIn the Books of Kings Achbor, son of Michaiah, is one of Josiah's officers, and one of the five men sent to the prophetess Huldah to inquire regarding the book of the law newly discovered in the Temple in Jerusalem (2 Kings 22:12, 14). This Achbor is also called Abdon (2 Chronicles 34:20).\nThis may be the same Achbor who is mentioned as the father of Elnathan in the Book of Jeremiah 26:20\u201323, and who lived in the reign of King Jehoiakim of Judah."}
{"id": "68567", "revid": "1281389063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68567", "title": "Achish", "text": "Biblical character (First Book of Samuel)\nAchish ( \"\u02be\u0101\u1e35\u012b\u0161\", Philistine: \ud802\udd00\ud802\udd0a\ud802\udd09\ud802\udd14 *\"\u02be\u0101kay\u016b\u0161\", Akkadian: \ud808\udd3f\ud808\udd57\ud808\udf11\ud808\udee2 \"i-ka-\u00fa-su\") is a name used in the Hebrew Bible for two Philistine rulers of Gath. It is perhaps only a general title of royalty, applicable to the Philistine kings. The two kings of Gath, which most scholars identify as Tell es-Safi, are:\nThe Latin transliteration \"Achish\" represents the begadkefat (aspiration over a medial stop) in Aramaic and in post-Biblical Hebrew. Before the strong influence of Aramaic over Hebrew, which occurred after the Babylonian captivity, would have been pronounced: \"Akish.\"\nIn the seventh-century BCE Ekron Royal Dedicatory Inscription, the name Akish appears as \"son of Padi, son of ysd, son of Ada, son of Ya'ir\"; Akish by then held enough authority in Ekron to dedicate a temple. A similar name, \"Ikausu\", appears as king of Ekron in seventh-century BCE Assyrian inscriptions, as does Padi. Scholars agree that these two are the same men, although a royal status cannot yet be confirmed for their ancestors Ysd, Ada, and Ya'ir.\nThis appears to indicate that either the name \"Akish\" was a common name for Philistine kings, used both at Gath and Ekron, or, as Naveh has suggested, that the editor of the biblical text used a known name of a Philistine king from the end of the Iron Age (Achish of Ekron) as the name of a king(s) of Gath in narratives relating to earlier periods.\nIn media.\nAchish of Gath is a supporting role in the 17th-century opera \"David et Jonathas\", sung by a bass.\nAchish king of Gath appears in the 1985 film \"King David\", starring Richard Gere.\nAchish appears in the streaming series \"House of David\", played by Iraqi actor Alexander Uloom.\nSee also.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68568", "revid": "390477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68568", "title": "Achmetha", "text": ""}
{"id": "68569", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68569", "title": "Achor", "text": "Valley near Jericho\nAchor ( \"muddy, turbid: gloomy, dejected\") is the name of a valley in the vicinity of Jericho.\nHistory.\nThe Book of Joshua, chapter seven, relates the story from which the valley's name comes. After the problems the Israelites had as a result of Achan's immoral theft of items commanded to be destroyed, the Israelite community stoned Achan and his household. The narrative about Achan is etiological, presenting a folk etymology.\nDue to the nature of this narrative, the phrase \"valley of trouble\" became eminently proverbial and occurs elsewhere in the Hebrew Bible. The Book of Isaiah and Book of Hosea use the term \u2013 \"the valley of trouble, a place for herds to lie down in\", \"the valley of trouble for a door of hope\", as a way of describing the redemption promised by God.\nIdentification.\nEusebius (in \"Onomasticon\") and Jerome (in \"Book of Sites and Names of Hebrew Places\") implied that they thought it was a valley north of Jericho. In the nineteenth century some writers identified the valley with the wadi al-Qelt, a deep ravine located to Jericho's south. In the twentieth century the Hyrcania valley (El-Buqei'a in Arabic) west and south of Qumran, and Wadi en-Nu'eima have also been suggested. One difficulty is that the narrative of Joshua appears to place the valley of Achor to the north of Jericho, between Jericho and Ai; but Joshua makes the valley part of the boundary between the tribe of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin, to the south of Jericho, but not as far south as El-Buqei'a.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68570", "revid": "1316737575", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68570", "title": "Achsah", "text": "Human biblical figure\nAchsah bat Caleb (; Hebrew: \u05e2\u05b7\u05db\u05b0\u05e1\u05b8\u05d4, also Acsah), was Caleb ben Yefune's only daughter. Her name comes from the word for \"anklet\", \u05e2\u05db\u05e1 (\"ekes\").\nShe was offered in marriage to the man who would lead an attack on the city of Debir, also called Kirjath-sepher/Kirjath-sannah. This was done by Othniel, Caleb's nephew or younger brother, who accordingly was permitted to marry her.\nAchsah later requested, and was given, upper and lower springs of water (presumably in the Negev) from her father.\nVarious Septuagint manuscripts, in various passages, give her name as \"Ascha,\" \"Achsa,\" \"Aza,\" and \"Oxa.\"\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68571", "revid": "9011961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68571", "title": "Achshaph", "text": "Achshaph (; ) was a royal city of the Canaanites, in the north of Canaan (Josh. 11:1; 12:20; 19:25). The name means \"sorcery\". \nLocation.\nAchshaph was in the eastern boundary of the tribe of Asher. There are several opinions as to its exact location, including Tell Keisan, Tell Regev, Tell Harbaj and Tell an-Nakhl. In the Greek Septuagint, in various manuscripts, depending on the passage, its name is given in the forms \"Azeiph,\" \"Achsaph,\" \"Achas,\" \"Keaph,\" \"Achiph,\" \"Acheib,\" and \"Chasaph.\"\nHistory.\nThe 1350 BC Amarna letters has Endaruta as the 'mayor' of Ak\u0161apa (Achshaph). In this time period, the Habiru are attacking city-states, and Abdi-Heba of Jerusalem, Surata of Acco, \u0160uwardata of Qiltu (?), and Endaruta are aiding each other.\nOnly one extremely short letter\u2014EA 223 (EA-el Amarna)\u2014is written from Endaruta of Ak\u0161apa, and it is a one sentence topic: [following a short 3-sentence formal-formulaic introduction] ... \" \"Whatever the king (i.e., pharaoh), my lord, orders, I shall prepare.\" \"\nBut one perfectly preserved letter from Pharaoh, to Endaruta of Ak\u0161apa is known, EA 367. Its topic is \"to guard\" (and defend) Ak\u0161apa and to prepare for \"troop arrivals\"-(the archer-forces).\nThe third and only other reference in the Amarna letters corpus is from letter EA 366 (from \u0160uwardata of Qiltu (?)), and the letter states:\n\" \"...only 'Abdi-Heba and I have been at war with that 'Apiru. Surata, the ruler of Akka, and Endaruta, the ruler of Ak\u0161apa, these two also came to my aid, ...\" \"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68572", "revid": "43419323", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68572", "title": "Achziv", "text": "Ancient site on the Mediterranean coast of northern Israel\nAchziv ( \"\u02beA\u1e35z\u012b\u1e07\") or Az-Zeeb () is an ancient site on the Mediterranean coast of northern Israel, between the border with Lebanon and the city of Acre. It is located north of Acre on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, within the municipal area of Nahariya. Today it is an Israeli national park.\nExcavations have unearthed a fortified Canaanite city of the second millennium BCE. The Phoenician town of the first millennium BCE is known both from the Hebrew Bible and Assyrian sources. Phoenician Achzib went through ups and downs during the Persian and Hellenistic periods. In early Roman times the town, known as \"Acdippa\", was a road station. The Bordeaux Pilgrim mentions it in 333-334 CE still as a road station; Jewish sources of the Byzantine period call it \"Kheziv\" and \"Gesiv\". There is no information about settlement at the site for the early Muslim period. The Crusaders built a new village with a castle there. During the Mamluk and Ottoman periods a modest village occupied the old tell (archaeological mound).\nIn modern times the site was known as the Palestinian town of Az-Zeeb, with a population of almost 2,000. It was depopulated during the Haganah's Operation Ben-Ami, on May 14, 1948, the last day of the British Mandate for Palestine.\nThe sole permanent resident of Achziv since declaration of the State was Eli Avivi (1930\u20132018), an Israeli photographer and micronationalist who hosted visitors to the legally disputed micronation of \"Akhzivland\", a small stretch of beach where he lived since 1975 until his death.\nEtymology.\nMentioned in the Bible by its ancient name \"Achzib\", evidence of human settlement at the site dates back to the 18th century BCE. During the Roman period (and in classical literature) the imperial authorities called it \"Ecdippa\", \"Ecdeppa\", or \"Ecdippon\". By the early Middle Ages, the Arab name for the village \"Az-Zeeb\", or \"al-Zib\" ( meaning 'trickster') was locally in common usage. Az-Zeeb is a shortened form of the site's original ancient Canaanite/Phoenician name, \"Achzib\".\nHistory.\nHuman settlement at the site dates to as early as the 18th century BCE; and by the 10th century BCE it was a walled town. A tell excavated between 1941\u201344 and 1959-1964 found evidence of settlement from the Middle Bronze Age II, through the Roman Empire and the Early Middle Ages. Achziv was the first fortified settlement found at the site by archaeologists.\nMiddle Bronze Age.\nMiddle Bronze Age IIA.\nIn the Middle Bronze IIA (MBIIA), remains are found at Phase N5 with features including child burials in storage jars below floors.\nMiddle Bronze Age IIA-B.\nAt the transition from MBIIA to MBIIB, the settlement was subject to a violent destruction.\nMiddle Bronze Age IIB.\nIn the Middle Bronze IIB (MBIIB), Phase N4 was part of a large Canaanite port city. The massive ramparts, some high, protected the city proper and a large area of port facilities. To the north and south the city extended to the two nearby rivers, which the Canaanite engineers connected by a fosse, thus transforming Achzib into an island. A substantial destruction level from the beginning of the Late Bronze Age proves that even these fortifications were eventually not sufficient. A fierce conflagration ended Phase N4 and led to the transition to the MBIIC/LBI in Phase N3.\nIron Age.\nIron II.\nBy the 1000 BCE, Achziv was a prosperous and fortified Phoenician town. Conquered by the Assyrian empire in the 8th century BCE, however, it was subsequently ruled by the Persians during the rule of the Roman Empire.\nPositioned on a passage between the plain of Acre and the city of Tyre, Achzib was an important road station. Between the 10th and 6th centuries BCE, it was a prosperous town, with public buildings and tombs with Phoenician inscriptions, attesting to the identity of its inhabitants at the time. Conquered by the Assyrians in 701 BCE and listed in \"Sennacherib's Annals\" as \"Ak-zi-bi\", the continuation of Phoenician settlement through this period and during the decline endured during the Persian period, is evidenced in 5th and 4th century BCE Phoenician inscriptions that were found at the site.\nPrior to the Assyrian invasion of Achziv under Sennacherib, in the late 8th-century BCE, Achziv and Akko belonged to the king of Sidon, and were considered Hittite territory.\nBiblical tradition.\nAchzib is mentioned in the Book of Joshua (19:29) and Book of Judges (1:31) as a town assigned to the tribe of Asher in the Hebrew Bible, but the Asherites did not manage to conquer it from the Phoenicians:\nAnd the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher ... and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib. ()\nAsher did not drive out the inhabitants of Acco, ... or of Achzib ... ()\nAccording to Biblical history, King David added the city into his Kingdom, but King Solomon returned it to Hiram I as part of the famous pact; archaeological evidence indicates that it remained Phoenician.\nClassic era.\nHellenistic period.\nDuring the reign of the Seleucids the border was established at Rosh HaNikra, just north to Achziv, making it a border city which they called \"Ekdippa\" (\u0388\u03ba\u03b4\u03b9\u03c0\u03c0\u03b1 in Ancient Greek) and put it under the control of Acre. Mentioned in the writings of Pseudo-Scylax, the site likely regained some importance in Hellenistic times.\nRoman and Byzantine periods.\nA maritime city named Cziv, north of Acre, is mentioned by Josephus Flavius and later by Eusebius. Achziv (Cheziv) is mentioned in Jewish rabbinic writings, for example Midrash Vayikra Rabba 37:4. Additionally, Achziv is mentioned in the Babylonian Talmud, and by the relating Middle Age commentators, concerning the location of Achziv in regards to historical borders of Israel. At the end of the Roman era, a pottery workshop was located there.\nMiddle Ages.\nBy the Early Middle Ages, Arab geographers were referring to the area as \"az-Zeeb\".\nCrusader period.\nWith the arrival of the Crusaders and after the fall of Acre in 1104, \"Casal Imbertia\" or \"Lambertie\" was established there. During the Crusader era, it expanded and became the main centre of a large estate with the same name, Casal Imbert. Lefiegre, Le Quiebre and La Gabassie were all part of this estate. The site was commonly known as \"\"Casale Umberti\",\" or Casal Humberti (after Hubert of Pacy who held the casale), and it is documented in 1108.\nAz-Zeeb (meaning \"trickster\"), is first mentioned in Crusader sources in 1123 as a village belonging to Hubert of Pacy. In 1146, the Crusaders established a settlement there protected by a castle and named \"Casale Huberti\" and sometimes still as \"Casal Humberti\". Under Baldwin III, European farmers settled there sometime before 1153.\nArab geographer Ibn Jubayr toured Palestine in 1182 and mentioned az-Zeeb as a large fortress with a village and adjoining lands between Acre and Tyre. In 1198, King Aimery gave a large part of the income from Az-Zeeb to the Teutonic Order. In 1226, Arab geographer Yaqut al-Hamawi described az-Zeeb as a large village on the coast whose name was also pronounced \"az-Zaib\".\nIn 1232 it was the site of the Battle of Casal Imbert between German and French Crusaders as part of the War of the Lombards. In 1253 King Henry gave the whole estate of Casal Imbert to John of Ibelin. Shortly after, in 1256, John of Ibelin leased Az-Zeeb and all its dependant villages to the Teutonic Order for 10 years. In 1261, the whole estate was sold to the Teutonic Order, in return for an annual sum for as long as Acre was in Christian hands. In 1283 the village was mentioned as part of the domain of the Crusaders, according to the \"hudna\" (truce) between the Crusaders in Acre and the Mamluk sultan Qalawun.\nMamluk period.\nThe Arab village of Az-Zeeb was established during the later Mamluk period with the houses erected using the stones of the destroyed Crusader castle; and thrived throughout the Ottoman rule. There are descriptions of the castle and village by Arab chroniclers in the 12th and 13th centuries, just prior to and during the rule of the Mamluks in the region.\nOttoman era.\nIn the early 16th century, az-Zeeb was incorporated into the Ottoman Empire and its inhabitants cultivated various crops and raised livestock on which they paid taxes to the Ottoman authorities. According to the 1596 tax records, it was a village in the \"nahiya\" (subdistrict) of Akka, part of Sanjak Safad with a population of 132 households and 27 bachelors and an estimated total of 875 persons. All were Muslim. The villagers paid a fixed tax rate of 25% on several agricultural items including, wheat, barley, \"summer crops\", fruits, cotton, beehives, goats, and water buffalo; a total of 23,669 ak\u00e7e. All of the revenue went to a waqf.\nA map by Pierre Jacotin from Napoleon's invasion of 1799 showed the village, named as \"Zib\". British traveler James Silk Buckingham describes az-Zeeb in 1816 as a small town built on a hill near the sea with few palm trees rising above its houses. During the period of Egyptian rule in Palestine, the sheikh (chief) of az-Zeeb, Said al-Sabi, joined the 1834 peasants' rebellion against governor Ibrahim Pasha. He was arrested and exiled to Egypt by the authorities in the summer of that year because of his participation.\nIn 1875, when Victor Gu\u00e9rin visited, Az-Zeeb had 500 Muslim inhabitants. Gu\u00e9rin noted that the hill on which it was built had formerly been surrounded by a wall, traces of which were still to be seen on the east side. By the late 19th century, most of the village houses were built of stone, a mosque and a clinic had been established, and the residents cultivated olives, figs, mulberries, and pomegranates. The population consisted of about 400 Muslims. In 1882, the Ottomans established an elementary school in az-Zeeb. A population list from about 1887 showed that Kh. ez Zib had about 730 inhabitants, all Muslim.\nBritish Mandate period.\nAz-Zeeb became a part of the British Mandate of Palestine in 1922. In the 1922 census of Palestine, \"Al Zib\" had a population of 804; 803 Muslims and 1 Christian, where the one Christian was a Roman Catholic. The population had increased in the 1931 census to 1059, all Muslims, in a total of 251 houses.\nThe main economic sectors in the village were in fishing and agriculture, particularly fruit cultivation, which included bananas, citrus, olives, and figs. The town held four olive presses: two mechanized and two animal-drawn. Between 1927 and 1945, the village's annual fish catch was 16 metric tons. In the 1945 statistics, the population of Az Zeeb was 1,910, all Muslims, with a total land area of 12,607 dunams. Of this, 2,973 dunams were used for citrus and bananas; 1,989 dunums were irrigated or used for orchards; 4,425 were for cereals; while 62 dunams were built-up (urban) areas.\nThe population of the village in 1945 was 1,910.\nPolitical unrest.\nIn 1946, The Jewish Resistance Movement attempted to blow up the railroad bridge over the creek at Achziv in an operation known as Night of the Bridges. A monument to the 14 soldiers killed there was erected on the site.\n1948 War.\nJust before the official end to Mandate rule on May 14, 1948, and the start of the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, az-Zeeb was captured by the Haganah's Carmeli Brigade, being one of the main places targeted in Operation Ben-Ami. According to Haganah accounts, the residents immediately \"fled upon the appearance of Jewish forces, and the Haganah command decided to hold on to [it].\" However, Israeli historian Benny Morris states that the Haganah had a \"long account\" with az-Zeeb because it was a center of Arab attacks on Jews and that most of the inhabitants fled after the village was hit with a mortar barrage by the Haganah. Morris writes that two Haganah companies reported in mid-May 1948 that they were \"attacking al Zib with the aim of blowing up the village\". Eyewitness accounts from among the villagers indicate that they mistook the incoming Israeli forces for Arab reinforcements because they had donned red and white \"keffiyehs\", and that these forces quickly overwhelmed the local militia of 35-40 men. Many of the inhabitants fled to Lebanon or nearby villages, but many also remained in az-Zeeb until they were relocated by the Israeli authorities to the Arab coastal town of Mazra'a. Some villagers later claimed that the Haganah had \"molested or violated\" a number of women.\nThe Israeli localities of Sa'ar and Gesher HaZiv were established on the village lands in 1948 and 1949. A domed mosque from the village has since been restored and serves as a tourist site, and the house of the last mukhtar (village headman) is now a museum.\nIsrael.\nAchziv is an Israeli national park. Today Achziv shores are part of the Achziv-Rosh haNikra marine protected area, which is located between the city of Naharia to the south and the Israeli-Lebanon border to the north. The marine protected area has 7 kilometers of shore line and continue into the sea for another 15 kilometers west. This marine nature reserve protects the fauna and flora of the stony reefs and the sandy beach environments. It is the only marine protected area in Israel in which the maximum depth is deeper than 850 meters. Near the national park is Akhzivland, founded by Eli Avivi in 1971 and currently used as a vacation village and camping site.\nArchaeology.\nRemnants of ancient Achziv, now known as Tel Achziv, are located on a sandstone mound between two streams, Kziv on the north and Shaal on the south, close to the border with Lebanon. An ancient port was located on the coast, and another secondary port is located 700 m to the south. Archeological excavations have revealed that a walled city existed at the location from the Middle Bronze period.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68573", "revid": "20823699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68573", "title": "Adah", "text": "Adah may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68575", "revid": "41258164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68575", "title": "Adar", "text": "12th month of the Hebrew calendar\nAdar (Hebrew: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d0\u05b2\u05d3\u05b8\u05e8\u200e, ; from Akkadian \"adaru\") is the sixth month of the civil year and the twelfth month of the religious year on the Hebrew calendar, roughly corresponding to the month of March in the Gregorian calendar. It is a month of 29 days.\nNames and leap years.\nThe month's name, like all the others from the Hebrew calendar, was adopted during the Babylonian captivity. In the Babylonian calendar the name was Ara\u1e2b Addaru or Ad\u0101r ('Month of Adar').\nIn leap years, it is preceded by a 30-day intercalary month named Adar Aleph (, \"aleph\" being the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet), also known as \"Adar Rishon\" (\"First Adar\") or \"Adar I\", and it is then itself called Adar Bet (, \"bet\" being the second letter of the Hebrew alphabet), also known as \"Adar Sheni\" (\"Second Adar\") or \"Adar II\". Occasionally instead of Adar I and Adar II, \"Adar\" and \"Ve'Adar\" are used (Ve means 'and' thus: And-Adar). Adar I and II occur during February\u2013March on the Gregorian calendar.\nSources disagree as to which of the two Adar months is the \"real\" Adar, and which is the added leap month.\nCustoms.\nDuring the Second Temple period, there was a Jewish custom to make a public proclamation on the first day of the lunar month Adar, reminding the people that they are to prepare their annual monetary offering to the Temple treasury, known as the half-Shekel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68576", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68576", "title": "Addon", "text": "Addon (, etymology unknown) was one of the persons named in the Neh. 7:61 who could not \"shew\ntheir father's house\" on the return from captivity. This, with similar instances (ver. 63), indicates the importance the Jews attached to their genealogies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68577", "revid": "44987666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68577", "title": "Adiel", "text": "Adiel () is a personal name meaning \"ornament of God\", or possibly \"God passes by\". It may refer to any of the following:\nAccording to Cheyne and Black, the \"Aduel\" of Tobit 1:1 has a name which is a Greek variant form of Adiel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68579", "revid": "44449668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68579", "title": "Admah", "text": "One of a cluster of five biblical cities\nAccording to the Bible, Admah (Heb. \u05d0\u05b7\u05d3\u05b0\u05de\u05b8\u05d4) was one of the five cities of the Vale of Siddim. It was destroyed along with Sodom and Gomorrah. It is supposed by William F. Albright to be the same as the \"Adam\" of . The location of Admah is unknown, although Bryant G. Wood a proponent of the southern theory for the Cities of the Plain identified the site with Numeira, but later changed it to Khirbat al-Khanazir Jordan, although it was only a cemetery during the Bronze Age and proponents of the northern theory for the Cities of the Plain identify the site with Tel Nimrin, Jordan.\nThe town is mentioned figuratively in the Bible, in Deuteronomy and Book of Hosea.\nThere has also been some conjecture that Admah is mentioned in the Ebla tablets as the Eblaite word \"ad-ma\" or \"ad-mu-utki\" = (Town of) Admah.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68581", "revid": "169027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68581", "title": "Adoni-zedec", "text": ""}
{"id": "68582", "revid": "14315450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68582", "title": "Adoni-Bezek", "text": "Ancient Canaanite king\nAdoni-Bezek, ( \"\u2019A\u1e0f\u014dn\u012b-\u1e06ezeq\", \"lord of Bezek\"), also written Adonibezek or Adoni Bezek, was a Canaanite king referred to in the Book of Judges (). Previous to the occupation of Canaan by the Israelites, he had subdued seventy of the kings of cities around him. The tribes of Judah and Simeon attacked the Canaanites and the Perizzites at Bezek and defeated him.\nThe historical reality of events described in the book of Judges is the subject of ongoing dispute among scholars, who vary in their opinions about how much of the book is historical.\nBezek.\nSome scholars propose that Bezek was near Gezer. Others suggest that the place is to be identified with Khirbet Ibzik or the nearby Khirbet Salhab, while others think that \"Bezek\" is a corruption of \"Zedek,\" in reference to the story of Adonizedek. Bezek appears again in as the site where Saul assembled the Israelite armies to fight against Nahash the Ammonite.\nMutilation.\nAdoni-Bezek, according to Judges, had removed the large toes and thumbs of kings he subjugated to render them harmless as warriors, presumably so they could no longer wield weapons or run. After Joshua had died, the tribes of Judah and Simeon continued the Israelite conquest of Canaan by leading an army against this Canaanite king. Employing the biblical law of \"eye for an eye\" they did the same to Adoni-Bezek before sending him to Jerusalem as a slave. Adoni-Bezek is recorded as saying \"Seventy kings with their thumbs and big toes cut off used to pick up scraps under my table. As I have done, so God has repaid me.\" According to Elicott's Commentary for English readers, \"The cutting off of his thumbs would prevent him from ever again drawing a bow or wielding a sword. Romans who desired to escape conscription cut off their thumbs\".\nLater life.\nAccording to the Book of Judges, he confessed that God had requited him for his cruelty to the seventy kings whom he had subdued. Otherwise, nothing is known of his life after his mutilation.\nComparison with Adonizedek.\nAccording to Coggins, he is probably the same person as Adonizedek mentioned in Joshua 10 who flourished c. 1200 BC. While some scholars think that the story of Adoni-bezek is a variation on the story of Adonizedek, James Martin argues that the stories are \"so dissimilar\" that the Adoni-Bezek narrative is most likely not \"simply a variant\" of the Adonizedek narrative. According to Joshua 10, Adonizedek was captured after taking refuge with four other rulers in a cave and put to death in the course of Joshua's campaign in Canaan. Adonibezek, on the other hand, was captured, in a campaign following Joshua's death, in his city (Judges 1).\nHis name is missing from the list of thirty-one city kings in Joshua 12:9-24, although he had subjugated seventy other kings in the Judge's account. It has been argued that the latter figure may not be literally true: \"The Temple Dictionary of the Bible\" (1910) stated: '\"This [70] is a round number, meaning 'many'\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68583", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68583", "title": "Adonijah", "text": "Fourth son of the Israelite king David\nAccording to 2 Samuel, Adonijah (, \"\u2019\u01cd\u1e0f\u014dn\u012byy\u0101\"; \"my lord is Yah\") was the fourth son of King David. His mother was Haggith as recorded in the book of . Adonijah was born at Hebron during the long conflict between David and the House of Saul. In 1 Kings, he briefly proclaimed himself king of Israel during the terminal illness of his father David, before peacefully ceding the throne to his brother Solomon.\nLife.\nAfter the death of his elder brothers Amnon and Absalom, Adonijah considered himself the heir-apparent to the throne. He acquired chariots and a large entourage. The king was unaware of this, being as he was \"stricken in years\" with his health failing him, and was in a different city. (KJV) Adonijah consulted and obtained the support of both the commander of the army Joab and the influential priest Abiathar. However, the priest Zadok, Benaiah (head of the king's bodyguard), Nathan (the court prophet), and others did not side with Adonijah.\nIn anticipation of his father's imminent death, Adonijah invited his brother princes and the court officials to a solemn sacrifice in order to announce his claim to the throne. Notably, he did not invite Solomon nor any of his supporters. According to the \"Jewish Study Bible\", by excluding Solomon, Adonijah demonstrates his awareness that he is in effect usurping the throne.\nAssuming that Adonijah will soon move to eliminate any rivals or opposition, Nathan warns Bathsheba, Solomon's mother, and counsels her to remind the king of a previous promise to make Solomon his successor. Lillian R. Klein finds in Nathan's promise to confirm Bathsheba's statement a suggestion that her words may have required verification, and that there was no earlier definite promise in Solomon's favor. However KJV confirms in 1 Chronicles 29 and 2 Samuel 15 that David had indeed promised that Solomon would be anointed King.\nHowever, Adonijah was supplanted by Solomon through the influence of Bathsheba, and through the diplomacy of the prophet Nathan. They induced David to give orders that Solomon should immediately be proclaimed and admitted to the throne, which David agreed.\nAfter receiving word that Solomon had been crowned king, Adonijah's supporters quickly fled, while Adonijah took refuge at the altar. He later received a pardon for his conduct from Solomon on the condition that he showed himself a worthy man (). Afterwards, Adonijah asked to marry Abishag from Shunem, who served his father David on his deathbed, and asks Bathsheba to plead with the king on his behalf . The text does not indicate if Bathsheba was aware of Adonijah's possible duplicity or not, only that she brought the request, which would bring death to Solomon's most dangerous rival, before her son (). Solomon, interpreting it as a second attempt to gain the throne, denied authorization for such an engagement and Adonijah was subsequently put to death ().\nInterpretation of Adonijah's death.\nIn some interpretations, the death of Adonijah was the last of the punishments meted out on David by God for his adultery with Bathsheba and the murder of her husband Uriah. As David demanded that the rich man of Nathan's parable restore the lamb fourfold (), so four of his sons had to die as reparation for the murder: Bathsheba's baby son (), Amnon (), Abshalom () and, after David's death, Adonijah.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68584", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68584", "title": "Adonikam", "text": ""}
{"id": "68585", "revid": "1319895169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68585", "title": "Adoniram", "text": "Adoniram (; Hebrew, \u05d0\u05d3\u05d5\u05e0\u05d9\u05e8\u05dd, 'my Lord has exalted'; alternate form Adoram, \u05d0\u05d3\u05d5\u05e8\u05dd \" 'adoram\", 'the Lord has exalted'), the son of Abda, was the tax collector in the United Kingdom of Israel for over forty years, from the late years of King David's reign until the reign of Rehoboam. In the language of the Tanakh, he was \"over the tribute\", i.e. the levy or forced labor.\nHe was in charge of conscripted timber cutters during the building of King Solomon's temple.\nAccording to the biblical narrative, he was stoned to death by the people of Israel when Rehoboam sent him in an attempt to collect taxes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68589", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68589", "title": "Adria", "text": "Adria is a town and \"comune\" in the province of Rovigo in the Veneto region of northern Italy, situated between the mouths of the rivers Adige and Po. The remains of the Etruscan city of Atria or Hatria are to be found below the modern city, three to four metres below the current level. Adria and Spina were the Etruscan ports and depots for Felsina (now Bologna). Adria may have given its name during an early period to the Adriatic Sea, to which it was connected by channels.\nHistory.\nAncient era.\nThe first settlements built in the area are of Venetic origin, during the twelfth to ninth centuries BC, consisting of stilt houses in the wetlands, that were then still close to the sea. At that time the main stream of the Po, the Adria channel, flowed into the sea in this area. The Villanovan culture, named for an archaeological site at the village of Villanova, near Bologna (Etruscan \"Felsina\"), flourished in this area from the tenth until as late as the sixth century BC. The foundations of classical Atria are dated from 530 to 520 BC.\nThe Etruscans built the port and settlement of Adria after the channel gradually started to run dry. During the later period of the sixth century BC the port continued to flourish. The Etruscan-controlled area of the Po Valley was generally known as Padanian Etruria, as opposed to their main concentration along the Tyrrhenian coast south of the Arno.\nGreeks from Aegina and later from Syracuse by Dionysius I colonised the city making it into an emporion. Greeks had been trading with the Veneti from the sixth century BC at least, especially the amber, originally coming from the Baltic sea.\nMass Celtic incursions into the Po valley resulted in friction between the Gauls and Etruscans and intermarriage, attested by epigraphic inscriptions on which Etruscan and Celtic names appear together. The city was populated by Etruscans, Veneti, Greeks and Celts.\nPliny the Elder, a Roman author and fleet commander, wrote about a system of channels in Atria that was, \"first made by the Tuscans [i.e. Etruscans], thus discharging the flow of the river across the marshes of the Atriani called the Seven Seas, with the famous harbor of the Tuscan town of Atria which formerly gave the name of Atriatic to the sea now called the Adriatic\". Those \"Seven Seas\" were interlinked coastal lagoons, separated from the open sea by sand spits and barrier islands. The Etruscans extended this natural inland waterway with new canals to extend the navigation possibilities of the tidal reaches of the Po all the way north to Atria. As late as the time of the emperor Vespasian, shallow draft galleys could still be rowed from Ravenna into the heart of Etruria. Under Roman occupation the town ceded importance to Ravenna as the continued siltation of the Po delta carried the seafront further to the east. The sea is now about from Adria.\nThe first exploration of ancient Atria was carried out by Carlo Bocchi and published as \"Importanza di Adria la Veneta\". The collections of the Bocchi family were given to the public at the beginning of the 20th century and comprise a major part of the city museum collection of antiquities.\nThere are several ideas concerning the etymology of the ancient toponym \"Adria/Atria\". One theory is that it derives from the Illyrian (Venetic language) word \"adur\" \"water, sea\".\nMedieval and modern age.\nAt the time of the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the port of Adria had lost most of its importance. It finally declined after the total change of the local hydrography in 589, following the catastrophic flood documented by Paul the Deacon, and Adria became a fief of the archdiocese of Ravenna.\nAfter a period as an independent commune, it was a possession of the Este of Ferrara and, in the 16th century, of the Republic of Venice. At that time Adria was a small village surrounded by malaria-plagued marshes. It recovered its importance when Polesine was reclaimed in the same century.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars it was first under France, then under Austria, to which it was assigned in 1815 after the Congress of Vienna, as part of Lombardy-Venetia.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAdria is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68590", "revid": "1315509982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68590", "title": "Adriel", "text": "Person mentioned in the Bible\nAdriel (Hebrew: \u05e2\u05d3\u05e8\u05d9\u05d0\u05dc) (Aramaic: \u0725\u0715\u072a\u071d\u0710\u071d\u0720) (literally https:// (flock) \u05d9 (of) \u05d0\u05dc (El)) was a person mentioned in the Bible. Adriel was a nobleman in the ancient kingdom of Israel.\nThe name Adriel is translated from the Hebrew word \u05e2\u05b7\u05d3\u05b0\u05e8\u05b4\u05d9\u05d0\u05b5\u05dc (ad-ree-ale'), which means \"flock of God\". \u05e2\u05b7\u05d3\u05b0\u05e8\u05b4\u05d9\u05d0\u05b5\u05dc comes from two Hebrew words: \u05e2\u05b5\u05ab\u05d3\u05b6\u05e8 (ay'-der) and \u05d0\u05b5\u05dc (ale). \u05e2\u05b5\u05ab\u05d3\u05b6\u05e8 (ay'-der) means \"flock\" and comes from another Hebrew word - \u05e2\u05b8\u05d3\u05b7\u05e8 (aw-dar') - that means \"to dig\" or \"to arrange\". \u05d0\u05b5\u05dc (ale) means \"God\". Adriel was the son of Barzillai the Meholathite. According to 1 Samuel 18:19, Saul married his daughter Merab to Adriel.\nHowever, 2 Samuel 21:653 in the Masoretic Text, records that Michal, another daughter of Saul \"brought up\" [R.V. \"bare\"] five sons with Adriel.\nThe claim that Michal \"brought up\" these five sons has been taken to mean either that she treated them as if she had been their own mother, or that for \"Michal\" we should read \"Merab\" in 2 Samuel 21:8, as in 1 Sam. 18:19.\nDue to that later discrepancy that states Michal as the wife of Adriel, instead of Merab as first said in 1st Samuel, many scholars believe this to be an ancient copyist's error that should have read Merab in 2 Samuel 21:8.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68591", "revid": "47496819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68591", "title": "Adullam", "text": "Archaeological site in Israel\nAdullam (, ) is an ancient ruin once numbered among the thirty-six cities of Canaan whose kings \"Joshua and the children of Israel smote\" . After that, it fell as an inheritance to the tribe of Judah and was included in the northern division of the Shephelah \"lowland\" cities of the land of Judah . Adullam is mentioned multiple times in the Hebrew Bible, including events featuring David who took refuge at Adullam, escaping King Saul. At this time Adullam was close to the land of the Philistines.\nThe current site is also known by the Arabic name Khurbet esh-Sheikh Madhkur, 9\u00a0mi. (15\u00a0km.) northeast of Bayt Jibrin, and was built upon a hilltop overlooking the Elah valley, straddling the Green Line between Israel and the West Bank, and with its suburban ruin, , lying directly below it. By the late 19th century, the settlement, which had been a town, was in ruins. The hilltop ruin is named after Madkour, one of the sons of the Sultan Beder, for whom is built a shrine (\"wely\") and formerly called by its inhabitants \"Wely Madkour\".\nThe hilltop is mostly flat, with cisterns carved into the rock. The remains of stone structures which once stood there can still be seen. Sedimentary layers of ruins from the old Canaanite and Israelite eras, mostly potsherds, are noticeable everywhere, although olive groves now grow atop of this hill, enclosed within stonewall enclosures. The villages of Aderet, Aviezer and Khirbet al-Deir are located nearby. The ruin lies about south of moshav Neve Michael. The site has been surveyed archaeologically and was partially excavated in 2015.\nMain archaeological sites; identification.\nKh. esh-Sheikh Madkur (Palestine grid: 1503/1175) sits at an elevation of above sea-level and is thought by modern historical geographers to be the \"upper Adullam\", based on its proximity to Kh. 'Id el-Minya. The name of this latter site is believed by historical geographers to be a corruption of the word \"Adullam.\" The identification of the upper site with the biblical Adullam is still inconclusive, as archaeological evidence attesting to its Old Canaanite name has yet to be found. In the late 19th century, the hilltop ruin and its adjacent ruins were explored by French explorer, Victor Gu\u00e9rin, who wrote:\n[Upon leaving the hilltop ruin, \"Khirbet el-Sheikh Madkour\"], at 11:20 [AM], we descend to the east in the valley. At 11:25 [AM], I examine other ruins, called \"Khirbet A'id el-Miah\". Sixty toppled houses in the \"wadi\" formed a village that still existed in the Muslim period, as [proven by] the remains of a mosque there observed. In antiquity, the ruins that cover the plateau of the hill of \"Sheikh Madkour\" and which extend in the valley were probably one and the same city, divided into two parts, the upper part and the lower part.\nWhile Gu\u00e9rin does not specifically say that the site in question was the ancient Adullam, he holds that and are to be recognised as the same city; the upper and the lower. The site is maintained by the Jewish National Fund in Israel, and archaeological surveys and partial excavations have been conducted. The site features ancient caverns, cisterns carved into the rock, and a Muslim shrine known as .\n, also known as (Palestine grid: 1504/1181), is the site recognised as Adullam proper, being now a tell at the southern end of , an extension of the Elah valley. The site was first recognised as the biblical Adullam by French archaeologist Clermont-Ganneau in 1871, based on its location, a close approximation of the name and the ceramic finds it yielded. The ruin sits at an elevation of above sea-level. The ruin is overgrown with vegetation and trees on the northern flanks of the mountain whereon lies . Razed stone structures, a stone water trough, and the shaft of a stone column can still be seen there. Palestine Exploration Fund surveyor, C.R. Conder, mentions having seen in an ancient well having stone water-troughs round it.\nEarlier attempts at identification have led some to call other cave systems by the name of \"Cave of Adullam.\" Early drawings depicting the so-called \"Adullam cave\" have tentatively been identified with the cavern of \"Umm el-Tuweimin\", and the cave at \"Khureitun\" (named after Chariton the Ascetic), although modern day archaeologists and historical geographers have rejected these early hypotheses as being the Cave of Adullam, and have accepted that is the Adullam of old.\nIt has been pointed out that , if indeed it is the biblical Adullam, lies only southwest of Timnah, a site mentioned in Genesis, ch. 38, as being visited by Judah when he went up from Adullam to shear his sheep.\nHistory.\nChalcolithic period.\nSurface finds of late Chalcolithic pottery have been recovered from Tel Adullam and the archaeological site at the foot of the tell. Further evidence of human activity from this period has not been discovered through excavation.\nLate Bronze Age, Iron Age and Hebrew Bible.\nThe \"Adullam\" mentioned in the Hebrew Bible is thought to be identical with \"Tell Sheikh Madkhur\". The so-called \"Biblical period\", for time reference-sake, has been referred to by historians and archaeologists as the Late Bronze Age and the Iron Age, meaning, the Late Canaanite and Israelite periods, respectively. A.F. Rainey recognized Adullam (\"Kh. esh-Sheikh Madhk\u00fbr\") as a Late Bronze Age site.\nBy the Iron Age, Adullam is referred to in the Hebrew Bible as being one of the royal cities of the Canaanites, and is listed along with the cities Jarmuth and Socho as occupying a place in the region geographically known as the \"Shefelah\", or what is a place of transition between the mountainous region and the coastal plains.\nIt was here that Judah, the son of Jacob (Israel), came when he left his father and brothers in Migdal Eder. Judah befriended a certain Hirah, an Adullamite. In Adullam, Judah met his first wife (unnamed in the Book of Genesis), the daughter of Shuah.\nDuring the period of the Israelite conquest of the land of Canaan, Adullam was one of many city-states with independent and sovereign kings. According to the same biblical source, the king of Adullam was slain by Joshua and the Israelites during their conquest of the land. The immediate lands were, by what was thought to be a \"divine act\" of casting lots, given as a tribal inheritance to the progeny of Judah.\nMore than 400 years later, the scene of David's victory over Goliath in the Elah valley was within a short distance from Adullam, at that time a frontier village. Although David was elevated and allowed to sit in King Saul's presence, he soon fell into disrepute with the king and was forced to flee. \nDavid sought refuge in Adullam after being expelled from the city of Gath by King Achish. The Book of Samuel refers to the Cave of Adullam where he found protection while living as a refugee from King Saul. Certain caves, grottos and sepulchres are still to be seen on the hilltop, as well as on its northern and eastern slopes. It was there that \"every one that was in distress gathered together, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented.\" There, David thirsted for the well-waters of his native Beth-lehem, then occupied by a Philistine garrison. A party of David's mighty-men of valor went and fetched him water from that place, but, when they returned, David refused to drink it.\nIn the 10th-century BCE, Adullam was thought to have strategic importance, prompting King David's grandson, Rehoboam (c.\u2009931\u2013913 BCE), to fortify the town, among others, against Ancient Egypt. According to Israeli historian Nadav Na'aman, this was not a fortress in the real sense, but only a town inhabited by a civilian population, although it functioned as an administrative military center in which a garrison was stationed and food and armor stored.\nAssyrian and Chaldean conquests.\nIn the late 8th-century BCE, the Book of Micah recalled the cities of the lowlands of Judah during a time of Assyrian encroachment in the country: \"I will yet bring unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah, him that shall possess thee; he shall come even unto Adullam, O glory of Israel.\"\nSennacherib, during his third military campaign, despoiled many of the cities belonging to Judah. The Assyrian period was followed by the rise of the Neo-Babylonian Empire, a time marked by general unrest and the eventual deportation of the inhabitants of Judah by the Neo-Babylonian army in the sixth century BCE. Adullam, as with other towns of the region, would not have gone unaffected.\nPersian period.\nThe only record of Adullam for this time-period (c. 539\u2013331 BCE) is taken from the Hebrew canonical books, specifically the account of Nehemiah who returned with the Jewish exiles from the Babylonian captivity, during the reign of Artaxerxes I. According to Ezra, the acclaimed author of the book, some of these returnees had settled in Adullam. According to Nehemiah, the postexilic community that resettled in Adullam traced their lineage to the tribe of Judah.\nThe political entity that was established in Judea at the time was that of a vassal state, as Judea became a province of the Persian Empire, governed by a satrap.\nHellenistic, Roman and Byzantine periods.\nFew records abound for the site during the classical period. In 163 BCE, it was in Adullam that Judas Maccabaeus, the principal leader of the Maccabean Revolt during a time of foreign dominion in the country, retired with his fighting men, after returning from war against the Idumaeans and the Seleucid general, Gorgias. Adullam stood near the highway which later became the Roman road in the Valley of Elah, which road led from Jerusalem to Beit Gubrin.\nAs late as the early 4th century CE, Adullam was described by Eusebius as being \"a very large village about ten [Roman] miles east of Eleutheropolis.\"\nOttoman period.\nAdullam was an inhabited village in the late 16th century. An Ottoman tax ledger of 1596 lists [\"sic\"] () in the \"nahiya\" \"\u1e2aal\u012bl\" (Hebron subdistrict), and where it is noted that it had thirty-six Muslim heads of households. The copyist of the same tax ledger had erroneously mistaken the Arabic \"dal\" in the document for a \"nun\", and which name has since been corrected by historical geographers Yoel Elitzur and Toledano to read (), based on the entry's number of fiscal unit in the \"daftar\" and its corresponding place on H\u00fctteroth's map. Local inhabitants grew wheat and barley, as well as cultivated olives. Total revenues accruing from the village for that year amounted to 5160 \"ak\u00e7e\".\nAccording to Conder, an ancient road, leading from Beit Sur to Isdud once passed through \"\u02bfA\u012bd el M\u00e2\" (Adullam) and was still partially visible.\nFrench orientalist and archaeologist, Charles Clermont-Ganneau, visited the site in 1874 and wrote: \"The place is absolutely uninhabited, except during the rainy season, when the herdsmen take shelter there for the night.\"\nThe Arabs of Bayt Nattif in the 19th century, when asked about the meaning of the name of the nearby ruin, , related their own legend about the origin of the name. According to their version, the name = lit. \"Holiday of the Hundred,\" revolves around an event that occurred there, years ago. According to their story, a large fight broke out on a holiday, in which a hundred people were killed and the settlement destroyed. In memory of the event, the ruins of the settlement were named , which means \"Holiday of the Hundred.\" Scholars explain this as a case of 'popular etymology', where, in Palestinian toponyms, the original denotation of a town's name is often \"re-interpreted\" by its local population.\nModern period.\nIn 1957, the establishment of the \"Adullam region\" () began, a settlement area comprising over 100,000 dunams (25,000 acres), and bearing the name of the biblical city. Near the mound, north of it, Moshav Aderet was established in 1958.\nSurveys were conducted on the site in the years 1992 and 1999. As late as 2003, the archaeological site of Adullam, both, Upper and Lower, had not been excavated, but by September 2015, an excavation to a depth of 0.2 m in six squares of equal size was conducted in the surface of the Upper ruin, in hopes of determining the extent of the settlement at the site during the various periods from the relative distribution of the pottery. The gathered pottery sherds found \"in situ\" dated from the Early Bronze Age to the Ottoman period.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68592", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68592", "title": "Adummim", "text": "Adummim () is a place-name mentioned in the biblical Book of Joshua in connection with the ascent of Adummim.\nLocation.\nAdummim was apparently on the road between Jerusalem and Jericho in the Judaean desert, today in the West Bank. It is mentioned in the Book of Joshua (, ) as being \"on the south side of the stream\", which Matthew Easton (1897) identified with Wadi Kelt, and across from Gilgal or/and Geliloth. Easton claimed that it was nearly halfway between Jerusalem and Jericho, and now bears the name of Tal'at ed-Dumm. More recently, Pekka Pitk\u00e4nen (2010) has stated that \"The location of Adummim is unclear.\"\nThe \"ascent of Adummim\" is a very important historical road that leads up from Jericho towards Jerusalem, following the top of a ridge that forms the southern bank of Wadi Qelt and separates it from Wadi Tal'at ad-Damm.\nName.\nThe name Adummim is related to , the Hebrew word for \"red\", and can be translated as \"red places\", which may refer to the reddish streaks found in the stone of the area. The red-brown hills of the area on the road descending from Jerusalem to Jericho are made of iron-oxide-tinged limestone. The Ascent of Adummim was known as the \"Ascent of Blood\" by the Crusaders.\nSources outside the Bible.\nThe name is attested in the Annals of Thutmose III at Temple of Karnak as Atamem, which Mariette, Roug\u00e9, Maspero, M\u00fcller, Borchardt and Budge identify with the biblical Adummim.\nIn Christianity.\nIt is supposed to have been the place referred to in the parable of the Good Samaritan. The so-called Inn of the Good Samaritan has been named based on this assumption.\nArchaeological sites.\nSt George's Monastery (Wadi Qelt).\nA lavra established in the 420s in Wadi Qelt and reorganised as a monastery around the year 500 became known as St George's Monastery. Rebuilt since the 19th century, it hangs spectacularly from the cliffs on the south side of the wadi, across from the ridge rising from the Plain of Jericho towards Jerusalem and known as the \"ascent of Adummim\".\nInn of the Good Samaritan (Khan al-Hatruri).\nAnother khan built along the Ascent of Adummim, the Good Samaritan Inn, known in Arabic both as Khan al-Hatruri, and sometimes, quite confusingly (see the other khan mentioned above), as Khan al-Ahmar, stands east of the Highway 1-Route 417 junction. Eusebius mentions the Late Roman fort of Maledomni, whose traces have disappeared under the Templar castle of Maldoim (see below). Under the protection of the fortified place, a caravanserai was established. In its present shape it was built in 1903.\nIn the Early Byzantine period, there seems to have been a fortress at the site (4th-5th century), replaced in the 6th century by a square-shaped hostel, erected around a central courtyard, providing Christian pilgrims with rooms, water from a central cistern, and a large church for worship.\nThe recently restored complex holds a museum of mosaics excavated by Israeli archaeologists in the Palestinian areas, and a wing dedicated to the history and customs of the Samaritans.\nTemplar castle of Maldoim.\nAcross the modern highway from the Inn of the Good Samaritan/Khan al-Hatruri, are the archaeological remains of a medieval castle known to the Crusaders as Maldoim, Adumim, or Rouge Cisterne / Cisterna Rubea (Red Cistern), among other names. In Arabic it is known as Qal'at ad-Damm, \"Blood Castle\", and the hill it crowns as Tal'at ed-Dam, \"hill of blood\".\nMaldoim was built by the Templars before 1169/72, probably at the site of a Late Roman fort, to protect the road between Jerusalem and Jericho. It stands at the top of the \"Ascent of Blood\", as the Ascent of Adummim was known to the Crusaders. The 2025 discovery of a mosaic under the castle floor suggests the presence of a Byzantine structure there.\nMonastery of St Euthymius (Khan al-Ahmar).\nThe Byzantine Monastery of St. Euthymius, founded at first as a lavra-type monastic community by Saint Euthymius the Great in 420 along the Ascent of Adummim, played a major role in the development of desert monasticism in Palestine, and in the spread of Chalcedonian orthodoxy in the country after the 451 Church Council. Fallen into ruin, it was rebuilt in the Crusader period, only to be abandoned again after its destruction at the beginning of the Mamluk period in the 13th century by Sultan Baybars. The structure was repurposed as a caravanserai or \"hhan\" for Muslim pilgrims travelling from Jerusalem to Mecca via the nearby shrine of Nabi Musa, and became known as Khan al-Ahmar, the \"Red Khan\".\nMonastery of Martyrius.\nThe Monastery of Martyrius (5th\u20137th century), excavated in the centre of Ma'ale Adummim at a site known in Arabic as Khirbet el-Murassas, was an important Byzantine centre of monastic life in the Judaean desert.\nOther places in the area.\nThe area is accessible via Israel Highway 1.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68595", "revid": "274535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68595", "title": "Advocate", "text": "Profession in the field of law\nAn advocate is a professional in the field of law. Different countries and legal systems use the term with somewhat differing meanings. The broad equivalent in many English law\u2013based jurisdictions could be a barrister or a solicitor. However, in Scottish, Manx, South African, Italian, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Scandinavian, Polish, Israeli, South Asian and South American jurisdictions, \"advocate\" indicates a lawyer of superior classification.\n\"Advocate\" is in some languages an honorific for lawyers, such as \"Adv. Sir Alberico Gentili\". \"Advocate\" also has the everyday meaning of speaking out to help someone else, such as patient advocacy or the support expected from an elected politician; this article does not cover those senses.\nEurope.\nUnited Kingdom and Crown dependencies.\nEngland and Wales.\nIn England and Wales, Advocates and proctors practiced civil law in the Admiralty Courts and also, but in England only, in the ecclesiastical courts of the Church of England, in a similar way to barristers, attorneys and solicitors in the common law and equity courts.\nAdvocates, who formed the senior branch of the legal profession in their field, were Doctors of Law of the University of Oxford, Cambridge, or Dublin and Fellows of the Society of Doctors' Commons.\nAdvocates lost their exclusive rights of audience in probate and divorce cases when the Crown took these matters over from the church in 1857, and in Admiralty cases in 1859. The Society of Advocates was never formally wound up, but its building was sold off in 1865 and the last advocate died in 1912.\nBarristers were admitted to the Court of Arches of the Church of England in 1867. More recently, Solicitor Advocates have also been allowed to play this role.\nScotland.\nFaculty of Advocates.\nAdvocates are regulated by the Faculty of Advocates in Edinburgh. The Faculty of Advocates has about 750 members, of whom about 460 are in private practice. About 75 are King's Counsel. The Faculty is headed by the Dean of the Faculty who, along with the Vice-Dean, Treasurer, and Clerk are elected annually by secret ballot.\nThe Faculty has a service company, Faculty Services Ltd, to which almost all Advocates belong, which organized the stables (sets of Advocates or barristers' chambers) and fee collection. This gives a guarantee to all newly called Advocates of a place. Until the end of 2007, there was an agreement with the Law Society of Scotland, which is the professional body for Scottish solicitors, as to the payment of fees, but this has now been replaced by the Law Society. It remains the case that Advocates are not permitted to sue for their fees, as they have no contractual relationship with their instructing solicitor or with the client. Their fees are honoraria.\nAdvocates wear wigs, white bow-ties (or falls in the case of senior counsel), straps and gowns as a dress in court.\nBecoming an advocate.\nThe process of becoming an advocate is referred to as devilling. All intrants will be Scottish solicitors, i.e. hold a Bachelor of Laws degree and the Diploma in Legal Practice, and must have completed the traineeships of two years (which in some cases may be reduced to eighteen months) required to qualify as a solicitor; or else will be members of the bar in another common law jurisdiction.\nAdmission to the Faculty of Advocates.\nAt the end of the devilling period, a devil's admission to the Faculty is dependent on certification by the principal devil master that the devil is a fit and proper person to be an advocate and that the devil has been involved in a wide range of work in the course of devilling. A devil's competence in a number of aspects of written and oral advocacy is assessed during devilling, and a devil will not be admitted to the Faculty if assessed as not competent. Further details of this process can be found in the assessment section.\nRecent developments.\nIn recent years, increasing numbers of Advocates have come to the Scottish Bar after some time as solicitors, but it is possible to qualify with a law degree, after twenty-one months traineeship in a solicitor's office and almost a year as a 'devil', or apprentice advocate. There are exceptions for lawyers who are qualified in other European jurisdictions, but all must take the training course as 'devils'.\nUntil 2007, a number of young European lawyers were given a placement with Advocates under the European Young Lawyers Scheme organized by the British Council. They are known as 'Eurodevils', in distinction to the Scottish 'devils'. This scheme was withdrawn by the British Council. In January 2009, a replacement scheme began.\nLawyers qualified in other European Union states (but not in England and Wales) may have limited rights of audience in the Scottish supreme courts if they appear with an advocate, and a few solicitors known as 'solicitor-Advocates' have rights of audience, but for practical purposes, Advocates have almost exclusive rights of audience in the supreme courts \u2013 the High Court of Justiciary (criminal), and the Court of Session (civil). Advocates share the right of audience with solicitors in the sheriff courts and justice of the peace courts.\nIt used to be the case that Advocates were completely immune from suit etc. while conducting court cases and pre-trial work, as they had to act 'fearlessly and independently'; the rehearing of actions was considered contrary to public interest; and Advocates are \"required\" to accept clients, they cannot pick and choose. However, the seven-judge English ruling of \"Arthur J.S. Hall &amp; Co. (a firm) v. Simons\" 2000 (House of Lords) declared that none of these reasons justified the immunity strongly enough to sustain it. This has been followed in Scotland in \"Wright v Paton Farrell\" (2006) \"obiter\" insofar as civil cases are concerned.\nIsle of Man.\nAdvocates are the only lawyers with rights of audience in the courts of the Isle of Man. An advocate's role is to advise on all matters of law: it may involve representing a client in the civil and criminal courts or advising a client on matters such as matrimonial and family law, trusts and estates, regulatory matters, property transactions, and commercial and business law. In court, Advocates wear a horsehair wig, stiff collar, bands, and a gown in the same way as barristers do elsewhere.\nTo become an advocate, it is normally necessary to hold either a qualifying law degree with no less than lower second class (2:2) honors, or else a degree in another subject with no less than lower second class (2:2) honors complemented by the Common Professional Examination. It is then necessary to obtain a legal professional qualification such as the Bar Professional Training Course or the Legal Practice Course. It is not, however, necessary actually to be admitted as an English barrister or solicitor to train as an advocate.\nTrainee Advocates (as articled clerks are now more usually known) normally undertake a period of two years' training articled to a senior advocate; in the case of English barristers or solicitors who have been practicing or admitted for three years this training, the period is reduced to one year. Foreign lawyers who have been registered as legal practitioners in the Isle of Man for a certain time may also undertake a shorter period of training and supervision. During their training, all trainee Advocates are required to pass the Isle of Man bar examinations, which include papers on civil and criminal practice, constitutional and land law, and company law and taxation, as well as accounts. The examinations are rigorous and candidates are limited to three attempts to pass each paper.\nSenior English barristers are occasionally licensed to appear as Advocates in cases expected to be unusually long or complex, without having to pass the bar examination or undertake further training: they are permitted only to act in relation to the matter for which they have been licensed. Similarly, barristers and solicitors employed as public prosecutors may be licensed to appear as Advocates without having to pass the bar examination or undertake further training: they are permitted only to act as such only for the duration of that employment.\nThe professional conduct of Advocates is regulated by the Isle of Man Law Society, which also maintains a library for its members in Douglas. While Advocates in the Isle of Man have not traditionally prefixed their names with 'Advocate' in the Channel Islands manner, some Advocates have now started to adopt this practice.\nJersey and the Bailiwick of Guernsey.\nJersey and the Bailiwick of Guernsey are two separate legal jurisdictions, have largely two different sets of laws and have two separate, but similar, legal professions. In both jurisdictions, Advocates\u2014properly called Advocates of the Royal Court\u2014are the only lawyers with general rights of audience in their courts.\nTo be eligible to practice as an advocate in Jersey, it is necessary first to have a law degree from a British university or a Graduate Diploma in Law and to have qualified as a recognized legal professional in England and Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland. Thereafter, a candidate must undertake two years of practical experience in a law office dealing with Jersey law, enrol on the Jersey Law Course provided by the Institute of Law, Jersey and pass examinations in six subjects. Alternatively, a person may apply to become a Jersey advocate two years after qualifying as a Jersey solicitor.\nTo become an advocate in Guernsey, one has to possess a valid law degree or diploma, plus a qualification as an English barrister or solicitor, or a French avocat. They must then study for the Guernsey Bar. Three months of study of Norman law at the Universit\u00e9 de Caen (University of Caen) is required; this is no longer required for entry into the legal profession in Jersey.\nGuernsey Advocates dress in the same way as barristers, but substitute a black biretta-like toque for a wig, while those in Jersey go bare-headed. Advocates are entitled to prefix their names with 'Advocate'; e.g. Mr. Tostevin is called to the Guernsey Bar and is henceforth known as Advocate Tostevin.\nThe head of the profession of advocate in each bailiwick is called the B\u00e2tonnier.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, the professional conduct and the professional education of the advocates is regulated by the Dutch bar association (Nederlandse orde van advocaten) pursuant to the Advocates Act (\"Advocatenwet\").\nDutch advocates are admitted to the bar conditionally, and have full rights of audience with the district courts and court of appeal. In order to obtain unconditional qualification, the advocate has to complete the Dutch bar education (\"Beroepsopleiding Advocaten\") and fulfil certain requirements (which may vary among the various judicial regions within the Netherlands) under the supervision of a senior advocate (the \"patroon\") for a period of at least three years, called the \"stage\". During this time, the advocate is referred to as an \"advocaat-stagiair(e)\".\nIn court, advocates must wear a long black robe (a \"toga\") and a white pleated band (a \"bef\").\nNordic countries.\nThe Nordic countries have a united legal profession, which means that they do not draw a distinction between lawyers who plead in court and those who do not. To get an official recognition with an Advocates title, the candidate must have a legal degree, that is, completed ca. 5\u20136 years of legal studies from an accredited university in his or own country, and in addition have worked for some time (around 2 \u2013 5 years) under the auspices of a qualified advocate and have some experience from court. When qualified, the candidate may obtain a license as an \"advocate\", the equivalent of being called to the bar. In all the Scandinavian languages the title is \"advokat\"; in Finland \"advokat\" is the Swedish title for such a qualified lawyer, with the equivalent title in Finnish being \"asianajaja\".\nHowever, one does not necessarily have to be an advocate to represent a party in the Nordic countries legally. In Norway, a person with an appropriate law degree, for example, can practice law as a registered legal advisor (\"rettshjelper\") instead, which gives many of the same rights as an advocate's title. Both in Sweden and Norway any adult, in theory, can represent a party in court without any prior approval, training, license or advocate title. In practice it's unusual, and in Norway, it's subject to the approval of the court, which is unlikely to give it except in very simple cases.\nIn English, the Scandinavian title of \"advokat\" is interchangeably also translated as barrister, lawyer or attorney-at-law.\nRussia.\nIn Russia, anyone with a legal education (lawyer) can practice law, but only a member of the \"\" () may practice before a criminal court (other person can be a defence counsel in criminal proceeding along with a member of \"Advokatura\" but not in lieu him) and Constitutional Court (leaving aside persons having academic degree of candidate or doctor in juridical sciences who also can represent parties in constitutional proceeding). Specialist degree in law is the most commonly awarded academic degree in Russian jurisprudence but after Russia's accession to the Bologna process only bachelor of laws and master of laws academic degrees are available in Russian institutions of higher education. An \"advocate\" is a lawyer who has demonstrated qualification and belongs to an organizational structure of Advocates specified by law, known as being \"called to the bar\" in Commonwealth countries.\nAn examination is administered by the qualifications commission of regional advocate's chamber for admission to its \"\". To sit for the exam, one must have a higher legal education and also two years of experience in legal work after graduation or a training program in a law firm after graduation. The exam is both written and oral, but the main test is oral. The written exam takes place in the form of computer testing and includes issues of the professional conduct of advocate and advocate's professional responsibility. After successfully passing of the written exam the candidates are allowed to take the oral exam. As part of the oral exam, the candidate must demonstrate his knowledge in various bodies of law and solve some mimic a real-life legal tasks. The candidate who does not pass the qualification exam can try to pass it again after 1 year only. The qualifications commission is composed of seven Advocates, two judges, two representatives of the regional legislature, and two representatives of the Ministry of Justice.\nAfter successful passing the qualification exam a candidate should take the oath of advocate. From the moment of taking the oath, he becomes an advocate and a member of the advocate's chamber of the relevant federal subject of Russia. Advocate's chamber sends relevant information to the territorial subdivision of the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation, which includes the new advocate in the register of Advocates of the relevant federal subject of Russia and issues to him an advocate's certificate, which is the only official document confirming the status of an advocate, on the basis of this information. The status of an advocate is granted for an indefinite period and is not limited by any age. There is only 1 advocate's chamber in each federal subject of Russia. Each advocate can be the member of only 1 advocate's chamber and can be listed in the register of Advocates of the relevant federal subject of Russia only. In case of relocation to another region, the advocate ceases to be a member of the advocate's chamber and should be excluded from register of Advocates at the old place of residence (advocate's certificate should be returned to the subdivision of the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation, which issued it), and after that he becomes a member of the advocate's chamber and is included in the register of Advocates at the new place of residence (where he receive new advocate's certificate) without any exams. Each advocate can carry out his professional activity throughout Russia, regardless of membership in particular regional advocate's chamber and regardless of particular regional register where he is listed in. Advocates carry out their professional activity individually (advocate's cabinet) or as the member of advocate's juridical person (collegium of Advocates, advocate's bureau). Advocate can open own cabinet after at least 3 years legal practice in collegium or bureau. An advocate, who has opened own cabinet, can not be the member of any advocate's juridical person, and an advocate, who is the member of one advocate's juridical person, can not be the member of any other advocate's juridical person. Advocate is obliged to report to advocate's chamber any changes in his membership in a collegium or a bureau and, equally, opening and closing a cabinet.\nAn advocate can not be an individual entrepreneur, government official, municipal official, notary, judge, elected official. An advocate can not work under an employment (labour) contract, with the exception of scientific and teaching activities. An advocate may combine his status with the status of a patent attorney, a trustee in bankruptcy. An advocate may be a shareholder/owner of business juridical persons and a member of voluntary associations and political parties. Russian advocate may have a status of advocate (attorney, barrister, solicitor) in foreign jurisdiction, subject to above conditions.\nRussian law provides for voluntary and involuntary suspension of advocate's status. Voluntary suspension for a term of 1 to 10 years occurs when an Advocate files relevant application to the advocate's chamber. Involuntary suspension is applicable in cases of serious illness, election to an elected position in federal, regional or local authorities, military conscription, declaration of absence made by the court decision. An Advocate can not carry out advocate's activity during suspension, otherwise he may be deprived of the right to be an Advocate. After the end of the suspension, advocate's status should be resumed without any additional conditions. Also Russian law provides for voluntary and involuntary termination of advocate's status. Voluntary termination of the status occurs when an Advocate files relevant application to the advocate's chamber. Involuntary termination of the status is applicable in cases of death, declaration of no having legal capacity or having limited legal capacity made by the court decision, conviction for intentional crime made by the court decision, violations of the federal law regulating advocate's activity or advocate's code of conduct found by advocate's chamber. The latter two cases incur lifetime prohibition on being an Advocate. In other cases, ex-Advocate can go back to being an Advocate on general grounds through a passing the qualification exam, on condition that the reasons for termination of advocate's status have ceased to exist.\nAdvocate's chambers are professional associations of Advocates, which are based on mandatory membership of Advocates. All regional advocate's chambers are mandatory members of Federal Chamber of Advocates of Russian Federation (), which is professional association at the federal level.\nAs of 2018, there were 49,4 Advocates per people in Russia.\nIn Russia, foreign Advocates can advise on the legislation of their countries; they should register in the special register maintained by the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation to obtain the right to carry out this activity. Foreign advocate can in addition become Russian advocate. There are two possible paths for that. The first possibility is to become Russian advocate on the same basis as Russian citizens (i.e. through higher legal education in one of Russian universities, two years of experience in legal work in Russia after graduation or a training program in Russian law firm after graduation, successful passing the qualification exam). Since Russia's WTO Accession the second possibility is available: foreign advocate can just pass special qualification exam to become Russian advocate.\nAsia.\nBangladesh.\nIn Bangladesh, after passing the Higher Secondary School Certificate, one can apply for admission for studying law in Universities. There are several public and private universities which provide Bachelor of Laws and Master of Laws degree in Bangladesh. Generally, the LL.B. course is equivalent to a four-year bachelor's degree. Graduate lawyers have to seat for and pass the Bar Council Exam to become Advocates.\nAdvocate of Supreme Court.\nBy passing the Bangladesh Bar Council Exam, Advocates are eligible to practice in the Supreme Court of Bangladesh and other courts. A license is obtained after successful completion of two year's practice in the lower courts by applicant, which is reviewed by a body of the relevant provincial Bar Council. Most applications after successful completion of the requirement, are accepted.\nIndia.\nIn India, the law relating to the Advocates is the Advocates Act, 1961 introduced and thought up by Ashoke Kumar Sen, the then law minister of India, which is a law passed by the Parliament and is administered and enforced by the Bar Council of India. Under the Act, the Bar Council of India is the supreme regulatory body to regulate the legal profession in India and also to ensure the compliance of the laws and maintenance of professional standards by the legal profession in the country.\nEach State has a Bar Council of its own whose function is to enroll the Advocates willing to practice predominantly within the territorial confines of that State and to perform the functions of the Bar Council of India within the territory assigned to them. Therefore, each law degree holder must be enrolled with a (single) State Bar Council to practice in India. However, enrollment with any State Bar Council does not restrict the Advocate from appearing before any court in India, even though it is beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the State Bar Council which he is enrolled in.\nThe advantage of having the State Bar Councils is that the workload of the Bar Council of India can be divided into these various State Bar Councils and also that matters can be dealt with locally and in an expedited manner. However, for all practical and legal purposes, the Bar Council of India retains with it, the final power to take decisions in any and all matters related to the legal profession on the whole or with respect to any Advocate individually, as so provided under the Advocates Act, 1961.\nThe process of being entitled to practice in India is twofold. First, the applicant must be a holder of a law degree from a recognised institution in India (or from one of the four recognised Universities in the United Kingdom) and second, must pass the enrollment qualifications of the Bar Council of the state where he/she seeks to be enrolled. For this purpose, the Bar Council of India has an internal Committee whose function is to supervise and examine the various institutions conferring law degrees and to grant recognition to these institutions once they meet the required standards. In this manner, the Bar Council of India also ensures the standard of education required for practicing in India is met with. As regards the qualification for enrollment with the State Bar Council, while the actual formalities may vary from one State to another, yet predominately they ensure that the application has not been a bankrupt /criminal and is generally fit to practice before courts of India.\nEnrollment with a Bar Council also means that the law degree holder is recognised as an Advocate and is required to maintain a standard of conduct and professional demeanor at all times, both on and off the profession. The Bar Council of India also prescribes \"Rules of Conduct\" to be observed by the Advocates in the courts, while interacting with clients and even otherwise.\nAll Advocates in India are at the same level and are recognised as such. Any distinction, if any, is made only on the basis of seniority, which implies the length of practice at the Bar. As a recognition of law practice and specialisation in an area of law, there is a concept of conferral of Senior Advocate status. An Advocate may be recognised by the Judges of the High Court (in case of an Advocate practicing before that High Court) or by the Supreme Court (in case of the Advocate practicing before the Supreme Court). While the conferral of Senior Advocate status not only implies distinction and fame of the Advocate, it also requires the Senior Advocate to follow higher standards of conduct and some distinct rules. Also, a Senior Advocate is not allowed to interact directly with the clients. He can only take briefs from other Advocates and argue on the basis of the details given by them. From the year 2010 onward a mandatory rule is made for lawyers passing out from the year 2009\u201310 to sit for an evaluation test named AIBE (All India Bar Exam) for one to qualify as an advocate and practice in the courts. However, to practice law before the Supreme Court of India, Advocates must first appear for and qualify in the Supreme Court Advocate on Record Examination conducted by the Supreme Court.\nFurther, under the Constitutional structure, there is a provision for the elevation of Advocates as judges of High Courts and Supreme Court. The only requirement is the Advocate must have ten years standing before the High Court(/s) or before the Supreme Court to be eligible for such. (Article 217 and 124 of the Constitution of India for High Courts and Supreme Court respectively)\nPakistan.\nThere are four levels of Advocates exist in Pakistan, 1. Advocate 2. Advocate High Court 3. Advocate Supreme Court 4. Senior Advocate Supreme Court:\nAdvocate.\nThe first level is that of an Advocate, who is eligible to practice in the district courts or lower courts in their respective province. An Advocate is considered an officer of the court. To become an Advocate, one can qualify by completing a five-year law degree (LL.B (Hons)), or by obtaining a foreign LL.B degree of a shorter duration, recognized by the relevant authorities. Additionally, they must complete six months of pupillage under a senior Advocate in their chambers. Afterward, they are required to pass a GAT test recognized by the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan (HEC) and the Pakistan Bar Council, achieving a minimum passing score of 50%. Subsequently, they must successfully clear the Bar admission test and undergo an examination conducted by the Bar Council of their respective province to determine their suitability for becoming an Advocate and confirm that they have no criminal convictions. Upon passing a multiple-choice question examination and an interview conducted by members of the provincial Bar Council, the Bar Council will issue them a license to practice before the Subordinate Courts up to the High Court.\nAdvocate High Court.\nAfter completing two years of practice as an Advocate, with a minimum of ten successfully litigated cases, the Advocate will be required to submit a list of these cases for examination by a committee appointed by the High Court. The committee, chaired by a High Court Judge, will review the cases and, if satisfied, grant their approval for the Advocate's elevation to practice as an Advocate of the High Court. Upon approval, the committee will send the recommendation directly to the Bar Council, and the Advocate will be issued a license to practice as an Advocate of the High Court. As an Advocate of the High Court, they will have the right to practice in any court throughout the country, except for the Supreme Court of Pakistan.\nAdvocate Supreme Court.\nAdvocate Supreme Court is the third level. After successful completion of ten years of practice in the High Courts by the applicant, the panel of members of Pakistan Bar Council and one judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, review the application. (Before 1985 the requirement was successful completion of five years practice in the High Courts of Pakistan.) Over fifty per cent of applications are accepted, after successful completion of the requirement. An unsuccessful application in one year does not bar the candidate from re-applying in the next judicial year.\nThe highest level is the Senior Advocate Supreme Court. It is Pakistan's title equivalent to Queen's Counsel in the United Kingdom. \nAfter at least fifteen years of practice, by invitation or by an application to a panel of Supreme Court Judges headed by the Chief Justice of Pakistan, one can become Senior Advocate of Supreme Court of Pakistan. Very few applications are accepted and even fewer invitations are made. Attorneys General are usually invited by the Supreme Court on the appointment, to the office. So are some notable High Court judges who upon retirement choose to practice before the Supreme Court, where they are still eligible to do so.\nSri Lanka.\nIn Sri Lanka (formally Ceylon) till 1973 Advocate was a practitioner in a court of law who is legally qualified to prosecute and defend actions in such court on the retainer of clients. Advocates had to pass the HSC exam and enter the Ceylon Law College and follow the Advocates course and sit for the relevant exams. Thereafter, they would have to practice under a senior advocate before being called to the bar for admission as an Advocate of the Supreme Court of Ceylon. Members of the English, Scottish and Irish Bars are permitted to be admitted to a Barrister without examination on payment of a fee. Ceylonese Advocates with three years standing were allowed to be called to the English Bar without examination on completing three terms. The \"Justice Law No. 44 of 1973\" of the National State Assembly created a single group of practitioners known as Attorneys-at-law. The current equivalent to an advocate is a counsel who is a trial lawyer distinguished from an instructing attorney.\nAfrica.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, there are two main branches of legal practitioner: attorneys, who do legal work of all kinds, and Advocates, who are specialist litigators; see Attorneys in South Africa. \nIn general, Advocates (also called 'counsel') are 'briefed' by attorneys when a specialist skill in court-based litigation, or in research into the law (an opinion) is required. \nReferral Advocates thus have no direct contact with clients and are said to be in a 'referral' profession. However, Advocates who have a Trust Account and hold a valid Fidelity Fund Certificate are authorized to take briefs directly from the public and attorneys respectively.\nThe key formal distinction, however, is the different rights with regard to the courts in which they may appear. Advocates have the right to appear in any court, while attorneys have the right to appear only in the lower courts. (And, under certain conditions, can acquire the right of appearance in the superior courts, by applying to the registrar of the provincial division of the relevant High Court.) A further distinction is that while attorneys practice in partnership, Advocates are individual practitioners and never form partnerships; practice in \"Chambers\" and / or \"Groups\" is standard.\nThe requirements to enter private practice as Advocates (Junior Counsel) are to hold the LL.B. degree, and to become a member of a https:// by undergoing a period of training (pupilage) for one year with a practicing Advocate, and to sit an admission examination. See Legal education in South Africa.\nOn the recommendation of the Bar Councils, an advocate \"of proven experience and skill\" with at least ten years experience, may be appointed by the President of South Africa as a Senior Counsel (SC; also referred to as a \"silk\"). Junior advocates are commonly rewarded with a traditional gift of a red brief bag by a Senior Counsel as recognition for excellence.\n\"State Advocates\" act as a public prosecutor in High Court matters, typically in cases requiring preparation and research. They are appointed by the National Prosecuting Authority and are attached to the Office of the National Director of Public Prosecutions.\nAmericas.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, the bar examination occurs nationally in March, August, and December. These examinations are unified and organized by the Order of Attorneys of Brazil. After 5 years in law school, Brazilian law students are required to take the bar exam, which consists of 2 phases: the multiple choice test and written test, without any further requirements.\nThe Constitution of Brazil applies restrictions on professional practice of law in the fulfillment of the requirements, which may include in addition to graduation, formal submission of the applicant in the proficiency tests. The Order exam is tied to Law No. 8609 of 4/7/1994:\n\"Article 8: For registration as an attorney is needed: IV - \"To pass the Examination of the Order;\"\nWithin its powers expressly granted by the Constitution, the ordinary legislative demands that whoever wishes to pursue the legal profession possess the degree of Bachelor of Law and approval of Examination of Order, whose preparation and implementation is done by their own class. The Constitution itself provides for the restriction, and the Statute of Law requires the examination.\nThe bar exam in Brazil approves very few students and is considered a hard one. For instance, in February 2014, the Bar association made a release stating that only 19.64% of students had been approved in the last exam and were able to register as a lawyer.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68597", "revid": "1314852185", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68597", "title": "Agabus", "text": "One of the seventy early Christian disciples\nAgabus (; ; ) was an early follower of Christianity from Syria mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles as a prophet. He is traditionally remembered as one of the Seventy Disciples described in Luke 10 ().\nName.\nThe name Agabus derived from the Aramaic \"\u1e24agab\", meaning \"Grasshopper\", which may have been a nickname or pseudonym.\nBiblical and traditional accounts.\nAccording to extrabiblical tradition, Agabus appears to have been a resident of Jerusalem. He is said to have been one of the seventy two disciples, mentioned in the Gospel of Luke, commissioned to preach the gospel. It is said that Agabus was with the twelve apostles in the upper room on the day of Pentecost.\nAccording to Acts , he was one of a group of prophets who travelled from Jerusalem to Antioch. The author reports that Agabus had received the gift of prophecy and predicted a severe famine, which occurred during the reign of the emperor Claudius.\nAlso, according to Acts , 'a certain prophet', () named Agabus met Paul the Apostle at Caesarea Maritima in AD 58. He was, according to the Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentary, 'no doubt the same' Agabus as had been mentioned in , and Heinrich Meyer states that 'there is no reason against the assumed identity of this person with the one mentioned in Acts 11:28. Agabus warned Paul of his coming capture; he bound his own hands and feet with Paul's belt to demonstrate what would happen if he continued his journey to Jerusalem, stating the message of the Holy Spirit:\nSo shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man who owns this belt, and deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.\nPaul, however, would not be persuaded to stay away.\nAgabus' symbolic action has been compared with the Jewish prophet Jeremiah:\nThus the LORD said to me, \"Go and buy yourself a linen waistband and put it around your waist, but do not put it in water.\" So I bought the waistband in accordance with the word of the LORD and put it around my waist ... For as a belt is bound around the waist, so I bound all the people of Israel and all the people of Judah to me,' declares the LORD, 'to be my people for my renown and praise and honor.\nTradition says that Agabas went to many countries, teaching and converting many. This moved the Jews of Jerusalem to arrest him, and they tortured him by beating him severely, and putting a rope around his neck. He was dragged outside the city and stoned to death. Jesuit theologian Anthony Maas says he was martyred at Antioch.\nVeneration.\nThe Catholic Church's General Roman Calendar lists his feast day on February 13, while Eastern Christians celebrate it on March 8.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68598", "revid": "31031784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68598", "title": "Agag", "text": "Northwest Semitic name or title applied to a biblical king\nAgag (; \"\u02be\u0102g\u0101g\") is a Northwest Semitic name or title applied to a biblical king. It has been suggested that \"Agag\" was a dynastic name of the kings of Amalek, just as Pharaoh was used as a dynastic name for the ancient Egyptians. The etymology is uncertain, according to John L. McKenzie (1995), while Cox (1884) suggested \"High.\"\nIn the Torah, the expression \"Its king higher than Agag, and its kingdom exalted\" was uttered by Balaam in Numbers 24:7, in his third prophetic utterance, to describe a king of Israel who would be higher than the king of Amalek. This is understood to mean that Israel's king would take a higher position than even Amalek himself, and would exercise a wider authority. The writer uses an allusion to the literal significance of the word \"Agag\", meaning \"high\", to convey that the king of Israel would be \"higher than High\". A characteristic trait of biblical poetry is to use puns.\nAgag also refers to the Amalekite king who survived King Saul's extermination campaign, as punishment for Amalekite crimes, in the Book of Samuel. Saul failed to execute Agag and allowed the people to keep some of the spoils, and this resulted in Samuel's pronouncement of God's rejection of Saul as king. Agag was then executed by Samuel, to punish him for his offense of \"bereaving women of children with the sword\".\nViews in Judaism.\nThe rabbis taught that the Jews took vengeance on Agag for the cruelties they had undergone at the hands of the Amalekites, who, to mock at the Israelites, their God, and the rite of circumcision, mutilated every Jew that fell into their power. Samuel, they say, treated Agag in the same way. According to some authorities, the death of Agag, described in the Bible by the unusual word \"va-yeshassef\" (\"hewed in pieces,\" I Samuel 15:33), was brought about in a much more cruel way than the word denotes. Others think that the only unusual thing in the execution of Agag consisted in the fact that it was not carried out strictly in accordance with the provisions of the Jewish law, requiring witnesses to prove the crime; nor had he been specifically \"warned\" as the law required. But, Agag being a heathen, Samuel convicted him according to the heathen law, which demanded only evidence of the crime for condemnation (Pesiq. iii. 25b, Pesiq. R. xii. xiii. and the parallel passages quoted by Buber in Pesiq.). The execution of Agag, however, occurred in one respect too late, for had he been killed one day sooner\u2014that is, immediately upon his capture by Saul\u2014the great peril which the Jews had to undergo at the hands of Haman would have been averted, for Agag thereby became a progenitor of Haman (Megillah 13a, Targ. Sheni to Esth. iv. 13).\nAccording to another Midrash, Doeg the Edomite tried to extend the life of Agag, the king of the Amalekites-Edomites, by interpreting Lev. 22:28 into a prohibition against the destruction of both the old and the young in war (Midr. Teh. lii. 4). Doeg is among those who have forfeited their portion in the future world by their wickedness (Sanh. x. 1; compare ib. 109b). Doeg is an instance of the evil consequences of calumny, because by calumniating the priests of Nob he lost his own life, and caused the death of Saul, Abimelech, and Abner (Yer. Peah i. 16a; Midr. Teh. cxx. 9 [ed. Buber, p.\u00a0504]).E. C. L. G.\nWhen he received the command to smite Amalek (I Sam. 15:3), Saul said: \"For one found slain the Torah requires a sin offering [Deut. 21:1-9]; and here so many shall be slain. If the old have sinned, why should the young suffer; and if men have been guilty, why should the cattle be destroyed?\" It was this mildness that cost him his crown (Yoma 22b; Num. R. i. 10)\u2014the fact that he was merciful even to his enemies, being indulgent to rebels themselves, and frequently waiving the homage due to him. If his mercy toward a foe was a sin, it was his misfortune that it was reckoned against him. David, although he had committed much iniquity, was so favored that it was not remembered to his injury (Yoma 22b; M. \u1e32 16b, and Rashi ad loc.).\nHarsh as it seems the command to blot out Amalek's memory, its justification was seen in the leniency shown by King Saul, the son of Kish, to Agag, the king of the Amalekites (I Samuel 15:9), which made it possible for Haman the Agagite to appear (Esther 3:1); his cruel plot against the Jews could only be counteracted by another descendant of Kish, Mordecai (Pesi\u1e33. R. xiii.). Every year, therefore, the chapter, \"Remember what Amalek did unto thee\" (Deut. 25:17-19), is read in the synagogue on the Sabbath preceding Purim, and the story of Saul and Agag in chapter 15 of I Samuel is read as the Haftarah."}
{"id": "68599", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68599", "title": "Age", "text": "Age or AGE may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68601", "revid": "649025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68601", "title": "Herod Agrippa", "text": "King of Judaea (11 BC\u2013AD 44) (r. 41\u201344)\nHerod Agrippa I (Roman name: Marcus Julius Agrippa; c.\u200911 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009AD 44), also simply known as Herod Agrippa, Agrippa I, () or Agrippa the Great, was the last king of Judea. He was a grandson of Herod the Great and the father of Herod Agrippa II, the last known king from the Herodian dynasty. He was an acquaintance or friend of Roman emperors and played crucial roles in internal Roman politics.\nHe spent his childhood and youth at the imperial court in Rome where he befriended the imperial princes Claudius and Drusus. He suffered a period of disgrace following the death of Drusus which forced him to return to live in Judea. Back in Rome around 35, Tiberius made him the guardian of his grandson Tiberius Gemellus, and Agrippa approached the other designated heir, Caligula. The advent of Caligula to the throne allowed Agrippa to become king of Batanea, Trachonitis, Gaulanitis, Auranitis, Paneas and Iturea in 37 by obtaining the old tetrarchies of Philip and Lysanias, then Galilee and Perea in 40 following the disgrace of his uncle, Herod Antipas.\nAfter the assassination of Caligula, he played a leading role in Rome to the accession of Claudius to becoming the head of the empire in 41, and he was endowed with the former territories of Herod Archelaus (Idumea, Judea and Samaria) thus ruling over a territory as vast as the kingdom of Herod the Great.\nCarrying a dual Jewish and Roman identity, he played the role of intercessor on behalf of the Jews with the Roman authorities and, on the domestic level, gave hope to some of his Jewish subjects of the restoration of an independent kingdom. Pursuing the Herodian policy of euergetism through major works in several Greek cities of the Near East, he nevertheless alienated some of his Greek and Syrian subjects while his regional ambitions earned him the opposition of Marsus, the legate of Roman Syria.\nAgrippa I died suddenly from an infestation of worms in 44. In a Christian context, he is traditionally identified as the king simply named Herod whose death is recounted in Acts 12 ().\nBiography.\nOrigins.\nFamily.\nHerod Agrippa was born in Caesarea Maritima around 11 BC. He was the son of Aristobulus IV, one of the children that Herod the Great had with Mariamne the Hasmonean. His mother was Berenice, daughter of Salome, daughter of Antipater the Idumaean and sister of Herod the Great. Herod the Great was therefore both the paternal grandfather and the maternal great-uncle of Agrippa, and Agrippa thus descends from both the Hasmonean and Herodian dynasties. His parents marked the Roman status of this Jewish prince by giving him the name of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, a close collaborator of Emperor Augustus.\nHerod the Great, a ruler perceived as a ruthless usurper by his subjects, was a devoted supporter of the Roman Empire and promoted its cause throughout his kingdom. His reign was characterized by violence and numerous family intrigues as he had 10 wives. In 29 BC, Herod executed his wife Mariamne (Agrippa\u2019s grandmother). In 7 BC, when Agrippa was just three or four years old, Herod had two of his sons (Agrippa's father Aristobulus IV and his uncle Alexander) executed following more palace intrigues. These events also led to the executions of Antipater, a son Herod had with Doris, and Costobarus, Agrippa\u2019s maternal grandfather, three years later. Herod was responsible for the deaths of many members of the Hasmonean dynasty and its supporters, almost wiping them out entirely. However, he spared the children of Aristobulus IV (including Agrippa, Herod, Aristobulus Minor, Herodias, and Mariamne).\nImperial court.\nIn 5 BC, two years after the condemnation of his father, the young Agrippa I was sent by Herod the Great to the imperial court of Rome in the company of Berenice as well as his brothers and sisters. He was supported there by his mother's friend Antonia Minor (sister-in-law of Tiberius \u2013 who would become emperor in 14 \u2013 and mother of the future emperor Claudius) as well as by Empress Livia, who was the friend of his grandmother. Agrippa I grew up in Rome with the children of the imperial family, including Drusus, the young son of Tiberius, to whom he was particularly attached, and Tiberius' nephew Claudius, who was the same age as Agrippa I. He thus lived all his youth in the capital of the empire and personally knew almost all the members of the imperial family. At that time, Agrippa I's future appeared to be secured by his privileged relationship with Drusus (the heir apparent of Tiberius) and Claudius.\nAs young men, Agrippa I and his friends Claudius and Drusus had a reputation for immorality and excess. Agrippa I went into debt as a result of this sumptuous life and received significant financial assistance from his uncle Herod Antipas. But Agrippa I's future darkened with the death of Drusus in 23, isolating him and leaving him helpless in the face of his creditors, especially since Berenice probably died at the same time. After the death of his son, the distraught Tiberius reacted by removing Agrippa I and Claudius from his court.\nReturn to Judea.\nAgrippa I squandered the rest of his fortune trying to win the favor of the freedmen of Tiberius, and he hastily left Rome for the province of Judaea. In Judaea he experienced various adventures and scandals linked to the need to ensure his lifestyle without enjoying the corresponding income.\nAround 26, Agrippa married his cousin Cypros (daughter of Phasael, son of the tetrarch Phasael) who gave him a son named Herod Agrippa II. Agrippa I and Cypros lived in a fortress in Malatha of Idumea where they led a modest existence, far from the splendor of the imperial court.\nCypros got along well with Herodias, the wife of Herod Antipas, who encouraged Antipas to continue to help Agrippa I. Antipas provided him with money, offered to settle Agrippa I and his family in Tiberias, and appointed him as the \"agoranomos\" (organizer of the \"agora\") of the city, which provided him with a regular income. However, this situation was short-lived. Agrippa I accepted at first, but he soon gave the impression of not being satisfied with what was given to him. He quickly found this burden boring in a small provincial town devoid of the amenities of the Roman civilization which he had become accustomed. He quarreled with Antipas during a banquet in Tyre and then went to Syria, of which his friend Lucius Pomponius Flaccus was the legate. Shortly after, he was disgraced following an intervention by his brother Aristobulus Minor, who denounced him to Flaccus for having received a bribe to defend the interests of Damascus against Sidon in a border dispute brought before his legate friend. Agrippa I then decided to attempt a return to Rome where Tiberius might agree to receive his son's old friends again.\nBack to Rome.\nAgrippa I borrowed the sum of 20,000 drachmas to embark at Anthedon for Alexandria, after having been reminded by the Roman governor of Yavne, Herennius Capiton, for the debts contracted vis-\u00e0-vis the treasury of the empire. Herennius sent him the troop, but taking advantage of the night, Agrippa I embarked and managed to reach Alexandria where he obtained new funding from the alabarch Alexander Lysimachus, brother of Philo and head of the Jewish community of Alexandria. This senior official, belonging to a Jewish family of Roman citizens, was a large landowner and, like Agrippa I, a friend of Claudius. Lysimachus refused to lend the money directly to Agrippa I, whose reputation for profligacy was well established. It was with his capital of 200,000 drachmas that Agrippa embarked for Italy in the spring of 36.\nTiberius, retired to Capri, received Agrippa I and gave his son's former companion a warm welcome, which was soon tempered by a letter from the governor of Yavne about his debts. But Antonia Minor helped Agrippa I to get out of this new embarrassment by advancing him the totality of the sum due\u2014300,000 drachmas\u2014and Agrippa I regained imperial favour. All these details are found in the second work of Josephus, the \"Antiquities of the Jews\", published around 93/94, during the reign of Domitian, but in book II of \"The Jewish War\", his first account, published between 75\u201379, Josephus was more direct. It was \"to accuse the tetrarch\" Herod Antipas, that Agrippa I decided to go \"to Tiberius\", in order to try to take his domain, and it was because Agrippa I had been ousted from his pretensions to obtain the tetrarchy of Antipas that he would have started plotting against the emperor. Like other information about Agrippa, these are not found in the Judaic texts, whereas Josephus expands much on the subject.\nThe emperor asked Agrippa I to take charge of Drusus' son, his grandson Tiberius Gemellus, then a teenager and one of the two designated heirs of Tiberius with his grand-nephew Caius Caligula, grandson of the protector of Agrippa I, Antonia. Antonia undertook to win the favors and friendship of Caius, imitated in this by another prince without a kingdom, Antiochos of Commagene, and managed to contract a loan of one million drachmas from a Samaritan freedman of the emperor to carry out his project with the rising star of Rome. Although the conditions are unknown under which the friendship between the two men was forged, it must have been worth such an investment.\nA flattery from Agrippa I to Caligula however caused him trouble: wishing in a conversation that the death of Tiberius would not be delayed any longer so that the young prince could succeed him, this remark was reported to Tiberius who ordered the arrest of Agrippa I. Agrippa I enjoyed a comfortable captivity and was released by Caligula shortly after the death of Tiberius on 16 March 37, when Pontius Pilate arrived in Rome.\nThe accession to the throne of his friend began Agrippa I's fortune. Caligula offered Agrippa I a gold chain \"of the same weight as the chain of his captivity\". He granted him, in addition to the title of king and the diadem which was its sign, the territories of Philip, who had died shortly before, tetrarch of Iturea, Trachonitis, Batanea, Gaulanitis, Auranitis and Paneas, located northeast of the lake of Tiberias. Caligula also conferred on him the praetorian ornaments, a dignity which allows certain non-senators to sit among them during public celebrations. \"This completely exceptional reversal of the situation seems to have greatly impressed Agrippa's contemporaries.\"\nAccording to Josephus, after he placed the royal diadem on the head of Agrippa I, Caligula sent Marullus as \"hipparch (\u1f31\u03c0\u03c0\u03ac\u03c1\u03c7\u03b7\u03c2) of Judea\" to replace Pontius Pilate, who had been dismissed by Lucius Vitellius and had just arrived in Rome. Agrippa I showed no eagerness to take charge of the affairs of his kingdom, and it was only in the summer of 38 that he went to Batanea for a short stay.\nTroubles in Judea.\nDuring his stay in Rome, several events took place in Judaea which created a very tense situation. Since 35, the Romans and the legate of Syria Lucius Vitellius were engaged in a decisive confrontation against the Parthians and their king Artabanus III about the control of the Kingdom of Armenia. In 36, the armies of two kings who were clients of the Romans, Aretas IV and Herod Antipas, clashed around the territory of Gamla, causing a crushing defeat for Antipas. According to Movses Khorenatsi, as well as several sources in Syriac and Armenian, King Abgar V of Edessa provided auxiliary forces to Aretas. However, the historicity of this mention is disputed by Jean-Pierre Mah\u00e9. It is possible that Aretas took advantage of Antipas' participation in the great conference on the Euphrates, to conceal peace and the Roman victory over Artabanus (autumn 36), to launch his offensive. The territorial claim of the Nabataeans was revived by Antipas' will to repudiate Phasa\u00e9lis, the daughter of Aretas, to marry Herodias, the sister of Agrippa I. Antipas' goal was dynastic. It is a question of consolidating his position to be named by the emperor at the head of the tetrarchy of Philip who has just died or to be named king. At some point in this conflict, probably between 29 and 35, Antipas attempted to silence his opposition by executing John the Baptist. This execution seems to have had important repercussions on the political situation in the region for several years. Thus the defeat of Antipas is considered within the Jewish population as a divine revenge against Antipas to punish him for having put John to death and of which Aretas would have been only the instrument.\nAccording to Simon Claude Mimouni, the governorship of Pontius Pilate was one of the five high points of the troubles that Judea experienced between the death of Herod the Great and the outbreak of the Great Jewish Revolt, punctuated by no less than six major incidents, to which must be added the crucifixion of Jesus of Nazareth and possibly the sedition of Jesus Bar Abbas, whose popularity is reported in the Synoptic Gospels. However, for some historians, the two Jesuses are one, the evangelists using a literary device to describe two faces of Jesus, while exempting the Romans from their responsibility in this execution, so that the Gospels cannot be suspected of containing the slightest criticism of the authorities in power.\nIn 36, Pontius Pilate quickly suppressed a gathering of Samaritans on Mount Gerizim. The gathering had a messianic connotation whose leader\u2014whom Josephus avoids naming\u2014sought to appear as the eschatological prophet similar to Moses, one of the three messianic figures found in the Dead Sea Scrolls. A figure that has also been attributed to John the Baptist and Jesus the Nazorean. Certain Church Fathers, as well as the Mandaean tradition and in particular one of their writings, the \"Haran-Gawaita\", provide indications according to which it could be Dositheos of Samaria who succeeded to the head of the movement of John the Baptist after his execution, for he was one of his disciples. Pilate crucified their leaders and the most prominent personalities that he managed to capture. At the end of 36, Vitellius used the complaints of the Council of Samaritans about this incident as a pretext to dismiss Pilate at the end of a ten-year term so that he explains to the emperor what the Jews are accusing him of. On the following Passover, he came in person to Jerusalem to dismiss the high priest Caiaphas, who was too closely linked to Pilate, and restored to the priests of the temple the supervision of the ceremonies of the Jewish worship festivals. When the death of Tiberius was announced at Pentecost in 37, Vitellius, reluctant to support Antipas with his troops, interrupted the march of his two legions against Aretas, considering that he could no longer wage war without orders from the new emperor. He made the people swear loyalty to Caligula and once again dismissed the high priest whom he had appointed 50 days earlier.\nEstablishment of the kingdom.\nAgrippa I returned to his territories in the summer of 38. Josephus does not recount the conditions under which the Nabataean troops withdrew from the former tetrarchy of Philip, which constituted the bulk of the territories attributed to Agrippa I. In an agreement between Aretas and Caligula, Damascus was transferred to Nabathean control.\nOn the way to his new kingdom, Agrippa I passed through Alexandria around July 38 where he probably lodged with the alabarch Alexander Lysimachus, the brother of Philo of Alexandria and the father of Tiberius Alexander. whose daughter Berenice would marry the son Marcus Alexander a few years later. There was then an anti-Jewish atmosphere in the city that had lasted for some time. During festivities, Agrippa was the target of a popular anti-Jewish masquerade featuring an \"idiot\" nicknamed Karabas, foreshadowing the Jewish-Alexandrian conflict that agitated the city from 38 to 41. These troubles led the two parties\u2014Jews and Alexandrian Greeks\u2014to each send three delegates to the emperor to settle the deeper conflict between the two communities. Philo was one of the Jewish delegation.\nThe return of Agrippa I excited the jealousy of his sister Herodias who urged her husband Antipas to claim for himself the title of king in Rome. In 39, Antipas resolved to meet Caligula to try to obtain this imperial favor, which precipitated his loss. Informed of this trip, Agrippa dispatched his most faithful freedman to Rome, bearing a letter for the emperor, followed soon after by Agrippa I himself. In the letter he accuses Antipas of fomenting a plot with the Parthians and of having accumulated, without informing the emperor, stocks of arms in his arsenals in Tiberias, probably with the intention of preparing his revenge against Aretas who had defeated him a few years earlier. While the second accusation is probably true, the first is doubtful. As a result of the letter, Caligula exiled Antipas to the south of Gaul and Herodias followed. As for Agrippa I, he received the territories of Antipas\u2014Galilee and Peraea\u2014as well as all the property confiscated from Antipas and Herodias.\nStatue of Caligula.\nFollowing the clashes between Jews and Greeks in Alexandria, for confused reasons the delegation led by Philo of Alexandria to Caligula learned \"with horror\" of the emperor's project to erect his own statue in the Temple of Jerusalem in gold under the guise of Zeus. According to Josephus, it is possible that the emperor was sensitive to the arguments of the delegation of Greeks from Alexandria led by Apion who, in the conflict between the two parties, complained of the \"privileges\" granted to the Jews. For the Jewish historian Goodman, Caligula intended to develop the imperial cult and to place himself above the politics of mortals in his lifetime and had the idea of imposing his divine status on the empire, whatever the political consequences.\nCaligula's initiative horrified the Jewish subjects of the empire and caused unrest in the diaspora in Rome as well as in Alexandria, Thessaloniki, Antioch and in Judea, particularly in Galilee. Caligula enjoined the proconsul of Syria, Publius Petronius, to place the statue willingly or by force in the \"Holy of Holies\" of the Temple of Jerusalem, violating Judaic aniconism in the holiest place of this religion. Petronius disposes necessary armed troops\u2014two Roman legions and auxiliaries\u2014which he barracks at Ptolemais in Phoenicia in the event of an uprising, and his mission was to accompany the procession of the statue\u2014being made in Sidon\u2014through Judea. The population rushed in numbers to Ptolemais, supported by the Jewish religious authorities, then to Tiberias where the troubles continued for about 40 days. Petronius met with Aristobulus brother of Agrippa I (Agrippa I was in Rome at the time) in the presence and under the pressure of the crowd. Convinced of the imminence of a major revolt, Petronius tempered with the emperor by an exchange of letters exposing\u2014at the risk of his life\u2014the difficulties of the situation: the inhabitants of Galilee were close to a revolt, and the Judeans were at risk of setting fire to the crops just before harvesting, while preparing for war. The emperor's first response was fairly moderate, but some sources report a \u201cfurious\u201d response from Caligula to Petronius, not considering any compromise.\nWhile Agrippa I was in Rome it is possible he learned of the affair from Caligula, which plunged him into a conflict between his two identities, Jewish and Roman. After a few days of reflection, he took the side of his Jewish compatriots in the defense of the Temple threatened with desecration: for Josephus, it was a discussion during a banquet; for Philo, it was a request addressed to the emperor, the content of which he reports, although in terms that reveal a certain exaggeration of the role of Agrippa. Agrippa I pleaded \"that the ancestral institutions are not disturbed. For what of my reputation among my countrymen and other men? Either I must be considered a traitor to myself or I must cease to be counted among your friends; there is no other choice\u2026\u201d.\nAt first, Caligula seemed to give in to his friend's pleas and instructed Petronius to suspend his action towards Jerusalem, while warning the Jewish populations not to take any action against the shrines, statues and altars erected in his honor, as a reproduction of Caligula's letter by Josephus seems to attest. But the emperor seemed to reconsider his decision and it was the murder of Caligula that seemed to put a definitive end to the enterprise and put an end to the desire for a popular uprising. Josephus recounts how the emperor, suspecting Petronius of having been bribed to break his orders, ordered him to commit suicide, but this letter arrived after the announcement of Caligula's death, in which Josephus saw an effect of Providence. This temporary success of Agrippa I testifies to the close relations which bound him with the most important personalities of the Roman world, which was confirmed during the succession of the assassinated emperor.\nDeath of Caligula and installation of Claudius.\nOn January 24, 41, Caligula was assassinated by a large-scale conspiracy, notably involving the praetorian commander Cassius Chaerea as well as several senators. The conspirators intended to return to a republic. Yet it was Claudius, Caligula's uncle, who was pushed to imperial power by the anti-republicans under curious conditions at the center of which Agrippa I gravitated. Claudius was certainly erudite but nevertheless excessively shy, afflicted with a physical handicap and without particular ambition. The support of his childhood friend, as well as his maneuvers, seem to have been decisive in his ascent to power.\nJosephus and Roman historian Cassius Dio both state that Agrippa I indeed played a significant role in the choice of the new emperor. It was he who led a squad of the Praetorian Guard to the palace in search of Claudius, who had hidden there for fear of being assassinated. It was also at his instigation that the praetorians proclaimed Claudius emperor because without a sovereign, the guard lost its \"raison d'\u00eatre\". He then went to the Capitol where the senators met in conclave and acted as intermediaries between them and Claudius. He inspired Claudius with a response to the senators, \"in conformity with the dignity of his power,\" and he persuaded them to wisely abandon their idea of a republic, arguing that a new emperor has been proclaimed by the praetorians\u2014of whom he pointed out that 'they surround the meeting\"\u2014and expected nothing but their enthusiastic support. The senators proclaimed Claudius emperor, and Agrippa I recommended that Claudius be lenient vis-\u00e0-vis the conspirators, except for the regicides Cassius Chaerea and Lupus.\nIf these stories are to be believed, this episode made Claudius obligated by his childhood friend, and this devotion earned him a sizeable reward: Agrippa I saw his possessions increased by most of the ancient kingdom of Herod Archelaus\u2014Judea, Idumea and Samaria\u2014but also the city of Abila in Anti-Lebanon so that he reigned over a territory as vast as that of his grandfather Herod the Great. According to Cassius Dio, Claudius also granted his friend consular rank and authorized him \"to appear in the senate and express his gratitude in Greek\". To mark the considerable status of Agrippa I, a treaty was ratified with the Senate and the people of Rome on the Forum, which took up the old treaties of friendship and Judeo-Roman alliance. Agrippa I was declared there \"rex amicus et socius Populi Romani\"\u2014as his grandfather had been in 40 BC.\u2014and the text is preserved on bronze tablets in the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus.\nSoon after his inauguration, Agrippa I embarked for Judaea. It was the same year that Berenice, daughter of Agrippa I, united under the patronage of the emperor to Marcus, the son of the alabarch of Alexandria, Alexander Lysimachus whom Claudius had freed from the captivity to which the reduced Caligula. Claudius' accession to the throne also marked the restoration of several other kingdoms in Asia Minor. Agrippa I's brother Herod of Chalcis received a royal title, was granted the principality of Chalcis (previously attached to the kingdom of Iturea) and was honored in Rome with the title of praetor. He would marry his niece, B\u00e9r\u00e9nice, after the premature death of her young husband.\nReign.\nJudaism in the empire.\nAn edict by Claudius recalls the privileges granted to Alexandrian Jews who lived according to their laws, and a second edict extended the Alexandrian privileges to the Jews of the diaspora throughout the whole empire. Agrippa I and his brother Herod of Chalcis played the role of intercessor in favor of the Jews with the emperor. These favors also extended to all the Jewish communities of the empire. They also had the status of censors of Jewish morals: they ensured respect for the Torah by the communities of the diaspora.\nA few months after the murder of Caligula, inhabitants of the Phoenician city of D\u00f4ra (south of Mount Carmel) introduced a statue of Claudius into the main synagogue of the city. For all those who stood up against Caligula's plan to erect his statue in the Temple of Jerusalem, it was a real provocation. Agrippa I intervened immediately and asked for the application of the decree of Claudius. He acted here as an ethnarch of the Jews, since Dora was not located on his territory. Petronius, the proconsul of Syria immediately ordered the magistrates of Dora to remove the statue, referring to the edict of Claudius. However, this openness must be put into perspective, which is also reflected in the measures to limit worship against the Jews of Rome, as Cassius Dio reports (History, 60, 6, 6\u20137), perhaps in reaction to the agitation resulting from the rapid development of the movement of the followers of Jesus and which would be evoked by the Letter of Claudius to the Alexandrians. For Fran\u00e7ois Blancheti\u00e8re, the writing of Philo Legation to Ca\u00efus \"constitutes an apology for Augustus, to be read a contrario as a criticism of the Judeophobic policy of Claudius (Legation to Caius 155\u2013158)\".\nAdministration of the kingdom.\nClaudius probably saw in the appointment of Agrippa I\u2014heir to the Herodians and the Hasmoneans but also attached to the Julio-Claudians by personal relations\u2014a factor of stability which could rid the imperial administration of the management of a province with endemic troubles.\nAgrippa I clearly inherited his grandfather's splendor and his desire for recognition beyond his borders. Internally, he tried to satisfy both his Jewish and pagan subjects and was divided between his religious capital, Jerusalem, and his \"little Rome\", Caesarea. He also undertook the major project of raising the ramparts of his historic capital and extending it to the northern district thanks to funding from the Temple treasury, which gave some of his Jewish subjects hope for the restoration of an independent kingdom. or at least a rediscovered form of sovereignty. He continued the policy of euergetism external to Judea of Herod the Great by financing the construction of prestigious works (theatre, amphitheater and baths) in liberalities which mainly benefited the Roman colony of Berytus, without forgetting however the cities of Phoenicia and Syria. He also offered shows and games, notably with gladiators, even if this contravened Jewish prescriptions, which he got accepted by using condemned criminals.\nOn a religious level, as soon as he arrived, Agrippa I forged the reputation of a pious man, as attested by the Mishnah, which recounts an orchestrated ceremony where the king was acclaimed and obtained the legitimacy of the priests in the Temple of Jerusalem while his grandfather Herod had never been admitted to the third court of the Temple. However, through his grandmother, Mariamne the Hasmonean, Agrippa I belonged to a priestly family, which Herod did not. He was thus the first Herodo-Hasmonean to participate in a Temple office since the dismissal of the Antigonus II Mattathias, although he did not offer sacrifices.\nThe Mishnah explains how the Jews of the Second Temple era interpreted the requirement of that the king should read the Torah to the people. At the conclusion of the first day of Sukkot immediately after the conclusion of the seventh year in the cycle, they erected a wooden dais in the Temple court, upon which the king sat. The synagogue attendant took a Torah scroll and handed it to the synagogue president, who handed it to the High Priest's deputy, who handed it to the High Priest, who handed it to the king. The king stood and received it, and was to read while seated. King Agrippa stood and received it and read standing, and the sages praised him for doing so. When Agrippa I reached the commandment of that \"you may not put a foreigner over you\" as king, his eyes ran with tears, but they said to him, \"Don't fear, Agrippa, you are our brother, you are our brother!\" The king read from up through the shema (), and then the portion regarding tithes (), the portion of the king (), and the blessings and curses (). The king would recite the same blessings as the High Priest, except that the king would substitute a blessing for the festivals instead of one for the forgiveness of sin. (http://; http://)\nAgrippa I used his prerogative to appoint the high priests of the Temple three times during his short reign, choosing alternately from the priestly dynasties of the Anan and the Boethos. His short administration was thus placed under the domination of Rome, of which he was an instrument of control, and the marks of honor given as sovereign by the Jews to the Temple testify to the \"generalized clientelism in which personal friendships administrative relations throughout the empire.\nRegional ambitions.\nGaius Vibius Marsus, the governor of Syria who succeeded Petronius, was much less favorable to Agrippa I. He sent a series of letters to Claudius to express his fears of Agrippa I's rising power, reflecting the jealousy of the prince's Roman compatriots in the region. For his part, Agrippa I repeatedly asked the emperor to dismiss Marsus.\nMarsus interrupted, on the orders of Claudius, the fortification of Jerusalem and tempered the regional diplomatic ambitions of Agrippa I. Indeed, Agrippa I invited to Tiberias Herod of Chalcis as well as three princes who had been his companions in Rome, Antiochos of Commagene, Cotys of Lesser Armenia and Polemon, king of Pontus. Marsus argued the possibility of a conspiracy. Although it is unlikely that Agrippa I considered breaking with his close Roman protectors and familiars, the kings were enjoined to return to their respective kingdoms without delay.\nUnexpected death.\nAgrippa I died unexpectedly in 44, after only three years of reign over Judaea, during the games of Caesarea in honor of the emperor. Patronizing the games, he appeared there in dazzling silver finery in front of the crowd who acclaimed him and compared him to a god, a blasphemous remark for a Jew against which the king did not then protest. Some of his contemporaries read as a divine punishment for this blasphemy the cause of his death which occurred shortly after: according to the Acts of the Apostles, an angel appeared, when a delegation from Tyre and Sidon were comparing him to a god, and struck him and caused worms to devour him (Acts 12:20\u201323). Two days later, he was seized with violent abdominal pains and died after five days of agony, at age 53. According to Josephus, before he died he scolded his friends for flattering him, and he accepted his imminent death in a state of teshuva. The precise causes of his death are unknown, but from that time on rumors of poisoning circulated. Several researchers believe that the poisoning by the Romans worried about his excessive political ambitions is likely, even that it was a personal initiative of Marsus to attenuate the hostility of the neighboring Syrian populations.\nThe reign of Agrippa I thus did not last long enough to be able to significantly outline its political orientation. Nevertheless, the hopes of regained sovereignty aroused among the Jews of Judea by his accession did not disappear with his death and were probably part of the causes that led to the Jewish revolt which broke out some 20 years later.\nSuccession.\nThe death of Agrippa I was celebrated by the pagan populations of the kingdom, in particular in Caesarea and Sebaste, which the sovereign had nevertheless largely favored. The hostility of the Syrian population was also evident in attacks by Syrian auxiliaries on statues of the king's daughters adorning the palace of Caesarea.\nRather than entrusting Agrippa I's kingdom to his son Agrippa II\u2014an inexperienced young man who grew up at the imperial court, protected by the emperor\u2014Claudius made it a Roman province with Cuspius Fadus as procurator. This decision, along with the unruly conduct of the Syrian auxiliaries, generated renewed unrest in Caesarea and elsewhere. The appointment of the priests and the control of the Temple of Jerusalem passed to Herod of Chalcis, who also became the foremost intermediary between the Jews and the Romans until his death in 48. For the Jews, these events marked the end of hopes for even a symbolic Jewish independence, and it was then that intransigent factious movements with messianic and anti-Roman connotations appeared.\nFrom his union with Cypros, Agrippa I had four children reaching adulthood: a son, Agrippa II, and three daughters, Berenice, Mariamne and Drusilla. Another son, Drusus, died in infancy.\nPosterity.\nHalf a century after Agrippa I's sudden death, Josephus evokes the sovereign in these terms: \"Agrippa's character was gentle and his benevolence was equal for all. He was full of humanity for people of foreign races and also showed them his liberality, but he was also helpful for his compatriots and showed them even more sympathy\". Josephus gives Agrippa a positive legacy and relates that he was known in his time as \"Agrippa the Great\". In the rabbinical sources, Agrippa is presented as a pious man, and his reign is described positively. Conversely, the pagan inhabitants of Caesarea and Sebaste organized rejoicings at his death.\nA significant number of critics follow the Christian tradition to identify Agrippa I with \"Herod the king\" who, in the Acts of the Apostles, persecutes the community of Jesus' disciples in Jerusalem, then who has James the Great killed \"with the sword\" while the apostle Peter, later arrested, owes his salvation only to the help of \"an angel\" who comes by night to help him escape from his prison. However, the Acts of the Apostles, composed in the 80s and 90s from several sources, \"have been the subject of devastating criticism for several decades, to the point of being denied by some, in whole or in part, any historical value\" due to the \"editorial activity\" of its three successive authors. Thus, the entire Petrine document (hypothetical document) to which these episodes would have belonged seems to have been placed at the beginning of Acts by its first writer, following this account by the \"Gesture of Paul\" and it is the next writer\u2014perhaps Luke the Evangelist\u2014which would have been inserted between the two \"Gestures\" of Peter and Paul, the account of the death of Agrippa which gives the impression that all that precedes is dated before 44 and all that follows is later, adding a coming of Paul to Jerusalem which does not appear anywhere in Paul's accounts in his epistles. It is therefore possible that \"Herod the king\" does not designate Agrippa I, but his son Agrippa II. Indeed, in addition to these editorial elements, the chronological inconsistencies of the Acts have been well known for more than a century, in particular the speech of Gamaliel, delivered seven chapters before the account of the death of Agrippa I to defend the apostles during a previous arrest, speaks of the death of Theudas intervened under the procurator Cuspius Fadus (44\u201346) and in the Gesture of Peter, the murder of James the Great, then the arrest and escape of Peter are later of five chapters to this speech and precedes the account of the death of Agrippa I. This account of the death of Agrippa I, probably inserted by the second redactor of the Acts of the Apostles diverges from that of Josephus but otherwise agrees with him on the divine origin of his mortal illness, occasioned by his impious refusal to reject the deification of which he is the object by the people, perhaps testifying to the use of a common Jewish source.\nPortrayals.\nHerod Agrippa I is the protagonist of the Italian opera \"L\u2019Agrippa tetrarca di Gerusalemme\" with music by Giuseppe Maria Buini and libretto by Claudio Nicola Stampa, first performed August 28, 1724 at the Teatro Ducale of Milan. Agrippa I is a major figure in the Robert Graves novel \"Claudius the God\", as well as the BBC television adaptation \"I, Claudius\", portrayed by James Faulkner as an adult and Michael Clements as a child. As Graves depicts Herod, he is a lifelong friend of Claudius, his most lasting and trustworthy advisor. Herod ultimately betrays their trust, raising a rebellion against Rome as the prophesied Messiah, much to the dismay of Claudius. Herod is struck down by unexplained illness, sending a final letter to Claudius seeking forgiveness.\nNotes and references.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68602", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68602", "title": "Herod Agrippa II", "text": "1st-century Judean ruler\nHerod Agrippa II (Roman name: Marcus Julius Agrippa, ; AD 27/28\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200992 or 100), sometimes shortened to Agrippa II or Agrippa, was the last ruler from the Herodian dynasty, reigning over territories outside of Judea as a Roman client. Agrippa II fled Jerusalem in 66, fearing the Jewish uprising, and he supported the Roman side in the First Jewish\u2013Roman War.\nEarly life.\nHerod Agrippa II was the son of the first and better-known Herod Agrippa and the brother of Berenice, Mariamne, and Drusilla (second wife of the Roman procurator Antonius Felix). He was educated at the court of the emperor Claudius, and at the time of his father's death he was 17 years old. Claudius therefore kept him at Rome and sent Cuspius Fadus as procurator of the Roman province of Judaea. While at Rome, he voiced his support for the Jews to Claudius and against the Samaritans and the procurator of Iudaea Province, Ventidius Cumanus, who was thought to have been the cause of some disturbances there.\nRise in power.\nOn the death of king Herod of Chalcis in 48, his small Syrian realm of Chalcis was given to Agrippa, with the right of superintending the Temple in Jerusalem and appointing its high priest, but only as a tetrarch.\nIn 53, Agrippa was forced to give up the tetrarchy of Chalcis, but in exchange Claudius made him ruler with the title of king over the territories previously governed by Philip\u2014Iturea, Trachonitis, Batanea, Gaulanitis, Auranitis and Paneas\u2014as well as the kingdom of Lysanias in Abila. The tetrarchy of Chalcis was subsequently in 57 given to his cousin Aristobulus (). Agrippa celebrated by marrying off his two sisters Mariamne and Drusilla. Josephus, the Jewish historian, repeats the gossip that Agrippa lived in an incestuous relationship with his sister Berenice.\nIn 55, the Emperor Nero added to Agrippa's realm the cities of Tiberias and Taricheae in Galilee, and Livias (Iulias), with 14 villages near it, in Peraea. It was before Agrippa and Berenice that, according to the New Testament, Paul the Apostle pleaded his case at Caesarea Maritima, probably in 59 or 60 ().\nAgrippa expended large sums in beautifying Jerusalem and other cities, especially Berytus (ancient Beirut), a Hellenised city in Phoenicia. His partiality for the latter rendered him unpopular amongst his own subjects, and the capricious manner in which he appointed and deposed the high priests made him disliked by the Jews.\nJewish\u2013Roman War.\nIn the 17th year of Agrippa's reign (corresponding with the 12th year of Nero's reign, or 65/66 AD), Agrippa tried desperately to avert a war with Rome, when he saw his countrymen generally disposed to fight against Rome because of insults and abuses they had been facing under the Roman procurator, Gessius Florus. At this time, they had broken off the cloisters leading from Antonia Fortress to the Temple Mount where Roman soldiers went to keep guard during the Jewish holidays, and they refused to pay the due tribute to Rome. Agrippa convened the people and urged them to tolerate the temporary injustices done to them and submit themselves to Roman hegemony. At length, Agrippa failed to prevent his subjects from rebelling, whereas, during a certain holiday when the Roman governor of Syria, Cestius Gallus, had passed through Judea to quell the rebellion, he was routed by Jewish forces. By 66 the citizenry of Jerusalem expelled Agrippa and Berenice from Jerusalem.\nDuring the First Jewish\u2013Roman War of 66\u201373, he sent 2,000 men, archers and cavalry, to support Roman general Vespasian, showing that, although a Jew, he was entirely devoted to the Roman Empire. He accompanied Vespasian's son Titus on part of his campaigns against the rebels and was wounded at the siege of Gamla. After the capture of Jerusalem, he went with Berenice to Rome, where he was invested with the dignity of praetor and rewarded with additional territory.\nRelations with Josephus.\nAgrippa had a great intimacy with the historian Josephus, having supplied him with information for his history, \"Antiquities of the Jews\". Josephus preserved two of the letters he received from him.\nDeath.\nAccording to the patriarch Photius I of Constantinople, Agrippa died childless at age 70, in the third year of the reign of Trajan, that is, 100, but statements of Josephus, in addition to the contemporary epigraphy from his kingdom, cast this date into serious doubt. The modern scholarly consensus holds that he died before 93/94. He was the last ruler from the House of Herod.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68603", "revid": "2497239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68603", "title": "Ague", "text": "Ague may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "68604", "revid": "50899192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68604", "title": "Ahasuerus", "text": "Name of various rulers in the Hebrew Bible\nAhasuerus ( ; Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0, \"Achashverosh\"; , in the Septuagint; in the Vulgate) is a name applied in the Hebrew Bible to three rulers of Ancient Persia and to a Babylonian official (or Median king) first appearing in the Tanakh in the Book of Esther and later in the Book of Tobit. It is a transliteration of either \"Xerxes\" or \"Artaxerxes;\" both are names of multiple Achaemenid dynasty Persian kings.\nEtymology.\nThe Hebrew form is believed to have derived from the Old Persian name of Xerxes I, \"X\u0161ay\u0101r\u0161\u0101\" (&lt; \"x\u0161aya\" 'king' + \"ar\u0161an\" 'male' &gt; 'king of all male; Hero among Kings'). That became Babylonian \"A\u1e2b\u0161iy\u00e2r\u0161u\" (, \"a\u1e2b-\u0161i-ia-ar-\u0161u\") and then \"Ak\u0161\u00eew\u00e2r\u0161u\" (, \"ak-\u0161i-i-wa6-ar-\u0161u\") and was borrowed as and thence into Latin as \"Ahasuerus\", the form traditionally used in English Bibles. The Persian name was independently rendered in Ancient Greek as \"X\u00e9rx\u0113s\". Many newer English translations and paraphrases of the Bible have used the name Xerxes.\nBook of Esther.\n\"Ahasuerus\" is given as the name of a king, the husband of Esther, in the \"Book of Esther\". He is said to have \"ruled over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces from India to Nubia\" \u2013 that is, over the Achaemenid Empire. Some consider the narrative of \"Esther\" was to provide an aetiology for Purim, and that the name Ahasuerus is usually understood to refer to Xerxes I, who ruled the Achaemenid Empire between 486 and 465 BC. Outside of the book of Esther, history records that Xerxes was married to Amestris, not Vashti or Esther. Moreover, it is understood that Persian kings did not marry outside a restricted number of Persian noble families. In the Septuagint, the \"Book of Esther\" refers to the king as 'Artaxerxes', who was the younger son of Xerxes ().\nIdentification of \"Ahasuerus\" as Xerxes I.\nNumerous scholars have proposed theories as to who Ahasuerus represents. Most scholars today identify him with Xerxes I, as did 19th-century Bible commentaries. Three factors, among others, contribute to this identification:\nIdentification of \"Ahasuerus\" as Artaxerxes I.\nWhile today the king of Esther is usually identified as Xerxes I, the ancient traditions identify him with his son, Artaxerxes I. The Septuagint, the Vulgate, the Midrash of \"Esther Rabbah\", I, 3, and the \"Josippon\" identify him as Artaxerxes. Many historians and exegetes from ancient times and the Middle Ages also identified Ahasuerus with Artaxerxes I, including, most notably, Josephus, who relates that \"Artaxerxes\" was the name by which he was known to the Greeks. The Ethiopic text calls him \"Ar\u0165eksis\", usually the Ethiopic equivalent of \"Artaxerxes\".\nIdentification of \"Ahasuerus\" as Artaxerxes II.\nSome have speculated that the king was Artaxerxes II. In his \"Chronography\", the 13th century Syriac historian Bar Hebraeus also identifies Ahasuerus as Artaxerxes II citing the sixth century AD historian John of Ephesus. Plutarch in his \"Lives\" (AD 75) records alternative names \"Oarses\" and \"Arsicas\" for Artaxerxes II Mnemon given by Deinon (c. 360\u2013340 BC) and Ctesias (Artexerxes II's physician) respectively. These derive from the Persian name \"Khshayarsha\" as do \"Ahasuerus\" (\"(Arta)Xerxes\") and the hypocorism \"Arshu\" for Artaxerxes II found on a contemporary inscription (\"LBAT\" 162). These sources thus arguably identify Ahasuerus as Artaxerxes II in light of the names used in the Hebrew and Greek sources and accords with the contextual information from Pseudo-Hecataeus and Berossus as well as agreeing with Al-Tabari and Masudi's placement of events.\nBook of Ezra.\nAhasuerus is also given as the name of a King of Persia in the Book of Ezra. Modern commentators associate him with Xerxes I who reigned from 486 to 465 BC. Other identifications have been made for Cambyses II or with Bardiya (Greek \"Smerdis\") who reigned (perhaps as an imposter) for seven months between Cambyses II and Darius I.\nBook of Daniel.\nAhasuerus is given as the name of the father of Darius the Mede in the \"Book of Daniel\". Josephus names Astyages as the father of Darius the Mede, and the description of the latter as uncle and father-in-law of Cyrus by mediaeval Jewish commentators matches that of Cyaxares II, who is said to be the son of Astyages by Xenophon. Thus this Ahasuerus is commonly identified with Astyages. He is alternatively identified, together with the Ahasuerus of the Book of Tobit, as Cyaxares I, said to be the father of Astyages. Views differ on how to reconcile the sources in this case. One view is that the description of Ahasuerus as the \"father\" of Darius the Mede should be understood in the broader sense of \"forebear\" or \"ancestor\". Another view notes that on the Behistun Inscription, \"Cyaxares\" is a family name, and thus considers the description as literal, viewing Astyages as an intermediate ruler wrongly placed in the family line in the Greek sources.\nMost scholars view Darius the Mede as a literary fiction, or possibly a conflation of Darius the Great with prophecies about the Medes.\nBook of Tobit.\nIn some versions of the deuterocanonical \"Book of Tobit\", Ahasuerus is given as the name of an associate of Nebuchadnezzar, who, together with him, destroyed Nineveh just before Tobit's death. A traditional Catholic view is that he is identical to the Ahasuerus of Daniel 9:1 In the Codex Sinaiticus Greek (LXX) edition, the two names in this verse appear instead as one name, Ahikar (also the name of another character in the story of Tobit). Other Septuagint texts have the name \"Achiachar\". Western scholars have proposed that \"Achiachar\" is a variant form of the name \"Cyaxares I of Media\", who historically did destroy Nineveh, in 612 BC.\nIn legends.\nIn some versions of the legend of the Wandering Jew, his true name is held to be Ahasuerus \u2013 even though the biblical king is not described as a Jew and nothing in the Biblical account of him is similar to that myth. This is the name by which Immanuel Kant refers to the Wandering Jew in \"The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68606", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68606", "title": "Ahaz", "text": "12th king of Judah\nAhaz (Hebrew: , \"\u02bc\u0100\u1e25\u0101z\", \"has held\"; \"Akhaz\"; ) an abbreviation of Jehoahaz II (of Judah), \"Yahweh has held\" (Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0; \"Ya'\u00fa\u1e2bazi\" [\"ia-\u00fa-\u1e2ba-zi\"]) was the twelfth king of Judah, and the son and successor of Jotham. Ahaz was 20 when he became king of Judah and reigned for 16 years.\nAhaz is portrayed as an evil king in the Second Book of Kings (2 Kings 16:2).\nIn Edwin R. Thiele's opinion, Ahaz was co-regent with Jotham from 736/735\u00a0BC, and his sole reign began in 732/731 and ended in 716/715\u00a0BC. However, William F. Albright has dated his reign to 744\u2013728\u00a0BC.\nThe Gospel of Matthew lists Ahaz of Judah in the genealogy of Jesus. He is also mentioned in Isaiah 7 and .\nReign.\nAhaz's reign commenced at the age of 20, in the 17th year of the reign of Pekah of Israel. It is described in ; ; and .\nDestruction of Northern Kingdom.\nImmediately upon his accession, Ahaz had to meet a coalition formed by northern Israel, under Pekah, and Damascus (Syria), under Rezin. These kings wished to compel him to join them in opposing the Assyrians, who were arming a force against the Northern Kingdom under Tiglath-Pileser III (Pul). Isaiah counsels Ahaz to trust in God rather than foreign allies, and tells him to ask for a sign to confirm that this is a true prophecy (verse 7:11). Ahaz refuses, saying he will not test God (7:12). Isaiah replies that Ahaz will have a sign whether he asks for it or not, and the sign will be the birth of a child, and the child's mother will call it Immanuel, meaning \"God-with-us\" (7:13\u201314).\nTo protect himself Ahaz called in the aid of the Assyrians. Tiglath-Pileser sacked Damascus and annexed Aram. According to , the population of Aram was deported and Rezin executed. Tiglath-Pileser then attacked Israel and \"took Ijon, Abel Beth Maacah, Janoah, Kedesh and Hazor. He took Gilead and Galilee, including all the land of Naphtali, and deported the people to Assyria.\" Tiglath-Pileser also records this act in one of his inscriptions.\nThrough Assyria's intervention, and as a result of its invasion and subjection of the kingdom of Damascus and the Kingdom of Israel, Ahaz was relieved of his troublesome neighbors; but his protector henceforth claimed and held suzerainty over his kingdom. This war of invasion lasted two years (734\u2013732 BC), and ended in the capture and annexation of Damascus to Assyria and of the territory of Israel north of the border of Jezreel. Ahaz in the meanwhile furnished auxiliaries to Tiglath-Pileser. This appeal to Assyria met with stern opposition from the prophet Isaiah, who counseled Ahaz to rely upon the Lord and not upon outside aid. Ahaz, during his whole reign, was free from troubles with which the neighboring rulers were harassed, who from time to time revolted against Assyria. Thus it was that, in 722, Samaria was taken and northern Israel wholly incorporated into the Assyrian empire.\nReligious observance.\nAhaz yielded readily to the glamour and prestige of the Assyrians in religion as well as in politics. In 732, he went to Damascus to swear homage to Tiglath-Pileser and his gods; and, taking a fancy to an altar which he saw there, he had one like it made in Jerusalem, which, with a corresponding change in ritual, he made a permanent feature of the Temple worship. Changes were also made in the arrangements and furniture of the Temple, \"because of the king of Assyria\" (). Furthermore, Ahaz fitted up an astrological observatory with accompanying sacrifices, after the fashion of the ruling people. In other ways Ahaz lowered the character of the national worship.\n records that Ahaz offered his son by fire to Moloch (or \"made his son pass through fire\"), a practice condemned by . The words may refer to a ceremony of purification or a sacrificial offering. The account in refers to \"sons\" (plural).\nHis government is considered by the Deuteronomistic historian as having been disastrous for the religious state of the country, and a large part of the reforming work of his son Hezekiah was aimed at undoing the evil that Ahaz had done.\nSuccession.\nHe died at the age of 36 and was succeeded by his son, Hezekiah. Because of his wickedness he was \"not brought into the sepulchre of the kings\" (). An insight into Ahaz's neglect of the worship of the Lord is found in the statement that on the first day of the month of Nisan that followed Ahaz's death, his son Hezekiah commissioned the priests and Levites to open and repair the doors of the Temple and to remove the defilements of the sanctuary, a task which took 16 days.\nRabbinic literature.\nAccording to the Talmudic rabbis, who refer to II Chron. xxviii. 19\u201325, Ahaz was the king who persisted in his wickedness even in the face of all the trials to which he was subjected, and would not repent (Sanh. 103a, Meg. 11a). Worse than this, he threatened Israel's religion to its very foundation, in order to destroy all hope of regeneration. He closed the schools and houses of worship so that no instruction should be possible, and the Shekinah (or Glory of God) should abandon the land. It was for this reason that Isaiah had to teach in secret (Yer. Sanh. x. 28b; Gen. R. xlii.), though Ahaz always humbly submitted to the prophet's rebukes\u2014his only redeeming feature (Sanh. 104a). Abi saved the life of her son Hezekiah, whom her godless husband, Ahaz, had designed as an offering to Moloch. By anointing him with the blood of the salamander, she enabled him to pass through the fire of Moloch unscathed (Sanh. 63b).\nChronological notes.\nThere has been considerable academic debate about the actual dates of reigns of the Israelite kings. Scholars have endeavored to synchronize the chronology of events referred to in the Bible with those derived from other external sources.\nThe calendars for reckoning the years of kings in Judah and Israel were offset by six months, that of Judah starting in Tishri (in the fall) and that of Israel in Nisan (in the spring). Cross-synchronizations between the two kingdoms therefore often allow narrowing of the beginning and/or ending dates of a king to within a six-month range. For Ahaz, the Scriptural data allow dating the beginning of his coregency with Jotham to some time in the six-month interval beginning of Nisan 1 of 735\u00a0BC. By the Judean calendar that started the regnal year in Tishri (a fall month), this could be written as 736/735, or more simply 736\u00a0BC. His father was removed from responsibility by the pro-Assyrian faction at some time in the year that started in Tishri of 732\u00a0BC. He died some time between Tishri 1 of 716\u00a0BC and Nisan 1 of 715\u00a0BC, i.e. in 716/715, or more simply 716\u00a0BC.\nRodger Young offers a possible explanation of why four extra years are assigned to Jotham in and why Ahaz's 16-year reign () is measured from the time of Jotham's death in 732/731, instead of when Jotham was deposed in 736/735. Taking into account the factionalism of the time, Young writes:\n[A]ny record such as that recognized these last four years for Jotham must have come from the annals of the anti-Assyrian and anti-Ahaz court that prevailed after the death of Ahaz. Ahaz is given sixteen years in these annals, measuring from the start of his sole reign, instead of the twenty or twenty-one years that he would be credited with if the counting started from 736t [i.e. 736/735 BC], when he deposed Jotham.\nSurviving artifacts.\nIn the mid-1990s a bulla appeared on the antiquities market. This bulla measures wide. The back of the bulla bears the imprint of the papyrus it once sealed, as well as the double string which held it together. It contains a fingerprint on the left edge. Like many bullae, it was preserved due to being baked by fire, presumably incidentally (house or city was burned), as in a kiln. The inscription reads: \"Belonging to Ahaz (son of) Yehotam, King of Judah.\" Given the process that created and preserved bullae, they are virtually impossible to forge, so most scholars believe this bulla to be authentic. It bears the seal of King Ahaz of Judah, who ruled from 732 to 716\u00a0BC.\nAn orange carnelian scaraboid seal dating to the 8th century BC also mentions Ahaz. Its inscription reads, \"Belonging to Ushna servant of Ahaz.\" While Ushna is unknown, the seal refers to Ahaz, king of Judah, who is mentioned in 2 Kings 16. This artifact is currently part of the Yale University's collection of ancient seals.\nAnother important source regarding the historicity of Ahaz comes from the Tiglath-Pileser III annals, mentioning tributes and payments he received from Ahaz, king of Judah and Menahem, king of Israel. Furthermore, in 2015, Eilat Mazar discovered a royal bulla of the Judean king Hezekiah, biblical son of Ahaz, that reads \"Belonging to Hezekiah [son of] Ahaz king of Judah\", and dates to between 727 and 698\u00a0BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "68607", "revid": "4007668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68607", "title": "Ahaziah", "text": "Ahaziah (, \"held by Yah(-weh)\"; Douay\u2013Rheims: Ochozias) was the name of two kings mentioned in the Hebrew Bible:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "68608", "revid": "131372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68608", "title": "Ahiezer", "text": ""}
{"id": "68609", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68609", "title": "Ahihud (biblical figure)", "text": "Ahihud is the name of two biblical figures. In English, both figures are called \"Ahihud,\" which represents two different names in Hebrew.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndex of articles associated with the same name\nThis includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names). &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "68610", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68610", "title": "Ahijah", "text": "Ahijah ( \"\u02be\u0102\u1e25\u012byy\u0101\", \"brother of Yah\"; Latin and Douay\u2013Rheims: Ahias) is a name of several biblical individuals:\nA man named Ahijah also appears in the Babylonian Talmud in the 2nd century AD as one of the first Babylonian Exilarchs.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "68611", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68611", "title": "Ahikam", "text": "Ahikam (Hebrew: \u05d0\u05d7\u05d9\u05e7\u05dd, \"My brother has risen\") was one of the five whom, according to the Hebrew Bible, Josiah sent to consult the prophetess Huldah in connection with the discovery of the book of the law.\nBiblical accounts.\nHe was the son of Shaphan, the royal secretary, and the father of Gedaliah, governor of Judea after the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians. \nOn one occasion, in a move described by Jonathan Magonet as taking the prophet into 'protective custody', he protected Jeremiah against the fury of Jehoiakim () It was in the chamber of another son (Gemariah) of Shaphan that Baruch read Jeremiah's scroll in the hearing of all the people. "}
{"id": "68612", "revid": "41719756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68612", "title": "Ahimaaz", "text": "Son of the high priest Zadok\nAhimaaz ( \"\u02be\u0102\u1e25\u012bma\u02bfa\u1e63\", \"My Brother Is Counselor\") was son of the high priest Zadok.\nAhimaaz first appears in the reign of King David (reigned c. 1000-962 BCE). During Absalom's revolt he remained faithful to David, and, along with Jonathan, son of Abiathar, assisted him by giving him news about the proceedings of Absalom in Jerusalem (2 Samuel 15:24\u201337; 17:15\u201321). He was a swift runner, and was the first to bring David news of the defeat of Absalom, although he refrained from mentioning his death (2 Samuel 18:19\u201333).\nUnder King Solomon (c. 970\u2013930 BCE), Ahimaaz's father Zadok became high priest. When Zadok died, Ahimaaz succeeded him in that position (1 Chronicles 6:8, 53).\nHe may have been the same Ahimaaz who took as wife Basemath, one of Solomon's daughters (1 Kings 4:15). Subsequent kings of Israel, Ahaz, also married daughters of the high priest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68613", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68613", "title": "Ahimelech", "text": "Biblical character\nAhimelech ( \"\u02be\u0102\u1e25\u012bmele\u1e35\", \"my brother is king\"/\"brother of a king\") was an Israelite priest and served as the grand priest of the town of Nob. In the Book of Samuel, he was described as the son of Ahitub and father of Abiathar (), but described as the son of Abiathar in and in four places in 1 Chronicles. He descended from Aaron's son Ithamar and the High Priest of Israel Eli. In his name is Abimelech according to the Masoretic Text, and is probably the same as Ahiah ().\nRelation to David.\nHe was the twelfth High Priest, and officiated at Nob, where he was visited by David (he gave David and his companions five loaves of the showbread) when David fled from Saul (). He was summoned into Saul's presence, and accused of disloyalty for assisting David, on the information of Doeg the Edomite. Then the king commanded that he, with the other priests who stood beside him, 86 in all, should be slain with his family. This sentence was carried into execution by Doeg in a cruel manner (). Possibly Abiathar had a son also called Ahimelech, or the two names, as some think, may have been accidentally transposed in ; , marg.; 24:3, 6, 31.\nInterpretation.\nAhimelech's death was seen as a partial fulfilment of the curse on the House of Eli \u2013 that none of Eli's male descendants would live to old age; the other part of the curse on the House of Eli \u2013 that the priesthood would pass out of his descendants (1 Samuel 2:)\u2013 was fulfilled when Abiathar was deposed from the office of High Priest. Rabbinical literature linked the extermination of the male descendants of David with the extermination of the priests of Nob by Saul - deeming it divine retribution because David's action had provoked Saul's outburst - and also linked the survival of David's descendant Joash with that of Ahimelech's son Abiathar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "68614", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68614", "title": "Ahinadab", "text": "Ahinadab ( \"Ahinadav\", \"my brother is noble\" or \"my brother has devoted himself\"), son of Iddo, is one of the twelve commissariat officers appointed by Solomon to districts of his kingdom to raise supplies by monthly rotation for his household. He was appointed to the district of Mahanaim (), east of Jordan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68615", "revid": "41718658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68615", "title": "Ahinoam", "text": "Hebrew female given name\nAhinoam () is a Hebrew name literally meaning \"brother of pleasantness\", or \"my brother is pleasant\", thus meaning \"pleasant\".\nThere are two references in the Bible to people; who bear that name;\nContext.\nSome scholars suggest that the two may be, in fact, one person. In 2 Samuel 12:8, God tells David through the prophet Nathan, \"I gave your master's house to you, and your master's wives into your arms.\" Jon Levenson suggests that this implies David took Ahinoam from Saul. However, Diana V. Edelman disagrees, \"Such a presumption would require David to have run off with the queen mother while Saul was still on the throne, which seems unlikely. In view of the possession of the royal harem as a claim to royal legitimacy, Nathan's comment can be related to David's eventual possession of Saul's wives after he ascended the throne in the wake of Eshbaal's death...\" Additionally, Leviticus 20:14 forbids men from marrying their mothers-in-law, and Ahinoam, wife of Saul, was the mother of David's first wife Michal, whom David considered to legally be his wife even after fleeing, and David was never indicted by any prophets for his marriage to Ahinoam.\nLevenson goes on to note that Ahinoam is always mentioned before Abigail and that she bears David a son before Abigail does, and concludes from this that \"she was already married to David when the conflict with Nabal erupted.\" When David had fled from Saul and dwelt with Achish, king of Gath, he had his two wives Ahinoam and Abigail with him as per 1 Samuel 27:3.\nAdherents of source criticism suggest that references to a woman called \"Ahinoam\" being Saul's wife belong to the account of the \"republican source\" of the Books of Samuel, while in the passages ascribed to the \"monarchial source\", the only mention of a woman called \"Ahinoam\" is the description of her as a wife of David.\nSince Ahinoam's name usually precedes that of Abigail, it has been suggested that David married Ahinoam before he married Abigail. However, if her son Amnon was David's firstborn son, then the order of their names might indicate Ahinoam's status as the crown prince's mother. Ahinoam is with David during his stay with King Achish of Gath, and is taken captive when Amalekites raid Ziklag, David's Philistine base, but was recovered by David. She is among those who go with David to Hebron when he becomes king over Judah (2 Sam 2:2).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68616", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68616", "title": "Ahio", "text": "Ahio - brotherly.\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68617", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68617", "title": "Ahitophel", "text": "Biblical counselor of King David\nAhitophel, Achitofel, or Ahithophel () was a counselor of King David and a man greatly renowned for his wisdom. During Absalom's attempt to usurp the throne, he deserted David and supported Absalom, whom he then turned to as an advisor. To counteract Ahitophel's counsel, the fleeing David sent his friend Hushai back to Absalom. Seeing that his advice against David had not been followed due to Hushai's influence, Ahithophel surmised that the revolt would fail, returned to his hometown of Giloh, and hanged himself. He was buried in \"the sepulcher of his fathers\".\nA man named Ahitophel is also mentioned in 2 Samuel 23:34, and he is said to be the father of Eliam. Since 2 Samuel 11:3 notes that Eliam is the father of Bathsheba, some scholars suggest that the Ahitophel of 2 Samuel 15 may be Bathsheba's grandfather. Levenson and Baruch Halpern, for example, note that \"the narrator is sufficiently subtle (or guileless) to have Bathsheba's grandfather ... instigate the exaction of YHWH's pound of flesh,\" as Nathan's curse in 2 Samuel 12:11 comes to fruition.\nIn Rabbinical literature.\nThe Talmud speaks of this counsellor of David as \"a man, like Balaam, whose great wisdom was not received in humility as a gift from heaven, and so became a stumbling block to him.\" He was \"one of those who, while casting longing eyes upon things not belonging to them, also lose the things they possess.\" Accordingly, Ahitophel was granted access by Almighty God into the Divine powers of God. And being thus familiar with Divine wisdom and knowledge as imparted through the Holy Spirit, he was consulted as an oracle like the Urim and Thummim. \"..and great as was his wisdom, it was equalled by his scholarship. Therefore, David did not hesitate to submit himself to his instruction, even though Ahitophel was a very young\nman at his death, not more than thirty-three years old. The one thing lacking in him was sincere piety, which proved his undoing in the end, for it induced him to participate in Absalom's rebellion against David. Thus, he forfeited even his share in the world to come. \nTo this dire course of action, he was misled by astrology and other signs, which he interpreted as prophecies of his kingship when in reality, they pointed to the royal destiny of his granddaughter Bath-sheba. Possessed by his erroneous belief, he cunningly urged Absalom to commit an unheard-of crime. Thus, Absalom would profit nothing by his rebellion, for, though he accomplished his father's ruin, he would yet be held to account and condemned to death for his violation of family purity, and the way to the throne would be clear for Ahitophel, the great sage in Israel.\" But he withheld his mystic knowledge from King David in the hour of peril and was therefore doomed to die from strangulation. \"Ahitophel of the house of Israel and Balaam of the heathen nations were the two great sages of the world who, failing to show gratitude to God for their wisdom, perished in dishonour. To them, the prophetic word finds application: 'Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom' (Jeremiah 9:23).\"\nIt is also said that David, during his reign, had many disagreeable encounters with Ahitophel. Shortly after his accession, the king seems to have overlooked Ahitophel in his appointments with judges and other officials. Consequently, when David was in despair concerning the visitation upon Uzzah during the attempted transport of the ark (2 Samuel 6:6; see Uzzah) and sought counsel of Ahitophel, the latter mockingly suggested to him that he had better apply to his wise men. Only upon David's malediction, that whoever knew a remedy and concealed it should surely end by committing suicide, did Ahitophel offer him some rather vague advice, concealing the true solution, which was that the ark must be carried on the shoulders of men instead of upon a wagon.\nCurse upon Ahitophel.\nAhitophel rendered a service to David upon another occasion, but not until he was again threatened with the curse. It appears that David excavated too deeply for the foundations of the Temple, resulting in the earth's deepest floods breaking forth and nearly inundating the earth. None could help but Ahitophel, who withheld his counsel from seeing David borne away upon the flood. When David again warned him of the malediction, Ahitophel counselled the king to throw a tile, with the Tetragrammaton written upon it, into the cavity; the waters began to sink. Ahitophel is said to have defended his use of the name of God in this emergency by referencing the practice enjoined by Scripture (Numbers 5:23) to restore marital harmony; surely a matter of small importance, he argued, compared with the threatened destruction of the world. David's repeated malediction that Ahitophel would be hanged was finally realized when the latter hanged himself.\nAhitophel's death was a great loss to David, for his wisdom was so great that Scripture itself (2 Samuel 16:23) avoids calling him a man, likening him to an angel; in the passage quoted the Hebrew word for man is omitted in the text, being supplied only by the Masorah. (The preceding statement is incorrect because the word for \"man\" in 2 Samuel 16:23 refers to one who asks at the word of God and not to Ahitophel. Thus, its absence does not imply anything about Ahitophel.) Indeed, his wisdom bordered on that of the angels. His learning in the Law was also extensive so that David did not scruple to call him \"master\"; the two things which David is there said to have learned from Ahitophel are more closely described in Masechet Kallah. Ahitophel's disposition, however, was a jealous one; and he always sought to wound David by mocking remarks. His devotion to the study of the Law was not founded on worthy motives. Ahitophel was thirty-three years old when he died. In his will, he left three warnings to his children to 1. Refrain from doing aught against a favourite of fortune. 2. Take heed not to rise up against the royal house of David and to take no part in their dissensions 3. If Shavuot falls on a sunny day, then sow wheat. Posterity has been favored with the knowledge of but a small part of Ahitophel's wisdom, and that little through two widely different sources, through Socrates, who was his disciple, and through a fortune-book written by him.\nAhitophel is counted among those that have no share in the world to come.\nIn Christian interpretation.\nChristian interpreters often see Judas Iscariot as an antitype to Ahitophel. Alexander Kirkpatrick, in the Cambridge Bible for Schools and Colleges, calls his suicide \"the first deliberate suicide on record\".\nAhitophel's betrayal of David and subsequent suicide are seen as anticipating Judas' betrayal of Jesus, and the gospels' account of Judas hanging himself (). Psalm 41:9, which seems to refer to Ahitophel, is quoted in John 13:18 as being fulfilled in Judas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttributions.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\n\u00a0This article\u00a0incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68618", "revid": "245306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68618", "title": "Ahitub", "text": "Ahitub ( \"\u2019\" or \"\u2019\" 'my brother is goodness') may refer to the following people in the Bible:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndex of articles associated with the same name\nThis includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names). &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "68619", "revid": "23939382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68619", "title": "Ahlab", "text": "Town in the Hebrew Bible\nAhlab (- \"fatness\"), a town of Asher lying within the unconquered Phoenician border (Judg. 1:31); commonly identified with Hirbet al-Mahalib, north to Tyre.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68620", "revid": "42769864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68620", "title": "Ahoah", "text": "Bible character\nAhoah (\"brotherly\") was one of the sons of Bela, the son of Benjamin (). He is also called Ahiah (ver. ) and Iri (). His descendants were called Ahohites ().\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68622", "revid": "2947573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68622", "title": "Aholah", "text": ""}
{"id": "68623", "revid": "1535071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68623", "title": "Oholiab", "text": "Person in the Hebrew Bible\nIn the Hebrew Bible, Oholiab (), son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, worked under Bezalel as the deputy architect of the Tabernacle and the implements which it housed, including the Ark of the Covenant. He is described in Exodus 38:23 as a master of carpentry, weaving, and embroidery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "68624", "revid": "2947573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68624", "title": "Aholibah", "text": ""}
{"id": "68625", "revid": "50947746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68625", "title": "Aholibamah", "text": "Human biblical figure (Genesis 36)\nAholibamah (), is an eight-time referenced matriarch in the biblical record.\nAholibamah was the daughter of Anah and granddaughter of Zibeon the Hivite, son of Seir the Horite. She was one of two Canaanite women who married Esau, the son of Isaac, when he was in his forties. Isaac and his wife Rebecca, however, were greatly opposed to this union. According to some Biblical scholars, Esau changed her name to Judith to pacify his parents. See Wives of Esau. Biblical scholars thus reconciled the two different name accounts given in Genesis for the three wives of Esau:\nThe name Aholibamah appears again later among the listed clans of Edom, suggesting that a descendant of Esau had the same (female) name and became a chief.\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "68626", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68626", "title": "Aijeleth Shahar", "text": ""}
