{"id": "61344", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61344", "title": "Lightning", "text": "Weather phenomenon involving electrostatic discharge\nLightning is a natural phenomenon consisting of electrostatic discharges occurring through the atmosphere between two electrically charged regions. One or both regions are within the atmosphere, with the second region sometimes occurring on the ground. Following the lightning, the regions become partially or wholly electrically neutralized.\nLightning involves a near-instantaneous release of energy on a scale averaging between 200 megajoules and 7 gigajoules. The air around the lightning flash rapidly heats to temperatures of about . There is an emission of electromagnetic radiation across a wide range of wavelengths, some visible as a bright flash. Lightning also causes thunder, a sound from the shock wave which develops as heated gases in the vicinity of the discharge experience a sudden increase in pressure.\nThe most common occurrence of a lightning event is known as a thunderstorm, though they can also commonly occur in other types of energetic weather systems, such as volcanic eruptions. Lightning influences the global atmospheric electrical circuit and atmospheric chemistry and is a natural ignition source of wildfires. Lightning is considered an Essential Climate Variable by the World Meteorological Organization, and its scientific study is called \"fulminology\".\nForms.\nThree primary forms of lightning are distinguished by where they occur:\nMany other observational variants are recognized, including: volcanic lightning, which can occur during volcanic eruptions; \"heat lightning\", which can be seen from a great distance but not heard; dry lightning, which can cause forest fires; and ball lightning, which is rarely observed scientifically.\nThe most direct effects of lightning on humans occur as a result of cloud-to-ground lightning, even though intra-cloud and cloud-to-cloud are more common. Intra-cloud and cloud-to-cloud lightning indirectly affect humans through their influence on atmospheric chemistry.\nThere are variations of each type, such as \"positive\" versus \"negative\" CG flashes, that have different physical characteristics common to each which can be measured.\nCloud to ground (CG).\nCloud-to-ground (CG) lightning is a lightning discharge between a thundercloud and the ground. It is initiated by a stepped leader moving down from the cloud, which is met by a streamer moving up from the ground.\nCG is the least common, but best understood of all types of lightning. It is easier to study scientifically because it terminates on a physical object, namely the ground, and lends itself to being measured by instruments on the ground. Of the three primary types of lightning, it poses the greatest threat to life and property, since it terminates on the ground or \"strikes\".\nThe overall discharge, termed a flash, is composed of a number of processes such as preliminary breakdown, stepped leaders, connecting leaders, return strokes, dart leaders, and subsequent return strokes. The conductivity of the electrical ground, be it soil, fresh water, or salt water, may affect the lightning discharge rate and thus visible characteristics.\nPositive and negative lightning.\nCloud-to-ground (CG) lightning is either positive or negative, as defined by the direction of the conventional electric current between cloud and ground. Most CG lightning is negative, meaning that a negative charge is transferred (electrons flow) downwards to ground along the lightning channel (the conventional current flows from the ground up to the cloud). The reverse happens in a positive CG flash, where electrons travel upward along the lightning channel, while also a positive charge is transferred downward to the ground (the conventional current travels from cloud to ground).\nPositive lightning is less common than negative lightning and on average makes up less than 5% of all lightning strikes.\nThere are a number of mechanisms theorized to result in the formation of positive lightning. These are mainly based on movement or intensification of charge centres in the cloud. Such changes in cloud charging may come about as a result of variations in vertical wind shear or precipitation, or dissipation of the storm. Positive flashes may also result from certain behaviour of in-cloud discharges, e.g. breaking off or branching from existing flashes.\nPositive lightning strikes tend to be much more intense than their negative counterparts. An average bolt of negative lightning creates an electric current of 30,000 amperes (30\u00a0kA), transferring a total 15\u00a0C (coulombs) of electric charge and 1 gigajoule of energy. Large bolts of positive lightning can create up to 120\u00a0kA and transfer 350\u00a0C. The average positive ground flash has roughly double the peak current of a typical negative flash, and can produce peak currents up to 400\u00a0kA and charges of several hundred coulombs. Furthermore, positive ground flashes with high peak currents are commonly followed by long continuing currents, a correlation not seen in negative ground flashes.\nAs a result of their greater power, positive lightning strikes are considerably more dangerous than negative strikes. Positive lightning produces both higher peak currents and longer continuing currents, making them capable of heating surfaces to much higher levels which increases the likelihood of a fire being ignited. The long distances positive lightning can propagate through clear air explains why they are known as \"bolts from the blue\", giving no warning to observers.\nPositive lightning has also been shown to trigger the occurrence of upward lightning flashes from the tops of tall structures and is largely responsible for the initiation of sprites several tens of kilometers above ground level. Positive lightning tends to occur more frequently in winter storms, as with thundersnow, during intense tornadoes and in the dissipation stage of a thunderstorm. Huge quantities of extremely low frequency (ELF) and very low frequency (VLF) radio waves are also generated.\nContrary to popular belief, positive lightning flashes do \"not\" necessarily originate from the anvil or the upper positive charge region and strike a rain-free area outside of the thunderstorm. This belief is based on the outdated idea that lightning leaders are unipolar and originate from their respective charge region. Despite the popular misconception that flashes originating from the anvil are positive, because they seem to originate from the positive charge region, observations have shown that these are in fact negative flashes. They begin as IC flashes within the cloud, the negative leader then exits the cloud from the positive charge region before propagating through clear air and striking the ground some distance away.\nCloud to cloud (CC) and intra-cloud (IC).\nLightning discharges may occur between areas of cloud without contacting the ground. When it occurs between two separate clouds, it is known as cloud-to-cloud (CC) or inter-cloud lightning; when it occurs between areas of differing electric potential within a single cloud, it is known as intra-cloud (IC) lightning. IC lightning is the most frequently occurring type.\nIC lightning most commonly occurs between the upper anvil portion and lower reaches of a given thunderstorm. This lightning can sometimes be observed at great distances at night as so-called \"sheet lightning\". In such instances, the observer may see only a flash of light without hearing any thunder.\nAnother term used for cloud\u2013cloud or cloud\u2013cloud\u2013ground lightning is \"Anvil Crawler\", due to the habit of charge, typically originating beneath or within the anvil and scrambling through the upper cloud layers of a thunderstorm, often generating dramatic multiple branch strokes. These are usually seen as a thunderstorm passes over the observer or begins to decay. The most vivid crawler behavior occurs in well developed thunderstorms that feature extensive rear anvil shearing.\nFormation.\nThe processes involved in lightning formation fall into the following categories:\nAtmospheric phenomena in which lightning occurs.\nLightning primarily occurs when warm air is mixed with colder air masses, resulting in atmospheric disturbances necessary for polarizing the atmosphere. The disturbances result in storms, and when those storms also result in lightning and thunder, they are called a thunderstorm.\nLightning can also occur during dust storms, forest fires, tornadoes, volcanic eruptions, and even in the cold of winter, where the lightning is known as thundersnow. Hurricanes typically generate some lightning, mainly in the rainbands as much as from the center.\nIntense forest fires, such as those seen in the 2019\u201320 Australian bushfire season, can create their own weather systems that can produce lightning (also called Fire Lightning) and other weather phenomena.&lt;ref name=\"ABC / Ceranic\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Intense heat from a fire causes air to rapidly rise within the smoke plume, causing the formation of pyrocumulonimbus clouds. Cooler air is drawn in by this turbulent, rising air, helping to cool the plume. The rising plume is further cooled by the lower atmospheric pressure at high altitude, allowing the moisture in it to condense into cloud. Pyrocumulonimbus clouds form in an unstable atmosphere. These weather systems can produce dry lightning, fire tornadoes, intense winds, and dirty hail.\nAs well as the thermodynamic and dynamic conditions of the atmosphere, aerosol (e.g. dust or smoke) composition is thought to influence the frequency of lightning flashes in a storm. A specific example of this is that relatively high lightning frequency is seen along ship tracks.\nAirplane contrails have also been observed to influence lightning to a small degree. The water vapor-dense contrails of airplanes may provide a lower resistance pathway through the atmosphere having some influence upon the establishment of an ionic pathway for a lightning flash to follow. Rocket exhaust plumes provided a pathway for lightning when it was witnessed striking the Apollo 12 rocket shortly after takeoff.\nThermonuclear explosions, by providing extra material for electrical conduction and a very turbulent localized atmosphere, have been seen triggering lightning flashes within the mushroom cloud. In addition, intense gamma radiation from large nuclear explosions may develop intensely charged regions in the surrounding air through Compton scattering. The intensely charged space charge regions create multiple clear-air lightning discharges shortly after the device detonates.\nSome high energy cosmic rays produced by supernovas as well as solar particles from the solar wind, enter the atmosphere and electrify the air, which may create pathways for lightning channels.\nCharge separation.\nCharge separation in thunderstorms.\nThe details of the charging process are still being studied by scientists, but there is general agreement on some of the basic concepts of thunderstorm charge separation, also known as electrification. Electrification can be by the triboelectric effect leading to electron or ion transfer between colliding bodies.\nThe main charging area in a thunderstorm occurs in the central part of the storm where air is moving upward rapidly (updraft) and temperatures range from ; see Figure 1. In that area, the combination of temperature and rapid upward air movement produces a mixture of super-cooled cloud droplets (small water droplets below freezing), small ice crystals, and graupel (soft hail). The updraft carries the super-cooled cloud droplets and very small ice crystals upward. At the same time, the graupel, which is considerably larger and denser, tends to fall or be suspended in the rising air.\nThe differences in the movement of the cloud particles cause collisions to occur. When the rising ice crystals collide with graupel, the ice crystals become positively charged and the graupel becomes negatively charged; see Figure 2. The updraft carries the positively charged ice crystals upward toward the top of the storm cloud. The larger and denser graupel is either suspended in the middle of the thunderstorm cloud or falls toward the lower part of the storm. Typically, the upper part of the thunderstorm cloud becomes positively charged while the middle to lower part of the thunderstorm cloud becomes negatively charged. The above process of charge separation as a result of cloud particle collisions is normally referred to as the \"non-inductive\" charging mechanism.\nThe upward motions within the storm and winds at higher levels in the atmosphere tend to cause the small ice crystals (and positive charge) in the upper part of the thunderstorm cloud to spread out horizontally some distance from the thunderstorm cloud base. This part of the thunderstorm cloud is called the anvil. While this is the main charging process for the thunderstorm cloud, some of these charges can be redistributed by air movements within the storm (updrafts and downdrafts). In addition, there is a small but important positive charge buildup near the bottom of the thunderstorm cloud due to the precipitation and warmer temperatures. The positive-negative-positive charge regions commonly occur in mature thunderstorms, and referred to as the \" tripolar\" charge structure.\nThere are also other charging processes that may play a role in thunderstorms, but are generally thought to be less important. An \"inductive\" charging mechanism has been studied, and would arise from the polarization of cloud droplets in the presence of the \"fair-weather\" electric field. It has also been stated that uncharged, colliding water-drops can become charged because of charge transfer between them (as aqueous ions) in an electric field as would exist in a thunderstorm.\nThe induced separation of charge in pure liquid water has been known since the 1840s as has the electrification of pure liquid water by the triboelectric effect. William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) demonstrated that charge separation in water occurs in the usual electric fields at the Earth's surface and developed a continuous electric field measuring device using that knowledge. The physical separation of charge into different regions using liquid water was demonstrated by Kelvin with the Kelvin water dropper. The most likely charge-carrying species were considered to be the aqueous hydrogen ion and the aqueous hydroxide ion. An electron is not stable in liquid water concerning a hydroxide ion plus dissolved hydrogen for the time scales involved in thunderstorms. The electrical charging of solid water ice has also been considered. The charged species were again considered to be the hydrogen ion and the hydroxide ion.\nEstablishing an electric field.\nIn order for an electrostatic discharge to occur, two preconditions are necessary: first, a sufficiently high potential difference between two regions of space must exist, and second, a high-resistance medium must obstruct the free, unimpeded equalization of the opposite charges. The atmosphere provides the electrical insulation, or barrier, that prevents free equalization between charged regions of opposite polarity. Meanwhile, a thunderstorm can provide the charge separation and aggregation in certain regions of the cloud.\nWhen the local electric field exceeds the dielectric strength of damp air (about 3 MV/m), electrical discharge results in a \"strike\", often followed by commensurate discharges branching from the same path. Mechanisms that cause the charges to build up to lightning are still a matter of scientific investigation. A 2016 study confirmed dielectric breakdown is involved. Lightning may be caused by the circulation of warm moisture-filled air through electric fields. Ice or water particles then accumulate charge as in a Van de Graaff generator.\nAs a thundercloud moves over the surface of the Earth, an equal electric charge, but of opposite polarity, is induced on the Earth's surface underneath the cloud. The induced positive surface charge, when measured against a fixed point, will be small as the thundercloud approaches, increasing as the center of the storm arrives and dropping as the thundercloud passes. The referential value of the induced surface charge could be roughly represented as a bell curve.\nThe oppositely charged regions create an electric field within the air between them. This electric field varies in relation to the strength of the surface charge on the base of the thundercloud \u2013 the greater the accumulated charge, the higher the electrical field.\nElectrical discharge as flashes and strikes.\nThe charge carrier in lightning is mainly electrons in a plasma. The process of going from charge as ions (positive hydrogen ion and negative hydroxide ion) associated with liquid water or solid water to charge as electrons associated with lightning must involve some form of electro-chemistry, that is, the oxidation and/or the reduction of chemical species.\nThe best-studied and understood form of lightning is cloud to ground (CG) lightning. Although more common, intra-cloud (IC) and cloud-to-cloud (CC) flashes are difficult to study because there are no fixed points to monitor inside the clouds. Also, because of the very low probability of lightning striking the same point repeatedly and consistently, scientific inquiry is difficult even in areas of high CG frequency.\nLightning leaders.\nIn a process not well understood, a bidirectional channel of ionized air, called a \"leader\", is initiated between oppositely-charged regions in a thundercloud. Leaders are electrically conductive channels of ionized gas that propagate through, or are otherwise attracted to, regions with a charge opposite of that of the leader tip. The negative end of the bidirectional leader fills a positive charge region, also called a well, inside the cloud while the positive end fills a negative charge well. Leaders often split, forming branches in a tree-like pattern. In addition, negative and some positive leaders travel in a discontinuous fashion, in a process called \"stepping\". The resulting jerky movement of the leaders can be readily observed in slow-motion videos of lightning flashes.\nIt is possible for one end of the leader to fill the oppositely-charged well entirely while the other end is still active. When this happens, the leader end which filled the well may propagate outside of the thundercloud and result in either a cloud-to-air flash or a cloud-to-ground flash. In a typical cloud-to-ground flash, a bidirectional leader initiates between the main negative and lower positive charge regions in a thundercloud. The weaker positive charge region is filled quickly by the negative leader which then propagates toward the inductively-charged ground.\nThe positively and negatively charged leaders proceed in opposite directions, positive upwards within the cloud and negative towards the earth. Both ionic channels proceed, in their respective directions, in a number of successive spurts. Each leader \"pools\" ions at the leading tips, shooting out one or more new leaders, momentarily pooling again to concentrate charged ions, then shooting out another leader. The negative leader continues to propagate and split as it heads downward, often speeding up as it gets closer to the Earth's surface.\nAbout 90% of ionic channel lengths between \"pools\" are approximately in length. The establishment of the ionic channel takes a comparatively long amount of time (hundreds of milliseconds) in comparison to the resulting discharge, which occurs within a few dozen microseconds. The electric current needed to establish the channel, measured in the tens or hundreds of amperes, is dwarfed by subsequent currents during the actual discharge.\nInitiation of the lightning leader is not well understood. The electric field strength within the thundercloud is not typically large enough to initiate this process by itself. Many hypotheses have been proposed. One hypothesis postulates that showers of relativistic electrons are created by cosmic rays and are then accelerated to higher velocities via a process called runaway breakdown. As these relativistic electrons collide and ionize neutral air molecules, they initiate leader formation. Another hypothesis involves locally enhanced electric fields being formed near elongated water droplets or ice crystals. Percolation theory, especially for the case of biased percolation, describes random connectivity phenomena, which produce an evolution of connected structures similar to that of lightning strikes. A streamer avalanche model has recently been favored by observational data taken by LOFAR during storms.\nUpward streamers.\nWhen a stepped leader approaches the ground, the presence of opposite charges on the ground enhances the strength of the electric field. The electric field is strongest on grounded objects whose tops are closest to the base of the thundercloud, such as trees and tall buildings. If the electric field is strong enough, a positively charged ionic channel, called a positive or upward streamer, can develop from these points. This was first theorized by Heinz Kasemir.\nAs negatively charged leaders approach, increasing the localized electric field strength, grounded objects already experiencing corona discharge will exceed a threshold and form upward streamers.\nAttachment.\nOnce a downward leader connects to an available upward leader, a process referred to as attachment, a low-resistance path is formed and discharge may occur. Photographs have been taken in which unattached streamers are clearly visible. The unattached downward leaders are also visible in branched lightning, none of which are connected to the earth, although it may appear they are. High-speed videos can show the attachment process in progress.\nDischarge \u2013 Return stroke.\nOnce a conductive channel bridges the air gap between the negative charge excess in the cloud and the positive surface charge excess below, there is a large drop in resistance across the lightning channel. Electrons accelerate rapidly as a result in a zone beginning at the point of attachment, which expands across the entire leader network at up to one third of the speed of light. This is the \"return stroke\" and it is the most luminous and noticeable part of the lightning discharge.\nA large electric charge flows along the plasma channel, from the cloud to the ground, neutralising the positive ground charge as electrons flow away from the strike point to the surrounding area. This huge surge of current creates large radial voltage differences along the surface of the ground. Called step potentials, they are responsible for more injuries and deaths in groups of people or of other animals than the strike itself. Electricity takes every path available to it.\nSuch step potentials will often cause current to flow through one leg and out another, electrocuting an unlucky human or animal standing near the point where the lightning strikes.\nThe electric current of the return stroke averages 30 kiloamperes for a typical negative CG flash, often referred to as \"negative CG\" lightning. In some cases, a ground-to-cloud (GC) lightning flash may originate from a positively charged region on the ground below a storm. These discharges normally originate from the tops of very tall structures, such as communications antennas. The rate at which the return stroke current travels has been found to be around 100,000\u00a0km/s (one-third of the speed of light). A typical cloud-to-ground lightning flash culminates in the formation of an electrically conducting plasma channel through the air in excess of tall, from within the cloud to the ground's surface.\nThe massive flow of electric current occurring during the return stroke combined with the rate at which it occurs (measured in microseconds) rapidly superheats the completed leader channel, forming a highly electrically conductive plasma channel. The core temperature of the plasma during the return stroke may exceed , causing it to radiate with a brilliant, blue-white color. Once the electric current stops flowing, the channel cools and dissipates over tens or hundreds of milliseconds, often disappearing as fragmented patches of glowing gas. The nearly instantaneous heating during the return stroke causes the air to expand explosively, producing a powerful shock wave which is heard as thunder.\nDischarge \u2013 Re-strike.\nHigh-speed videos (examined frame-by-frame) show that most negative CG lightning flashes are made up of 3 or 4 individual strokes, though there may be as many as 30.\nEach re-strike is separated by a relatively large amount of time, typically 40 to 50 milliseconds, as other charged regions in the cloud are discharged in subsequent strokes. Re-strikes often cause a noticeable \"strobe light\" effect.\nTo understand why multiple return strokes utilize the same lightning channel, one needs to understand the behavior of positive leaders, which a typical ground flash effectively becomes following the negative leader's connection with the ground. Positive leaders decay more rapidly than negative leaders do. For reasons not well understood, bidirectional leaders tend to initiate on the tips of the decayed positive leaders in which the negative end attempts to re-ionize the leader network. These leaders, also called \"recoil leaders\", usually decay shortly after their formation. When they do manage to make contact with a conductive portion of the main leader network, a return stroke-like process occurs and a \"dart leader\" travels across all or a portion of the length of the original leader. The dart leaders making connections with the ground are what cause a majority of subsequent return strokes.\nEach successive stroke is preceded by intermediate dart leader strokes that have a faster rise time but lower amplitude than the initial return stroke. Each subsequent stroke usually re-uses the discharge channel taken by the previous one, but the channel may be offset from its previous position as wind displaces the hot channel.\nSince recoil and dart leader processes do not occur on negative leaders, subsequent return strokes very seldom utilize the same channel on positive ground flashes which are explained later in the article.\nDischarge \u2013 Transient currents during flash.\nThe electric current within a typical negative CG lightning discharge rises very quickly to its peak value in 1\u201310 microseconds, then decays more slowly over 50\u2013200 microseconds. The transient nature of the current within a lightning flash results in several phenomena that need to be addressed in the effective protection of ground-based structures. Rapidly changing (alternating) currents tend to travel on the surface of a conductor, in what is called the skin effect, unlike direct currents, which \"flow-through\" the entire conductor like water through a hose. Hence, conductors used in the protection of facilities tend to be multi-stranded, with small wires woven together. This increases the total bundle surface area in inverse proportion to the individual strand radius, for a fixed total cross-sectional area.\nThe rapidly changing currents also create electromagnetic pulses (EMPs) that radiate outward from the ionic channel. This is a characteristic of all electrical discharges. The radiated pulses rapidly weaken as their distance from the origin increases. However, if they pass over conductive elements such as power lines, communication lines, or metallic pipes, they may induce a current which travels outward to its termination. The surge current is inversely related to the surge impedance: the higher in impedance, the lower the current. This is the surge that, more often than not, results in the destruction of delicate electronics, electrical appliances, or electric motors. Devices known as surge protectors (SPD) or transient voltage surge suppressors (TVSS) attached in parallel with these lines can detect the lightning flash's transient irregular current, and, through alteration of its physical properties, route the spike to an attached earthing ground, thereby protecting the equipment from damage.\nDistribution, frequency and properties.\nGlobal monitoring indicates that lightning on Earth occurs at an average frequency of approximately 44\u00a0(\u00b1\u00a05) times per second, equating to nearly 1.4 billion flashes per year. Median duration is 0.52 seconds made up from a number of much shorter flashes (strokes) of around 60 to 70 microseconds. Occurrences are distributed unevenly across the planet with about 70% being over land in the tropics where atmospheric convection is the greatest.\nMany factors affect the frequency, distribution, strength and physical properties of a typical lightning flash in a particular region of the world. These factors include ground elevation, latitude, prevailing wind currents, relative humidity, and proximity to warm and cold bodies of water.\nLightning is usually produced by cumulonimbus clouds, which have bases that are typically above the ground and tops up to in height.\nIn general, CG lightning flashes account for only 25% of all total lightning flashes worldwide. The proportions of intra-cloud, cloud-to-cloud, and cloud-to-ground lightning may also vary by season at latitude. In the tropics, where the freezing level is generally higher in the atmosphere, only 10% of lightning flashes are CG. At the latitude of Norway (around 60\u00b0 North latitude), where the freezing elevation is lower, 50% of lightning is CG.\nThe place on Earth where lightning occurs most often is over Lake Maracaibo, wherein the Catatumbo lightning phenomenon produces 250 bolts of lightning a day. This activity occurs on average, 297 days a year. The second most lightning density is near the village of Kifuka in the mountains of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the elevation is around . On average, this region receives . Other lightning hotspots include Singapore and Lightning Alley in Central Florida.\nResearchers at the University of Florida found that the final one-dimensional speeds of 10 flashes observed were between 1.0\u00d7105 and 1.4\u00d7106 m/s, with an average of 4.4\u00d7105 m/s.\nMegaflashes.\nAn unusually long lightning bolt is sometimes called a megaflash. The American Meteorological Society defines a megaflash as \"a continuous mesoscale lightning flash with a horizontal path length of approximately 100 km or greater.\" Because of their long distance the duration of a megaflash is also long, typically more than 5 seconds. Megaflashes are caused by expansive electrified clouds that discharge slowly; these do not occur in ordinary thunderstorms, only in mesoscale convective systems. As of 2022, megaflashes have been observed only in the Great Plains of North America and the R\u00edo de la Plata Basin of South America. This is, in part, because only part of the world is observed with the kind of satellite instrument necessary to detect megaflashes. The launch of the Meteosat Third Generation satellite in 2022 increased that coverage to include Africa and Europe. \nAccording to the World Meteorological Organization, on April 29, 2020, a bolt 768\u00a0km (477.2\u00a0mi) long was observed in the southern U.S.\u2014sixty km (37\u00a0mi) longer than the previous distance record (southern Brazil, October 31, 2018). A single flash in Uruguay and northern Argentina on June 18, 2020, lasted for 17.1 seconds\u20140.37 seconds longer than the previous record (March 4, 2019, also in northern Argentina).In 2025, scientists discovered the longest observed flash occurred in October 2017 across Texas and Kansas, measuring 829 km (515 mi). The flash, which was detected by NOAA's Geostationary Lightning Mapper, touched ground in five states.\nExtraterrestrial.\nLightning has been observed within the atmospheres of planets other than Earth, such as Jupiter, Saturn, and probably Uranus and Neptune. Lightning on Jupiter is far more energetic than on Earth, despite seeming to be generated via the same mechanism. Recently, a new type of lightning was detected on Jupiter, thought to originate from \"mushballs\" including ammonia. On Saturn, lightning, initially referred to as \"Saturn Electrostatic Discharge\", was discovered by the Voyager 1 mission.\nLightning on Venus has been a controversial subject after decades of study. During the Soviet Venera and U.S. Pioneer missions of the 1970s and 1980s, signals suggesting lightning may be present in the upper atmosphere were detected. The short Cassini\u2013Huygens mission fly-by of Venus in 1999 detected no signs of lightning, but radio pulses recorded by the spacecraft \"Venus Express\" (which began orbiting Venus in April 2006) may originate from lightning on Venus.\nIn 2025, researchers reported the putative detection of lightning on Mars by a microphone Mars 2020 rover \"Perseverance\". Previous researchers in 2009 had reported the detection of large-scale electric discharge events on Mars, but later researchers could not reproduce their findings.\nEffects.\nA lightning strike can unleash a variety of effects, some temporary, including very brief emission of light, sound and electromagnetic radiation, and some long-lasting, such as death, damage, and atmospheric and environmental changes.\nInjury, damage and destruction.\nThe immense amount of energy transferred in a lightning strike can have potentially devastating effect in a multitude of areas.\nTo nature.\nObjects struck by lightning experience heat and magnetic forces of great magnitude. Consequently:\nTo man-made structures and their contents.\nBuildings or tall structures hit by lightning may be damaged as the lightning seeks unimpeded paths to the ground. By safely conducting a lightning strike to the ground, a lightning protection system, usually incorporating at least one lightning rod, can greatly reduce the probability of severe property damage. Surge protection devices (SPDs) can additionally or alternatively be used to help protect electrical installations from lightning induced electrical surges that risk damaging or destroying electrical equipment or starting a fire. Electrical fires obviously threaten not only structures but all assets, personal possessions, and living beings (people, pets and livestock) within. What, if any, protection system a building or structure requires is determined through a risk assessment. Threats to structures come not only from direct strikes to the structure itself, but also from direct or indirect strikes to connected electrically conductive services (electrical power lines; communication lines; water/gas pipes), or even to the surrounding area from which a surge may reach a service connection as it spreads out into the ground.\nTo aircraft.\nAircraft are highly susceptible to being struck due to their metallic fuselages, but lightning strikes are generally not dangerous to them. Due to the conductive properties of aluminium alloy, the fuselage acts as a Faraday cage. Present day aircraft are built to be safe from a lightning strike and passengers will generally not even know that it has happened. However, there have been suspicions that lightning strikes can ignite fuel vapor and cause explosion, and nearby lightning can momentarily blind the pilot and cause permanent errors in magnetic compasses.\nTo living beings.\nAlthough 90 percent of people struck by lightning survive, humans and other animals struck by lightning may suffer severe injury due to internal organ and nervous system damage.\nNoise (thunder).\nBecause the electrostatic discharge of terrestrial lightning superheats the air to plasma temperatures along the length of the discharge channel in a short duration, kinetic theory dictates gaseous molecules undergo a rapid increase in pressure and thus expand outward from the lightning creating a shock wave audible as thunder. Since the sound waves propagate not from a single point source but along the length of the lightning's path, the sound origin's varying distances from the observer can generate a rolling or rumbling effect. Perception of the sonic characteristics is further complicated by factors such as the irregular and possibly branching geometry of the lightning channel, by acoustic echoing from terrain, and by the usually multiple-stroke characteristic of the lightning strike. Thunder is heard as a rolling, gradually dissipating rumble because the sound from different portions of a long stroke arrives at slightly different times.\nLightning at a sufficient distance may be seen and not heard; there is data that a lightning storm can be seen at over whereas the thunder travels about . Anecdotally, there are many examples of people describing a 'storm directly overhead' or 'all-around' and yet 'no thunder'. Since thunderclouds can be up to high, lightning occurring high up in the cloud may appear close but is actually too far away to produce noticeable thunder.\nThe distance approximation trick.\nLight travels at about , while sound only travels through air at about . An observer can approximate the distance to the strike by timing the interval between the visible lightning and the audible thunder it generates. A lightning flash preceding its thunder by one second would be approximately away; thus a delay of three seconds would indicate a distance of about ; while a flash preceding thunder by five seconds would indicate a distance of roughly . Consequently, a lightning strike observed at a very close distance will be accompanied by a sudden clap of thunder, with almost no perceptible time lapse, possibly accompanied by the smell of ozone (O3).\nElectromagnetic radiation and interference.\nElectromagnetic waves are emitted in a variety of wavelengths, most obviously that of visible light \u2013 the big bright flash. This emitted radiation results partly from black-body radiation due to the temperature increase caused by electrical resistance of the air, and partly for other reasons that are still being actively researched.\nRadio frequency radiation.\nLightning discharges generate radio-frequency electromagnetic waves which can be received thousands of kilometers from their source. The discharge by itself is relatively simple short-lived dipole source that creates a single electromagnetic pulse with a duration of about 1 ms and a wide spectral density. \nIn the absence in the nearby environment of materials with magnetic or electrical interaction properties, at a large distances in a far field zone, the electromagnetic wave will be proportional to the second derivation of the discharge current. This is what happens with high-altitude discharges or discharges over areas of a dry land.\nIn other cases, the surrounding environment will change the shape of the source signal by absorbing some of its spectrum and converting it into a heat or re-transmitting it back as modified electromagnetic waves.\nHigh-energy radiation.\nThe production of X-rays by a bolt of lightning was predicted as early as 1925 by C.T.R. Wilson. No evidence was found until 2001-2002, when researchers at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology detected X-ray emissions from an induced lightning strike along a grounded wire trailed behind a rocket shot into a storm cloud. In the same year, University of Florida and Florida Tech researchers used an array of electric field and X-ray detectors at a lightning research facility in North Florida to confirm that natural lightning makes X-rays in large quantities during the propagation of stepped leaders. The cause of the X-ray emissions was left as a matter for further research, as the temperature of lightning is too low to account for the X-rays observed. The relativistic runaway electron avalanche mechanism explains both the emission of X-rays and the initiation of lightning flashes.\nA number of observations by space-based telescopes have revealed even higher energy gamma ray emissions, the so-called terrestrial gamma-ray flashes (TGFs). These observations posed a challenge to then-current theories of lightning, especially with the 2000s discovery of clear signatures of antimatter produced in lightning. Research in the 2010s has shown that secondary species, produced by these TGFs, such as electrons, positrons, neutrons or protons, can gain energies of up to several tens of MeV.\nEnvironmental changes.\nMore permanent or longer-lasting environmental changes include the following.\nAtmospheric chemistry.\nThe very high temperatures generated by lightning lead to significant local increases in ozone and oxides of nitrogen. Each lightning flash in temperate and sub-tropical areas produces 7\u00a0kg of on average. In the troposphere the effect of lightning can increase by 90% and ozone by 30%.\nGround fertilisation.\nLightning serves an important role in the nitrogen cycle by oxidizing diatomic nitrogen in the air into nitrates which are deposited by rain and can fertilize the growth of plants and other organisms.\nInduced permanent magnetism.\nThe movement of electrical charges produces a magnetic field (see electromagnetism). The intense currents of a lightning discharge create a fleeting but very strong magnetic field. Where the lightning current path passes through rock, soil, or metal these materials can become permanently magnetized. This effect is known as lightning-induced remanent magnetism, or LIRM. These currents follow the least resistive path, often horizontally near the surface but sometimes vertically, where faults, ore bodies, or ground water offers a less resistive path. One theory suggests that lodestones, natural magnets encountered in ancient times, were created in this manner.\nLightning-induced magnetic anomalies can be mapped in the ground, and analysis of magnetized materials can confirm lightning was the source of the magnetization and provide an estimate of the peak current of the lightning discharge.\nMagnetic hallucinations.\nResearch at the University of Innsbruck has calculated that magnetic fields generated by plasma may induce hallucinations in subjects located within of a severe lightning storm, similar to the effects of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).\nDetection and monitoring.\nThe earliest detector invented to warn of the approach of a thunderstorm was the lightning bell. Benjamin Franklin installed one such device in his house. The detector was based on an electrostatic device called the 'electric chimes' invented by Andrew Gordon in 1742.\nLightning discharges generate a wide range of electromagnetic radiations, including radio-frequency pulses. The Earth-ionosphere waveguide traps electromagnetic VLF- and ELF waves. Electromagnetic pulses transmitted by lightning strikes propagate within that waveguide. The waveguide is dispersive, which means that their group velocity depends on frequency. The difference of the group time delay of a lightning pulse at adjacent frequencies is proportional to the distance between transmitter and receiver. Together with direction-finding methods, this allows locating lightning strikes up to distances of 10,000\u00a0km from their origin. Moreover, the eigenfrequencies of the Earth-ionospheric waveguide, the Schumann resonances\nat about 7.5\u00a0Hz, are used to determine the global thunderstorm activity.\nA number of countries have installed nationwide lightning detector networks. The United States federal\ngovernment has constructed a nationwide grid of such lightning detectors, allowing lightning discharges\nto be tracked in real time throughout the continental U.S. The EUCLID detection network is a\ncombination of several national networks across Europe. Other examples of nations with lightning detection networks are India and Brazil.\nThere are a range of global detection networks, which vary in their commercial and academic principles.\nBlitzortung (a private global detection system that consists of over 500 detection stations owned and\noperated by hobbyists/volunteers) provides near real-time lightning maps. The World Wide\nLightning Location Network (WWLLN) is an academic led detection system. The Vaisala GLD360 network is a private\nenterprise.\nIn addition to ground-based lightning detection, several instruments aboard satellites have been constructed to observe lightning distribution. Some of the first satellite-based observations were made in the late 1970s. The global and tropical long-term climatology of lightning has been observed by the Optical Transient Detector (OTD), aboard the OrbView-1 satellite launched on April 3, 1995, and the subsequent Lightning Imaging Sensor (LIS) aboard TRMM launched on November 28, 1997. In addition, the ISS carried a LIS instrument for three years from March 2017.\nStarting in 2016, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration launched Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite\u2013R Series (GOES-R) weather satellites outfitted with Geostationary Lightning Mapper (GLM) instruments which are near-infrared optical transient detectors that can detect the momentary changes in an optical scene, indicating the presence of lightning. The lightning detection data can be converted into a real-time map of lightning activity across the Western Hemisphere; this mapping technique has been implemented by the United States National Weather Service. At the end of 2022, EUMETSAT launched the Lightning Imager (MTG-LI) on board the Meteosat Third Generation. This complements NOAA's GLM as MTG-LI will observe Europe and Africa.\nImpact of climate change and air pollution.\nIt is difficult to accurately predict changes in lightning due to climate change because it is challenging to simulate cloud physics variables that predict lightning (such as convection and cloud ice) in climate models.\nA large share of the world's lightning occurs over Africa. While there are regional variations in how climate change affects lightning across the continent, one study predicts a small increase in the total amount of lightning across the continent with warming. More specifically, the total number of lightning days per year is predicted to decrease, while more cloud ice and stronger convection leads to more lightning strikes occurring on days when lightning does occur.\nLightning is much less common near the North and South Poles than in other regions. However, observations are beginning to show that lightning in the Arctic is increasing. and models suggest that climate change will continue to increase the frequency of lightning in the Arctic in future. The ratio of Arctic summertime lightning strikes has increased from 2010 to 2020 compared to the total lightning strikes in the world, indicating that the region is becoming more influenced by lightning.\nLightning activity is increased by particulate emissions (a form of air pollution). However, this only occurs up to a point (aerosol optical depth = 0.3). Once this threshold is crossed, lightning is then suppressed by further increases in particulates.\nWhen lightning occurs, it generates rapid heating causing nitrogen and oxygen molecules in the atmosphere to break apart. This process leads to the formation of nitrogen oxides (NOx), which can subsequently result in the production of ozone, a greenhouse gas when occurring in the troposphere. However, lightning NOx also leads to increased amounts of hydroxyl (OH) and hydroperoxyl (HO2) radicals. These reactive molecules initiate chemical reactions that break down greenhouse gases like methane, effectively cleaning the atmosphere.\nLightning and climate change feedbacks.\nAs lightning is influenced by climate change, there is a corresponding change to the lightning's influence on climate. These changes can lead to further climate change, thus creating a climate change feedback.\nLightning leads to the production of tropospheric ozone and destruction of methane, both greenhouse gases and air pollutants. Therefore, the net impact of lightning on climate depends on the balance between this warming and cooling effect of the gases' effects on atmospheric chemistry. Predictions of this feedback can vary, resulting in either no change (net zero feedback), or a warming effect (positive feedback), depending on the method used to predict lightning.\nLightning is the major natural cause of wildfire, estimated to cause 10% of forest fires worldwide. Wildfire can contribute to climate change. Because wildfires emit greenhouse gases, and also affect vegetation cover (which affects how much sunlight is reflected), a lightning-wildfire feedback is possible. Multiple studies suggest there could be an increase in Boreal and Arctic lightning-ignited fires in response to climate change. There is evidence that arctic lightning wildfire feedback may also influence vegetation and permafrost cover. The impact of lightning on fires in the tropics remains uncertain.\nIn culture.\nThe first known photograph of lightning is from 1847, by Thomas Martin Easterly. The first surviving photograph is from 1882, by William Nicholson Jennings.\nReligion and mythology.\nIn many cultures, lightning has been viewed as a sign or part of a deity or a deity in and of itself. These include the Greek god Zeus, the Aztec god Tlaloc, the Mayan God K, Slavic mythology's Perun, the Baltic P\u0113rkons/Perk\u016bnas, Thor in Norse mythology, Ukko in Finnish mythology, the Hindu god Indra, the Yoruba god Sango, Illapa in Inca mythology and the Shinto god Raijin. The ancient Etruscans produced guides to divining the future based on the omens supposedly displayed by thunder or lightning. Such use of thunder and lightning in divination is also known as ceraunoscopy, a kind of aeromancy. In the traditional religion of the African Bantu tribes, lightning is a sign of the ire of the gods. Scriptures in Judaism, Islam and Christianity also ascribe supernatural importance to lightning.\nIn popular culture.\nAlthough sometimes used figuratively, the idea that lightning never strikes the same place twice is a common myth. In fact, lightning can, and often does, strike the same place more than once. Lightning in a thunderstorm is more likely to strike objects and spots that are more prominent or conductive. For instance, lightning strikes the Empire State Building in New York City on average 23 times per year.\nIn French and Italian, the expression for \"Love at first sight\" is \"coup de foudre\" and \"colpo di fulmine\", respectively, which literally translated means \"lightning strike\".\nPolitical and military culture.\nThe bolt of lightning in heraldry is called a thunderbolt. This symbol usually represents power and speed.\nSome political parties use lightning flashes as a symbol of power, such as the People's Action Party in Singapore, the British Union of Fascists during the 1930s, and the National States' Rights Party in the United States during the 1950s. The Schutzstaffel, the paramilitary wing of the Nazi Party, used the Sig rune in their logo which symbolizes lightning. The German word Blitzkrieg, which means \"lightning war\", was a major offensive strategy of the German army during World War II.\nThe lightning bolt is a common insignia for military communications units. A lightning bolt is also the NATO symbol for a signal asset.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61345", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61345", "title": "Documentary hypothesis", "text": "Hypothesis to explain the origins and composition of the Torah\nThe documentary hypothesis (DH) is one of the models used by biblical scholars to explain the origins and composition of the Torah (or Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy). A version of the documentary hypothesis, frequently identified with the German scholar Julius Wellhausen, was almost universally accepted for most of the 20th century. It posited that the Pentateuch is a compilation of four originally independent documents: the Jahwist, Elohist, Deuteronomist, and Priestly sources, frequently referred to by their initials. The first of these, J, was dated to the Solomonic period (c. 950 BCE). E was dated somewhat later, in the 9th century BCE, and D was dated just before the reign of King Josiah, in the 7th or 8th century BCE. Finally, P was generally dated to the time of Ezra in the 5th century BCE. The sources would have been joined at various points in time by a series of editors or \"redactors\".\nThe consensus around the classical documentary hypothesis has now faltered. This was triggered in large part by the influential publications of John Van Seters, Hans Heinrich Schmid, and Rolf Rendtorff in the mid-1970s, who argued that J was to be dated no earlier than the time of the Babylonian captivity (597\u2013539 BCE), and rejected the existence of a substantial E source. They also called into question the nature and extent of the three other sources. Van Seters, Schmid, and Rendtorff shared many of the same criticisms of the documentary hypothesis, but were not in complete agreement about what paradigm ought to replace it. \nAs a result, there has been a revival of interest in \"fragmentary\" and \"supplementary\" models, frequently in combination with each other and with a documentary model, making it difficult to classify contemporary theories as strictly one or another. Modern scholars also have given up the classical Wellhausian dating of the sources, and generally see the completed Torah as a product of the Achaemenid period (probably 450\u2013350 BCE), although some would place its production as late as the Hellenistic period (333\u2013164 BCE), after the conquests of Alexander the Great.\nHistory of the documentary hypothesis.\nThe Torah (or Pentateuch) is collectively the first five books of the Bible: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. According to tradition, they were dictated by God to Moses, but when modern critical scholarship began to be applied to the Bible, it was discovered that the Pentateuch was not the unified text one would expect from a single author. As a result, the Mosaic authorship of the Torah had been largely rejected by leading scholars by the 17th century, with many modern scholars viewing it as a product of a long evolutionary process.\nIn the mid-18th century, some scholars started a critical study of doublets (parallel accounts of the same incidents), inconsistencies, and changes in style and vocabulary in the Torah. In 1780, Johann Eichhorn, building on the work of the French doctor and exegete Jean Astruc's \"Conjectures\" and others, formulated the \"older documentary hypothesis\": the idea that Genesis was composed by combining two identifiable sources, the Jehovist (\"J\"; also called the Yahwist) and the Elohist (\"E\"). These sources were subsequently found to run through the first four books of the Torah, and the number was later expanded to three when Wilhelm de Wette identified the Deuteronomist as an additional source found only in Deuteronomy (\"D\"). Later still the Elohist was split into Elohist and Priestly (\"P\") sources, increasing the number to four.\nThese documentary approaches were in competition with two other models, the fragmentary and the supplementary. The fragmentary hypothesis argued that fragments of varying lengths, rather than continuous documents, lay behind the Torah; this approach accounted for the Torah's diversity but could not account for its structural consistency, particularly regarding chronology. The supplementary hypothesis was better able to explain this unity: it maintained that the Torah was made up of a central core document, the Elohist, supplemented by fragments taken from many sources. The supplementary approach was dominant by the early 1860s, but it was challenged by an important book published by Hermann Hupfeld in 1853, who argued that the Pentateuch was made up of four documentary sources, the Priestly, Yahwist, and Elohist intertwined in Genesis-Exodus-Leviticus-Numbers, and the stand-alone source of Deuteronomy. At around the same period, Karl Heinrich Graf argued that the Yahwist and Elohist were the earliest sources and the Priestly source the latest, while Wilhelm Vatke linked the four to an evolutionary framework: the Yahwist and Elohist to a time of primitive nature and fertility cults, the Deuteronomist to the ethical religion of the Hebrew prophets, and the Priestly source to a form of religion dominated by ritual, sacrifice and law.\nWellhausen and the new documentary hypothesis.\nIn 1878, Julius Wellhausen published ('History of Israel, Vol 1'). The second edition was printed as \"Prolegomena zur Geschichte Israels\" (\"Prolegomena to the History of Israel\") in 1883, and the work is better known under that name. (The second volume, a synthetic history titled ['Israelite and Jewish History'], did not appear until 1894 and remains untranslated.) Crucially, this historical portrait was based upon two earlier works of his technical analysis: \"Die Composition des Hexateuchs\" ('The Composition of the Hexateuch') of 1876\u201377, and sections on the \"historical books\" (Judges\u2013Kings) in his 1878 edition of Friedrich Bleek's ('Introduction to the Old Testament').\nWellhausen's documentary hypothesis owed little to Wellhausen himself but was mainly the work of Hupfeld, Eduard Eug\u00e8ne Reuss, Graf, and others, who in turn had built on earlier scholarship. Wellhausen accepted Hupfeld's four sources and, in agreement with Graf, placed the Priestly work last. J was the earliest document, a product of the 10th century BCE and the court of Solomon; E was from the 9th century BCE in the northern Kingdom of Israel, and had been combined by a redactor (editor) with J to form a document JE; D, the third source, was a product of the 7th century BCE, by 620\u00a0BCE, during the reign of King Josiah; P (what Wellhausen first named \"Q\") was a product of the priest-and-temple dominated world of the 6th century BCE; and the final redaction, when P was combined with JED to produce the Torah as we now know it.\nWellhausen's explanation of the formation of the Torah was also an explanation of the religious history of Israel. The Yahwist and Elohist described a primitive, spontaneous, and personal world, in keeping with the earliest stage of Israel's history; in Deuteronomy, he saw the influence of the prophets and the development of an ethical outlook, which he felt represented the pinnacle of Jewish religion; and the Priestly source reflected the rigid, ritualistic world of the priest-dominated, post-exilic period. His work, notable for its detailed and wide-ranging scholarship and close argument, entrenched the \"new documentary hypothesis\" as the dominant explanation of Pentateuchal origins from the late 19th to the late 20th centuries.\nCritical reassessment.\nIn the mid to late 20th century, new criticism of the documentary hypothesis formed. Three major publications of the 1970s caused scholars to reevaluate the assumptions of the documentary hypothesis: \"Abraham in History and Tradition\" by John Van Seters, (\"The So-Called Yahwist\") by Hans Heinrich Schmid, and (\"The Tradition-Historical Problem of the Pentateuch\") by Rolf Rendtorff. These three authors shared many of the same criticisms of the documentary hypothesis, but were not in agreement about what paradigm ought to replace it.\nVan Seters and Schmid both forcefully argued that the Yahwist source could not be dated to the Solomonic period (c. 950 BCE) as posited by the documentary hypothesis. They instead dated J to the period of the Babylonian captivity (597\u2013539 BCE), or the late monarchic period at the earliest. Van Seters also sharply criticized the idea of a substantial Elohist source, arguing that E extends at most to two short passages in Genesis.\nSome scholars, following Rendtorff, have come to espouse a fragmentary hypothesis, in which the Pentateuch is seen as a compilation of short, independent narratives, which were gradually brought together into larger units in two editorial phases: the Deuteronomic and the Priestly phases. By contrast, scholars such as John Van Seters advocate a supplementary hypothesis, which posits that the Torah is the result of two major additions\u2014Yahwist and Priestly\u2014to an existing corpus of work.\nSome scholars use these newer hypotheses in combination with each other and with a documentary model, making it difficult to classify contemporary theories as strictly one or another. The majority of scholars today continue to recognise Deuteronomy as a source, with its origin in the law-code produced at the court of Josiah as described by De Wette, subsequently given a frame during the exile (the speeches and descriptions at the front and back of the code) to identify it as the words of Moses. Most scholars also agree that some form of Priestly source existed, although its extent, especially its end-point, is uncertain. The remainder is called collectively non-Priestly, a grouping which includes both pre-Priestly and post-Priestly material.\nThe general trend in recent scholarship is to recognize the final form of the Torah as a literary and ideological unity, based on earlier sources, likely completed during the Persian period (539\u2013333 BCE). A minority of scholars would place its final compilation somewhat later, however, in the Hellenistic period (333\u2013164 BCE).\nA revised neo-documentary hypothesis still has adherents, especially in North America and Israel. This distinguishes sources by means of plot and continuity rather than stylistic and linguistic concerns, and does not tie them to stages in the evolution of Israel's religious history. Its resurrection of an E source is probably the element most often criticised by other scholars, as it is rarely distinguishable from the classical J source and European scholars have largely rejected it as fragmentary or non-existent.\nThe Torah and the history of Israel's religion.\nWellhausen used the sources of the Torah as evidence of changes in the history of Israelite religion as it moved (in his opinion) from free, simple and natural to fixed, formal and institutional. Modern scholars of Israel's religion have become more circumspect in how they use the Hebrew Bible, not least because many have concluded that the Hebrew Bible is not a reliable witness to the religion of ancient Israel and Judah, representing instead the beliefs of only a segment of the ancient Israelite community centered in Jerusalem and devoted to the exclusive worship of Yahweh.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61346", "revid": "49984288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61346", "title": "Commutative ring", "text": "Algebraic structure\nIn mathematics, a commutative ring is a ring in which the multiplication operation is commutative. The study of commutative rings is called commutative algebra. Complementarily, noncommutative algebra is the study of ring properties that are not specific to commutative rings. This distinction results from the high number of fundamental properties of commutative rings that do not extend to noncommutative rings.\nCommutative rings appear in the following chain of class inclusions:\n rngs \u2283 rings \u2283 commutative\u00a0rings \u2283 integral\u00a0domains \u2283 integrally\u00a0closed\u00a0domains \u2283 GCD\u00a0domains \u2283 unique\u00a0factorization\u00a0domains \u2283 principal\u00a0ideal\u00a0domains \u2283 Euclidean\u00a0domains \u2283 fields \u2283 algebraically\u00a0closed fields\nDefinition and first examples.\nDefinition.\nA \"ring\" is a set formula_1 equipped with two binary operations, i.e. operations combining any two elements of the ring to a third. They are called \"addition\" and \"multiplication\" and commonly denoted by \"formula_2\" and \"formula_3\"; e.g. formula_4 and formula_5. To form a ring these two operations have to satisfy a number of properties: the ring has to be an abelian group under addition as well as a monoid under multiplication, where multiplication distributes over addition; i.e., formula_6. The identity elements for addition and multiplication are denoted formula_7 and formula_8, respectively.\nIf the multiplication is commutative, i.e.\nformula_9\nthen the ring formula_1 is called \"commutative\". In the remainder of this article, all rings will be commutative, unless explicitly stated otherwise.\nFirst examples.\nAn important example, and in some sense crucial, is the ring of integers formula_11 with the two operations of addition and multiplication. As the multiplication of integers is a commutative operation, this is a commutative ring. It is usually denoted formula_11 as an abbreviation of the German word \"Zahlen\" (numbers).\nA field is a commutative ring where formula_13 and every non-zero element formula_14 is invertible; i.e., has a multiplicative inverse formula_15 such that formula_16. Therefore, by definition, any field is a commutative ring. The rational, real and complex numbers form fields.\nIf formula_1 is a given commutative ring, then the set of all polynomials in the variable formula_18 whose coefficients are in formula_1 forms the polynomial ring, denoted formula_20. The same holds true for several variables.\nIf formula_21 is some topological space, for example a subset of some formula_22, real- or complex-valued continuous functions on formula_21 form a commutative ring. The same is true for differentiable or holomorphic functions, when the two concepts are defined, such as for formula_21 a complex manifold.\nDivisibility.\nIn contrast to fields, where every nonzero element is multiplicatively invertible, the concept of divisibility for rings is richer. An element formula_14 of ring formula_1 is called a unit if it possesses a multiplicative inverse. Another particular type of element is the zero divisors, i.e. an element formula_14 such that there exists a non-zero element formula_15 of the ring such that formula_29. If formula_1 possesses no non-zero zero divisors, it is called an integral domain (or domain). An element formula_14 satisfying formula_32 for some positive integer formula_33 is called nilpotent.\nLocalizations.\nThe \"localization\" of a ring is a process in which some elements are rendered invertible, i.e. multiplicative inverses are added to the ring. Concretely, if formula_34 is a multiplicatively closed subset of formula_1 (i.e. whenever formula_36 then so is formula_37) then the \"localization\" of formula_1 at formula_34, or \"ring of fractions\" with denominators in formula_34, usually denoted formula_41 consists of symbols\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_42 with formula_43\nsubject to certain rules that mimic the cancellation familiar from rational numbers. Indeed, in this language formula_44 is the localization of formula_11 at all nonzero integers. This construction works for any integral domain formula_1 instead of formula_11. The localization formula_48 is a field, called the quotient field of formula_1.\nIdeals and modules.\nMany of the following notions also exist for not necessarily commutative rings, but the definitions and properties are usually more complicated. For example, all ideals in a commutative ring are automatically two-sided, which simplifies the situation considerably.\nModules.\nFor a ring formula_1, an formula_1-\"module\" formula_52 is like what a vector space is to a field. That is, elements in a module can be added; they can be multiplied by elements of formula_1 subject to the same axioms as for a vector space.\nThe study of modules is significantly more involved than the one of vector spaces, since there are modules that do not have any basis, that is, do not contain a spanning set whose elements are linearly independents. A module that has a basis is called a free module, and a submodule of a free module needs not to be free.\nA module of finite type is a module that has a finite spanning set. Modules of finite type play a fundamental role in the theory of commutative rings, similar to the role of the finite-dimensional vector spaces in linear algebra. In particular, Noetherian rings (see also \"\", below) can be defined as the rings such that every submodule of a module of finite type is also of finite type.\nIdeals.\n\"Ideals\" of a ring formula_1 are the submodules of formula_1, i.e., the modules contained in formula_1. In more detail, an ideal formula_57 is a non-empty subset of formula_1 such that for all formula_59 in formula_1, formula_61 and formula_62 in formula_57, both formula_64 and formula_65 are in formula_57. For various applications, understanding the ideals of a ring is of particular importance, but often one proceeds by studying modules in general.\nAny ring has two ideals, namely the zero ideal formula_67 and formula_1, the whole ring. These two ideals are the only ones precisely if formula_1 is a field. Given any subset formula_70 of formula_1 (where formula_72 is some index set), the ideal \"generated by\" formula_73 is the smallest ideal that contains formula_73. Equivalently, it is given by finite linear combinations\nformula_75\nPrincipal ideal domains.\nIf formula_73 consists of a single element formula_59, the ideal generated by formula_73 consists of the multiples of formula_59, i.e., the elements of the form formula_80 for arbitrary elements formula_81. Such an ideal is called a principal ideal. If every ideal is a principal ideal, formula_1 is called a principal ideal ring; two important cases are formula_11 and formula_84, the polynomial ring over a field formula_85. These two are in addition domains, so they are called principal ideal domains.\nUnlike for general rings, for a principal ideal domain, the properties of individual elements are strongly tied to the properties of the ring as a whole. For example, any principal ideal domain formula_1 is a unique factorization domain (UFD) which means that any element is a product of irreducible elements, in a (up to reordering of factors) unique way. Here, an element formula_14 in a domain is called irreducible if the only way of expressing it as a product\nformula_88\nis by either formula_15 or formula_90 being a unit. An example, important in field theory, are irreducible polynomials, i.e., irreducible elements in formula_84, for a field formula_85. The fact that formula_11 is a UFD can be stated more elementarily by saying that any natural number can be uniquely decomposed as product of powers of prime numbers. It is also known as the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.\nAn element formula_14 is a prime element if whenever formula_14 divides a product formula_96, formula_14 divides formula_15 or formula_90. In a domain, being prime implies being irreducible. The converse is true in a unique factorization domain, but false in general.\nFactor ring.\nThe definition of ideals is such that \"dividing\" formula_57 \"out\" gives another ring, the \"factor ring\" formula_101: it is the set of cosets of formula_57 together with the operations\nformula_103 and formula_104.\nFor example, the ring formula_105 (also denoted formula_106), where formula_33 is an integer, is the ring of integers modulo formula_33. It is the basis of modular arithmetic.\nAn ideal is \"proper\" if it is strictly smaller than the whole ring. An ideal that is not strictly contained in any proper ideal is called maximal. An ideal formula_109 is maximal if and only if formula_110 is a field. Except for the zero ring, any ring (with identity) possesses at least one maximal ideal; this follows from Zorn's lemma.\nNoetherian rings.\nA ring is called \"Noetherian\" (in honor of Emmy Noether, who developed this concept) if every ascending chain of ideals\nformula_111\nbecomes stationary, i.e. becomes constant beyond some index formula_33. Equivalently, any ideal is generated by finitely many elements, or, yet equivalent, submodules of finitely generated modules are finitely generated.\nBeing Noetherian is a highly important finiteness condition, and the condition is preserved under many operations that occur frequently in geometry. For example, if formula_1 is Noetherian, then so is the polynomial ring formula_114 (by Hilbert's basis theorem), any localization formula_41, and also any factor ring formula_101.\nAny non-Noetherian ring formula_1 is the union of its Noetherian subrings. This fact, known as Noetherian approximation, allows the extension of certain theorems to non-Noetherian rings.\nArtinian rings.\nA ring is called Artinian (after Emil Artin), if every descending chain of ideals\nformula_118\nbecomes stationary eventually. Despite the two conditions appearing symmetric, Noetherian rings are much more general than Artinian rings. For example, formula_11 is Noetherian, since every ideal can be generated by one element, but is not Artinian, as the chain\nformula_120\nshows. In fact, by the Hopkins\u2013Levitzki theorem, every Artinian ring is Noetherian. More precisely, Artinian rings can be characterized as the Noetherian rings whose Krull dimension is zero.\nSpectrum of a commutative ring.\nPrime ideals.\nAs was mentioned above, formula_11 is a unique factorization domain. This is not true for more general rings, as algebraists realized in the 19th century. For example, in\nformula_122\nthere are two genuinely distinct ways of writing 6 as a product:\nformula_123\nPrime ideals, as opposed to prime elements, provide a way to circumvent this problem. A prime ideal is a proper (i.e., strictly contained in formula_1) ideal formula_125 such that, whenever the product formula_126 of any two ring elements formula_14 and formula_15 is in formula_129 at least one of the two elements is already in formula_130 (The opposite conclusion holds for any ideal, by definition.) Thus, if a prime ideal is principal, it is equivalently generated by a prime element. However, in rings such as formula_131 prime ideals need not be principal. This limits the usage of prime elements in ring theory. A cornerstone of algebraic number theory is, however, the fact that in any Dedekind ring (which includes formula_132 and more generally the ring of integers in a number field) any ideal (such as the one generated by 6) decomposes uniquely as a product of prime ideals.\nAny maximal ideal is a prime ideal or, more briefly, is prime. Moreover, an ideal formula_133 is prime if and only if the factor ring formula_134 is an integral domain. Proving that an ideal is prime, or equivalently that a ring has no zero-divisors can be very difficult. Yet another way of expressing the same is to say that the complement formula_135 is multiplicatively closed. The localisation formula_136 is important enough to have its own notation: formula_137. This ring has only one maximal ideal, namely formula_138. Such rings are called local.\nSpectrum.\nThe \"spectrum of a ring\" formula_139, denoted by formula_140, is the set of all prime ideals of formula_139. It is equipped with a topology, the Zariski topology, which reflects the algebraic properties of formula_139: a basis of open subsets is given by\nformula_143 where formula_144 is any ring element.\nInterpreting formula_144 as a function that takes the value \"f\" mod \"p\" (i.e., the image of \"f\" in the residue field \"R\"/\"p\"), this subset is the locus where \"f\" is non-zero. The spectrum also makes precise the intuition that localisation and factor rings are complementary: the natural maps \"R\" \u2192 \"R\"\"f\" and \"R\" \u2192 \"R\" / \"fR\" correspond, after endowing the spectra of the rings in question with their Zariski topology, to complementary open and closed immersions respectively. Even for basic rings, such as illustrated for \"R\" = Z at the right, the Zariski topology is quite different from the one on the set of real numbers.\nThe spectrum contains the set of maximal ideals, which is occasionally denoted mSpec (\"R\"). For an algebraically closed field \"k\", mSpec (k[\"T\"1, ..., \"T\"\"n\"] / (\"f\"1, ..., \"f\"\"m\")) is in bijection with the set\nThus, maximal ideals reflect the geometric properties of solution sets of polynomials, which is an initial motivation for the study of commutative rings. However, the consideration of non-maximal ideals as part of the geometric properties of a ring is useful for several reasons. For example, the minimal prime ideals (i.e., the ones not strictly containing smaller ones) correspond to the irreducible components of Spec \"R\". For a Noetherian ring \"R\", Spec \"R\" has only finitely many irreducible components. This is a geometric restatement of primary decomposition, according to which any ideal can be decomposed as a product of finitely many primary ideals. This fact is the ultimate generalization of the decomposition into prime ideals in Dedekind rings.\nAffine schemes.\nThe notion of a spectrum is the common basis of commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry proceeds by endowing Spec \"R\" with a sheaf formula_146 (an entity that collects functions defined locally, i.e. on varying open subsets). The datum of the space and the sheaf is called an affine scheme. Given an affine scheme, the underlying ring \"R\" can be recovered as the global sections of formula_146. Moreover, this one-to-one correspondence between rings and affine schemes is also compatible with ring homomorphisms: any \"f\"\u2009: \"R\" \u2192 \"S\" gives rise to a continuous map in the opposite direction\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt; Spec \"S\" \u2192 Spec \"R\", \"q\" \u21a6 \"f\"\u22121(\"q\"), i.e. any prime ideal of \"S\" is mapped to its preimage under \"f\", which is a prime ideal of \"R\". \nThe resulting equivalence of the two said categories aptly reflects algebraic properties of rings in a geometrical manner.\nSimilar to the fact that manifolds are locally given by open subsets of R\"n\", affine schemes are local models for schemes, which are the object of study in algebraic geometry. Therefore, several notions concerning commutative rings stem from geometric intuition.\nDimension.\nThe \"Krull dimension\" (or dimension) dim \"R\" of a ring \"R\" measures the \"size\" of a ring by, roughly speaking, counting independent elements in \"R\". The dimension of algebras over a field \"k\" can be axiomatized by four properties:\nThe dimension is defined, for any ring \"R\", as the supremum of lengths \"n\" of chains of prime ideals\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"p\"0 \u228a \"p\"1 \u228a ... \u228a \"p\"\"n\".\nFor example, a field is zero-dimensional, since the only prime ideal is the zero ideal. The integers are one-dimensional, since chains are of the form (0) \u228a (\"p\"), where \"p\" is a prime number. For non-Noetherian rings, and also non-local rings, the dimension may be infinite, but Noetherian local rings have finite dimension. Among the four axioms above, the first two are elementary consequences of the definition, whereas the remaining two hinge on important facts in commutative algebra, the going-up theorem and Krull's principal ideal theorem.\nRing homomorphisms.\nA \"ring homomorphism\" or, more colloquially, simply a \"map\", is a map \"f\"\u2009: \"R\" \u2192 \"S\" such that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"f\"(\"a\" + \"b\") = \"f\"(\"a\") + \"f\"(\"b\"), \"f\"(\"ab\") = \"f\"(\"a\")\"f\"(\"b\") and \"f\"(1) = 1.\nThese conditions ensure \"f\"(0) = 0. Similarly as for other algebraic structures, a ring homomorphism is thus a map that is compatible with the structure of the algebraic objects in question. In such a situation \"S\" is also called an \"R\"-algebra, by understanding that \"s\" in \"S\" may be multiplied by some \"r\" of \"R\", by setting\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"r\" \u00b7 \"s\" := \"f\"(\"r\") \u00b7 \"s\".\nThe \"kernel\" and \"image\" of \"f\" are defined by ker(\"f\") = {\"r\" \u2208 \"R\", \"f\"(\"r\") = 0} and im(\"f\") = \"f\"(\"R\") = {\"f\"(\"r\"), \"r\" \u2208 \"R\"}. The kernel is an ideal of \"R\", and the image is a subring of \"S\".\nA ring homomorphism is called an isomorphism if it is bijective. An example of a ring isomorphism, known as the Chinese remainder theorem, is\nformula_148\nwhere \"n\" = \"p\"1\"p\"2...\"p\"\"k\" is a product of pairwise distinct prime numbers.\nCommutative rings, together with ring homomorphisms, form a category. The ring Z is the initial object in this category, which means that for any commutative ring \"R\", there is a unique ring homomorphism Z \u2192 \"R\". By means of this map, an integer \"n\" can be regarded as an element of \"R\". For example, the binomial formula\nformula_149\nwhich is valid for any two elements \"a\" and \"b\" in any commutative ring \"R\" is understood in this sense by interpreting the binomial coefficients as elements of \"R\" using this map.\nGiven two \"R\"-algebras \"S\" and \"T\", their tensor product\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"S\" \u2297\"R\" \"T\"\nis again a commutative \"R\"-algebra. In some cases, the tensor product can serve to find a \"T\"-algebra which relates to \"Z\" as \"S\" relates to \"R\". For example,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"R\"[\"X\"] \u2297\"R\" \"T\" = \"T\"[\"X\"].\nFinite generation.\nAn \"R\"-algebra \"S\" is called finitely generated (as an algebra) if there are finitely many elements \"s\"1, ..., \"s\"\"n\" such that any element of \"s\" is expressible as a polynomial in the \"s\"\"i\". Equivalently, \"S\" is isomorphic to\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"R\"[\"T\"1, ..., \"T\"\"n\"] / \"I\".\nA much stronger condition is that \"S\" is finitely generated as an \"R\"-module, which means that any \"s\" can be expressed as a \"R\"-linear combination of some finite set \"s\"1, ..., \"s\"\"n\".\nLocal rings.\nA ring is called local if it has only a single maximal ideal, denoted by \"m\". For any (not necessarily local) ring \"R\", the localization\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"R\"\"p\"\nat a prime ideal \"p\" is local. This localization reflects the geometric properties of Spec \"R\" \"around \"p\"\". Several notions and problems in commutative algebra can be reduced to the case when \"R\" is local, making local rings a particularly deeply studied class of rings. The residue field of \"R\" is defined as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"k\" = \"R\" / \"m\".\nAny \"R\"-module \"M\" yields a \"k\"-vector space given by \"M\" / \"mM\". Nakayama's lemma shows this passage is preserving important information: a finitely generated module \"M\" is zero if and only if \"M\" / \"mM\" is zero.\nRegular local rings.\nThe \"k\"-vector space \"m\"/\"m\"2 is an algebraic incarnation of the cotangent space. Informally, the elements of \"m\" can be thought of as functions which vanish at the point \"p\", whereas \"m\"2 contains the ones which vanish with order at least 2. For any Noetherian local ring \"R\", the inequality\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;dim\"k\" \"m\"/\"m\"2 \u2265 dim \"R\"\nholds true, reflecting the idea that the cotangent (or equivalently the tangent) space has at least the dimension of the space Spec \"R\". If equality holds true in this estimate, \"R\" is called a regular local ring. A Noetherian local ring is regular if and only if the ring (which is the ring of functions on the tangent cone)\nformula_150\nis isomorphic to a polynomial ring over \"k\". Broadly speaking, regular local rings are somewhat similar to polynomial rings. Regular local rings are UFD's.\nDiscrete valuation rings are equipped with a function which assign an integer to any element \"r\". This number, called the valuation of \"r\" can be informally thought of as a zero or pole order of \"r\". Discrete valuation rings are precisely the one-dimensional regular local rings. For example, the ring of germs of holomorphic functions on a Riemann surface is a discrete valuation ring.\nComplete intersections.\nBy Krull's principal ideal theorem, a foundational result in the dimension theory of rings, the dimension of\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"R\" = \"k\"[\"T\"1, ..., \"T\"\"r\"] / (\"f\"1, ..., \"f\"\"n\")\nis at least \"r\" \u2212 \"n\". A ring \"R\" is called a complete intersection ring if it can be presented in a way that attains this minimal bound. This notion is also mostly studied for local rings. Any regular local ring is a complete intersection ring, but not conversely.\nA ring \"R\" is a \"set-theoretic\" complete intersection if the reduced ring associated to \"R\", i.e., the one obtained by dividing out all nilpotent elements, is a complete intersection. As of 2017, it is in general unknown, whether curves in three-dimensional space are set-theoretic complete intersections.\nCohen\u2013Macaulay rings.\nThe depth of a local ring \"R\" is the number of elements in some (or, as can be shown, any) maximal regular sequence, i.e., a sequence \"a\"1, ..., \n\"a\"\"n\" \u2208 \"m\" such that all \"a\"\"i\" are non-zero divisors in\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"R\" / (\"a\"1, ..., \"a\"\"i\"\u22121).\nFor any local Noetherian ring, the inequality\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;depth(\"R\") \u2264 dim(\"R\")\nholds. A local ring in which equality takes place is called a Cohen\u2013Macaulay ring. Local complete intersection rings, and a fortiori, regular local rings are Cohen\u2013Macaulay, but not conversely. Cohen\u2013Macaulay combine desirable properties of regular rings (such as the property of being universally catenary rings, which means that the (co)dimension of primes is well-behaved), but are also more robust under taking quotients than regular local rings.\nConstructing commutative rings.\nThere are several ways to construct new rings out of given ones. The aim of such constructions is often to improve certain properties of the ring so as to make it more readily understandable. For example, an integral domain that is integrally closed in its field of fractions is called normal. This is a desirable property, for example any normal one-dimensional ring is necessarily regular. Rendering a ring normal is known as \"normalization\".\nCompletions.\nIf \"I\" is an ideal in a commutative ring \"R\", the powers of \"I\" form topological neighborhoods of \"0\" which allow \"R\" to be viewed as a topological ring. This topology is called the \"I\"-adic topology. \"R\" can then be completed with respect to this topology. Formally, the \"I\"-adic completion is the inverse limit of the rings \"R\"/\"In\". For example, if \"k\" is a field, \"k\"\"X\", the formal power series ring in one variable over \"k\", is the \"I\"-adic completion of \"k\"[\"X\"] where \"I\" is the principal ideal generated by \"X\". This ring serves as an algebraic analogue of the disk. Analogously, the ring of \"p\"-adic integers is the completion of Z with respect to the principal ideal (\"p\"). Any ring that is isomorphic to its own completion, is called complete.\nComplete local rings satisfy Hensel's lemma, which roughly speaking allows extending solutions (of various problems) over the residue field \"k\" to \"R\".\nHomological notions.\nSeveral deeper aspects of commutative rings have been studied using methods from homological algebra. lists some open questions in this area of active research.\nProjective modules and Ext functors.\nProjective modules can be defined to be the direct summands of free modules. If \"R\" is local, any finitely generated projective module is actually free, which gives content to an analogy between projective modules and vector bundles. The Quillen\u2013Suslin theorem asserts that any finitely generated projective module over \"k\"[\"T\"1, ..., \"T\"\"n\"] (\"k\" a field) is free, but in general these two concepts differ. \nA local Noetherian ring is regular if and only if its global dimension is finite, say \"n\", which means that any finitely generated \"R\"-module has a resolution by projective modules of length at most \"n\".\nThe proof of this and other related statements relies on the usage of homological methods, such as the\nExt functor. This functor is the derived functor of the functor\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Hom\"R\"(\"M\", \u2212).\nThe latter functor is exact if \"M\" is projective, but not otherwise: for a surjective map \"E\" \u2192 \"F\" of \"R\"-modules, a map \"M\" \u2192 \"F\" need not extend to a map \"M\" \u2192 \"E\". The higher Ext functors measure the non-exactness of the Hom-functor. The importance of this standard construction in homological algebra stems can be seen from the fact that a local Noetherian ring \"R\" with residue field \"k\" is regular if and only if\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Ext\"n\"(\"k\", \"k\")\nvanishes for all large enough \"n\". Moreover, the dimensions of these Ext-groups, known as Betti numbers, grow polynomially in \"n\" if and only if \"R\" is a local complete intersection ring. A key argument in such considerations is the Koszul complex, which provides an explicit free resolution of the residue field \"k\" of a local ring \"R\" in terms of a regular sequence.\nFlatness.\nThe tensor product is another non-exact functor relevant in the context of commutative rings: for a general \"R\"-module \"M\", the functor\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"M\" \u2297\"R\" \u2212\nis only right exact. If it is exact, \"M\" is called flat. If \"R\" is local, any finitely presented flat module is free of finite rank, thus projective. Despite being defined in terms of homological algebra, flatness has profound geometric implications. For example, if an \"R\"-algebra \"S\" is flat, the dimensions of the fibers\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"S\" / \"pS\" = \"S\" \u2297\"R\" \"R\" / \"p\"\n(for prime ideals \"p\" in \"R\") have the \"expected\" dimension, namely dim \"S\" \u2212 dim \"R\" + dim(\"R\" / \"p\").\nProperties.\nBy Wedderburn's theorem, every finite division ring is commutative, and therefore a finite field. Another condition ensuring commutativity of a ring, due to Jacobson, is the following: for every element \"r\" of \"R\" there exists an integer \"n\" &gt; 1 such that \"r\"\"n\" = \"r\". If, \"r\"2 = \"r\" for every \"r\", the ring is called Boolean ring. More general conditions which guarantee commutativity of a ring are also known.\nGeneralizations.\nGraded-commutative rings.\nA graded ring \"R\" = \u2a01\"i\"\u220aZ \"R\"\"i\" is called graded-commutative if, for all homogeneous elements \"a\" and \"b\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"ab\" = (\u22121)deg \"a\" \u22c5 deg \"b\" \"ba\".\nIf the \"R\"\"i\" are connected by differentials \u2202 such that an abstract form of the product rule holds, i.e.,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\u2202(\"ab\") = \u2202(\"a\")\"b\" + (\u22121)deg \"a\"a\u2202(\"b\"),\n\"R\" is called a commutative differential graded algebra (cdga). An example is the complex of differential forms on a manifold, with the multiplication given by the exterior product, is a cdga. The cohomology of a cdga is a graded-commutative ring, sometimes referred to as the cohomology ring. A broad range examples of graded rings arises in this way. For example, the Lazard ring is the ring of cobordism classes of complex manifolds.\nA graded-commutative ring with respect to a grading by Z/2 (as opposed to Z) is called a superalgebra.\nA related notion is an almost commutative ring, which means that \"R\" is filtered in such a way that the associated graded ring\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;gr \"R\" := \u2a01 \"F\"\"i\"\"R\" / \u2a01 \"F\"\"i\"\u22121\"R\"\nis commutative. An example is the Weyl algebra and more general rings of differential operators.\nSimplicial commutative rings.\nA simplicial commutative ring is a simplicial object in the category of commutative rings. They are building blocks for (connective) derived algebraic geometry. A closely related but more general notion is that of E\u221e-ring.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61347", "revid": "9493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61347", "title": "Field of quotients", "text": ""}
{"id": "61348", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61348", "title": "Singularities", "text": ""}
{"id": "61349", "revid": "3090506", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61349", "title": "Taylor expansion", "text": ""}
{"id": "61350", "revid": "50545994", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61350", "title": "Claudette Colbert", "text": "American actress (1903\u20131996)\nClaudette Colbert (ko\u028al\u02c8b\u025b\u0259r/ \"kohl-BAIR\", born \u00c9milie \"Lily\" Claudette Chauchoin (\u0283o\u0283w\u025b\u0303/ \"show-shwan\"); September 13, 1903 \u2013 July 30, 1996) was an American actress. Colbert began her career in Broadway productions during the late 1920s and progressed to films with the advent of talking pictures. Initially contracted to Paramount Pictures, Colbert became one of the few major actresses of the period who worked freelance; that is to say, independently of the studio system. In 1999, the American Film Institute named Colbert the 12th-greatest female star of classic Hollywood cinema.\nWith her Mid-Atlantic accent, versatility, witty dialogues, aristocratic demeanor, and flair for light comedy and emotional drama, Colbert became one of the popular stars of the 1930s and 1940s. In all, Colbert acted in more than 60 movies. Among her frequent co-stars were Fred MacMurray in seven films (1935\u20131949), and Fredric March in four (1930\u20131933).\nColbert won the Academy Award for Best Actress for \"It Happened One Night\" (1934), and received two other Academy Award nominations during her career. Her other notable films include \"Cleopatra\" (1934), \"The Palm Beach Story\" (1942) and \"Since You Went Away\" (1944).\nBy the mid-1950s Colbert had turned from motion pictures to television and stage work; she earned a Tony Award nomination for \"The Marriage-Go-Round\" in 1959. Her career began to wane in the early 1960s. In the late 1970s she experienced a comeback in the theater, and received a Sarah Siddons Award for her Chicago theater work in 1980. Her television appearance in \"The Two Mrs. Grenvilles\" (1987) earned her a Golden Globe Award and an Emmy Award nomination.\nEarly life.\n\u00c9milie \"Lily\" Claudette Chauchoin was born in 1903 in Saint-Mand\u00e9, France, to Jeanne (n\u00e9e\u00a0Loew, with British Channel Islands heritage) and Georges Chauchoin.\nAlthough christened \"\u00c9milie\", she was called \"Lily\" after Jersey-born actress Lillie Langtry. Her mother had intended to name her daughter Lily, but the pastor mistakenly chose \u00c9milie, so she was always called Lily in the family. Colbert's brother, Charles Chauchoin, was also born in the Bailiwick of Jersey. Jeanne held various occupations, while Georges owned and managed a chain store of pastry and bonbon shops (more than eleven), and was also a major stockholder of an ink factory in which he suffered business setbacks. Colbert's grandmother Marie Loew had been to the U.S., and Colbert's uncle Charles Loew was living in New York City. Marie was willing to help Georges financially, but also encouraged him to try his luck in the U.S.\nTo pursue more employment opportunities, Colbert and her family, including Marie and her aunt Emily Loew, immigrated to Manhattan in 1906.\nThey lived in a fifth-floor walk-up at 53rd Street. Colbert stated that she was always climbing those stairs until the age of 18. Her parents formally changed her legal name to Lily Claudette Chauchoin. Georges worked as a minor official in the foreign department at First National City Bank, and the family was naturalized in 1912. Before Colbert entered public school, she quickly learnt Channel Island English from Marie, and grew up bilingual, speaking both English and French. Already as a small child, she had read Shakespeare's plays and acquired an international sensibility. She had hoped to become a painter ever since she first gripped a pencil. Her brother was drafted in 1917 as a private first class. After the First World War, he studied at the School of Military Aeronautics at Cornell University. Colbert's mother was an opera music fan, and her aunt was a dressmaker.\nColbert studied at Washington Irving High School, which was known for its strong arts program. Her speech teacher, Alice Rostetter, encouraged her to audition for a play Rostetter had written. In 1921, Colbert made her stage debut at the Provincetown Playhouse in revivals of Rostetter's \"The Widow's Veil\" and \"Aria da Capo\" by Edna St. Vincent Millay, at the age of 17. Her interests, though, still leaned towards painting, fashion design, and commercial art.\nIntending to become a fashion designer, she attended the Art Students League of New York, where she paid for her art education by working in a dress shop. After attending a party with writer Anne Morrison, Colbert was offered a bit part in Morrison's play, and appeared on the Broadway stage in a small role in \"The Wild Westcotts\" (1923). She had used the name Claudette, instead of Lily, since high school; for her stage name, she added her paternal grandmother's maiden name, Colbert. Her father died in 1925; her grandmother died in New York in the mid-1930s at the age of 88.\nCareer.\nThe beginnings, 1924\u20131927.\nColbert worked in a string of mostly short-lived shows in Chicago, Washington, D.C., Boston and Connecticut, which enabled her to gain experience in different genres. In 1924 the actor Leslie Howard met her, was impressed by her ability to speak with both Mid-Atlantic and British accents, and contacted the producer Al Woods to cast her in Frederick Lonsdale's \"The Fake\", but she was replaced by Frieda Inescort before it opened. After signing a five-year contract with Woods, Colbert played \"ingenue\" roles on Broadway from 1925 to 1929. During this period she rejected being typecast as a French maid. By 1925 she was having success in the comedy \"A Kiss in a Taxi\", which ran for 103 performances over a two-month period. Columnists sang the praises of her unconventional beauty and her power to enrapture an audience. Colbert was again acclaimed as a carnival snake charmer in the Broadway production of \"The Barker\" (1927), and she reprised the role in London's West End. She was noticed by theatrical producer Leland Hayward, who suggested her for the heroine role in the silent film \"For the Love of Mike\" (1927). Now believed to be lost, the film did not fare well at the box office.\nThe early films, 1928\u20131934.\nIn 1928, Colbert signed a contract with Paramount Pictures. A demand existed for stage actors who could handle dialogue in the new \"talkies\", and Colbert's elegance and musical voice were among her best assets. Her distinctive high-cheekboned\nbeauty drew attention in \"The Hole in the Wall\" (1929), but at first she did not like film acting. Her earliest films were produced in New York. During the filming of \"The Lady Lies\" (also 1929), she was also appearing nightly in the play \"See Naples and Die\". \"The Lady Lies\" was a box-office success. Colbert's acting looks much more natural in these films than her later ones. At this period, many film critics wrote her having potential to be the screen's next big star. In 1930, she starred opposite Maurice Chevalier in \"The Big Pond\", which was better quality musical film, which featured their songs. With her first husband Norman Foster she co-starred in the film \"Young Man of Manhattan\" (1930), for which he received negative reviews as one of her weakest leading men.\nColbert co-starred with Fredric March in \"Manslaughter\" (1930), acclaimed again by critics for her performance as a woman charged with vehicular manslaughter. She was paired with March again in \"Honor Among Lovers\" (1931), which was popular at that time; he was also originally cast as her co-star in \"His Woman\" (1931), but was replaced by Gary Cooper. Colbert also starred in \"Mysterious Mr. Parkes\" (1931), a French-language version of \"Slightly Scarlet\" for the European market, although her French was tinged with an English accent after American life. It was also screened in the United States. She sang and played piano/violin in the Ernst Lubitsch musical \"The Smiling Lieutenant\" (1931), which was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture as well as being a box-office hit and critical success. \nColbert's career got a further boost when she played the supporting role as \"femme fatale\" Poppaea in Cecil B. DeMille's historical epic \"The Sign of the Cross\" (1932), opposite Fredric March and Charles Laughton. In one of the best-remembered scenes of her film career, she bathes nude in a marble pool filled with asses' milk. The film was the highest-grossing picture of the year in the United States. \nIn 1933, Colbert renegotiated her contract with Paramount to allow her to appear in films for other studios. The pioneering screwball comedy film \"Three-Cornered Moon\"\u00a0reached No. 9 in the National Board of Review Awards in 1933. Her musical voice, a contralto that footnotes list as being coached by Bing Crosby, was also featured in \"Torch Singer\" (1933), co-starring Ricardo Cortez and David Manners. Partly as results, she was ranked as the year's 13th box-office star. By 1933, she had appeared in 21 films, averaging four per year. Many of her early films were dramatics, and her performances were admired. Colbert's leading roles were down-to-earth and diverse, highlighting her versatility.\nColbert was initially reluctant to appear in the screwball comedy \"It Happened One Night\" (1934). The studio agreed to pay her $50,000 for the role and guaranteed filming would be done within four weeks so she could take a planned vacation. She won the Academy Award for Best Actress for the film.\nIn \"Cleopatra\" (1934), Colbert played the title role opposite Warren William and Henry Wilcoxon. It was the second highest-grossing picture of that year in the United States. Thereafter, Colbert did not wish to be portrayed as overtly sexual and later refused such roles. She was loaned to Universal Pictures for \"Imitation of Life\" (1934), which was another box-office success. Those three films were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture in the next year; Colbert is the only actress to date to star in three films nominated for Best Motion Picture in the same year.\nMid-career, 1935\u20131944.\nColbert's rising profile internationally allowed her to renegotiate her contract, which raised her salary. For 1935 and 1936, she was listed sixth and eighth in Quigley's annual \"Top-Ten Money-Making Stars Poll\". \"The Gilded Lily\" (1935) was popular at that time, but she received an Academy Award nomination for her role in the hospital drama \"Private Worlds\" (1935).\nIn 1936, Colbert signed a new contract with Paramount, making her Hollywood's highest-paid actress. When the studio renewed her contract in 1938, she was again reported to be Hollywood's top-paid actress, with a salary of $426,924. At the peak of her popularity in the late 1930s, she earned $150,000 per film. In 1937 and 1938, she was listed as the fourteenth and sixth (respectively) top money-making woman in the U.S.\nColbert spent the rest of the 1930s deftly alternating between romantic comedies and dramas: \"She Married Her Boss\" (1935) with Melvyn Douglas; \"The Bride Comes Home\" (1935), with Fred MacMurray; \"Under Two Flags\" (1936) with Ronald Colman; \"Zaza\" (1939) with Herbert Marshall; and \"It's a Wonderful World\" (1939) with James Stewart.\nColbert was tall, higher than the average American woman at the time. One columnist wrote that Colbert placed her career \"ahead of everything, save possibly her marriage\", and that she had a strong sense of what was best for her, and a \"deep-rooted desire to be in shape, efficient, and under control\". A biographer wrote that Colbert \"helped define femininity for her generation with her chic manner\". Colbert once said, \"I know what's best for me\u2014after all.\"\nColbert was very particular about how she appeared on-screen, and believed her face was difficult to light and photograph. She insisted on having the right side of her face away from the camera when shooting close-up, because of a small bump from a broken nose as a child. This sometimes required movie sets to be redesigned. During the filming of \"Tovarich\" (1937), director Anatole Litvak favored co-starring Charles Boyer over her in the camera angles, so she got very frustrated.\nGary Cooper was terrified at the prospect of working with Colbert in his first comedy, \"Bluebeard's Eighth Wife\" (1938), considering Colbert an expert in the genre.\n\"Midnight\" (1939) with Don Ameche, directed by Mitchell Leisen and written by \nBilly Wilder and Charles Brackett, was one of her best comedy films. Ernst Lubitsch and Mitchell Leisen were her particularly favorite film directors working with.\nColbert learnt about lighting and cinematography, and refused to begin filming until she was satisfied that she would be shown to her best advantage. \"Drums Along the Mohawk\" (1939) with Henry Fonda was her first color film, and was the 10th-grossing picture of the year in the United States. However, she mistrusted the relatively new Technicolor process, and fearing she would not photograph well, preferred thereafter to be filmed in black-and-white.\nDuring this time, she began performing on CBS's popular radio program \"Lux Radio Theater\", and was heard in 22 episodes between 1935 and 1954. She also participated in 13 episodes of radio's \"The Screen Guild Theater\", between 1939 and 1952.\nIn 1940, Colbert was offered a seven-year contract with Paramount Pictures that would have paid her $200,000 a year; she declined the offer after learning she could command $150,000 per film as a freelance artist. She secured roles in several prestigious films and this period marked the height of her earning power. As a supporting role, Colbert co-starred with Clark Gable and Spencer Tracy in \"Boom Town\", released by MGM in 1940 and was the highest-grossing picture of the year in the United States. However, Colbert once often said that \"Arise, My Love\" (1940) was her favorite of all her movies.\n It won the Academy Award for Best Story.\nPreston Sturges' mature \"The Palm Beach Story\" (1942) had been accepted some re-evaluation over the years as a comedic classic, where she did one of the best performances of her film career, which featured\u00a0such a thing as beauty that speaks of intelligence. She again became the industry's highest-paid star in 1942. In the next year, \"No Time for Love\" (1943) was popular.\nDuring filming of \"So Proudly We Hail!\" (1943), her co-star Paulette Goddard preferred working with the other co-star Veronica Lake, over Colbert; Colbert felt that the younger actress had treated her like an \"old lady\". Goddard said that Colbert \"was at [my] eyes at every moment\". Goddard insisted that portions of the script be rewritten so that her role was as large as Colbert's. This was unusual for Colbert, who was otherwise known for maintaining high standards of professionalism. For example, from her early film career, she offered acting advice to her less experienced co-stars.\nImpressed by Colbert's role in \"So Proudly We Hail!\", David O. Selznick approached her to play the lead in \"Since You Went Away\" (1944). Colbert was initially reluctant to appear as a mother of teenaged children, but Selznick eventually convinced her to take the role. Released in June 1944, the film made almost $5\u00a0million at the US box office and was the year's third highest-grossing picture. One critic praised aspects of the film, but particularly Colbert's work. Partly as a result, she received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress.\nDuring the World War II, she also volunteered with the Red Cross.\nMiddle years, 1945\u20131961.\nIn 1945, Colbert ended her association with Paramount and continued to freelance in such films as \"Guest Wife\" (1945) with Don Ameche. She starred opposite John Wayne in RKO's \"Without Reservations\" (1946), which grossed $3\u00a0million in the U.S. While working on it, director Mervyn LeRoy described Colbert as an \"interesting\" lady to work with, recalling her habit of not watching where she was going and constantly bumping into things. Praised for her sense of style and fashion, Colbert ensured throughout her career that she was impeccably groomed and costumed. For the melodrama \"Tomorrow Is Forever\" (1946), Jean Louis was hired to create 18 changes of wardrobe for her. \"Tomorrow is Forever\" and \"The Secret Heart\" (also 1946) were also substantial commercial successes, and Colbert's popularity during 1947 led her to place 9th in Quigley's \"Top Ten Money-Making Stars Poll\".\nShe achieved great success opposite Fred MacMurray in the comedy \"The Egg and I\" (1947), which was the year's second-highest grossing picture, and later acknowledged as the 12th-most profitable American film of the 1940s. The suspense film \"Sleep, My Love\" (1948) with Robert Cummings was a modest commercial success. By 1949, she still ranked as the 22nd-highest box-office star.\nThe romantic comedy \"Bride for Sale\" (1949), wherein Colbert played part of a love triangle that included George Brent and Robert Young, was well-reviewed. Her performance in the Pacific war film \"Three Came Home\" (1950) was also praised by critics. However, the mystery melodrama \"The Secret Fury\" (1950), distributed by RKO Studios, received mixed reviews. During this period, Colbert was unable to work beyond 5 p.m. each day due to orders from her doctor. While Colbert still looked like a young woman, she found it difficult making the transition to playing more mature characters as she entered middle age. She said, \"I'm a very good comedienne, but I was always fighting that image, too.\"\nIn 1949, Colbert was asked to play the lead role in \"All About Eve\", because the producer felt that she best represented the style he envisioned for the part. However, Colbert severely injured her back, forcing her to abandon the picture shortly before filming began. Bette Davis was cast, instead. In later life, Colbert said, \"I just never had the luck to play bitches.\"\nIn the early 1950s, Colbert traveled to Europe for tax purposes and joined fewer films. \"The Planter's Wife\" (1952) was a success in British market. She played a small role in \"Royal Affairs in Versailles\" (1954), her only film with a French director (Sacha Guitry). Colbert had found the directorial method disappointing, which was on the heavy-handed and ponderous. It was screened in the United States in 1957.\nIn 1954, Colbert turned down a million-dollar broadcast deal with NBC-TV, but made a pact with CBS-TV to star in several teleplays. After a successful appearance in a television version of \"The Royal Family\" (a parody of the Barrymore family in \"The Best of Broadway\" series), she took on more than 20 television works. She starred in television adaptations of \"Blithe Spirit\" in 1956 and \"The Bells of St. Mary's\" in 1959, and guest-starred on \"Robert Montgomery Presents\" and \"Playhouse 90\".\nIn 1956, Colbert hosted the 28th Academy Awards ceremony.\nIn 1957, she was cast as Lucy Bradford, wife of schoolteacher Jim Bradford (Jeff Morrow), in the \"Blood in the Dust\" episode of CBS's \"Dick Powell's Zane Grey Theatre\". In the story, Jim refuses to back down when a gunman orders him to leave town, and Lucy is distressed because Jim hasn't fired a weapon since he was in the Civil War.\nIn the show's 1960 episode \"So Young the Savage Land\", she played Beth Brayden, who becomes disillusioned with her rancher-husband Jim (John Dehner) when he turns to violence to protect their property.\nIn 1958, she returned to Broadway in \"The Marriage-Go-Round\", for which she was nominated for a Best Actress Tony Award.\nShe made a brief return to the screen, played the supporting role as the mother of Troy Donahue in \"Parrish\" (1961). It was her last appearance on the big screen. The film was a commercial success, but Colbert received little attention, and she directed her agent to end any further attempts to generate interest in her as a TV actress. Even at this period, she still looked younger than her actual age.\nLater career, 1963\u20131987.\nColbert made successful Broadway appearances in \"The Irregular Verb to Love\" (1963); in \"The Kingfisher\" (1978), with co-star Rex Harrison; and in Frederick Lonsdale's \"Aren't We All?\" (1985), also with Harrison. She told an interviewer, \"Audiences always sound like they're glad to see me, and I'm damned glad to see them.\"\u3000\nShe appeared in a supporting role in the television miniseries \"The Two Mrs. Grenvilles\" (1987), which was a ratings success, and for which she won a Golden Globe and was nominated for an Emmy Award. Towards the end of her life, she explained why she had never written her autobiography, \"I've been happy, and that's no story.\"\nModern critics have pointed out that Colbert had a unique set of assets\u2014her heart-shaped face, distinct facial features, curly hair, aristocratic manner, relaxed acting, little mysterious, and intelligent style,\u2014that distinguishes her from other classic cinema stars through the 1930s and 1940s. In her comedies, she invariably played shrewd, self-reliant women; unlike many of her contemporaries, though, she rarely engaged in physical comedy. Her characters were more likely to be observers and commentators.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1928, Colbert married actor and director Norman Foster, with whom she co-starred in the Broadway show \"The Barker\". Their marriage remained a secret for many years while they lived in separate homes.\nIn Los Angeles, Colbert shared a home with her mother, Jeanne Chauchoin, who disliked Foster and reputedly did not allow him into the home. Colbert and Foster divorced in 1935 in Mexico.\nOn Christmas Eve, 1935, in Yuma, Arizona, Colbert married Dr. Joel Pressman, who eventually became a professor and chief of the head and neck surgery department of UCLA Medical School. She gave Pressman a Beechcraft airplane as a present. They purchased a ranch in northern California, where Colbert enjoyed horseback riding and her husband kept show cattle. During this time, Colbert drove a Lincoln Continental and a Ford Thunderbird. The marriage lasted 33 years, until Pressman's death from liver cancer in 1968.\nJeanne reportedly envied her daughter, preferred her son's company, and made Colbert's brother Charles serve as his sister's agent. Charles used the surname Wendling, borrowed from Jeanne's paternal grandmother Rose Wendling. He served as Colbert's business manager for a time, and was credited with negotiating some of her more lucrative contracts in the late 1930s and early 1940s. In 1942, Charles enlisted to take part in World War Two. Colbert's uncle Charles Loew died in 1953, and her aunt Emily Loew in 1954.\nAlthough virtually retired from motion pictures since the mid-1950s, Colbert continued to maintain an upscale lifestyle. She had a country house in Palm Springs for weekends. An advertising executive said, \"Claudette was extravagant; I never, ever saw her question the price of anything.\" In 1963, Colbert sold her Lloyd Wright-designed residence in Holmby Hills, and she and Dr. Pressman rented a small house in Beverly Hills.\nIn 1958, she met Verna Hull, a wealthy painter, photographer, and the stepdaughter of a Sears Roebuck heiress. They had a nine-year friendship that included travel, and an interest in art, and they rented twin New York penthouses. When Colbert bought a house in Barbados in the early 1960s, Hull bought a house next door, amid rumors that their friendship was a romantic one, which Colbert denied. The friendship ended after an argument that took place as Colbert's husband lay dying, during which Hull insisted that Pressman would not only take his own life, but Colbert's as well, rather than die alone. Pressman died on February 26, 1968.\nColbert was a lifelong Republican.\nFinal years and death.\nFor years, Colbert divided her time between her Manhattan apartment and her vacation home in Speightstown, Barbados. The latter, purchased from a British gentleman and nicknamed Bellerive, was the island's only plantation house fronting the beach. Her permanent address remained Manhattan.\nWhen her mother Jeanne died in 1970, and her brother Charles in 1971, Colbert's only surviving relative was her brother's daughter, Coco Lewis.\nColbert suffered a series of small strokes during the last three years of her life. She died in 1996 in Barbados at the age of 92, where she had employed a housekeeper and two cooks. Her remains were transported to New York City for cremation and funeral services.\nA requiem mass was later held at Church of St. Vincent Ferrer in Manhattan. Her ashes are laid to rest in the Godings Bay Church Cemetery, Speightstown, Saint Peter, Barbados, alongside her mother and second husband.\nColbert never had children. She left most of her estate, estimated at $3.5\u00a0million and including her Manhattan apartment and Bellerive, to longtime friend Helen O'Hagan, a retired director of corporate relations at Saks Fifth Avenue. Colbert had met O'Hagan in 1961 on the set of \"Parrish\", her last film, and they became best friends around 1970.\nAfter Pressman's death, Colbert instructed her friends to treat O'Hagan as they had Pressman, \"as her spouse\". Although O'Hagan was financially comfortable without the generous bequest, Bellerive was sold for over $2\u00a0million to David Geffen. Colbert's will also left $150,000 to her niece Coco Lewis; a trust of over $100,000 to UCLA, in Pressman's memory; and $75,000 to Marie Corbin, her Bajan housekeeper.\nSelected filmography.\nThe following is a list of feature films in which Colbert had top billing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61351", "revid": "47922254", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61351", "title": "Laurent polynomial", "text": "Polynomial with negative exponents\nIn mathematics, a Laurent polynomial (named\nafter Pierre Alphonse Laurent) in one variable over a field formula_1 is a linear combination of positive and negative powers of the variable with coefficients in formula_1. Laurent polynomials in formula_3 form a ring denoted formula_4. They differ from ordinary polynomials in that they may have terms of negative degree. The construction of Laurent polynomials may be iterated, leading to the ring of Laurent polynomials in several variables. Laurent polynomials are of particular importance in the study of complex variables.\nDefinition.\nA Laurent polynomial with coefficients in a field formula_1 is an expression of the form\n formula_6\nwhere formula_3 is a formal variable, the summation index formula_8 is an integer (not necessarily positive) and formula_9 for all large negative formula_8. Two Laurent polynomials are equal if their coefficients are equal. Such expressions can be added, multiplied, and brought back to the same form by reducing similar terms. Formulas for addition and multiplication are exactly the same as for the ordinary polynomials, with the only difference that both positive and negative powers of formula_3 can be present:\nformula_12\nand\nformula_13\nSince only finitely many coefficients formula_14 and formula_15 are non-zero, all sums in effect have only finitely many terms, and hence represent Laurent polynomials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61352", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61352", "title": "Formal Laurent series", "text": ""}
{"id": "61353", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61353", "title": "Laurent expansion", "text": ""}
{"id": "61354", "revid": "1314270904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61354", "title": "Norma Shearer", "text": "Canadian-American actress (1902\u20131983)\nEdith Norma Shearer (August 11, 1902\u00a0\u2013 June 12, 1983) was a Canadian-American actress who was active on film from 1919 through 1942. Shearer often played spunky, sexually liberated women. She appeared in adaptations of No\u00ebl Coward, Eugene O'Neill, and William Shakespeare, and was the first five-time Academy Award acting nominee, winning Best Actress for \"The Divorcee\" (1930).\nReviewing Shearer's work, Mick LaSalle called her a feminist pioneer, or \"the exemplar of sophisticated modern womanhood and ... the first American film actress to make it chic and acceptable to be single and not a virgin on screen\".\nEarly life.\nShearer was of Scottish, English and Irish descent. Her childhood was spent in Montreal, where she was educated at Montreal High School for Girls and Westmount High School. Her life was one of privilege, due to the success of her father's construction business. However, the marriage between her parents was unhappy. Andrew Shearer was prone to manic depression and \"moved like a shadow or a ghost around the house.\" Her mother was Edith Mary (n\u00e9e Fisher) Shearer. Young Norma was interested in music, but after seeing a vaudeville show for her ninth birthday, she announced her intention to become an actress. Edith offered support, but as Shearer entered adolescence, she became secretly fearful that her daughter's physical flaws would jeopardize her chances. Norma Shearer \"had no illusions about the image I saw in the mirror\". She acknowledged her \"dumpy figure, with shoulders too broad, legs too sturdy, hands too blunt\", and was acutely aware of her small eyes that appeared crossed due to a cast in her left eye. By her own admission, she was \"ferociously ambitious\" even when she was young.\nThe childhood and adolescence that Shearer once described as \"a pleasant dream\" ended in 1918 when her father's company collapsed, and her older sister Athole suffered her first serious mental breakdown. Forced to move into a small, dreary house in a \"modest\" Montreal suburb, Shearer found her determined attitude strengthened by the sudden plunge into poverty: \"At an early age, I formed a philosophy about failure. Perhaps an endeavor, like my father's business, could fail, but that didn't mean Father had failed.\"\nEdith Shearer thought otherwise. Within weeks, she had left her husband and moved into a cheap boarding house with her two daughters. A few months later, encouraged by her brother, who believed his niece should try her luck in \"the picture business\", then operating largely on the East Coast of the United States, Edith sold her daughter's piano and the family dog. In her pocket was a letter of introduction for Norma, acquired from a local theatre owner, to Florenz Ziegfeld, who was preparing a new season of his famous \"Ziegfeld Follies\".\nCareer.\nEarly days.\nIn January 1920, the three Shearer women arrived in New York, each of them dressed up for the occasion. \"I had my hair in little curls\", Shearer remembered, \"and I felt very ambitious and proud.\" Her heart sank, however, when she saw their rented apartment: \"There was one double bed, a cot with no mattress and a stove with one gas jet. The communal bathroom was at the end of a long, dimly lit hallway. Athole and I took turns sleeping with mother in the bed, but sleep was impossible anyway\u2014the elevated trains rattled right past our window every few minutes.\"\nThe introduction to Ziegfeld proved equally disastrous. He turned Shearer down flat, reportedly calling her a \"dog\", and criticized her crossed eyes and stubby legs. She continued doing the rounds with her determination undimmed: \"I learned that Universal Pictures was looking for eight pretty girls to serve as extras. Athole and I showed up and found 50 girls ahead of us. An assistant casting director walked up and down looking us over. He passed up the first three and picked the fourth. The fifth and sixth were unattractive, but the seventh would do, and so on, down the line until seven had been selected\u2014and he was still some ten feet ahead of us. I did some quick thinking. I coughed loudly, and when the man looked in the direction of the cough, I stood on my tiptoes and smiled right at him. Recognizing the awkward ruse to which I'd resorted, he laughed openly and walked over to me and said, 'You win, Sis. You're Number Eight.'\"\nOther extra parts followed, including one in \"Way Down East\", directed by D. W. Griffith. Taking advantage of a break in filming and standing shrewdly near a powerful arc light, Shearer introduced herself to Griffith and began to confide her hopes for stardom. \"The Master looked down at me, studied my upturned face in the glare of the arc, and shook his eagle head. Eyes no good, he said. A cast in one and far too blue; blue eyes always looked blank in close-up. You'll never make it, he declared, and turned solemnly away.\"\nStill undeterred, Shearer risked some of her savings on a consultation with Dr. William Bates, a pioneer in the treatment of strabismus. He wrote out a series of muscle-strengthening exercises that after many years' daily practice would successfully conceal Shearer's cast for long periods of time on the screen. She spent hours in front of the mirror, exercising her eyes and striking poses that concealed or improved the physical flaws noted by Ziegfeld or Griffith. At night, she sat in the galleries of Broadway theatres, studying the entrances of Ina Claire, Lynn Fontanne, and Katharine Cornell.\nIn desperate need of money, Shearer resorted to some modeling work, which proved successful. On her modeling career, she commented: \"I could smile at a cake of laundry soap as if it were dinner at the Ritz. I posed with a strand of imitation pearls. I posed in dust-cap and house dress with a famous mop, for dental paste and for soft drink, holding my mouth in a whistling pose until it all but froze that way.\" She became the new model for Kelly-Springfield Tires and was bestowed with the title \"Miss Lotta Miles\" and depicted seated inside the rim of a tire, smiling down at traffic from a large floodlit billboard.\nFinally, a year after her arrival in New York, she received a break in film: fourth billing in a B-movie titled \"The Stealers\" (1920). In January 1923, Shearer received an offer from Louis B. Mayer Pictures, a studio in Northeast Los Angeles that was run by a small-time producer, Louis B. Mayer. Irving Thalberg had moved to Louis B. Mayer Pictures as vice president on February 15, 1923, but had already sent a telegram to Shearer's agent, inviting her to come to the studio. After three years of hardship, she found herself signing a contract. It called for $250 a week for six months, with options for renewal and a test for a leading role in a major film called \"The Wanters\".\nHollywood.\nShearer left New York around February 17. Accompanied by her mother, she felt \"dangerously sure of herself\" as her train neared Los Angeles. When she was not welcomed, even an hour after her arrival, she realized that there would be no star treatment from her new studio. Dispirited, she allowed Edith to hail a taxi.\nThe next morning, Shearer went to the Mayer Company on Mission Road to meet with Thalberg. Shearer was momentarily thrown by their confused introduction, but soon found herself \"impressed by his air of dispassionate strength, his calm self-possession and the almost black, impenetrable eyes set in a pale olive face\".\nShearer was less impressed, however, with her first screen test: \"The custom then was to use flat lighting, to throw a great deal of light from all directions, in order to kill all shadows that might be caused by wrinkles or blemishes. But the strong lights placed on either side of my face made my blue eyes look almost white, and by nearly eliminating my nose, made me seem cross-eyed. The result was hideous.\"\nThe day after the test had been screened for Mayer and Thalberg, cameraman Ernest Palmer found Shearer frantic and trembling in the hallway. Speaking with her, he was struck by her \"fierce, almost raging disappointment\", and after viewing the test himself, agreed that she had been \"poorly handled\". Under Palmer's own supervision, a second test was made and judged a success by the studio brass. The lead in \"The Wanters\" seemed hers, until the film's director, John M. Stahl, objected, finding her \"unphotogenic\". Again, Shearer was to be disappointed, relegated to a minor role.\nShe accepted her next role in \"Pleasure Mad\", knowing \"it was well understood that if I didn't deliver in this picture, I was through\". After only a few days of shooting, things were not looking good. Shearer was struggling. Finally, the film's director, Reginald Barker, complained to Mayer that he could get nothing out of the young actress, and when summoned to Mayer's office, she fully expected the axe to fall: \"But to my surprise, Mr. Mayer's manner was paternal. 'There seems to be a problem,' he said, 'tell me about it.' I told him that the director had shouted at me and frightened me. Nobody had warned me that Mayer was a better actor than any of us, and I was unprepared for what happened next. He staged an alarming outburst, screaming at me, calling me a fool and a coward, accusing me of throwing away my career because I couldn't get on with a director. It worked. I became tearful, but obstinate. 'I'll show you!' I said to him. 'You'll see!' Delighted, Mayer resumed the paternal act. 'That's what I wanted to hear', he said, smiling.\" Returning to the set, Shearer plunged into an emotional scene. \"I took that scene lock, stock, and barrel, fur, fins and feathers\", she remembered, earning her the respect of her director and her studio. As a reward, Thalberg cast her in six films in eight months.\nThe apprenticeship served Shearer well. On April 26, 1924, Louis B. Mayer Pictures was merged with Metro Pictures and the Samuel Goldwyn Company to form Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Shearer was cast with Lon Chaney and John Gilbert in the studio's first official production, \"He Who Gets Slapped\". The film was a conspicuous success and contributed to the meteoric rise of the new company, and to Shearer's visibility. By late 1925, she was carrying her own films, and was one of MGM's biggest attractions, a \"bona fide\" star. She signed a new contract; it paid $1,000 a week and would rise to $5,000 over the next five years. She bought a house for herself and Edith at 2004 Vine Street, which was located under the Hollywoodland sign.\nIrving and Norma.\nHaving become a star, Shearer's new challenge was to remain one. Many other talented actresses were at the studio, and she realized she would have to fight hard to stay ahead of the pack. Seeing that sensational newcomer Greta Garbo was one of a kind, she went to Thalberg and \"demanded recognition as one of another kind\". It was just one of the many visits she paid to his office, always to plead for better material, better parts. Thalberg would listen patiently, then invariably advise her to keep toeing the line, that MGM knew best, and that the movies she complained about had made her a popular actress. Occasionally, Shearer would burst into tears, but this seemed to make \"no more impression than rain on a raincoat\".\nPrivately, Thalberg was very impressed by Shearer. In a story conference, when her name was suggested to him for the part of a girl threatened with rape, Thalberg shook his head, and, with a wry smile, he said, \"She looks too well able to take care of herself.\"\nThalberg's appeal was not primarily sexual. What attracted Shearer was his commanding presence and steely grace, the impression he gave that wherever he sat was always the head of the table. In spite of his youth \u2013 he was only 26 \u2013 Thalberg became a father figure to the 23-year-old actress.\nAt the end of a working day in July 1925, Shearer received a phone call from Thalberg's secretary, asking if she would like to accompany Thalberg to the premiere of Chaplin's \"The Gold Rush\". That night, they made their first appearance as a couple. A few weeks later, Shearer went to Montreal to visit her father. While there, she had a reunion with an old school friend, who remembered: \"At the end of lunch, over coffee, Norma leant in across the table. 'I'm madly in love', she whispered. 'Who with?' I asked. 'With Irving Thalberg', she replied, smiling. I asked how Thalberg felt. 'I hope to marry him', Norma said, and then, with the flash of the assurance I remembered so well, 'I believe I will.'\"\nOver the next two years, both Shearer and Irving saw other people. Louise Brooks remembered: \"I held a dinner party sometime in 1926. All the place cards at the dinner table were books. In front of Thalberg's place was Dreiser's \"Genius\", and in front of Norma's place, I put \"The Difficulty of Getting Married\". It was so funny because Irving walked right in and saw \"Genius\", and sat right down, but Norma kept walking around. She wouldn't sit down in front of \"The Difficulty of Getting Married\"\u00a0\u2013 no way!\"\nBy 1927, Shearer had made a total of 13 silent films for MGM. Each had been produced for under $200,000, and had, without fail, been a substantial box-office hit, often making a $200,000+ profit for the studio. She was rewarded for this consistent success by being cast in Ernst Lubitsch's \"The Student Prince in Old Heidelberg\", her first prestige production, with a budget over $1,000,000. While she was finishing \"The Student Prince\", Shearer received a call summoning her to Thalberg's office. She entered to find Thalberg sitting at his desk before a tray of diamond engagement rings. He granted her the option to choose her own ring; she picked out the biggest. After weeks of rumors, provoked by wearing the ring, it was announced in August 1927 that they were to wed. On September 29, 1927, they were married in the Hollywood wedding of the year. Shearer had two children with Thalberg \u2013 Irving Thalberg, Jr. (1930\u20131987), and Katherine (1935\u20132006). Before they were married, Shearer converted to Judaism so she could marry Thalberg.\nTransition to sound.\nOne week after the marriage, \"The Jazz Singer\" was released. The first feature-length motion picture with sound, it effectively changed the cinematic landscape overnight and signaled the end of the silent motion-picture era. It also spelled the end of many silent careers, and Shearer was determined hers would not be one of them. Her brother, Douglas Shearer, was instrumental in the development of sound at MGM, and every care was taken to prepare her for the microphone.\nHer first talkie, \"The Trial of Mary Dugan\" (1929), turned out to be a tremendous success. Shearer's \"medium-pitched, fluent, flexible Canadian accent, not quite American, but not at all foreign\", was critically applauded, and thereafter widely imitated by other actresses, nervous about succeeding in talkies. Despite the popularity of her subsequent early talking films, \"The Last of Mrs. Cheyney\" and \"Their Own Desire\" (both 1929), Shearer feared the public would soon tire of her \"good girl\" image, and took the advice of friend and co-star Ram\u00f3n Novarro to visit an unknown photographer named George Hurrell. There, she took a series of sensual portraits that convinced her husband that she could play the lead in MGM's racy new film, \"The Divorcee\" (1930).\nPre-Code.\nShearer won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in \"The Divorcee\", and a series of highly successful pre-Code films followed, including \"Let Us Be Gay\" (1930), \"Strangers May Kiss\" (1931), \"A Free Soul\" (1931) with Leslie Howard and Clark Gable, \"Private Lives\" (1931), and \"Strange Interlude\" (1932). All of these were box-office hits, placing Shearer in competition with Joan Crawford, Greta Garbo, and Jean Harlow as MGM's top actress through the remainder of the decade.\nShearer's marriage to Thalberg gave her a degree of power in Hollywood that was resented by rivals such as Crawford, who complained that Shearer would always be offered the best roles and best conditions: \"How can I compete with Norma when she's sleeping with the boss?\"\nShearer's pre-Code films included period dramas and theatrical adaptations. \"Smilin' Through\" (1932), which co-starred Fredric March, was one of the most successful films of the period. An adaptation of Eugene O'Neill's four-hour experimental \"Strange Interlude\" (1932), which also starred Clark Gable, was a disappointing adaptation of O'Neill, but a showcase for Shearer, thus a major hit.\nThe First Lady of MGM.\nThe enforcement of the Production Code in 1934 forced Shearer to drop her celebrated \"free soul\" image, and move exclusively into period dramas and \"prestige\" pictures. Of these, \"The Barretts of Wimpole Street\" (1934) proved her most successful at the box office, making a profit of $668,000, in part because the film contained elements that slipped by the newly instituted Production Code. In that film, she played a role made famous by Katharine Cornell. Shearer also took on another play popularized by Cornell in \"Romeo and Juliet\" (1936) (her first film of the 1930s to lose money), and \"Marie Antoinette\" (1938) (a budget of almost $2,500,000 was too great for the studio to expect a profit), though their elaborate sets and costumes helped make the films immensely popular with audiences.\nShearer was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress on six occasions, winning only for \"The Divorcee\" in 1930. She was nominated the same year for \"Their Own Desire\", for \"A Free Soul\" in 1931, \"The Barretts of Wimpole Street\" in 1934, \"Romeo and Juliet\" in 1936, and \"Marie Antoinette\" in 1938. Marion Davies later recalled that Shearer came to a party at San Simeon in her Marie Antoinette costume; Davies said she was not about to remove the door so Shearer could enter, so Norma made her grand entrance through wider doors leading from another room. Four chairs were arranged so she could sit at the table in her voluminous skirts.\nGeorge Cukor, who directed Shearer in \"Romeo and Juliet\", offered this character sketch of the actress:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I found that Norma Shearer, when I made \"Romeo and Juliet\", is a nervous, highly self-critical woman who has schooled herself to give an impression of self-confidence. If one had accepted that impression, one would have gone far astray in working with her. She needed sympathy and reassurance. Another way in which Miss Shearer might mislead a\u2014I am sure she continually misleads herself\u2014is in the matter of physical resources and sheer stamina. She becomes so engrossed in her work, so keyed up with a kind of taut, nervous energy, that she is apt to overtax her strength. She will play a long, exhausting scene over and over again without appearing to lose an atom of her freshness and verve. When it is over she will tell you she feels fine\u2014and believe it. Then she will go to her dressing room and collapse. If one worked her as hard as she seems to want to work, she would be worn out before the film was half finished. With her, the director has to reverse the normal process of inspiring his star to greater efforts. He has to persuade her to spare herself. The greatest joy of working with Miss Shearer comes from her complete lack of vanity. Far from bridling at minor criticisms as many actresses do, she will criticize herself with a penetrating, almost unfeminine, impersonal judgment. When she sees the unedited versions of the previous days footage [\"rushes\"] she seems to cease to be an actress and to look at her own work on the screen with the shrewd and critical mind of a producer.\"\nIn 1939, she attempted an unusual role in the dark comedy \"Idiot's Delight\", adapted from the 1936 Robert E. Sherwood play. It was the last of Shearer's three films with Clark Gable, after \"A Free Soul\" (1931) and \"Strange Interlude\" (1932). \"The Women\" (1939) followed, with an entirely female cast of more than 130 speaking roles.\nShearer was also one of the many actresses considered for the role of Scarlett O'Hara in \"Gone With The Wind\" (1939) and some publications even reported that she won the role in 1938. However, she withdrew herself from consideration after negative feedback from movie fans. Years later when asked about potentially playing Scarlett, Shearer jokingly said, \"Scarlett is a thankless role. The one I'd really like to play is Rhett!\"\nCritics praised the suspenseful atmosphere in her next film, \"Escape\" (1940), where she played the lover of a Nazi general who helps an American free his mother from a concentration camp. With increasing interest in the war in Europe, the film performed well at the box office, but Shearer passed up roles in highly successful films \"Now, Voyager\" and \"Mrs. Miniver\", to star in \"We Were Dancing\" and \"Her Cardboard Lover\" (1942), which both failed at the box office. In 1942, Shearer unofficially retired from acting.\nRetirement.\nAfter Thalberg's unexpected death on September 14, 1936, Shearer retained a lawyer to ensure that Thalberg's percentages of films on which he had worked were still paid to his estate, which was contested by MGM. When she took the story to gossip columnist Louella Parsons, the studio was forced to give in and granted all the profits from MGM movies made and released from 1924 to 1938, meaning the estate eventually received over $1.5\u00a0million in percentage payments. Nevertheless, Shearer's contract was renewed for six films at $150,000 each. During this time, she embarked on a brief romance with the younger actor James Stewart, and then with the married actor George Raft. Raft (who had separated from his wife years earlier, soon after they married) stated publicly that he wanted to marry Shearer. However, his wife's refusal to allow a divorce and the disapproval of MGM studio head Louis B. Mayer caused Shearer to end the affair.\nFollowing her retirement in 1942, she married Martin Arroug\u00e9 (March 23, 1914\u00a0\u2013 August 8, 1999), a World War II Navy aviator, a former ski instructor to her children, 11 years her junior. Despite often attending public events in her later life, Shearer gradually withdrew from the Hollywood social scene. In 1960, her secretary stated: \"Miss Shearer does not want any publicity. She doesn't talk to anyone. But I can tell you that she has refused many requests to appear in motion pictures and TV shows.\" Arroug\u00e9 and Shearer remained married until her death.\nDeath.\nOn June 12, 1983, Shearer died of bronchial pneumonia at the Motion Picture Country Home in Woodland Hills, California, where she had been living since 1980.\nShe is entombed in the Great Mausoleum at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California, in a crypt marked Norma Arrouge, along with her first husband, Irving Thalberg.\nLegacy.\nShearer's fame declined after her retirement in 1942. She was rediscovered in the late 1950s, when her films were sold to television, and in the 1970s, when her films enjoyed theatrical revivals. By the time of her death in 1983, she was best known for her noble roles in \"Marie Antoinette\" and \"The Women\".\nA Shearer revival began in 1988, when Turner Network Television began broadcasting the entire Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film library. In 1994, Turner Classic Movies began showcasing her films, most of which had not been seen since the reconstitution of the Production Code in 1934. Shearer's work was seen anew, and the critical focus shifted from her noble roles to her pre-Code roles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEven for a pampered star, her output in the sound era is strikingly meager. And yet this was part of her undeniable aura \u2013 that she did not make movies lightly and frivolously, but with great care, sincerity and conviction.\n\u2014Andrew Sarris, from \"\"You Ain't Heard Nothin' Yet\": The American Talking Film History &amp; Memory, 1927\u20131949\".\nShearer's work gained more attention in the 1990s through the publication of a series of books. The first was a biography by Gavin Lambert. Next came \"Complicated Women: Sex and Power in Pre-Code Hollywood\" by Mick LaSalle, film critic at the \"San Francisco Chronicle\". Mark A. Vieira published three books on subjects closely related to Shearer: a biography of her husband, producer Irving Thalberg; and two biographies of photographer George Hurrell. Shearer was noted not only for the control she exercised over her work, but also for her patronage of Hurrell and Adrian, and for discovering actress Janet Leigh and actor-producer Robert Evans.\nFor her contribution to the motion-picture industry, Shearer has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, at 6636 Hollywood Boulevard. On June 30, 2008, Canada Post issued a postage stamp in its \"Canadians in Hollywood\" series to honour Norma Shearer, along with others for Raymond Burr, Marie Dressler, and Chief Dan George.\nShearer and Thalberg are reportedly the models for Stella and Miles, the hosts of the Hollywood party in the short story \"Crazy Sunday\" (1932) by F. Scott Fitzgerald.\nMost of Shearer's MGM films are broadcast on Turner Classic Movies, and many of them are also available on DVD from Warner Home Video. In 2008, she was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame. In 2015, a number of Shearer films became available in high-definition format, authored by Warner Home Video, in most cases, from the nitrate camera negatives: \"A Free Soul\", \"Romeo and Juliet\", \"Marie Antoinette\", and \"The Women\".\nShearer is portrayed in director David Fincher's film \"Mank\" by actress Jessie Cohen.\nAwards and nominations.\nShearer was the first person to receive five Academy Award nominations for acting. Her brother Douglas Shearer and she are the first Oscar-winning siblings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61356", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61356", "title": "List of Ontario Municipal Divisions", "text": ""}
{"id": "61358", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61358", "title": "Oral law", "text": "Code of conduct transmitted by oral tradition\nAn oral law is a code of conduct in use in a given culture, religion or community application, by which a body of rules of human behaviour is transmitted by oral tradition and effectively respected, or the single rule that is orally transmitted.\nMany cultures have an oral law, while most contemporary legal systems have a formal written organisation. The oral tradition (from the Latin \"tradere\" = to transmit) is the typical instrument of transmission of the oral codes or, in a more general sense, is the complex of what a culture transmits of itself among the generations, \"from father to son\". This kind of transmission can be due to lack of other means, such as in illiterate or criminal societies, or can be expressly required by the same law.\nThere has been a continuous debate over oral versus written transmission, with the focus on the perceived higher reliability of written evidence, primarily based on the \"linear world of academia\" where only written down records are accepted. However, \"standard\" theories of orality and literacy have been proposed.\nIn jurisprudence.\nFrom a legal point of view, an oral law can be:\nAn oral law, intended as a body of rules, can be admitted in jurisprudence as long as it shows some efficacy, therefore it needs that the law is public, the human action is evaluated by a judge (ordinarily producing a sentence according to the general interpretation of the law) and then a punishment has eventually to be put into effect. Some oral laws provide all these elements (for instance, some codes of conduct in use among criminal associations like the Mafia do have a well known law, a judge, a condemnation), while others usually miss some of them.\nAlbanian customary law.\nThe Kanun is a set of Albanian traditional customary laws, which has directed all the aspects of the Albanian tribal society. For at least the last five centuries and until today, Albanian customary laws have been kept alive only orally by the tribal elders. The success in preserving them exclusively through oral systems is an indication of ancient origins. Strong pre-Christian motifs mixed with motifs from the Christian era reflect the stratification of the Albanian customary law across various historical ages. The Kanun has held a sacred \u2013 although secular \u2013 longstanding, unwavering and unchallenged authority with a cross-religious effectiveness over the Albanians, which is attributed to an earlier pagan code common to all the Albanian tribes. The northern Albanian customary law is among the Albanian literary monuments that are of interest to Indo-European studies, reflecting many legal practices of great antiquity. It has been pointed out that \"The laws governing such matters as hospitality, the rights of the heads of households, marriage, blood-feuds and payment of damages find precise echoes in Vedic India and ancient Greece and Rome\".\nOver time, Albanian customary laws have undergone their historical development, they have been changed and supplemented with new norms, in accordance with certain requirements of socio-economic development. According to some historical sources, the government of the Roman and Byzantine empire had to recognize autonomous customary laws to the various local communities for their self-administration. In this context, during different periods, Albanian customary laws were implemented in parallel with Roman, Byzantine, Ecclesiastic, and subsequently Sharia and Ottoman laws. This helped the Albanian mountain tribes to preserve their way of life, identity, and neutrality in the face of external centralizing administration.\nIn Judaism.\nRabbinic Judaism maintains that the books of the Tanakh were transmitted in parallel with an oral tradition, as relayed by God to Moses and from him handed on to the scholarly and other religious leaders of each generation. Thus, in Judaism, the \"Written Instruction\" (\"Torah she-bi-khtav\" \u05ea\u05d5\u05e8\u05d4 \u05e9\u05d1\u05db\u05ea\u05d1) comprises the Torah and the rest of the Tanakh; the \"Oral Instruction\" (\"Torah she-be'al peh\" \u05ea\u05d5\u05e8\u05d4 \u05e9\u05d1\u05e2\u05dc \u05e4\u05d4) was ultimately recorded in the Talmud (lit. \"Learning\") and Midrashim (lit. \"Interpretations\"). The interpretation of the Oral Torah is thus considered as the authoritative reading of the Written Torah. Further, Halakha (lit. \"The Path\", frequently translated as \"Jewish Law\") is based on a written instruction together with an oral instruction. Jewish law and tradition is thus not based on a literal reading of the Tanakh, but on the combined oral and written tradition.\nCitations and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61360", "revid": "49119008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61360", "title": "List of counties of Prince Edward Island", "text": "The Canadian province of Prince Edward Island has three counties that have historically been used as administrative divisions for the provincial government, and prior to Confederation (in 1873), the colonial government.\nThe current system of land division in Prince Edward Island, including its three counties, dates to a series of surveys undertaken in 1764-65 by Captain Samuel Holland of the British Army's Corps of Royal Engineers. Holland's survey saw the island divided into the three counties, each of which had a \"royalty\" (or shire town) as a county seat. The rest of the county outside the royalty was sub-divided into parishes for the Church of England, measuring approximately ; the parishes were further sub-divided into townships measuring approximately .\nThe counties are no longer used as administrative boundaries for the provincial government; however, they continue to be used as census divisions by Statistics Canada for statistical purposes in administering the Canadian census.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61361", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61361", "title": "Boy's surface", "text": "Self-intersecting compact surface, an immersion of the real projective plane\nIn geometry, Boy's surface is an immersion of the real projective plane in three-dimensional space. It was discovered in 1901 by the German mathematician Werner Boy, who had been tasked by his doctoral thesis advisor David Hilbert to prove that the projective plane could not be immersed in three-dimensional space. \nBoy's surface was first parametrized explicitly by Bernard Morin in 1978. Another parametrization was discovered by Rob Kusner and Robert Bryant. Boy's surface is one of the two possible immersions of the real projective plane which have only a single triple point.\nUnlike the Roman surface and the cross-cap, it has no other singularities than self-intersections (that is, it has no pinch-points).\nParametrization.\nBoy's surface can be parametrized in several ways. One parametrization, discovered by Rob Kusner and Robert Bryant, is the following: given a complex number \"w\" whose magnitude is less than or equal to one (formula_1), let\nformula_2\nand then set \nformula_3\nwe then obtain the Cartesian coordinates \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\" of a point on the Boy's surface.\nIf one performs an inversion of this parametrization centered on the triple point, one obtains a complete minimal surface with three ends (that's how this parametrization was discovered naturally). This implies that the Bryant\u2013Kusner parametrization of Boy's surfaces is \"optimal\" in the sense that it is the \"least bent\" immersion of a projective plane into three-space.\nProperty of Bryant\u2013Kusner parametrization.\nIf \"w\" is replaced by the negative reciprocal of its complex conjugate, formula_4 then the functions \"g\"1, \"g\"2, and \"g\"3 of \"w\" are left unchanged.\nBy replacing \"w\" in terms of its real and imaginary parts \"w\" = \"s\" + \"it\", and expanding resulting parameterization, one may obtain a parameterization of Boy's surface in terms of rational functions of \"s\" and \"t\". This shows that Boy's surface is not only an algebraic surface, but even a rational surface. The remark of the preceding paragraph shows that the generic fiber of this parameterization consists of two points (that is that almost every point of Boy's surface may be obtained by two parameters values).\nRelation to the real projective plane.\nLet formula_5 be the Bryant\u2013Kusner parametrization of Boy's surface. Then\nformula_6\nThis explains the condition formula_7 on the parameter: if formula_8 then formula_9 However, things are slightly more complicated for formula_10 In this case, one has formula_11 This means that, if formula_12 the point of the Boy's surface is obtained from two parameter values: formula_13 In other words, the Boy's surface has been parametrized by a disk such that pairs of diametrically opposite points on the perimeter of the disk are equivalent. This shows that the Boy's surface is the image of the real projective plane, RP2 by a smooth map. That is, the parametrization of the Boy's surface is an immersion of the real projective plane into the Euclidean space.\nSymmetries.\nBoy's surface has 3-fold symmetry. This means that it has an axis of discrete rotational symmetry: any 120\u00b0 turn about this axis will leave the surface looking exactly the same. The Boy's surface can be cut into three mutually congruent pieces.\nApplications.\nBoy's surface can be used in sphere eversion as a half-way model. A half-way model is an immersion of the sphere with the property that a rotation interchanges inside and outside, and so can be employed to evert (turn inside-out) a sphere. Boy's (the case p\u00a0=\u00a03) and Morin's (the case p\u00a0=\u00a02) surfaces begin a sequence of half-way models with higher symmetry first proposed by George Francis, indexed by the even integers 2p (for p odd, these immersions can be factored through a projective plane). Kusner's parametrization yields all these.\nModels.\nModel at Oberwolfach.\nThe Oberwolfach Research Institute for Mathematics has a large model of a Boy's surface outside the entrance, constructed and donated by Mercedes-Benz in January 1991. This model has 3-fold rotational symmetry and minimizes the Willmore energy of the surface. It consists of steel strips representing the image of a polar coordinate grid under a parameterization given by Robert Bryant and Rob Kusner. The meridians (rays) become ordinary M\u00f6bius strips, i.e. twisted by 180 degrees. All but one of the strips corresponding to circles of latitude (radial circles around the origin) are untwisted, while the one corresponding to the boundary of the unit circle is a M\u00f6bius strip twisted by three times 180 degrees \u2014 as is the emblem of the institute .\nModel made for Clifford Stoll.\nA model was made in glass by glassblower Lucas Clarke, with the cooperation of Adam Savage, for presentation to Clifford Stoll. It was featured on Adam Savage's YouTube channel, Tested. All three appeared in the video discussing it.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61363", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61363", "title": "Epacris impressa", "text": "Species of plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEpacris impressa, also known as common heath, is a species of plant in the heath family Ericaceae. It is native to south-eastern Australia (the states of Victoria, Tasmania, South Australia and New South Wales). French botanist Jacques Labillardi\u00e8re collected the species in 1793 and described it in 1805. Four forms have been identified, but no subspecies are recognised. Growing in heathland, shrubland or open forest, it is generally a small shrub around tall, with small stiff leaves. The red, pink or white tube-like flowers appear from late autumn to early spring. Honeyeater birds, particularly the eastern spinebill, feed upon the nectar of the flowers. It regenerates after bushfire by seed or by resprouting.\nA highly regarded garden plant, the common heath was first cultivated in England in 1825; over seventy named cultivars have been developed, most of which have now vanished. A pink-flowered form, often referred to as \"pink heath\", is the floral emblem of the state of Victoria. \"Epacris impressa\" has proven a difficult plant to propagate reliably, which has limited its use in horticulture and revegetation. It grows best in well-drained but moist soil in a semishaded position.\nDescription.\n\"Epacris impressa\" grows as a woody shrub with an erect habit, sometimes reaching in height although plants in the range of tall are more commonly observed. The branches are stiff and have small leaves with prickly, pointed apices that are long. The flowers mainly occur between late autumn and early spring, arising in dense and sometimes pendulous clusters along the stems. White, pink or red in colour, they are and are narrow and tubular with five indentations on the base. The corolla of the flower is formed by five petals, fused at the base to form a tubelike structure, with the free petal ends forming five lobes at the apex. There are five whorled sepals at the base of the corolla. Within the corolla is a central style that persists through development of the fruit. The style connects the stigma at the apex and ovary at the base, where the nectar is also located. Different colour forms are often observed growing near each other. The fruit is a 5-locule capsule that is about in diameter. It is globular in shape, sometimes with one end flattened. Initially green, it dries and splits, releasing numerous tiny seeds.\nTaxonomy.\nThe type specimen of common heath was collected in 1793 by French botanist Jacques Labillardi\u00e8re in Van Diemen's Land (now Tasmania) during a voyage with Antoine Bruni d'Entrecasteaux. Labillardi\u00e8re described it in his 1805 work \"Novae Hollandiae Plantarum Specimen\", giving it its current name \"Epacris impressa\". The Latin specific epithet \"impressa\" (meaning \"impressed\" or \"indented\") alludes to the indentations on the floral tube. The original mounted specimen is currently held at the National Herbarium of Victoria at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Melbourne.\nA number of specimens once described as separate species are now regarded as \"Epacris impressa\", with no recognised subspecies. Scottish botanist Robert Brown described \"Epacris ruscifolia\" in his 1810 work \"Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae et Insulae Van Diemen\" alongside \"E. impressa\". John Lindley described \"Epacris tomentosa\" from plant specimens collected during the third expedition of Thomas Mitchell in 1838. Upon encountering \"Epacris impressa\" on Mount William in the Grampians, Mitchell remarked that it was \"A most beautiful downy-leaved Epacris with large, curved, purple flowers, allied to \"E. grandiflora\" but much handsomer\". Dr Robert Graham described \"Epacris ceriflora\" (which he spelt \"ceraeflora\") from plants cultivated at the Edinburgh Botanic Gardens in 1832. The seed had come from Tasmania, the resulting progeny flowering over April and May 1832. A year later, he described \"E. nivalis\", which he called an \"exceedingly beautiful species\", from specimens growing in Loddiges nursery. He also noted a form with long corollas that had been called \"E. variabilis\" that was in cultivation at the time, and noted it was difficult to describe the precise characteristics that distinguished \"E. ceraeflora\", \"E. nivalis\", \"E. variabilis\" and \"E. impressa\".\nIn his landmark \"Flora Australiensis\" (1869), George Bentham argued that several previously described species were in fact a single species \u2013 \"E. impressa\", uniting \"E. variabilis\", a short red-flowered \"E. campanulata\", \"E. ruscifolia\", which had narrow leaves and long flowers, the white-flowered \"E. nivalis\", and short white-flowered \"E. ceraeflora\". He re-classified as a separate species \u2013 \"E. reclinata\" \u2013 several plants that Allan Cunningham had collected in the Blue Mountains and classified as \"E. impressa\".\nIn the same work, Bentham named and described two naturally occurring varieties, \"Epacris impressa\" var. \"grandiflora\" and \"E. impressa\" var. \"ovata\". Plant specimens designated as \"grandiflora\" had been collected in the Wimmera, the Grampians (including those previously designated as \"E. tomentosa\") and at Stawell in Victoria. Those classified as \"ovata\" were collected at Twofold Bay and Mount Imlay in southeastern New South Wales as well as Woolnorth and Rocky Cape in northern Tasmania. Bentham noted that, although variable, all forms had \"five impressed cavities outside, alternating with the stamens immediately above the ovary.\"\nIn his 1972 publication \"A Handbook to Plants in Victoria\", Australian botanist Jim Willis expressed his view that dividing the species into subspecies was not feasible given that common heath is highly variable in flower colour and leaf shape, though he conceded the Grampians race \"grandiflora\" might be distinctive based on its larger corollas and coarser and hairier foliage. Currently, both \"grandiflora\" and \"ovata\" are regarded as synonyms of \"Epacris impressa\" rather than being classified as distinct varieties. The plant populations that best fit Bentham's original description of \"grandiflora\", also known as Grampians heath, occur naturally on sandstone at locations including Mount Zero, Mount Stapylton and the Black Range. Other nearby populations are regarded as having intermediate characteristics, including those in the Victoria Range and Mount Arapiles. Although not recognised in the Australian Plant Census, the variety is noted as \"rare\" on the list of \"Advisory List of Rare or Threatened Plants in Victoria\" issued by the Department of Environment and Primary Industries.\nVariation in flower colour and length.\nIn 1977 Helen Stace and Yvonne Fripp from La Trobe University studied 195 populations of \"Epacris impressa\" in Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania and found that 120 consisted of mixed stands of two or more races while 75 populations were of one race only. They identified four races based on the following corolla characteristics:\nThe long-pink and short-white races frequently occur in close proximity to each other; in these mixed populations the former tends to flower in winter and the latter in spring. The question has been raised whether these different forms are becoming incompatible. However, controlled cross-pollination between plants with short and long corollas showed that there was no incompatibility between them.\nPink-flowering populations have a relatively distinct genetic makeup, whereas red or white flowering populations have more evident sharing of genetic traits. Research based on DNA profiling has revealed substantial genetic diversity within and between flower colour races and site populations. This has implications for vegetation projects in that provenance material needs to be collected from a wide geographic area to maintain this diversity.\nDistribution.\n\"Epacris impressa\" is commonly found in coastal regions and nearby foothills, ranging from Kangaroo Island and the southern Mount Lofty Ranges in South Australia across southern Victoria, extending to the Grampians and the Little Desert, and northwards to southern New South Wales as far as the Clyde River in the Budawang Range. It is also widespread in Tasmania. Plants are recorded at altitudes up to at Mount Stradbroke and Mount Tingaringy in East Gippsland. The species grows in widely diverse habitats including sand and clay heathland, herb-rich and heathy woodland, lowland and shrubby dry forests, riparian thickets, montane rocky shrubland and rocky outcrops.\nEcology.\nHoneyeaters such as the eastern spinebill are attracted to the flowers. As the bird gathers the nectar, the pollen, which has fins, attaches itself to the feathers on the heads of the birds and is carried to other flowers, aiding cross pollination. A study in forests near Hobart in Tasmania found that the eastern spinebill arrived in the area at the same time the common heath was in flower in March, and left once flowering had finished. Other honeyeaters, such as the strong-billed, crescent and yellow-throated honeyeaters, fed occasionally at common heath flowers. Field work in the Mount Lofty Ranges in South Australia recorded the white-plumed and New Holland honeyeaters, as well as the crescent honeyeater and the eastern spinebill.\nInsects recorded visiting white-flowered plants include the Australian painted lady (\"Vanessa kershawi\") and yellow admiral (\"V. itea\"), as well as bees. Field work in southern Tasmania showed that the introduced bumblebee (\"Bombus terrestris\") sometimes robbed nectar by piercing the base of the tube. This then allowed honeybees (\"Apis mellifera\") to retrieve nectar the same way. \"Epacris impressa\" is host to the scale insect \"Lecanodiaspis microcribraria\".\nA field study of the invasion of the pathogen \"Phytophthora cinnamomi\" into the Brisbane Ranges National Park in Victoria in 1971 indicated that \"Epacris impressa\" was moderately susceptible to the pathogen. Inoculation of seedlings confirmed this. Fieldwork in the Brisbane Ranges National Park in 1985 showed that there was some evidence that \"E. impressa\" seedlings were able to recolonise areas that had been infested with \"P. cinnamomi\" a decade before.\n\"Epacris impressa\" regenerates after bushfire by seed and resprouting. Fieldwork in heathland in the Otway Ranges in the years following the 1983 Ash Wednesday bushfires showed that large numbers of \"E. impressa\" seedlings appeared in some areas, and that flowering took place as early as the second year after the fire.\nThe roots of \"Epacris impressa\" are colonized by fungi forming ericoid mycorrhiza. It is believed that the fungal species vary between regions.\nCultivation.\nPropagated from seed collected by William Baxter in southern Australia, common heath was introduced into cultivation in England by the Clapton Nursery in 1825. Due to its frost-tenderness, it was mostly restricted to greenhouse cultivation. In 1873, a variety known as \"Epacris impressa alba\" was recorded as being grown commercially for cut flowers in Boston in the United States. While initially popular \u2013 over seventy cultivars appeared in the literature at the time \u2013 most have since disappeared.\nPlants grow best in a moist but well-drained, acidic soil, with added peat being helpful. They may be grown in coastal gardens in a sheltered position, and generally require some degree of shade. Once established, plants can tolerate short dry spells. As they age, plants may become straggly, but benefit from hard pruning after fertilizing and watering, which promotes compact, bushier growth. Common heath can be short-lived and difficult to transplant, though it can be readily grown as a pot plant. Along with other members of the genus, \"Epacris impressa\" initially proved difficult to grow and maintain on original soil in the Australian National Botanic Gardens in Canberra.\nPropagation both by seed and cuttings is difficult, reducing potential production by plant nurseries. Germination rates of soil-stored seeds have been found to increase substantially with the application of heat and aqueous solutions of smoke. The most satisfactory results from cuttings can be achieved by using tip growth, taken six weeks after the cessation of flowering, and kept under a fogging system for twenty weeks. Plantsman Neil Marriott recommends semi-hardened cutting material taken in spring and autumn. Roots of cuttings are brittle and easily damaged.\nCultivars.\nThe following forms have been selected and grown for cultivation:\nThis is a form from Bega in southern New South Wales that has bright red flowers and grows to high. It is regarded as one of the more reliable forms in cultivation. White- and pink-flowered forms from the same region also have horticultural potential.\n'Cranbourne Bells' is a double-flowered form with pink flower buds fading to white as they open. Registered by the Australian Cultivar Registration Authority in 1988, it occurred naturally near the Royal Botanic Gardens Cranbourne in Victoria, but its habitat has since been cleared. A double-flowered form of \"Epacris impressa\" was collected as early as the 1860s in Victoria when Government Botanist Ferdinand von Mueller sent a specimen to Kew Gardens. This was examined by botanist William Hemsley in 1865. The specimen, labelled as \"Epacris impressa\" var. \"pleniflora\", originated from Stawell in western Victoria. Another specimen given the same name by Mueller was collected at Nunawading, today a suburb of Melbourne. Charles French, co-founder of the Field Naturalists Club of Victoria, collected a white double-flowered form from Cheltenham south of Melbourne in 1859 and a pink double-flowered form from Dromana on the Mornington Peninsula in about 1862. These were later sent as rooted cuttings to Veitch Nurseries in England. Double-flowered forms of various colours have since been found throughout Victoria, but only single plants have been observed in any location, and they are still regarded as a rarity. A naturally occurring form of the variety \"grandiflora\" with rosebud-like double flowers is also grown.\nA form with deep pink flowers on long spikes, 'Spring Pink' appears in spring. It grows to high.\nFloral emblem of Victoria.\nIn 1951, at a meeting of representatives of government and other bodies, it was agreed that the pink form of the common heath, the \"pink heath\", be adopted as the official floral emblem for the state of Victoria. Victoria was the first Australian state to adopt a floral emblem. The proclamation, made on 11 November 1958 by the Governor, Dallas Brooks, was as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, the Governor of the State of Victoria, in the Commonwealth of Australia, by and with the advice of the Executive Council of the said State, do by this my Proclamation declare that the Pink Form of the Common Heath, \"Epacris impressa\" Labill., be adopted as the Floral Emblem for the State of Victoria\"\nAn Australian stamp series of state floral emblems was issued in 1968. The pink heath was featured on the 13 cent stamp. In 2014, a 70-cent stamp labelled as \"Common Heath\" was issued. The pink heath is also depicted on the Victorian driver's licence. In 1973, a depiction of pink heath was added to the armorial bearings for Victoria.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61364", "revid": "217736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61364", "title": "Steiner surface", "text": ""}
{"id": "61366", "revid": "10547048", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61366", "title": "X.500", "text": "Series of computer networking standards covering electronic directory services\nX.500 is a series of computer networking standards covering electronic directory services. The X.500 series was developed by the Telecommunication Standardization Sector of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU-T) and was first approved in 1988. The directory services were developed to support requirements of X.400 electronic mail exchange and name lookup. The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) were partners in developing the standards, incorporating them into the Open Systems Interconnection suite of protocols. ISO/IEC 9594 is the corresponding ISO/IEC identification.\nX.500 protocols.\nThe protocols defined by X.500 include:\nBecause these protocols used the OSI networking stack, a number of alternatives to DAP were developed to allow Internet clients to access the X.500 Directory using the TCP/IP networking stack. The most well-known alternative to DAP is Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP). While DAP and the other X.500 protocols can now use the TCP/IP networking stack, LDAP remains a popular directory access protocol.\nTransport Protocols.\nThe X.500 protocols traditionally use the OSI networking stack. However, the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) uses TCP/IP for transport. In later versions of the ITU Recommendation X.519, the Internet Directly-Mapped (IDM) protocols were introduced to allow X.500 protocol data units (PDUs) to be transported over the TCP/IP stack. This transport involves ISO Transport over TCP as well as a simple record-based binary protocol to frame protocol datagrams.\nX.500 data models.\nThe primary concept of X.500 is that there is a single Directory Information Tree (DIT), a hierarchical organization of entries which are distributed across one or more servers, called Directory System Agents (DSA). An entry consists of a set of attributes, each attribute with one or more values. Each entry has a unique Distinguished Name, formed by combining its Relative Distinguished Name (RDN), one or more attributes of the entry itself, and the RDNs of each of the superior entries up to the root of the DIT. As LDAP implements a very similar data model to that of X.500, there is further description of the data model in the article on LDAP.\nX.520 and X.521 together provide a definition of a set of attributes and object classes to be used for representing people and organizations as entries in the DIT. They are one of the most widely deployed white pages schema.\nX.509, the portion of the standard providing for an authentication framework, is now also widely used outside of the X.500 directory protocols. It specifies a standard format for public-key certificates.\nRelationship to X.509v3 digital certificates.\nThe current use of X.509v3 certificates loaded directly into web browsers (as opposed to referenced in a directory structure) was necessary for e-commerce to develop by allowing for secure web based (SSL/TLS) communications which did not require the X.500 directory as a source of digital certificates as originally conceived in X.500 (1988). \nX.509 was designed to be the secure access method for updating X.500 before the World Wide Web, but then as web browsers became popular, there needed to be a simple method of encrypting connections on the transport layer to web servers. Hence, trusted root certificates for supported certificate authorities were pre-loaded into certificate storage areas on the communicating devices (e.g. personal computer, proxy, or web server).\nAdded security is envisaged by the scheduled 2011-2014 implementation of the US National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace, a two- to three-year project protecting digital identities in cyberspace.\nThe WWW e-commerce implementation of X.509v3 bypassed, but did not replace, the original ISO standard authentication mechanism of binding distinguished names in the X.500 Directory.\nThese packages of certificates can be added or removed by the end user in their software, but are reviewed by browser and operating system vendors (such as Microsoft and Mozilla) in terms of their continued trustworthiness. Should a problem arise, such as what occurred with DigiNotar, browser vendors can issue an update to mark a certificate authority as untrusted, but this is a serious removal effectively of that CA from \"internet trust\". X.500 offers a way to view which organization claims a specific root certificate, outside of that provided bundle. This can function as a \"4 corner model of trust\" adding another check to determine if a root certificate has been compromised.\nThe contrast of this browser bundled approach is that in X.500 or LDAP the attribute \"caCertificate\" can be \"bound\" to a directory entry and checked in addition to the default pre-loaded bundle of certificates of which end users typically have never noticed unless an SSL warning message has appeared.\nFor example, a web site using SSL, typically the DNS site name \"www.foobar.com\" is verified in a browser by the software using libraries that would check to see if the certificate was signed by one of the trusted root certificates given to the user.\nTherefore, creating trust for users that they had reached the correct web site via HTTPS.\nHowever, stronger checks are also possible, to indicate that more than the domain name was verified. To contrast this with X.500, the certificate is one attribute of many for an entry, in which the entry could contain anything allowable by the specific Directory schema. Thus X.500 does store the digital certificate, but it is one of many attributes that could potentially verify the organization, such as physical address, a contact telephone number and an email contact.\nCA Certs or certificate authority certs are loaded into the browser automatically (in the case of Microsoft's update mechanism), or in new version updates of browsers, and the user is given further choices to import, delete, or develop an individual trust relationship with the loaded Certificate Authorities and determine how the browser will behave if OCSP revocation servers are unreachable.\nThis is in contrast with the Directory model which associates the attribute \"caCertificate\" with a listed certificate authority.\nThus the browser can verify the SSL cert of the website by means of the loaded group of accepted certificates or the root certificates can be looked up in an X.500 or LDAP Directory (or via HTTP/S) and imported into the list of trusted certificate authorities.\nThe \"bound\" distinguished name is located in the subject fields of the certificate which matches the Directory entry. X.509v3 can contain other extensions depending on the community of interest other than international domain names. For broad Internet use, RFC-5280 PKIX describes a profile for fields that may be useful for applications such as encrypted email.\nAn end user who relies on the authenticity of a certificate being presented to a browser or email has no simple way to compare a forged certificate presented (perhaps which triggers a browser warning) with a valid certificate, without also being given the opportunity to validate the DN or Distinguished Name which was designed to be looked up in an X.500 DIT.\nThe certificate itself is public and, because of its signature, considered to be unforgeable and can therefore be distributed in any manner, but an associated binding to an identity occurs in the Directory. Binding is what links the certificate to the identity who claims to be using that certificate. For example, the X.500 software that runs the Federal Bridge has cross certificates that enable trust between certificate authorities.\nIf a X.509v3 certificate is bound to a valid organization's distinguished name within the Directory, then a simple check can be made in regards to the authenticity of the certificate by a comparison with what is presented to the browser with what is present in the Directory.\nSome options do exist to check notaries to see if a certificate has only recently been seen, and therefore more likely to have been compromised. If the cert is likely to be trusted and is failing because the domain name is a slight mismatch, it will then initially fail in the browser, but then be subjected to the notary trust, which can then bypass the browser warning.\nA valid organizational entry, such as o=FoobarWidgets, will also have an associated alphanumeric OID, and it has been \"identity proofed\" by ANSI, providing another layer of assurance regarding binding the certificate to the identity.\nCertificate distribution via DNS and directories; sector-specific uses.\nSome deployments (for example, the US Direct Project, which created standards for PKI in the healthcare industry) specify DNS-based publication of recipient S/MIME certificates, with options for DNS-based or LDAP-based discovery. Early profiles used the DNS CERT Resource Record (); newer specifications define DANE mechanisms, including TLSA for TLS and SMIMEA for S/MIME. In practice, many production healthcare exchanges rely on curated trust-anchor bundles and directory/HTTP services, with DNSSEC/DANE adoption varying by ecosystem.\nDNS is sometimes preferred for storing and distributing information as it is highly available, and this can be applied to certificates and identities.\nNamespace and governance considerations.\nThe concept of DNS root name servers has been contentious within the Internet community, though the issue is largely resolved for DNS. By contrast, the X.500 namespace has traditionally been viewed as starting with a national naming authority, mirroring ISO/ITU approaches with national representation. Different countries therefore create their own unique X.500 services.\nSecurity incidents and transparency efforts.\nEvents in 2011 highlighted threats from unknown nation-state actors forging certificates. A man-in-the-middle attack against political activists in Syria accessing Facebook over the web would normally have triggered a browser warning (which many ordinary users would reflexively dismiss), but would not have done so had the MITM certificate been issued by a CA already trusted by the browser. Similar techniques were used by Stuxnet to allow malicious software to impersonate trusted code \u2013 in that event, using stolen rather than forged certificates. The aim of certificate transparency is to provide an end user with a simple procedure to determine whether a certificate is valid; checking only against the default bundle may be insufficient, hence the desire for an additional check. Other proposals for certificate transparency have also been advanced.\nA different attack affected Comodo, resulting in forged certificates targeting high-profile communications websites and necessitating urgent updates to major browsers. In that case, the certificates were actually issued by a trusted CA, leaving end users with no warning if they visited a spoofed site \u2013 unlike the Syrian incident, where the certificate was crudely forged (substituting \"Alto Palo\" for \"Palo Alto\") and contained incorrect serial numbers.\nCriticism.\nThe authors of note that \"The original X.500 plan is unlikely ever to come to fruition. Collections of directory entries... are considered valuable or even confidential by those owning the lists and are not likely to be released to the world in the form of an X.500 directory sub-tree.\" and that \"The X.500 idea of a distinguished name (a single, globally unique name that everyone could use when referring to an entity) is also not likely to occur.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61367", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61367", "title": "Kent (disambiguation)", "text": "Kent is a county in South East England.\nKent may also refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61368", "revid": "49557139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61368", "title": "Ohio County, West Virginia", "text": "County in West Virginia, United States\nOhio County is a county located in the Northern Panhandle of the U.S. state of West Virginia, and forms part of the Wheeling metropolitan area. As of the 2020 census, the population was 42,425. Its county seat is Wheeling. The county was formed in 1776 from the District of West Augusta, Virginia. It was named for the Ohio River, which forms its western boundary with the state of Ohio. West Liberty (formerly Black's Cabin) was designated as the county seat in 1777, serving to 1797.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.9%) is water. It is the third-smallest county in West Virginia by area. The highest point of elevation in Ohio County is approximately and located about southwest of West Alexander, Pennsylvania.\nThe county is drained by Wheeling and other small creeks.\nWhen Ohio County was formed in 1776, its area was much larger totaling and included portions of what is now Washington and Greene counties in Pennsylvania. The formation of the Mason\u2013Dixon line and resolution of border disputes between Pennsylvania and Virginia began the first in a long series of reductions in the county's size.\nIn 1863, West Virginia's counties were divided into civil townships, with the intention of encouraging local government. This proved impractical in the heavily rural state, and in 1872 the townships were converted into magisterial districts. Ohio County was divided into five districts: Center, Clay, Liberty, Madison, Richland, Ritchie, Triadelphia, Union, Washington, and Webster. Centre, Clay, Madison, Union, and Webster Districts all lay within the city of Wheeling, as did part of Washington District.\nBy 1880, part of Ritchie District had also been subsumed by Wheeling. In the 1970s, the ten historic magisterial districts were consolidated into five new districts: Liberty Triadelphia; Madison, Union Clay, Washington District; Titchie Webster Center District, and Triadelphia. These were further consolidated in the 1980s to form District 1, District 2, and District 3.\nAdjacent counties.\nOhio County is one of four counties in the United States to border a state with which it shares the same name (the other three counties are Nevada County, California; Texas County, Oklahoma; and Delaware County, Pennsylvania).\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 42,425 people and 18,132 households residing in the county. There were 21,128 housing units in Ohio County. The racial makeup of the county was 92.5% White, 3.8% African American, 0.8% Asian, 0.3% Native American, and 2.6% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 1.7% of the population.\nThere were 18,132 households, of which 41.6% were married couples living together, 31.8% had a female householder with no spouse present, 20.8% had a male householder with no spouse present. The average household and family size was 2.86. The median age in the county was 42.8 years with 19.7% of the population under 18. The median income for a household was $57,867 and the poverty rate was 15.7%.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 44,443 people, 18,914 households, and 11,181 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 21,172 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 93.2% white, 3.7% black or African American, 0.8% Asian, 0.1% American Indian, 0.2% from other races, and 1.9% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 0.8% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 34.0% were German, 19.1% were Irish, 14.4% were English, 8.5% were Italian, 7.2% were Polish, and 5.7% were American.\nOf the 18,914 households, 24.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.4% were married couples living together, 11.7% had a female householder with no husband present, 40.9% were non-families, and 35.3% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.21 and the average family size was 2.86. The median age was 43.5 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $39,669 and the median income for a family was $54,909. Males had a median income of $42,213 versus $28,211 for females. The per capita income for the county was $23,950. About 11.9% of families and 15.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 25.2% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those age 65 or over.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 47,427 people, 19,733 households, and 12,155 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 22,166 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 94.50% White, 3.57% Black or African American, 0.09% Native American, 0.78% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.13% from other races, and 0.91% from two or more races. 0.50% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 27.0% were of German, 13.7% Irish, 10.4% English, 8.4% Italian, 8.3% American and 6.7% Polish ancestry.\nThere were 19,733 households, out of which 25.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.30% were married couples living together, 11.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.40% were non-families. 33.70% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.27 and the average family size was 2.91.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 21.30% under the age of 18, 10.50% from 18 to 24, 25.10% from 25 to 44, 24.40% from 45 to 64, and 18.80% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 87.80 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.00 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $30,836, and the median income for a family was $41,261. Males had a median income of $31,132 versus $21,978 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,734. About 11.50% of families and 15.80% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.10% of those under age 18 and 10.40% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nOhio County is governed by a three-member county commission. The three county commissioners are elected from single-member magisterial districts and serve six-year terms, staggered so that one seat is up for election every even year. The County Commission annually chooses its own President. The Ohio County Commissioners are Commission President Randy Wharton, Zachary Abraham, and Don Nickerson. The county commission typically appoints a county administrator to oversee the daily executive duties for the commission. The current county administrator is Randy Russell. In addition to the three members of the county commission, other elected officials include a county clerk, currently Michael E. Kelly, and a county assessor, currently Tiffany Hoffmann.\nOhio County is part of the West Virginia's First Judicial Circuit, which also includes nearby Hancock and Brooke counties. In West Virginia, circuit judges are elected in non-partisan elections to eight-year terms. The current judges of the First Judicial Circuit are Jason A. Cuomo, Michael J. Olejasz, David Sims, and Ronald E. Wilson. The clerk of the circuit court is elected in a partisan election and serves a six-year term. The current clerk of the First Judicial Circuit in Ohio County is Brenda Miller. Ohio County is part of the First Family Court Circuit of West Virginia, which covers the same three territories as the First Judicial Circuit. In West Virginia, Family Court judges have been elected to eight-year terms since 2008. The current judges of the First Family Circuit are Joyce D. Chernenko and Heather Wood.\nMagistrates are elected in non-partisan elections serving four-year terms. Vacancies occurring in unexpired terms can be filled by a respective Circuit Court judge. Unlike Circuit Court and Family Court judges, magistrates are not required to be attorneys. Ohio County currently has four magistrates: Charles W. Murphy, Patricia L. Murphy, Joseph E. Roxby, and Janine L. Varner.\nIn West Virginia, prosecuting attorneys in each county are elected in partisan elections to four-year terms, currently Scott R. Smith. County sheriffs (who also serve \"ex-officio\" as county treasurer) are elected by each county to a four-year term, currently Thomas J. Howard. They are limited to two terms.\nProposed metro government.\nIn 2006, the West Virginia Legislature adopted a new section to the West Virginia code \u2013 Chapter 7A \u2013 which provided for the consolidation of cities, cities with counties, or counties with counties. Interest has been expressed by some Ohio County residents and officials and has become the main political endeavour of a local council of churches called \"Hopeful City\". As of March 2007, no official action has been taken in Ohio County on this matter. Other municipalities in West Virginia are considering consolidation including Beckley-Raleigh County and Fairmont-Marion County. The most significant proposals under this legislation include a consolidation of Wirt County with Wood County and a population consolidation for Kanawha-Putnam-Cabell counties.\nPolitics.\nIn the West Virginia Senate, Ohio County is in the first Senate district, along with Hancock, Brooke, and part of Marshall counties. The district is represented by Laura Wakim Chapman (R-Wheeling) and Ryan Weld (R-Wellsburg).\nIn the West Virginia House of Delegates, parts of Ohio County are represented by the third, fourth, and fifth House of Delegates districts. The third district is represented by Delegate Jimmy Willis (R-Brooke County). The fourth district is represented by Bill Flanigan (R-Wheeling). The fifth district is represented by Delegate Shawn Fluharty (D-Wheeling). All delegates to the state House serve two-year terms.\nIn the United States House of Representatives, Ohio County is part of the West Virginia's 2nd congressional district, which includes nearly all of the northern part of the state. The current Representative is Alex Mooney, a Republican from Charles Town in Jefferson County. West Virginia's two senators, who represent the entire state, are Shelley Moore Capito and Jim Justice, both Republicans. \nAlthough powerfully Unionist during the Civil War, Ohio County politics differs substantially from the two more northerly counties of the Northern Panhandle. The county was a competitive swing county for most of the period between Reconstruction and the end of the twentieth century, voting for the popular vote winner in every election except 1916, 1968 and 1976. Since 2000, like all of West Virginia, its conservative white voters have trended Republican due to a combination of declining unionization and differences with the Democratic Party's liberal views on social issues. The trend in the county has been less extreme than in most counties of the state.\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\nAll public schools within Ohio County operate under the jurisdiction of Ohio County Schools with the consolidated high school housing grades 9\u201312, middle schools housing grades 6\u20138, and elementary schools housing grades K\u20135.\nOhio County Schools has a five-member elected Board of Education http:// (Molly J. Aderholt, Christine N. Carder, David Croft, Sarah C. Koegler, President Zachary T. Abraham, Superintendent Dr. Kimmberly Miller, and an Assistant Superintendent Rick Jones. In addition, the Board of Education has an Attendance Director (Wm. Jeffrey Laird).\nPrivate and parochial schools.\nThe Diocese of Wheeling-Charleston operates several K\u20138 schools and one high school in Ohio County.\nAdditionally, there are two private schools in Ohio County.\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPublic attractions.\nThe Ohio County Fair is held annually in October at Site 1 in Oglebay Park.\nDog races and gaming.\nIn 2007, the West Virginia Legislature adopted https:// which created Chapter 29-22 C of the West Virginia Code and permits county residents where racetracks are located to vote on expansion to table games. Ohio County was the first county in West Virginia to take action concerning the matter when the Ohio County Commission initiated a special election date of June 9 for the referendum. The ballot initiative successfully passed in Ohio County with 66% of the vote. The measure permits Wheeling Island Racetrack and Gaming Center to operate table games such as blackjack and poker. On June 9, Jefferson County voters rejected their ballot measure. On June 30, Hancock County voters approved their ballot measure. Kanawha County has scheduled a special election for August 11. While the West Virginia Family Foundation vowed to challenge the constitutionality of HB 2718, it announced on August 7 that it would not file any appeal on the matter. According to newspaper accounts, the West Virginia Lottery Commission has set November 1, 2007, as the latest date at which table games will begin preliminary operation at Wheeling Island Racetrack and Gaming Center.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61369", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61369", "title": "Rapid Update Cycle", "text": "Weather forecasting system used in the U.S. until 2012\nThe Rapid Update Cycle (RUC) was an American atmospheric prediction system that consisted primarily of a numerical forecast model and an analysis system to initialize the model. The first operational implementation was created in 1994, with 60km resolution and a 3-hour cycle. \nThe RUC was designed to provide accurate short-range (0- to 12-hr, later expanded to 18-hr in 2010) numerical forecast guidance for weather-sensitive users, such as those in the aviation community. Significant weather forecasting problems that occur in the 0- to 12-hr range include severe weather in all seasons (for example, tornadoes, thunderstorms, snow, and ice storms) and hazards to aviation (for example, clear air turbulence, icing, and downbursts). \nThe RUC ran at the highest frequency of any forecast model at the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP), assimilating recent observations to provide very high frequency updates of current conditions and short-range forecasts. This update frequency was only once an hour (the standard interval for ASOS observation reporting), and with computational limitations and the time required to assimilate all of the data, there is approximately a one-hour delay in producing the forecasts. Because of this, it was common practice to use a one-hour forecast from the RUC as a current analysis, as the one-hour forecast would come out only a few minutes before the time it is forecasting for. There is also little possibility for error in a one-hour forecast, meaning that the RUC's one-hour forecast would not usually vary greatly from the actual state of the atmosphere at that particular point in time.\nThe RUC was decommissioned on May 1, 2012; it was replaced by the Rapid Refresh (RR or RAP) model, based on the WRF. Like the RUC, the Rapid Refresh model also runs hourly out to 18 hours on a grid spacing, but also covers a wider area. An experimental High Resolution Rapid Refresh (HRRR) ran by the Earth System Research Laboratories (ESRL) offers resolution at 15-minute intervals. A backup version of the RUC continued to run until that too was stopped on May 15, 2013, thus formally bringing an end to the model.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61370", "revid": "422817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61370", "title": "Barbour County, West Virginia", "text": "County in West Virginia, United States\nBarbour County is a county in north central West Virginia, United States. At the 2020 census, the population was 15,465. The county seat is Philippi, which was chartered in 1844. Both county and city were named for Philip P. Barbour (1783\u20131841), a U.S. Congressman from Virginia and Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. The county was formed in 1843 when the region was still part of the state of Virginia. In 1871, a small part of Barbour County was transferred to Tucker County, West Virginia.\nThe Battle of Philippi, also known as the \"Philippi Races\", was fought in Barbour County on June 3, 1861. Although a minor action, it is generally considered the first land engagement of the American Civil War.\nFor 114 years (1909-2023), Barbour County was home to Alderson-Broaddus College (later Alderson Broaddus University), an American Baptist institution. Its four-year Physician Assistant (PA) baccalaureate program was the first such anywhere.\nHistory.\nSettlement and formation.\nThe first white settlement in present-day Barbour County was established in 1780 by Richard Talbott \u2013 along with his brother Cotteral and sister Charity \u2013 about downriver from the future site of Philippi. At this time the region was still a part of Monongalia County, Virginia. The region had had no permanent Indian settlements and so conflicts with Native Americans were relatively infrequent in the early days. Nevertheless, the Talbotts were obliged to leave their homestead several times for safety and twice found it necessary to retreat back east of the Alleghenies, returning each time. No member of this eventually large family was ever killed by Indian attacks.\nOver time, parts of the future Barbour County were included in the newly created Harrison (1784), Randolph (1787), and Lewis (1816) Counties. Barbour County itself was created in 1843 and named for the late Virginia politician and jurist Philip P. Barbour (1783\u20131841). (Barbour had served as a U.S. Congressman from Virginia, Speaker of the House, and Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court.) The settlement of Philippi \u2013 formerly \"Anglin's Ford\" and \"Booth's Ferry\" \u2013 was platted, named, and made the county seat in the same year; it was chartered in 1844. By the 1850s, when a major covered bridge was constructed at Philippi to service travellers on the Beverly-Fairmont Turnpike, the county's population was approaching 10,000 people.\nThe first newspaper in the county was the \"Barbour Jeffersonian\", published starting in August 1857 and running only to about June 1861. It was put out by Thompson Surghnor (1820-1864).\nCivil War.\nIn April 1861, an Ordinance of Secession from the United States of America was approved throughout the state of Virginia in a referendum. Delegates from 25 western counties, however, assembled at Wheeling on 13 May for the first of a two meetings (see Wheeling Convention) called to repeal the Ordinance. The delegates from Barbour County for the first convention were Spencer Dayton, John H. Shuttleworth, and E.H. Manafee. Barbour County had voted in favor of Virginia's secession, though, and a palmetto secession flag had been flying above the courthouse since January, 1861.\nOn 3 June 1861, Philippi was the scene of one of the first battles of the American Civil War. The battle was later lampooned as the \"Philippi Races\" because of the hurried retreat by the Confederate troops encamped in the town. (The skirmish is reenacted every June during the town's \"Blue and Gray Reunion\".) At daylight on June 3, two columns of Union forces under the command of Col. Benjamin Franklin Kelley and Col. Ebenezer Dumont, with perhaps 3,000 men, arrived from Grafton and attacked about 800 poorly armed Confederate recruits under the command of Col. George A. Porterfield. The Union troops had marched all night through a heavy rain storm to arrive just before daylight. The surprise attack awakened the sleeping Confederates. After firing a few shots at the advancing Union troops, the Southerners broke lines and began running frantically to the south, some still in their bed clothes.\nThe Union victory in a relatively bloodless battle propelled the young Major General George B. McClellan into the national spotlight, and he would soon be given command of all Union armies. The battle also inspired more vocal protests in the Western part of Virginia against secession. On 11 June, the second Wheeling Convention met in that city and Barbour County was again represented by Dayton and Shuttleworth, who were this time joined by N.H. Taft. The Convention nullified the Virginia Ordinance of Secession and named Francis H. Pierpont governor. These events would eventually result in the separate statehood of West Virginia.\nLater history.\nThe economy and infrastructure in Barbour grew steadily, but slowly, through the late 19th century. Although the first railroad had reached nearby Grafton in 1852, a narrow-gauge railroad was not laid through the county until the early 1880s; a standard gauge line followed in the 1890s.\nIn 1990, private developers offered Barbour County citizens $4M to $6M annually in host fees to accept out-of-state garbage into a County landfill over the following three decades. Up to 200,000 tons of garbage per month would be delivered. (At the time, the county's annual budget was only about $1M.) County voters rejected the offer.\nIn 2023, Barbour County lost its major employer when Alderson-Broaddus University's board of trustees voted to close the institution some 152 years after its founding.\nRegistered Historic Places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.5%) is water.\nBarbour County is situated on the Allegheny Plateau at the western edge of the Allegheny Mountains (represented by Laurel Mountain at the county's eastern boundary). Most of the county is drained by the Tygart Valley River which traverses it from south to north and on which its three largest settlements \u2013 Philippi, Belington, and Junior \u2013 are sited. Tributaries of the Tygart in the County include Teter Creek, Laurel Creek, Hacker's Creek, the Buckhannon River and the West Fork River. A portion of the County in the west drains into the Middle Fork River, principally through Elk Creek. Audra State Park \u2013 the county's only state park \u2013 is situated on the Middle Fork in the southwest corner. Teter Creek Lake Wildlife Management Area \u2013 the county's only WMA \u2013 is located on that stream and lake in the eastern portion. All of the mentioned streams are part of the greater Monongahela River watershed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 15,465 people and 5,813 households residing in the county. There were 7,114 housing units in Barbour. The racial makeup of the county was 93.5% White, 1.8% African American, 0.2% Asian, 0.2% Native American, 0.3% from other races, and 4% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 1.2% of the population.\nOf the 5,813 households, 47.5% were married couples living together, 25.5% had a female householder with no spouse present, 18.4% had a male householder with no spouse present. The average household and family size was 3.22. The median age in the county was 42.7 years with 20.5% of the population under 18. The median income for a household was $42,260 and the poverty rate was 20.8%.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 16,589 people, 6,548 households, and 4,643 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 7,849 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 96.8% white, 0.7% black or African American, 0.6% American Indian, 0.2% Asian, 0.2% from other races, and 1.5% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 0.6% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 23.4% were German, 22.3% were American, 13.6% were Irish, and 11.0% were English.\nOf the 6,548 households, 30.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.8% were married couples living together, 10.9% had a female householder with no husband present, 29.1% were non-families, and 24.2% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 2.89. The median age was 41.5 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $31,212 and the median income for a family was $39,434. Males had a median income of $34,573 versus $21,797 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,304. About 14.3% of families and 18.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 27.5% of those under age 18 and 13.6% of those age 65 or over.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 15,557 people, 6,123 households, and 4,365 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 7,348 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.36% White, 0.49% Black or African American, 0.71% Native American, 0.26% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.12% from other races, and 1.03% from two or more races. 0.47% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. In addition, the area has a significant population of racially mixed (though often light-skinned and blue-eyed) people, known locally as 'the Chestnut Ridge people', whose specific origins are uncertain. They are categorized by many scholars among the Melungeons found scattered throughout Appalachia.\nThere were 6,123 households, out of which 30.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.20% were married couples living together, 10.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.70% were non-families. 25.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 2.94.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 23.00% under the age of 18, 9.40% from 18 to 24, 26.80% from 25 to 44, 25.20% from 45 to 64, and 15.60% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 96.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.00 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $24,729, and the median income for a family was $29,722. Males had a median income of $24,861 versus $17,433 for females. The per capita income for the county was $12,440. 22.60% of the population and 18.40% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 32.00% of those under the age of 18 and 16.70% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.\nPolitics.\nFederal politics.\nBarbour County lies within West Virginia's 2nd congressional district. The current representative of the district is Alex Mooney (R).\nBarbour County was generally split for most of the twentieth century, though it tended to vote more for Democrats rather than Republicans. This is due to the county's split position in the American Civil War between Unionists and Secessionists. Since the 2000 presidential election, Barbour County has followed the trend with the rest of the state towards the Republicans.\nEconomy.\nMajor employment in Barbour County is provided by health care and social service sectors, retail, education, accommodation and food services, logging and wood product manufacturing, trucking and construction. The largest employers are Alderson Broaddus University and Broaddus Hospital.\nBituminous coal mining has been significant in Barbour; seven times as much tonnage has been produced from underground as by surface mining. Natural gas and oil wells provide a modest amount of employment. Wholesale lumber production (wood and wood products) is also present. (The county is a member of the West Virginia Hardwood Alliance Zone.) There is notable production of eggs and horse raising, but the major agricultural products are livestock, forage, dairy foods and orchard fruits.\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMinor civil divisions.\nIn 1863, West Virginia's counties were divided into civil townships, with the intention of encouraging local government. This proved impractical in the heavily rural state, and in 1872 the townships were converted into magisterial districts. Barbour County's original magisterial districts were Barker, Cove, Elk, Glade, Philippi, Pleasant, and Union. Between 1880 and 1890, part of Barker District was split off to form Valley District. These eight districts continued until the 1970s, when they were consolidated into three districts: North, South, and West.\nThe names and boundaries of Barbour county's historic magisterial districts were preserved as assessment and tax districts, alongside the corporations of Belington, Junior, and Philippi. The City of Philippi is divided into four wards, all of which are in Philippi District. The first and second wards of Belington are in Valley District, while the second and third ward are in Barker District.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61371", "revid": "50208315", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61371", "title": "Paris (disambiguation)", "text": "Paris is the capital of France, which may consist of :\nParis may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61373", "revid": "37569883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61373", "title": "Golden ratio base", "text": "Positional numeral system\nGolden ratio base is a non-integer positional numeral system that uses the golden ratio (the irrational number formula_1\u00a0\u2248\u00a01.61803399 symbolized by the Greek letter \u03c6) as its base. It is sometimes referred to as base-\u03c6, golden mean base, phi-base, or, colloquially, phinary. Any non-negative real number can be represented as a base-\u03c6 numeral using only the digits 0 and 1, and avoiding the digit sequence \"11\"\u00a0\u2013 this is called a \"standard form\". A base-\u03c6 numeral that includes the digit sequence \"11\" can always be rewritten in standard form, using the algebraic properties of the base \u03c6\u00a0\u2014 most notably that \u03c6\"n\"\u00a0+\u00a0\u03c6\"n\" \u2212 1\u00a0=\u00a0\u03c6\"n\" + 1. For instance, 11\u03c6\u00a0= 100\u03c6.\nDespite using an irrational number base, when using standard form, all non-negative integers have a unique representation as a terminating (finite) base-\u03c6 expansion. The set of numbers which possess a finite base-\u03c6 representation is the ring Z[formula_1]; it plays the same role in this numeral systems as dyadic rationals play in binary numbers, providing a possibility to multiply.\nOther numbers have standard representations in base-\u03c6, with rational numbers having recurring representations. These representations are unique, except that numbers with a terminating expansion also have a non-terminating expansion. For example, 1 = 0.1010101\u2026 in base-\u03c6 just as 1\u00a0=\u00a00.99999\u2026 in decimal.\nWriting golden ratio base numbers in standard form.\nIn the following example of conversion from non-standard to standard form, the notation 1 is used to represent the signed digit \u22121.\n211.01\u03c6 is not a standard base-\u03c6 numeral, since it contains a \"11\" and additionally a \"2\" and a \"1\" = \u22121, which are not \"0\" or \"1\".\nTo put a numeral in standard form, we may use the following substitutions: formula_3, formula_4, formula_5, formula_6. The substitutions may be applied in any order we like, as the result will be the same. Below, the substitutions applied to the number on the previous line are on the right, the resulting number on the left.\nformula_7\nAny positive number with a non-standard terminating base-\u03c6 representation can be uniquely standardized in this manner. If we get to a point where all digits are \"0\" or \"1\", except for the first digit being negative, then the number is negative. (The exception to this is when the first digit is negative one and the next two digits are one, like 1111.001=1.001.) This can be converted to the negative of a base-\u03c6 representation by negating every digit, standardizing the result, and then marking it as negative. For example, use a minus sign, or some other significance to denote negative numbers.\nRepresenting integers as golden ratio base numbers.\nWe can either consider our integer to be the (only) digit of a nonstandard base-\u03c6 numeral, and standardize it, or do the following:\n1 \u00d7 1 = 1, \u03c6 \u00d7 \u03c6 = 1 + \u03c6 and = \u22121 + \u03c6. Therefore, we can compute\n (\"a\" + \"b\"\u03c6) + (\"c\" + \"d\"\u03c6) = ((\"a\" + \"c\") + (\"b\" + \"d\")\u03c6),\n (\"a\" + \"b\"\u03c6) \u2212 (\"c\" + \"d\"\u03c6) = ((\"a\" \u2212 \"c\") + (\"b\" \u2212 \"d\")\u03c6)\nand\n (\"a\" + \"b\"\u03c6) \u00d7 (\"c\" + \"d\"\u03c6) = ((\"ac\" + \"bd\") + (\"ad\" + \"bc\" + \"bd\")\u03c6).\nSo, using integer values only, we can add, subtract and multiply numbers of the form (\"a\" + \"b\"\u03c6), and even represent positive and negative integer powers of \u03c6.\n(\"a\" + \"b\"\u03c6) &gt; (\"c\" + \"d\"\u03c6) if and only if 2(\"a\" \u2212 \"c\") \u2212 (\"d\" \u2212 \"b\") &gt; (\"d\" \u2212 \"b\") \u00d7 \u221a5. If one side is negative, the other positive, the comparison is trivial. Otherwise, square both sides, to get an integer comparison, reversing the comparison direction if both sides were negative. On squaring both sides, the formula_8 is replaced with the integer 5.\nSo, using integer values only, we can also compare numbers of the form (\"a\" + \"b\"\u03c6).\nThe above procedure will never result in the sequence \"11\", since 11\u03c6 = 100\u03c6, so getting a \"11\" would mean we missed a \"1\" prior to the sequence \"11\".\nStart, e.g., with integer = 5, with the result so far being ...00000.00000...\u03c6\nHighest power of \u03c6 \u2264 5 is \u03c63 = 1 + 2\u03c6 \u2248 4.236067977\nSubtracting this from 5, we have 5 \u2212 (1 + 2\u03c6) = 4 \u2212 2\u03c6 \u2248 0.763932023..., the result so far being 1000.00000...\u03c6\nHighest power of \u03c6 \u2264 4 \u2212 2\u03c6 \u2248 0.763932023... is \u03c6\u22121 = \u22121 + 1\u03c6 \u2248 0.618033989...\nSubtracting this from 4 \u2212 2\u03c6 \u2248 0.763932023..., we have 4 \u2212 2\u03c6 \u2212 (\u22121 + 1\u03c6) = 5 \u2212 3\u03c6 \u2248 0.145898034..., the result so far being 1000.10000...\u03c6\nHighest power of \u03c6 \u2264 5 \u2212 3\u03c6 \u2248 0.145898034... is \u03c6\u22124 = 5 \u2212 3\u03c6 \u2248 0.145898034...\nSubtracting this from 5 \u2212 3\u03c6 \u2248 0.145898034..., we have 5 \u2212 3\u03c6 \u2212 (5 \u2212 3\u03c6) = 0 + 0\u03c6 = 0, with the final result being 1000.1001\u03c6.\nNon-uniqueness.\nJust as with any base-n system, numbers with a terminating representation have an alternative recurring representation. In base-10, this relies on the observation that 0.999... = 1. In base-\u03c6, the numeral 0.1010101... can be seen to be equal to 1 in several ways:\nformula_9\nThis non-uniqueness is a feature of the numeration system, since both 1.0000 and 0.101010... are in standard form.\nIn general, the final 1 of any number in base-\u03c6 can be replaced with a recurring 01 without changing the value of that number.\nRepresenting rational numbers as golden ratio base numbers.\nEvery non-negative rational number can be represented as a recurring base-\u03c6 expansion, as can any non-negative element of the field Q[\u221a5] = Q + \u221a5Q, the field generated by the rational numbers and formula_8. Conversely any recurring (or terminating) base-\u03c6 expansion is a non-negative element of Q[\u221a5]. For recurring decimals, the recurring part has been overlined:\nThe justification that a rational gives a recurring expansion is analogous to the equivalent proof for a base-\"n\" numeration system (\"n\" = 2,3,4...). Essentially in base-\u03c6 long division there are only a finite number of possible remainders, and so once there must be a recurring pattern. For example, with = = long division looks like this (note that base-\u03c6 subtraction may be hard to follow at first):\nThe converse is also true, in that a number with a recurring base-\u03c6; representation is an element of the field Q[\u221a5]. This follows from the observation that a recurring representation with period k involves a geometric series with ratio \u03c6\u2212k, which will sum to an element of Q[\u221a5].\nRepresenting irrational numbers of note as golden ratio base numbers.\nThe base-\u03c6 representations of some interesting numbers:\nAddition, subtraction, and multiplication.\nIt is possible to adapt all the standard algorithms of base-10 arithmetic to base-\u03c6 arithmetic. There are two approaches to this:\nCalculate, then convert to standard form.\nFor addition of two base-\u03c6 numbers, add each pair of digits, without carry, and then convert the numeral to standard form. For subtraction, subtract each pair of digits without borrow (borrow is a negative amount of carry), and then convert the numeral to standard form. For multiplication, multiply in the typical base-10 manner, without carry, then convert the numeral to standard form.\nFor example,\nAvoid digits other than 0 and 1.\nA more \"native\" approach is to avoid having to add digits 1 + 1 or to subtract 0 \u2212 1. This is done by reorganising the operands into nonstandard form so that these combinations do not occur. For example,\nThe subtraction seen here uses a modified form of the standard \"trading\" algorithm for subtraction.\nDivision.\nNo non-integer rational number can be represented as a finite base-\u03c6 number. In other words, all finitely representable base-\u03c6 numbers are either integers or (more likely) an irrational in a quadratic field Q[\u221a5]. Due to long division having only a finite number of possible remainders, a division of two integers (or other numbers with finite base-\u03c6 representation) will have a recurring expansion, as demonstrated above.\nRelationship with Fibonacci coding.\nFibonacci coding is a closely related numeration system used for integers. In this system, only digits 0 and 1 are used and the place values of the digits are the Fibonacci numbers. As with base-\u03c6, the digit sequence \"11\" is avoided by rearranging to a standard form, using the Fibonacci recurrence relation \"F\"\"k\"+1 = \"F\"\"k\" + \"F\"\"k\"\u22121. For example,\n30 = 1\u00d721 + 0\u00d713 + 1\u00d78 + 0\u00d75 + 0\u00d73 + 0\u00d72 + 1\u00d71 + 0\u00d71 = 10100010fib.\nPractical usage.\nIt is possible to mix base-\u03c6 arithmetic with Fibonacci integer sequences. The sum of numbers in a General Fibonacci integer sequence that correspond with the nonzero digits in the base-\u03c6 number, is the multiplication of the base-\u03c6 number and the element at the zero-position in the sequence. For example:"}
{"id": "61374", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61374", "title": "List of cities and things named Rome", "text": ""}
{"id": "61376", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61376", "title": "Correa (plant)", "text": "Genus of flowering plants\nCorrea is a genus of eleven species of flowering plants in the family Rutaceae that are endemic to Australia. Plants in the genus \"Correa\" are shrubs to small trees with simple leaves arranged in opposite pairs, bisexual flowers with four sepals, four petals usually fused for most of their length and eight stamens.\nDescription.\nPlants in the genus \"Correa\" are shrubs to small trees with simple leaves arranged in opposite pairs. The flowers are bisexual and are arranged in cymes in leaf axils or on the ends of branchlets. The four sepals are fused, at least at the base, forming a cup-shaped calyx. The four petals are usually fused for most of their length to form a tubular corolla and the eight stamens are free from each other. There are four carpels fused at the base, the four styles are fused and the stigma is similar to the style. The follicles contain up to two dull brown seed that are released explosively.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus \"Correa\" was first formally described in 1798 by Henry Cranke Andrews in \"The Botanist's Repository for New, and Rare Plants\" and the first species he described was \"Correa alba\". The genus is named after the Portuguese botanist Jos\u00e9 Correia da Serra (1750\u20131823), known as Abb\u00e9 Correa.\nSpecies list.\nThe following is a list of species, subspecies and varieties of \"Correa\" accepted by the Australian Plant Census as at July 2020:\nUse in horticulture.\nMany \"Correa\" hybrids are grown in Australian gardens. They are generally easy to grow. \"Correa alba\" and \"C. glabra\" varieties are the hardiest withstanding heavy frost and severe droughts. They can be grown in either full sun or a partly shaded spot in the garden. \"Correa glabra\" varieties have fragrant leaves. \"Correa lawrenceana\" is the largest of the correas. These need to be grown in the shade and do best in an understorey habitat. They are highly attractive to birds for both nectar and nest sites and are ideally planted in a thicket. \"Correa pulchella\" varieties produce the most beautiful coloured bells ranging from pale pink to deep orange to carmine. They need to be grown in part shade and watered regularly. \"Correa reflexa\" varieties range in colour from green to deep red. They also need to be grown in a partly shaded position and watered regularly. Some \"Correa\" species, such as \"C. eburnea\" and \"C. calycina\", are endangered and difficult to obtain in the nursery trade.\nThere are also hundreds of named cultivars, many of which have been registered with the Australian Cultivar Registration Authority (http://).\nIn cultivation in the UK the following species and cultivars have received the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit:-\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n\"Correas: Australian Plants for Waterwise Gardens\" Maria Hitchcock Rosenberg 2010"}
{"id": "61377", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61377", "title": "List of places and things named London", "text": ""}
{"id": "61379", "revid": "91689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61379", "title": "ObjectPAL", "text": "ObjectPAL is short for Object-Oriented Paradox Application Language, which is the programming language used by the Borland Paradox database application (now owned by Corel).\nParadox, now in its 11th version, is a constituent of Corel's Word Perfect X3 office suite, for 32-bit Microsoft Windows. The language is tightly-bound to the application's forms, and provides a very rapid and robust development environment for creating database applications for Windows. ObjectPAL is not a full free-standing object-oriented language. It belongs to the family of languages inspired by Hypercard, with influences from PAL (wherever functionality could be kept the same), Smalltalk, and Garnet (a UI language created by Brad Myers). While its objects do encapsulate source code, there is no support for polymorphism, and only a very limited inheritance concept, which is wedded to objects on a form which can be controlled by code placed on a higher object in a form's object hierarchy. However, for what it is, ObjectPAL provides a wideranging and versatile language for creating Paradox applications. The syntax and structure of the language resembles Visual Basic, but knowing Visual Basic would only help someone new to ObjectPAL in the sense that any other programming skill would be transferable to ObjectPAL. ObjectPAL was the successor to PAL, which was the Paradox for DOS programming language. With the advent of Paradox for Windows 1.0 in 1993, which was then owned by Borland Corporation, ObjectPAL was born. Version 1.0 was quickly succeeded by version 4.5 that same year.\nIt can be used as such as a web server scripting language when combined with the Corel Web Server Control OCX, which implements a server API similar to the CGI, and its standalone console, the Corel Web Server.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61385", "revid": "51002622", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61385", "title": "Jacksonville (disambiguation)", "text": "Jacksonville is the largest city in the U.S. state of Florida.\nJacksonville may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61386", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61386", "title": "John Canaparius", "text": "German Camaldolese monk and chronologist\nJohn Canaparius, O.S.B. Cam., (), was a German Camaldolese monk who became the prior of the Monastery of Santi Bonifacio ed Alessio in Rome. It had been long assumed that in the year 999 he wrote the first \"Vita sancti Adalberti episcopi Pragensis\", or \"Life of St. Adalbert of Prague\", another member of that monastery, just two years after Adalbert's death.\nAdalbert was sent by Pope Gregory V to convert the pagan Old Prussians to Christianity and had come to Prussia, apparently taking the route along the Vistula River to reach the Baltic Sea at \u201eurbem Gyddanyzc\u201c., which is identified with the later Gda\u0144sk (Danzig). Then a small trading and fishing settlement with wooden buildings.\nIt is, however, now assumed by Johannes Fried, that the 'Vita' was not written by Canaparius, but was written down in Li\u00e8ge, with the oldest traceable version having been at the imperial Adalbert shrine at Aachen. It was only recently recovered at the Marienstift, and is used to reconstruct the archetype of the \"Vita\". Notger of Li\u00e8ge, a hagiographer himself, apparently had knowledge of the earlier handwritten \"Vita\" from Aachen. The imperial court at Aachen had in 997 assembled immediately upon receiving word of Adalbert's death and had thereupon planned the upcoming events.\nAnother famous biographer of Adalbert was St. Bruno of Querfurt who wrote his hagiography in 1001\u20131004.\nNikolaus von Jeroschin, a priest of the Teutonic Order, translated the \"Vita Sancti Adalberti\" into Middle High German in the 14th century.\nEditions in Latin.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61388", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61388", "title": "Deoxyribose", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nDeoxyribose, or more precisely 2-deoxyribose, is a monosaccharide with idealized formula H\u2212(C=O)\u2212(CH2)\u2212(CHOH)3\u2212H. Its name indicates that it is a deoxy sugar, meaning that it is derived from the sugar ribose by loss of a hydroxy group. Discovered in 1929 by Phoebus Levene, deoxyribose is most notable for its presence in DNA. Since the pentose sugars arabinose and ribose only differ by the stereochemistry at C2\u2032, 2-deoxyribose and 2-deoxyarabinose are equivalent, although the latter term is rarely used because ribose, not arabinose, is the precursor to deoxyribose.\nStructure.\nSeveral isomers exist with the formula H\u2212(C=O)\u2212(CH2)\u2212(CHOH)3\u2212H, but in deoxyribose all the hydroxyl groups are on the same side in the Fischer projection. The term \"2-deoxyribose\" may refer to either of two enantiomers: the biologically important d-2-deoxyribose and to the rarely encountered mirror image l-2-deoxyribose. d-2-deoxyribose is a precursor to the nucleic acid DNA. 2-deoxyribose is an aldopentose, that is, a monosaccharide with five carbon atoms and having an aldehyde functional group.\nIn aqueous solution, deoxyribose primarily exists as a mixture of three structures: the linear form H\u2212(C=O)\u2212(CH2)\u2212(CHOH)3\u2212H and two ring forms, deoxyribofuranose (\"C3\u2032-endo\"), with a five-membered ring, and deoxyribopyranose (\"C2\u2032-endo\"), with a six-membered ring. The latter form is predominant (whereas the C3\u2032-endo form is favored for ribose). \nBiological importance.\nAs a component of DNA, 2-deoxyribose derivatives have an important role in biology. The DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecule, which is the main repository of genetic information in life, consists of a long chain of deoxyribose-containing units called nucleotides, linked via phosphate groups. In the standard nucleic acid nomenclature, a DNA nucleotide consists of a deoxyribose molecule with an organic base (usually adenine, thymine, guanine or cytosine) attached to the 1\u2032 ribose carbon. The 5\u2032 hydroxyl of each deoxyribose unit is replaced by a phosphate (forming a nucleotide) that is attached to the 3\u2032 carbon of the deoxyribose in the preceding unit. \nThe absence of the 2\u2032 hydroxyl group in deoxyribose is apparently responsible for the increased mechanical flexibility of DNA compared to RNA, which allows it to assume the double-helix conformation, and also (in the eukaryotes) to be compactly coiled within the small cell nucleus. The double-stranded DNA molecules are also typically much longer than RNA molecules. The backbone of RNA and DNA are structurally similar, but RNA is single stranded, and made from ribose as opposed to deoxyribose.\nOther biologically important derivatives of deoxyribose include mono-, di-, and triphosphates, as well as 3\u2032-5\u2032 cyclic monophosphates.\nBiosynthesis.\nDeoxyribose is generated from ribose 5-phosphate by enzymes called ribonucleotide reductases. These enzymes catalyse the deoxygenation process.\nAngiogenesis.\nIn one study, deoxyribose was shown to have pro-angiogenic properties when applied topically in a gel to wounds in rats. In addition, this topical gel also increased Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF), which has been implicated in hair growth. This could potentially lead to future products to treat hair loss in humans.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61392", "revid": "31696229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61392", "title": "1962 FIFA World Cup", "text": "Association football tournament in Chile\nInternational football competition\nThe 1962 FIFA World Cup was the 7th edition of the FIFA World Cup, the quadrennial international football championship for senior men's national teams. It was held from 30 May to 17 June 1962 in Chile. The qualification rounds took place between August 1960 and December 1961, with 56 teams entering from six confederations, and fourteen qualifying for the finals tournament alongside Chile, the hosts, and Brazil, the defending champions.\nBrazil successfully defended their World Cup title, defeating Czechoslovakia 3\u20131 in the final in the Chilean capital Santiago. They became the second team, after Italy in 1934 and 1938, to win the World Cup twice consecutively; no team has since achieved the feat. Host nation Chile finished third, defeating Yugoslavia 1\u20130 in the third-place play-off.\nThe tournament was marred by violence between players on the pitch and a toxic atmosphere; it included the first-round match between Chile and Italy (2\u20130), which became known as the Battle of Santiago, one of a number of violent matches played throughout the tournament. It was the first World Cup that used goal average as a means of separating teams with the same number of points. It was also the first World Cup in which the average number of goals per match was less than three (2.78); this has been repeated at every World Cup since.\nHost selection.\nAfter Europe hosted two consecutive World Cups, the American federations demanded the 1962 edition must be held in South America or they would stage a complete boycott of the tournament, similar to 1938. Argentina, after previously failed candidacies, was the favourite. Magallanes' chairman, Ernesto Alvear, attended a FIFA Congress held in Helsinki while the Finnish city was hosting the 1952 Summer Olympics. He considered that Chile was able to organise the World Cup. Several sources also say that FIFA did not want Argentina to run alone, requesting the participation of Chile as almost symbolic. Chile registered its candidacy in 1954 alongside Argentina and West Germany, the latter withdrawing at the request of FIFA.\nChile's football federation committee, led by Carlos Dittborn and Juan Pinto Dur\u00e1n, toured many countries convincing various football associations about the country's ability to organise the tournament in comparison to Argentina's superior sports infrastructure and prestige. The FIFA Congress met in Lisbon, Portugal on 10 June 1956. That day, Raul Colombo, representing Argentina's candidacy, ended his speech with the phrase \"We can start the World Cup tomorrow. We have it all.\" The next day, Dittborn presented four arguments that supported Chile's candidacy: Chile's continued participations at FIFA-organised conferences and tournaments, sports climate, tolerance of race and creed and political and institutional stability of the country. In addition, Dittborn invoked Article 2 of the FIFA statutes that addressed the tournament's role in promoting the sport in countries deemed \"underdeveloped\". In a counter-point to Colombo's claim that \"We have it all\" Dittborn coined the phrase \"Because we have nothing, we want to do it all\" () around the fifteenth minute of his speech. Chile won 32 votes to Argentina's 10. Fourteen members abstained from voting.\nQualification.\n57 teams entered the 1962 World Cup (due to rejected entries and withdrawals, 52 teams eventually participated in the qualifying stages). Chile as host nation and Brazil as reigning World Cup champions were granted automatic qualification, with the remaining 14 finals places divided among the continental confederations.\nEight places were contested by UEFA teams (Europe) and three by CONMEBOL teams (South America). CAF teams (Africa), AFC teams (Asia), NAFC teams (North America), and CCCF teams (Central America and Caribbean) contested three play-offs slots. The three winners would then face a European or South American team for entry into the World Cup. The 1962 tournament was the last one for which only nations from Europe or the Americas qualified.\nTwo teams qualified for the first time ever: Colombia and Bulgaria.\nAustria withdrew during the qualification tournament due to financial problems.\nItaly, Switzerland and Uruguay all qualified for the first time since 1954, and Spain for the first time since 1950.\nList of qualified teams.\nThe following 16 teams qualified for the final tournament.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVenues.\nOriginally, eight stadiums were selected to host the World Cup matches in eight cities: Santiago, Vi\u00f1a del Mar, Rancagua, Arica, Talca, Concepci\u00f3n, Talcahuano and Valdivia.\nThe Valdivia earthquake, the most powerful earthquake ever recorded, occurred on 22 May 1960. With over 50,000 casualties and more than 2 million people affected, the earthquake forced the organising committee to completely modify the World Cup's calendar. Talca, Concepci\u00f3n, Talcahuano and Valdivia were severely damaged and discarded as venues. Antofagasta and Valpara\u00edso declined to host any matches as their venues were not financially self-sustainable. Vi\u00f1a del Mar and Arica managed to rebuild their stadiums while Braden Copper Company, then an American company that controlled the El Teniente copper mine, allowed the use of its stadium in Rancagua. Due to these setbacks, this is the World Cup edition with the smallest number of venues spread across the country (while the 1930 FIFA World Cup was held in three venues, all of them were located in a single city). The most used stadium was the Estadio Nacional in Santiago, with 10 matches; the Estadio Sausalito in Vi\u00f1a del Mar hosted 8 matches, and the stadiums in Rancagua and far-away Arica (the only location that was not close to the other cities) both hosted 7 matches. Being that Estadio Nacional was the only large venue of the tournament (all others had less than 20,000 seats), it also saw the largest attendance average, by far, with Estadio Sausalito's attendance only being boosted with the Brazil matches it hosted (the semifinal between Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia was the only one in the stadium with less than 10,000 spectators).\nBeing largely concerned with the rebuilding of the country after the 1960 earthquake, government support for the tournament was minimal.\nSquads.\nSquads for the 1962 World Cup consisted of 22 players, as for the previous tournament in 1958.\nAfter Attilio Demar\u00eda and Luis Monti, who both represented Argentina in 1930 and Italy in 1934, Ferenc Pusk\u00e1s (Hungary in 1954, then Spain), Jos\u00e9 Santamar\u00eda (Uruguay in 1954, then Spain) and Jos\u00e9 Altafini (Brazil in 1958, then Italy) became the third, fourth and fifth players to play for two national teams in the World Cup. In light of this, FIFA created stipulations describing that once a player represents a nation during a World Cup or its qualifying rounds the player cannot switch to another national team. Robert Prosine\u010dki and Robert Jarni would later become the sixth and seventh such players, playing for Yugoslavia in 1990, then for Croatia in 1998; Davor \u0160uker was also selected in both squads, but did not play in 1990. This was accepted by FIFA because Croatia was a newly independent former republic of Yugoslavia.\nMatch officials.\nEighteen match officials from 17 countries were assigned to the tournament to serve as referees and assistant referees.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormat.\nThe format of the competition was similar to that of the 1958 competition: 16 teams qualified, divided into four groups of four. Four teams were seeded in the draw taking place in Santiago, on 18 January 1962: Brazil, England, Italy and Uruguay. The top two teams in each group advanced to the quarter-finals.\nTwo points were awarded for a win and one for a draw. In a change from the 1958 format, goal average was used to separate any teams equal on points. (In 1958, goal average was available, but was only between teams level on points in first place, or if a playoff between teams equal in second place failed to yield a result after extra time). Argentina became the first team in World Cup history to be eliminated on goal average when England advanced from Group 4 in second place.\nIn the knockout games, if the teams were level after ninety minutes, thirty minutes of extra time were played. For any match other than the final, if the teams were still even after extra time then lots would be drawn to determine the winner. The final would have been replayed if still tied after extra time; but if still tied after the replay, the champion would have been decided by drawing lots. In the event, no replays or drawing of lots were necessary.\nSummary.\nIn May 1960, as the preparations were well under way, Chile suffered the largest earthquake ever recorded (9.5 magnitude), which caused enormous damage to the national infrastructure. In the face of this, Carlos Dittborn, the president of the Organization Committee, coined the phrase \"Porque nada tenemos, lo haremos todo\" (Because we have nothing, we will do everything). Stadia and other infrastructure were rebuilt at record speed and the tournament occurred on schedule with no major organisational flaw. Dittborn did not live to see the success of his efforts, as he died one month before the start of the tournament. The World Cup venue at Arica was named Estadio Carlos Dittborn in his honour and bears his name to this day. Even with these few and low-capacity stadiums Chile was able to meet the demand for seats as international travel to Chile, far-away for Europe, was minimal at the time.\nPresident Jorge Alessandri gave an uninspiring inaugural speech before the first match, which was played between Chile and Switzerland. Alessandri left however before the end of the match. While Chilean society was living in a \"footballized\" atmosphere, Alessandri was criticised for his cold attitude towards the tournament, which forced his ministers to come out and claim he was as \"footballized\" as everybody else, but was too busy to devote too much attention to the competition.\nThe competition was marred by constant violence on the pitch. This poisonous atmosphere culminated in the first-round match between host Chile and Italy (2\u20130), known as the \"Battle of Santiago\". Two Italian journalists had written unflattering articles about the host country and its capital city; describing Santiago as a \"proudly backwards and poverty-stricken dump full of prostitution and crime\". Although only two players (both of them Italian) were sent off by the English referee Ken Aston, the match saw repeated attempts from players on both sides to harm opponents, and the Italian team needed police protection to leave the field in safety. Articles in the Italian papers \"La Nazione\" and \"Corriere della Sera\" were saying that allowing Chile to host the World Cup was \"pure madness\"; this was used and magnified by local newspapers to inflame the Chilean population. The British newspaper the \"Daily Express\" wrote \"The tournament shows every sign of developing into a violent bloodbath. Reports read like battlefront despatches; the Italy vs West Germany match was described as 'wrestling and warfare'\".\nAs the competition began, a shift in strategy was imminent. Defensive strategies began to take hold as the average goals per match dropped to 2.78, under 3 for the first time in competition history (the average has never been above 3 since).\nPel\u00e9 was injured in the second group match against Czechoslovakia. The Soviet Union goalkeeper Lev Yashin, arguably the best goalkeeper in the world at the time, was in poor form and his team went out to Chile (1\u20132) in the quarter-finals. Bright spots included the emergence of the young Brazilians Amarildo (standing in for Pel\u00e9) and Garrincha, the heroics of Czechoslovakia goalkeeper Viliam Schrojf against Hungary and Yugoslavia, and the performance of the host nation Chile, who took third place with a squad of relatively unknown players.. This has been the best performance of a South American team in a World Cup so far without taking into account the historical ones (Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay).\nIn the first round, Brazil topped their group with Czechoslovakia finishing second, above Mexico and Spain, even as the latter had in their ranks the naturalised Ferenc Pusk\u00e1s and Alfredo Di St\u00e9fano who, injured, was called up but did not play. USSR and Yugoslavia finished above Uruguay and Colombia. Hungary, along with England progressed to the quarter-finals, while Argentina and Bulgaria were eliminated. England had the same number of points as Argentina but progressed due to a superior goal average; the first time such a requirement had been necessary in a World Cup finals tournament. Switzerland lost all three games while West Germany and Chile both went through over Italy.\nChile defeated European champions USSR to earn a semi-final game against the winner of the England \u2013 Brazil game. Garrincha scored two goals in a 3\u20131 win against England. Meanwhile, 1\u20130 wins for Yugoslavia against West Germany \u2013 and another 1\u20130 win of Czechoslovakia against neighbours Hungary \u2013 saw the two Slavic states meet in the semi-finals.\nVi\u00f1a del Mar was the original venue for the South American semi-final and Santiago for the Slavic one, but due to Chile's surprise qualification, the organisers prompted FIFA to switch the venues. This irritated crowds in Vi\u00f1a del Mar and only a little under 6,000 spectators came to Estadio Sausalito to watch Czechoslovakia beat Yugoslavia 3\u20131, whereas a capacity crowd of 76,600 in Santiago watched Brazil beat the hosts 4\u20132. This game saw Garrincha sent off for Brazil and Honorino Landa sent off for Chile. Chile eventually took third place in a 1\u20130 victory over Yugoslavia with the last play of the match. The same player, Eladio Rojas, had also scored the winning goal in Chile's game against USSR.\nSantiago's Estadio Nacional served as the venue for the final, and after 15 minutes, Brazil again found themselves a goal behind in the World Cup final, as a long ball from Adolf Scherer was latched onto by Josef Masopust: 1\u20130 Czechoslovakia. As in the previous final in 1958, Brazil soon hit back, equalising two minutes later through Amarildo after an error by Czechoslovak goalkeeper Schroijf. The Brazilians scored goals from Zito and Vav\u00e1 (another Schrojf error) midway through the second half, and the Czechoslovaks could not get back into the game. The match ended 3\u20131 to Brazil, a successful defence of the title for only the second time in the history of the competition in spite of the absence of one of their star players of 1958, Pel\u00e9, who was replaced by Amarildo.\nGoalscorers.\nWith four goals each, Fl\u00f3ri\u00e1n Albert, Garrincha, Valentin Ivanov, Dra\u017ean Jerkovi\u0107, Leonel S\u00e1nchez and Vav\u00e1 were the top scorers in the tournament. In total, 89 goals were scored by 54 players, with none of them credited as own goal.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFIFA retrospective ranking.\nIn 1986, FIFA published a report that ranked all teams in each World Cup up to and including 1986, based on progress in the competition, overall results and quality of the opposition. The rankings for the 1962 tournament were as follows:\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61396", "revid": "2096716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61396", "title": "A. E. Waite", "text": "British occultist mystic, poet and writer\nArthur Edward Waite (2 October 1857 \u2013 19 May 1942) was a British poet and scholarly mystic who wrote extensively on the occult and Western esotericism. He was the co-creator of the Rider\u2013Waite Tarot (also called the Rider\u2013Waite\u2013Smith or Waite\u2013Smith deck). As his biographer R.\u00a0A. Gilbert described him, \"Waite's name has survived because he was the first to attempt a systematic study of the history of Western occultism\u2014viewed as a spiritual tradition rather than as aspects of protoscience or as the pathology of religion.\"\nHe was a Freemason, as well as being a member of the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia and the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn.\nHe spent most of his life in or near London, connected to various publishing houses and editing a magazine, \"The Unknown World\".\nEarly life and education.\nArthur Edward Waite was born on 2 October 1857 in Brooklyn, New York City, United States, to unmarried parents. His father, Captain Charles F. Waite, died at sea when Arthur was very young, and his widowed mother, Emma Lovell, returned to her home country of England, where he was then raised. They were well enough off to educate Waite at a small private school in North London.\nWhen he was 13, he was educated for two terms at St. Charles' College. When he left school to become a clerk he wrote verse in his spare time. In 1863 Waite's mother converted to Catholicism and Arthur was raised a Catholic. The death of his sister Frederika Waite in 1874 soon attracted him into psychical research. At 21, he began to read regularly in the Library of the British Museum, studying many branches of esotericism. In 1881 Waite discovered the writings of \u00c9liphas L\u00e9vi.\nCareer.\nGolden Dawn.\nWaite joined the Outer Order of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn in January 1891 after being introduced by Edmund William Berridge. In 1893 he withdrew from the Golden Dawn, but rejoined the Outer Order in 1896. In 1899 he entered the Second order of the Golden Dawn. He became a Freemason in 1901, and entered the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia (SRIA) in 1902.\nIn 1903 Waite founded the Independent and Rectified Order R. R. et A. C. This Order was disbanded in 1914. The Golden Dawn was torn by internal feuding until Waite's departure in 1914; in July 1915 he formed the Fellowship of the Rosy Cross. By that time there existed some half-dozen offshoots from the original Golden Dawn, and as a whole it never recovered.\nFreemason.\nWaite was interested in the higher grades of Freemasonry and saw initiation into Craft Masonry as a way to gain access to these rites. After joining the SRIA and the Knights Templar, Waite travelled to Switzerland in 1903 to receive the \"R\u00e9gime Ecossais Rectifi\u00e9\" or the Rectified Scottish Rite and its grade of \"Chevalier Bienfaisant de la Cit\u00e9 Sainte\" (C.B.C.S.). Waite believed that the Rectified Scottish Rite, more than any other Masonic Rite, represented the \"Secret Tradition\" of mystical spiritual illumination.\nWriter and scholar.\nWaite was a writer and many of his works were well received in the esoteric circles of his time, but his lack of academic training is visible in his limitations as a historian and in his belittling of other authors.\nHe wrote texts on subjects including divination, esotericism, freemasonry, ceremonial magic, Kabbalism and alchemy; he also translated and reissued several mystical works. He wrote about the Holy Grail, influenced by his friendship with Arthur Machen. A number of his volumes remain in print, including \"The Book of Ceremonial Magic\" (1911), \"The Holy Kabbalah\" (1929), \"A New Encyclopedia of Freemasonry\" (1921), and his edited translation of L\u00e9vi's 1896 \"Transcendental Magic, its Doctrine and Ritual\" (1910), having been reprinted in recent years.\nWaite also wrote two allegorical fantasy novels, \"Prince Starbeam\" (1889) and \"The Quest of the Golden Stairs\" (1893), and edited \"Elfin Music\", an anthology of poetry based on English fairy folklore.\nTarot deck.\nWaite is best known for his involvement with the Rider\u2013Waite Tarot, first published in 1910, with illustrations by his fellow Golden Dawn member Pamela Colman Smith. Waite authored the deck's companion volume, the \"Key to the Tarot\", republished in expanded form in 1911 as the \"Pictorial Key to the Tarot\", a guide to tarot-reading. The Rider\u2013Waite Tarot was notable for illustrating all 78 cards fully, at a time when only the 22 Major Arcana cards were typically illustrated, with the Sola Busca tarot, 1491, being a notable historical exception. Prior to the publication of this deck, many esoteric tarot readers used the Tarot of Marseilles playing card deck. The Rider-Waite deck has gone on to have a large influence on contemporary tarot card reading.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1888 he married Ada Lakeman (also called \"Lucasta\"), and they had one daughter, Sybil. From 1900 to 1909 Waite earned a living as a manager for Horlicks, the manufacturer of malted milk.\nLucasta died in 1924. In 1933 Waite married Mary Broadbent Schofield. Waite died on 19 May 1942 at age 84.\nIn popular culture.\nH. P. Lovecraft's short story \"The Thing on the Doorstep\" includes a character named Ephraim Waite. According to Robert M. Price, this character was based on Waite.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61397", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61397", "title": "FIPS place code", "text": ""}
{"id": "61398", "revid": "50908195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61398", "title": "Superpower", "text": "State with extensive power or influence over much of the world\nSuperpower describes a sovereign state or supranational union that holds a dominant position characterized by the ability to exert influence and project power on a global scale. This is done through the combined means of economic, military, technological, political, and cultural strength as well as diplomatic and soft power influence. Traditionally, superpowers are preeminent among the great powers. While a great power state is capable of exerting its influence globally, superpowers are states so influential that no significant action can be taken by the global community without first considering the positions of the superpowers on the issue.\nIn 1944, during World War II, the term was first applied to the British Empire, the Soviet Union, and the United States. During the Cold War, the British Empire dissolved, leaving the United States and the Soviet Union to dominate world affairs. At the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the United States became the world's sole superpower, a position sometimes referred to as that of a \"hyperpower\". Since the late 2010s and into the 2020s, China has increasingly been described as an emerging superpower or even an established one, as China represents the \"biggest geopolitical test of the 21st century\" to the United States, as it is \"the only country with enough power to jeopardize the current global order\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrigin.\nSome researchers consider Achaemenid Empire, Roman Empire or Chinese Yellow Emperor as early and ancient pioneers for this concept.\nNo agreed definition of what a superpower is exists and may differ between sources. However, a fundamental characteristic that is consistent with all definitions of a superpower is a nation or state that has mastered the seven dimensions of state power, namely geography, population, economy, resources, military, diplomacy, and national identity.\nThe term was first used to describe nations with greater than great power status as early as 1944, but only gained its specific meaning with regard to the United States and the Soviet Union after World War II. This was because the United States and the Soviet Union had proved themselves to be capable of casting great influence in global politics and military dominance. The term in its current political meaning was coined by Dutch-American geostrategist Nicholas Spykman in a series of lectures in 1943 about the potential shape of a new post-war world order. This formed the foundation for the book \"The Geography of the Peace\", which referred primarily to the unmatched maritime global supremacy of the British Empire and the United States as essential for peace and prosperity in the world.\nA year later, William T. R. Fox, an American foreign policy professor, elaborated on the concept in the book \"The Superpowers: The United States, Britain and the Soviet Union \u2013 Their Responsibility for Peace\" which spoke of the global reach of a super-empowered nation. Fox used the word superpower to identify a new category of power able to occupy the highest status in a world in which\u2014as the war then raging demonstrated\u2014states could challenge and fight each other on a global scale. According to him, at that moment, there were three states that were superpowers, namely the United States, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom. The British Empire was the most extensive empire in world history and considered the foremost power, holding sway over 25% of the world's population and controlling about 25% of the Earth's total land area, while the United States and the Soviet Union grew in power before and during World War II. The UK would face serious political, financial, and colonial issues after World War II that left it unable to match Soviet or American power. Ultimately, Britain's empire would gradually dissolve over the course of the 20th century, sharply reducing its global power projection.\nAccording to Lyman Miller, \"[t]he basic components of superpower stature may be measured along four axes of power: military, economic, political, and cultural (or what political scientist Joseph Nye has termed 'soft power')\".\nIn the opinion of Kim Richard Nossal of Queen's University in Canada, \"generally, this term was used to signify a political community that occupied a continental-sized landmass; had a sizable population (relative at least to other major powers); a superordinate economic capacity, including ample indigenous supplies of food and natural resources; enjoyed a high degree of non-dependence on international intercourse; and, most importantly, had a well-developed nuclear capacity (eventually, normally defined as second strike capability)\".\nIn the opinion of Professor Paul Dukes, \"a superpower must be able to conduct a global strategy, including the possibility of destroying the world; to command vast economic potential and influence; and to present a universal ideology\", although \"many modifications may be made to this basic definition\". According to Professor June Teufel Dreyer, \"[a] superpower must be able to project its power, soft and hard, globally\". In his book \"\", Dr. Ian Bremmer, president of the Eurasia Group, argues that a superpower is \"a country that can exert enough military, political, and economic power to persuade nations in every region of the world to take important actions they would not otherwise take\".\nApart from its common denotation of the foremost post-WWII states, the term \"superpower\" has colloquially been applied by some authors retrospectively to describe various preeminent ancient great empires or medieval great powers, in works such as Channel 5 (UK)'s documentary \"\" or the reference in \"The New Cambridge Medieval History\" to \"the other superpower, Sasanian Persia\".\nDuring the Cold War.\nThe 1956 Suez Crisis suggested that Britain, financially weakened by two world wars, could not then pursue its foreign policy objectives on an equal footing with the new superpowers without sacrificing convertibility of its reserve currency as a central goal of policy. As the majority of World War II had been fought far from its national boundaries, the United States had not suffered the industrial destruction nor massive civilian casualties that marked the wartime situation of the countries in Europe or Asia. The war had reinforced the position of the United States as the world's largest long-term creditor nation and its principal supplier of goods; moreover, it had built up a strong industrial and technological infrastructure that had greatly advanced its military strength into a primary position on the global stage. Despite attempts to create multinational coalitions or legislative bodies (such as the United Nations), it became increasingly clear that the superpowers had very different visions about what the post-war world ought to look like and after the withdrawal of British aid to Greece in 1947, the United States took the lead in containing Soviet expansion in the Cold War.\nThe two countries opposed each other ideologically, politically, militarily, and economically. The Soviet Union promoted the ideology of Marxism\u2013Leninism, planned economy, and a one-party state while the United States promoted the ideologies of liberal democracy and the free market in a capitalist market economy. This was reflected in the Warsaw Pact and NATO military alliances, respectively, as most of Europe became aligned with either the United States or the Soviet Union. These alliances implied that these two nations were part of an emerging bipolar world, in contrast with a previously multipolar world.\nThe idea that the Cold War period revolved around only two blocs, or even only two nations, has been challenged by some scholars in the post\u2013Cold War era, who have noted that the bipolar world only exists if one ignores all of the various movements and conflicts that occurred without influence from either of the two superpowers. Additionally, much of the conflict between the superpowers was fought in proxy wars, which more often than not involved issues more complex than the standard Cold War oppositions.\nAfter the Soviet Union disintegrated in the early 1990s, the term \"hyperpower\" began to be applied to the United States as the sole remaining superpower of the Cold War era. This term, popularized by French foreign minister Hubert V\u00e9drine in the late 1990s, is controversial and the validity of classifying the United States in this way is disputed. One notable opponent to this theory is Samuel P. Huntington, who rejects this theory in favor of a multipolar balance of power. Other international relations theorists such as Henry Kissinger theorize that because the threat of the Soviet Union no longer exists to formerly American-dominated regions such as Western Europe and Japan, American influence is only declining since the end of the Cold War because such regions no longer need protection or have necessarily similar foreign policies as the United States.\nAfter the Cold War.\nAfter the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 which ended the Cold War, the post\u2013Cold War world has in the past been considered by some to be a unipolar world, with the United States as the world's sole remaining superpower. In 1999, political scientist and author Samuel P. Huntington wrote: \"The United States, of course, is the sole state with preeminence in every domain of power \u2013 economic, military, diplomatic, ideological, technological, and cultural \u2013 with the reach and capabilities to promote its interests in virtually every part of the world\". However, Huntington rejected the claim that the world was unipolar, arguing: \"There is now only one superpower. But that does not mean that the world is unipolar\", describing it instead as \"a strange hybrid, a uni-multipolar system with one superpower and several major powers\". He further wrote that \"Washington is blind to the fact that it no longer enjoys the dominance it had at the end of the Cold War. It must relearn the game of international politics as a major power, not a superpower, and make compromises\".\nExperts argue that this older single-superpower assessment of global politics is too simplified, in part because of the difficulty in classifying the European Union at its current stage of development. Others argue that the notion of a superpower is outdated, considering complex global economic interdependencies and propose that the world is multipolar.\nA 2012 report by the National Intelligence Council predicted that the United States superpower status will have eroded to merely being first among equals by 2030, but that it would remain highest among the world's most powerful countries because of its influence in many different fields and global connections that the great regional powers of the time would not match. Additionally, some experts have suggested the possibility of the United States losing its superpower status completely in the future, citing speculation of its decline in power relative to the rest of the world, economic hardships, a declining dollar, Cold War allies becoming less dependent on the United States, and the emergence of future powers around the world.\nAccording to a RAND Corporation paper by American diplomat James Dobbins, Professor Howard J. Shatz, and policy analyst Ali Wyne, Russia in the breakdown of a disintegrating unipolar world order, while not a peer competitor to the United States, would still remain a player and a potential rogue state that would undermine global affairs. The West could contain Russia with methods like those employed during the Cold War with the Soviet Union, though this would be tested by Russia's overt and covert efforts to destabilize Western alliances and political systems. On the other hand, China is a peer competitor to the United States that cannot be contained, and will be a far more challenging entity for the West to confront. The authors state that China's military dominance in the Asia-Pacific is already eroding American influence at a rapid pace, and the costs for the US to defend its interests there will continue to rise. Moreover, China's economic influence has already broken out of its regional confines long ago and is on track to directly contest the US role as the center for economic trade and commerce.\nPotential superpowers.\nThe term potential superpowers has been applied by scholars and other qualified commentators to the possibility of several political entities achieving superpower status. \n1980s and 1990s.\nIn the 1980s, some commentators thought Japan would become a superpower due to its large GDP and high economic growth at the time. However, Japan's economy crashed in 1991, creating a long period of economic slump in the country which has become known as the \"Lost Decades\".\n21st century.\nDue to their large markets, growing military strength, economic potential, and influence in international affairs, China, the European Union, Russia, and India are among the political entities most cited as having the potential of achieving superpower status in the 21st century. In 2020, a new UBS survey found that 57% of global investors predicted that China would replace the U.S. as the world's biggest superpower by 2030. However, many historians, writers, and critics have expressed doubts about whether China or India would ever emerge as a new superpower. Some political scientists and other commentators have even suggested that such countries might simply be emerging powers, as opposed to potential superpowers. The European Union has been called a \"regulatory superpower\" due to the Brussels effect.\nIncreasing doubts have emerged around the potential of Russia to gain superpower status given its declining economy, severe military underperformance during the invasion of Ukraine, and its loss of influence in Central Asia, a region once dominated by Moscow for centuries.\nSuperpower collapse.\nSoviet Union.\nDramatic changes occurred in the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc during the 1980s and early 1990s, with \"perestroika\" and \"glasnost\", the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989, and finally the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991. As early as 1970, Andrei Amalrik had made predictions of Soviet collapse, and Emmanuel Todd made a similar prediction in 1976. Due to Russia's capabilities of conventional warfare during the Russian invasion of Ukraine Russia was compared to a \"Potemkin Superpower\" by Paul Krugman. Russia is a nuclear-weapon state.\nBritish Empire.\nThe Suez Crisis of 1956 is considered by some commentators to be the beginning of the end of Britain's period as a superpower, but other commentators have pointed much earlier such as in World War I, the Depression of 1920\u201321, the Partition of Ireland, the return of the pound sterling to the gold standard at its prewar parity in 1925, the Fall of Singapore, the loss of wealth from World War II, the end of Lend-Lease Aid from the United States in 1945, the postwar , the Winter of 1946\u201347, the beginning of decolonization and the independence of British India as other key points in Britain's decline and loss of superpower status.\nThe Suez Crisis in particular is regarded by historians to be a political and diplomatic disaster for the British Empire, as it led to large-scale international condemnation, including extensive pressure from the United States and Soviet Union. This forced the British and the French to withdraw in embarrassment and cemented the increasingly-bipolar Cold War politics between the Soviet Union and United States. In the 1960s, the movement for decolonization reached its peak, with remaining imperial holdings achieving independence, accelerating the transition from the British Empire to the Commonwealth of Nations. As the Empire continued to crumble, the home islands of the United Kingdom later experienced deindustrialization throughout the 1970s, coupled with high inflation and industrial unrest that unraveled the postwar consensus. This led to some economists to refer to Britain as the Sick Man of Europe. In 1976, the United Kingdom had to seek assistance from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which it had previously ironically helped create, receiving funding of $3.9\u00a0billion, the largest-ever loan to be requested up until that point. In 1979, the country suffered major widespread strikes known as the Winter of Discontent. All these factors were seen by academics, economists and politicians as symbolising Britain's postwar decline. Lastly, the Handover of Hong Kong to China in July 1997 was seen by experts as the definitive end of the British Empire.\nNevertheless, the United Kingdom today has retained global soft power in the 21st century, including a formidable military. The United Kingdom continues to have a permanent seat on the UN Security Council alongside only four other powers, and is one of the nine nuclear powers. Its capital city, London, continues to be regarded as one of the pre-eminent cities in the world, being ranked as a global city by the Mori Foundation. In 2022, the United Kingdom was ranked the foremost European country in terms of soft power by Brand Finance.\nUnited States.\nIn \"\" (2001), French sociologist Emmanuel Todd predicts the eventual decline and fall of the United States as a superpower. \"After years of being perceived as a problem-solver, the US itself has now become a problem for the rest of the world.\" Since the 2010s, as a result of asymmetric polarization within the United States, as well as globally perceived U.S. foreign policy failures, and China's growing influence around the world, some academics and geopolitical experts have argued that the United States may already be experiencing a decay in its soft power around the world.\nSuperpower disengagement.\nSuperpower disengagement is a foreign policy option whereby the most powerful nations, the superpowers, reduce their interventions in an area. Such disengagement could be multilateral among superpowers or lesser powers, or bilateral between two superpowers, or unilateral. It could mean an end to either direct or indirect interventions. For instance, disengagement could mean that the superpowers remove their support of proxies in proxy wars to de-escalate a superpower conflict back to a local problem based on local disputes. Disengagement can create buffers between superpowers that might prevent conflicts or reduce the intensity of conflicts.\nThe term usually refers to various policy proposals during the Cold War which attempted to defuse tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States, largely because of the risk of any superpower conflict to escalate to nuclear war. Examples of one-sided disengagement include when Joseph Stalin decided to end Soviet support for the communist guerrillas in Greece during the Greek Civil War, and when Richard Nixon withdrew US troops from Vietnam in the early 1970s.\nThe more important candidates for disengagement were where Soviet and US forces faced each other directly such as in Germany and Austria. The Austrian State Treaty is an example of formal, multilateral, superpower disengagement which left Austria as neutral for the duration of the Cold War, with Austria staying out of the Warsaw Pact, NATO, and the European Economic Community. The 1952 Stalin Note is perhaps the most controversial proposal of superpower disengagement from Germany.\nProposed early superpowers.\nThese are proposed examples of ancient or historical superpowers, taking into account that the knowledge of what the \"known world\" comprised was extremely limited in past eras (for example, Europeans became aware of the existence of the Americas and Australia only after the Age of Discovery, which began in the late 15th century, and prior to this era, they had a very limited knowledge about East Asia as well).\nArchaic globalization (before 1500).\nMany of the nations of this historical period were never superpowers, however they were regional powers with influence in their respective regions. \nNote: Does not take into account city-states and stateless nomadic peoples. \nBronze Age.\nFertile Crescent in the Early Bronze Age.\nIn the early history of both regions contact between these civilization was very limited, long distance trade definitely occurred but primarily through long chains of intermediaries rather than directly.\nFertile Crescent in the Middle Bronze Age.\nRegular contact between Egypt, Mesopotamia and Anatolia dates from this period. Mitanni was an important intermediary in the trade between these civilizations.\nFertile Crescent and Mediterranean Sea in the Late Bronze Age.\nKnown by the Minoans and Mycenaean Greeks:\nIndian subcontinent.\nContact with other civilizations was very limited; long distance trade with Mesopotamia definitely occurred but primarily through long chains of intermediaries rather than directly.\nClassical antiquity.\nKnown world by the ancient Romans in their republican era.\nThe Drachma, minted by many states, most notably in the Ptolemaic Egypt was the reserve currency in the Mediterranean and Near East\nKnown world by the ancient Romans in their imperial era.\nMain reserve currency in the Mediterranean and Near East: Roman Denarius, later replaced by the Roman Solidus.\nEast Asia.\nNot fully known outside East Asia. The West knew of these powers because of the Silk Road, although little information reached them.\nMesoamerica.\nIsolated civilizations in relation to the Afro-Eurasia.\nAndes.\nIsolated civilization in relation to Afro-Eurasia.\nPost-Classical Age.\nKnown world by Medieval Europeans and Middle Easterners.\nMain reserve currency in the Mediterranean and Near East: Roman Solidus, later replaced by the Dinar, minted by the Caliphates.\nSub-Saharan Africa.\nDuring the Middle Ages the region was known by Arab merchants. Europeans were aware that the region existed (to the point that Mansa Musa was mentioned in the Catalan Atlas), but little information about the place reached Europe.\nMesoamerica.\nIsolated civilization in relation to the Afro-Eurasia.\nSouth America.\nIsolated civilizations in relation to the Afro-Eurasia.\nProto-globalization (1500\u20131800).\nThe\u00a0Age of Discovery\u00a0brought a broad change in globalization, being the first period in which previously isolated parts of the world became connected to form the\u00a0world system, and the first colonial empires of the early modern age emerged, such as the Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch and French empires. The British Empire, after its Glorious Revolution in 1688 and its pioneering role in the industrialization process in the 18th century would lead to its global hegemony in the 19th century and early 20th century (before the World War I). \nThe contact between distant civilizations was highly facilitated as well as the mapping of a large part of the planet, with people in this historical period having a better understanding of the global map of the Planet Earth.\nModern globalization (1800\u20131945).\nAccording to historical statistics and research from the OECD, until the early modern period, Western Europe, China, and India accounted for roughly two thirds of the world's GDP.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "61399", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61399", "title": "Imperialist", "text": ""}
{"id": "61400", "revid": "5586291", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61400", "title": "Camprodon", "text": "Camprodon (; from \"Camp Rod\u00f3\" \"Round Field\", ultimately from Latin \"Campus Rotundus\") is a small town in the comarca of Ripoll\u00e8s in Girona, Catalonia, Spain, located in the Pyrenees, near the French border.\nHistory.\nThe settlement of Camprodon was in 1118, when Ramon Berenguer III allowed the building of a market near the monastery of Sant Pere de Camprodon, which is located in the present-day town. In 1252, Camprodon was granted the title of royal city and left the jurisdiction of the abbot of Sant Pere.\nThe city celebrates the feast day of \"Sant Patllari\" (Palladius of Embrun), and the church of Santa Maria de Camprodon claims his relics, which lie in a 14th-century reliquary (\"arqueta de Sant Patllari\").\nThe epicentre of the Catalan earthquake of 1428 that killed hundreds of people was near Camprodon. The earthquake was related to the active Amer-Brugent fault system which lies to the south-east of Camprodon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61401", "revid": "47555821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61401", "title": "MBA (disambiguation)", "text": "MBA (Master of Business Administration) is a master's degree.\nMBA or Mba may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61402", "revid": "23891347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61402", "title": "Figueres", "text": "City in Catalonia, Spain\nFigueres (; ) is the capital city of Alt Empord\u00e0 County, in the Girona region, Catalonia, Spain.\nThe town is the birthplace of artist Salvador Dal\u00ed, and houses the Dal\u00ed Theatre and Museum, a large museum designed by Dal\u00ed himself which attracts many visitors. It is also the birthplace of Narc\u00eds Monturiol, inventor of the first successful machine-powered submarine. Also born here was M\u00f3nica Naranjo, one of the best-selling Spanish singers of the 1990s and 2000s.\nHistory.\nThe town's name derives from that of Ficaris, of Visigoth origin. In 1267, King James I of Aragon granted it \"fuero\" rights, but four years later Count Pon\u00e7 IV of Emp\u00faries set the town on fire.\nIn 1794, Figueras was surrendered to France, but it was regained in 1795. During the Peninsular War it was taken by the French in 1808, recaptured by the Spaniards in 1811, and retaken by the French in the same year.\nDuring the Spanish Civil War, it remained loyal to the Republican government, and was repeatedly bombed by the Nazi and Fascist Italian aviation.\nIt was one of the most heavily bombed Catalan cities during the Civil War, in 1938, and, especially, at the beginning of 1939, when thousands of people passed through the town on their way into exile. The number of bombing victims cannot be known with certainty, but could be close to 400.\nSpain's Republican government held its final meeting of the civil war (on 1 February 1939) in the dungeons of its Sant Ferran Castle.\nFigueres recovered starting from the 1950s, consolidating its economy around the tourism industry.\nFigueres was once home to a Jewish community prior to the expulsion of the Jews in 1492, and a small Jewish quarter remains.\nTransport.\nSituated in the northeast corner of Catalonia, Figueres is about from Girona, from Barcelona, from Perpignan, and from Girona-Costa Brava Airport. It is also served by its own railway station just east of the old town center.\nFigueres has been connected since December 2010 to the high-speed rail network with the start of services connecting Figueres to Perpignan via LGV, allowing direct TGV services to Paris in 5\u00a0h 27\u00a0min. Connections to Madrid-Barcelona via AVE began on 8 January 2013 and the trip takes 53\u00a0min to Barcelona Sants (12\u00a0min to Girona).\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nFigueres is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61403", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61403", "title": "Winfield Scott", "text": "United States Army general (1786\u20131866)\nWinfield Scott (June 13, 1786\u00a0\u2013 May 29, 1866) was an American military commander and a presidential candidate. He served as Commanding General of the United States Army from 1841 to 1861, and was a veteran of the War of 1812, American Indian Wars, Mexican\u2013American War, and the early stages of the American Civil War. Scott was the Whig Party's presidential nominee in the 1852 election but was defeated by Democrat Franklin Pierce. He was known as Old Fuss and Feathers for his insistence on proper military etiquette and the Grand Old Man of the Army for his many years of service.\nScott was born near Petersburg, Virginia, in 1786. After training as a lawyer and brief militia service, he joined the army in 1808 as a captain of the light artillery. In the War of 1812, Scott served on the Canadian front, taking part in the Battle of Queenston Heights and the Battle of Fort George, and was promoted to brigadier general in early 1814. He served with distinction in the Battle of Chippawa but was badly wounded in the subsequent Battle of Lundy's Lane. After the conclusion of the war, Scott was assigned to command army forces in a district containing much of the Northeastern United States, and he and his family made their home near New York City. During the 1830s, Scott negotiated an end to the Black Hawk War, took part in the Second Seminole War and the Creek War of 1836, and presided over the forced removal of the Cherokee. Scott also helped to avert war with the United Kingdom, defusing tensions arising from the Patriot War and the Aroostook War.\nIn 1841, Scott became the Commanding General of the United States Army, beating out his rival Edmund P. Gaines for the position. After the outbreak of the Mexican\u2013American War in 1846, Scott was relegated to an administrative role, but in 1847 he led a campaign against the Mexican capital of Mexico City. After capturing the port city of Veracruz, he defeated Mexican General Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna's armies at the Battles of Cerro Gordo, Contreras, and Churubusco. He then captured Mexico City, after which he maintained order in the Mexican capital and indirectly helped envoy Nicholas Trist negotiate the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which brought an end to the war.\nScott unsuccessfully sought the Whig presidential nomination three times, in 1840, 1844, and 1848. He won it in 1852, when the party was in danger of dying off. The Whigs were severely divided over the Compromise of 1850, and Democrat Franklin Pierce won a decisive victory over his former commander. Nonetheless, Scott remained popular among the public. In 1855, he received a brevet promotion to lieutenant general, becoming the first U.S. Army officer to hold that rank since George Washington. In 1859, he peacefully solved the Pig War in Washington Territory, ending the last in a long series of British-American border conflicts. Despite being a Virginia native, Scott stayed loyal to the Union when the Civil War broke out and served as an essential adviser to President Abraham Lincoln during the opening stages of the war. He developed a strategy known as the Anaconda Plan but retired in late 1861 after Lincoln increasingly relied on General George B. McClellan for military advice and leadership. In retirement, he lived in West Point, New York, where he died on May 29, 1866. \nContemporaries highly regarded Scott's military talent, and historians generally consider him one of the most accomplished generals in U.S. history.\nEarly life.\nScott was born on June 13, 1786, the fifth child of Ann (Mason) Scott and William Scott, a planter, veteran of the American Revolutionary War, and officer in the Dinwiddie County militia. At the time, the Scott family resided at Laurel Hill, a plantation near Petersburg, Virginia. Ann Mason Scott was the daughter of Daniel Mason and Elizabeth Winfield, and Scott's parents chose his maternal grandmother's surname for his first name. Scott's paternal grandfather, James Scott, had migrated from Scotland after the defeat of Charles Edward Stuart's forces in the Battle of Culloden. Scott's father died when Scott was six years old; his mother did not remarry. She raised Scott, his older brother James, and their sisters Mary, Rebecca, Elizabeth, and Martha until her death in 1803. Although Scott's family held considerable wealth, most of the family fortune went to James, who inherited the plantation. At six feet, five inches tall and 230 pounds, with a hardy constitution, in his prime Scott was a physically large and imposing figure.\nScott's education included attendance at schools run by James Hargrave and James Ogilvie. In 1805, Scott began attending the College of William and Mary, but he soon left to study law in the office of attorney David Robinson. His contemporaries in Robinson's office included Thomas Ruffin. While apprenticing under Robinson, Scott attended the trial of Aaron Burr, who had been accused of treason for his role in events now known as the Burr conspiracy. During the trial, Scott developed a negative opinion of the Senior Officer of the United States Army, General James Wilkinson, as the result of Wilkinson's efforts to minimize his complicity in Burr's actions by providing forged evidence and false, self-serving testimony.\nScott was admitted to the bar in 1806, and practiced in Dinwiddie. In 1807, Scott gained his initial military experience as a corporal of cavalry in the Virginia Militia, serving amid the \"Chesapeake\u2013Leopard\" affair. Scott led a detachment that captured eight British sailors who had attempted to land to purchase provisions. Virginia authorities did not approve of this action, fearing it might spark a wider conflict, and they soon ordered the release of the prisoners. Later that year, Scott attempted to establish a legal practice in South Carolina but was unable to obtain a law license because he did not meet the state's one-year residency requirement.\nEarly career, 1807\u20131815.\nFirst years in the army.\nIn early 1808, President Thomas Jefferson asked Congress to authorize an expansion of the United States Army after the British announced an escalation of their naval blockade of France, thereby threatening American shipping. Scott convinced U.S. Senator William Branch Giles, a family friend, to help him obtain a commission in the newly expanded army. In May 1808, shortly before his twenty-second birthday, Scott was commissioned as a captain in the light artillery. Tasked with recruiting a company, he raised his troops from the Petersburg and Richmond areas, then traveled with his unit to New Orleans to join their regiment. Scott was deeply disturbed by what he viewed as the unprofessionalism of the army, which at the time consisted of just 2,700 officers and men. He later wrote that \"the old officers had, very generally, sunk into either sloth, ignorance, or habits of intemperate drinking.\"\nHe soon clashed with his commander, General James Wilkinson, over Wilkinson's refusal to follow the orders of Secretary of War William Eustis to remove troops from an unhealthy bivouac site. Wilkinson owned the site, and while the poor location caused several illnesses and deaths among his soldiers, Wilkinson refused to relocate them because he personally profited. In addition, staying near New Orleans enabled Wilkinson to pursue his private business interests and continue the courtship of Celestine Trudeau, whom he later married.\nScott briefly resigned his commission over his dissatisfaction with Wilkinson, but before his resignation had been accepted, he withdrew it and returned to the army. In January 1810, Scott was convicted in a court-martial, partly for making disrespectful comments about Wilkinson's integrity, and partly because of a $50 shortage in the $400 account he had been provided to conduct recruiting duty in Virginia after being commissioned. Concerning the money, the court-martial members concluded that Scott had not been intentionally dishonest but had failed to keep accurate records. His commission was suspended for one year. After the trial, Scott fought a duel with William Upshaw, an army medical officer and Wilkinson friend Scott blamed for initiating the court-martial. Each fired at the other, and Upshaw's bullet grazed the top of Scott's head, but both emerged unharmed.\nAfter the duel, Scott returned to Virginia, where he spent the year studying military tactics and strategy, and practicing law in partnership with Benjamin Watkins Leigh. Meanwhile, Wilkinson was removed from command for insubordination and was succeeded by General Wade Hampton. The rousing reception Scott received from his army peers as he began his suspension led him to believe that most officers approved of his anti-Wilkinson comments, at least tacitly; their high opinion of him, coupled with Leigh's counsel to remain in the army, convinced Scott to resume his military career once his suspension had been served. He rejoined the army in Baton Rouge, where one of his first duties was to serve as a judge advocate (prosecutor) in the court-martial of Colonel Thomas Humphrey Cushing.\nWar of 1812.\nDuring the early 19th century, relationships between Britain and the United States continued to deteriorate due to a variety of factors, including the British impressment of American citizens alleged to be Royal Navy deserters and Britain's support to Native Americans who were resisting U.S. colonization in the Northwest Territory. In July 1812, the U.S. Congress declared war on Britain. After the declaration of war, Scott was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel and assigned as second-in-command of the 2nd Artillery Regiment, serving under George Izard. While Izard continued to lead recruitment efforts, Scott led two companies north to join General Stephen Van Rensselaer's militia force, which was preparing for an invasion of the Canadas. President James Madison made the invasion the central part of his administration's war strategy in 1812, as he sought to capture Montreal and thereby take control of the St. Lawrence River and cut off Upper Canada from Lower Canada. The invasion would begin with an attack on the town of Queenston, which was just across the Niagara River from Lewiston, New York.\nIn October 1812, Van Rensselaer's force attacked a British force in the Battle of Queenston Heights. Scott led an artillery bombardment that supported an American crossing of the Niagara River, and he took overall command of U.S. forces at Queenston after Colonel Solomon Van Rensselaer was badly wounded. Shortly after Scott took command, a British column under Roger Hale Sheaffe arrived. Sheaffe's numerically superior force compelled an American retreat, ultimately forcing Scott to surrender to the British after reinforcements from the militia failed to materialize. As a prisoner of war, Scott was treated hospitably by the British, although two Mohawk leaders nearly killed him while he was in British custody. As part of a prisoner exchange, Scott was released in late November; upon his return to the United States, he was promoted to colonel and appointed to command the 2nd Artillery Regiment. He also became the chief of staff to Henry Dearborn, who was the senior general of the army and personally led operations against Canada in the area around Lake Ontario.\nDearborn assigned Scott to lead an attack against Fort George, which commanded a strategic position on the Niagara River. With help from United States Navy elements commanded by Isaac Chauncey and Oliver Hazard Perry, he led U.S. troops to land behind the fort, forcing its surrender. Scott was widely praised for his conduct in the battle, although he was personally disappointed that the bulk of the British garrison escaped capture. As part of another campaign to capture Montreal, Scott forced the British to withdraw from Hoople Creek in November 1813. Despite this success, the campaign fell apart after the American defeat at the Battle of Crysler's Farm and after Wilkinson (who had taken command of the front in August) and Hampton failed to cooperate on a strategy to take Montreal. With the failure of the campaign, President Madison and Secretary of War John Armstrong Jr. relieved Wilkinson and some other senior officers of their battlefield commands. They were replaced with younger officers such as Scott, Izard, and Jacob Brown. In early 1814, Scott was promoted to brigadier general and was assigned to lead a regiment under Brown.\nIn mid-1814, Scott took part in another invasion of Canada, which began with a crossing of the Niagara River under Brown's command. Scott was instrumental in the American success at the Battle of Chippawa, which took place on July 5, 1814. Though the battle was regarded as inconclusive from the strategic point of view because the British force remained intact after the battle, it was seen as a significant moral victory. The battle was \"the first real success attained by American troops against British regulars.\"\nLater, in July 1814, a scouting expedition led by Scott was ambushed, beginning the Battle of Lundy's Lane. Scott's brigade was decimated after British troops led by General Gordon Drummond arrived as reinforcements, and he was placed in the reserve in the second phase of the battle. Scott was later severely wounded while seeking a place to commit his reserve forces. He believed that Brown's decision to refrain from fully committing his strength at the outset of this battle resulted in the destruction of Scott's brigade and many unnecessary deaths. The battle ended inconclusively after Brown ordered his army to withdraw, effectively bringing an end to the invasion. Scott spent the following months convalescing under the supervision of military doctors and physician Philip Syng Physick.\nScott's performance at the Battle of Chippawa had earned him national recognition. He was promoted to the brevet rank of major general and awarded a Congressional Gold Medal. In October 1814, Scott was appointed commander of American forces in Maryland and northern Virginia, taking command in the aftermath of the Burning of Washington. The War of 1812 came to an effective end in February 1815, after news of the signing of the Treaty of Ghent (which had been signed in December 1814) reached the United States.\nIn 1815, Scott was admitted to the Pennsylvania Society of the Cincinnati as an honorary member in recognition of his service in the War of 1812. Scott's Society of the Cincinnati insignia, made by silversmiths Thomas Fletcher and Sidney Gardiner of Philadelphia, was a one-of-a-kind, solid gold eagle measuring nearly three inches in height. It is one of the most unique military society insignias ever produced. There are no known portraits or photographs of Scott wearing the insignia, which is now in the collection of the United States Military Academy Museum.\nFamily.\nIn March 1817, Scott married Maria DeHart Mayo (1789\u20131862). She was the daughter of Abigail (n\u00e9e DeHart) Mayo and Colonel John Mayo, a wealthy engineer and businessman who came from a distinguished family in Virginia. Scott and his family lived in Elizabethtown, New Jersey for most of the next thirty years. Beginning in the late 1830s, Maria spent much of her time in Europe because of a bronchial condition, and she died in Rome in 1862. They were the parents of seven children, five daughters and two sons:\nMid-career, 1815\u20131841.\nPost-war years.\nWith the conclusion of the War of 1812, Scott served on a board charged with demobilizing the army and determining who would continue to serve in the officer corps. Andrew Jackson and Brown were selected as the army's two major generals, while Alexander Macomb, Edmund P. Gaines, Scott, and Eleazer Wheelock Ripley would serve as the army's four brigadier generals. Jackson became commander of the army's Southern Division, Brown became commander of the army's Northern Division, and the brigadier generals were assigned leadership of departments within the divisions. Scott obtained a leave of absence to study warfare in Europe, though to his disappointment, he reached Europe only after Napoleon's final defeat at the Battle of Waterloo. Upon his return to the United States in May 1816, he was assigned to command army forces in parts of the Northeastern United States. He made his headquarters in New York City and became part of the city's social life. He earned the nickname \"Old Fuss and Feathers\" for his insistence on proper military bearing, courtesy, appearance, and discipline. In 1835, Scott wrote \"Infantry Tactics, Or, Rules for the Exercise and Maneuvre of the United States Infantry\", a three-volume work that served as the standard drill manual for the United States Army until 1855.\nScott developed a rivalry with Jackson after Jackson took offense to a comment Scott had made at a private dinner in New York, though they later reconciled. He also continued a bitter feud with Gaines that centered over which of them had seniority, as both hoped to eventually succeed the ailing Brown. In 1821, Congress reorganized the army, leaving Brown as the sole major general and Scott and Gaines as the only brigadier generals; Macomb accepted demotion to colonel and appointment as the chief of engineers, while Ripley and Jackson both left the army. After Brown died in 1828, President John Quincy Adams passed over Scott and Gaines due to their feuding, instead appointing Macomb. Scott was outraged and asked to be relieved of his commission, but ultimately backed down.\nBlack Hawk War and Nullification Crisis.\nIn 1832, President Andrew Jackson ordered Scott to Illinois to take command of a conflict known as the Black Hawk War. By the time Scott arrived in Illinois, the conflict had come to a close with the army's victory at the Battle of Bad Axe. Scott and Governor John Reynolds concluded the Black Hawk Purchase with Chief Keokuk and other Native American leaders, opening up much of present-day Iowa to settlement by whites. Later, in 1832, Jackson placed Scott in charge of army preparations for a potential conflict arising from the Nullification Crisis. Scott traveled to Charleston, South Carolina, the center of the nullification movement, where he strengthened federal forts but also sought to cultivate public opinion away from secession. Ultimately, the crisis ended in early 1833 with the passage of the Tariff of 1833.\nIndian Removal.\nPresident Jackson launched a policy of Indian removal, forcing Native Americans to move west of the Mississippi River. Some Native Americans moved peacefully, but others resisted, including many Seminoles. In December 1835, the Second Seminole War broke out after the Dade massacre, in which a group of Seminoles ambushed and massacred a U.S. Army company in Central Florida. President Jackson ordered Scott to take command of operations against the Seminoles personally, and the officer arrived in Florida by February 1836. After several months of inconclusive campaigning, Scott was ordered to the border of Alabama and Georgia to put down a Muscogee uprising known as the Creek War of 1836. American forces under Scott, General Thomas Jesup, and Alabama Governor Clement Comer Clay quickly defeated the Muscogee. Some subordinates and civilians criticized Scott's actions in the campaigns against the Seminole and the Muscogee, and President Jackson convened a Court of Inquiry that investigated Scott and Gaines. The court cleared Scott of misconduct; still, it reprimanded him for his language criticizing Gaines in official communications. The court was critical of Gaines' actions during the campaign, though it did not accuse him of misconduct or incompetence. It also criticized the language he used to defend himself publicly and to the court.\nMartin Van Buren, a personal friend of Scott's, assumed the presidency in 1837, and Van Buren continued Jackson's Indian removal policy. In April 1838, Van Buren placed Scott in command of the removal of Cherokee people from the Southeastern United States. Some of Scott's associates tried to dissuade Scott from what they viewed as an immoral mission, but Scott accepted his orders. After almost all of the Cherokee refused to relocate voluntarily, Scott made careful plans to ensure that his soldiers forcibly but humanely relocated the Cherokee. Nonetheless, the Cherokee endured abuse from Scott's soldiers; one account described soldiers driving the Cherokee \"like cattle, through rivers, allowing them no time to take off their shoes and stockings. In mid-1838, Scott agreed to Chief John Ross's plan to let the Cherokee lead a movement west, and he awarded a contract to the Cherokee Council to complete the removal. Scott was strongly criticized by many Southerners, including Jackson, for awarding the contract to Ross rather than continuing the removal under his own auspices. Scott accompanied one Cherokee group as an observer, traveling with them from Athens, Tennessee, to Nashville, Tennessee, where he was ordered to the Canada\u2013United States border.\nTensions with the United Kingdom.\nIn late 1837, the so-called \"Patriot War\" broke out along the Canadian border when some Americans sought to support the Rebellions of 1837\u20131838 in Canada. Tensions escalated after the Caroline affair, in which Canadian forces burned a steamboat that had delivered supplies to rebel forces. President Van Buren dispatched Scott to western New York to prevent unauthorized border crossings and war between the United States and the United Kingdom. Still popular in the area due to his service in the War of 1812, Scott issued public appeals, asking Americans to refrain from supporting the Canadian rebels. In late 1838, a new crisis known as the Aroostook War broke out over a dispute regarding the border between Maine and Canada, which had not been conclusively settled in previous treaties between Britain and the United States. Scott was tasked with preventing the conflict from escalating into a war. After winning the support of Governor John Fairfield and other Maine leaders, Scott negotiated a truce with John Harvey, who commanded British forces in the area.\nPresidential election of 1840.\nIn the mid-1830s, Scott joined the Whig Party, which opponents of President Jackson established. Scott's success in preventing war with Canada under Van Buren confirmed his popularity with the broad public, and in early 1839, newspapers began to mention him as a candidate for the presidential nomination at the 1839 Whig National Convention. By the time of the convention in December 1839, party leader Henry Clay and 1836 presidential candidate William Henry Harrison had emerged as the two front-runners, but Scott loomed as a potential compromise candidate if the convention deadlocked. After several ballots, the convention nominated Harrison for president. Harrison went on to defeat Van Buren in the 1840 presidential election, but he died just one month into his term and was succeeded by Vice President John Tyler.\nCommanding General, 1841\u20131861.\nService under Tyler.\nOn June 25, 1841, Macomb died, and Scott and Gaines were still the two most obvious choices for the position of Commanding General of the United States Army. Secretary of War John Bell recommended Scott, and President Tyler approved; Scott was also promoted to the rank of major general. According to biographer John Eisenhower, the office of commanding general had, since its establishment in 1821, been an \"innocuous and artificial office ... its occupant had been given little control over the staff, and even worse, his advice was seldom sought by his civilian superiors.\" Macomb had largely been outside the chain of command, and senior commanders like Gaines, Scott, and Quartermaster General Thomas Jesup reported directly to the Secretary of War. Despite Scott's efforts to invigorate the office, he enjoyed little influence with President Tyler, who quickly became alienated from most of the Whig Party after taking office. Some Whigs, including Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania, favored Scott as the Whig candidate in the 1844 presidential election. Still, Clay quickly emerged as the prohibitive front-runner for the Whig nomination. Clay won the 1844 Whig nomination, but he was defeated in the general election by Democrat James K. Polk. Polk's campaign centered on his support for the annexation of the Republic of Texas, which had gained independence from Mexico in 1836. After Polk won the election, Congress passed legislation enabling the annexation of Texas, and Texas achieved statehood in 1845.\nMexican\u2013American War.\nEarly war.\nPolk and Scott had never liked one another, and their distrust deepened after Polk became president, partly due to Scott's affiliation with the Whig Party. Polk came into office with two primary foreign policy goals: the acquisition of Oregon Country, which was under joint American and British rule, and the acquisition of Alta California, a Mexican province. The United States nearly went to war with Britain over Oregon, but the two powers ultimately agreed to partition Oregon Country at the 49th parallel north. The Mexican\u2013American War broke out in April 1846 after U.S. forces under the command of Brigadier General Zachary Taylor clashed with Mexican forces north of the Rio Grande in a region claimed by both Mexico and Texas. Polk, Secretary of War William L. Marcy, and Scott agreed on a strategy in which the U.S. would capture Northern Mexico and then pursue a favorable peace settlement. While Taylor led the army in Northern Mexico, Scott presided over the expansion of the army, ensuring that new soldiers were properly supplied and organized.\nInvasion of Central Mexico.\nTaylor won several victories against the Mexican army, but Polk eventually concluded that merely occupying Northern Mexico would not compel Mexico to surrender. Scott drew up an invasion plan that would begin with a naval assault on the Gulf port of Veracruz and end with the capture of Mexico City. With Congress unwilling to establish the rank of lieutenant general for Democratic Senator Thomas Hart Benton, Polk reluctantly turned to Scott to command the invasion. Among those who joined the campaign were several officers who would later distinguish themselves in the American Civil War, including Major Joseph E. Johnston, Captain Robert E. Lee, and Lieutenants Ulysses S. Grant, George B. McClellan, George G. Meade, and P. G. T. Beauregard. While Scott prepared the invasion, Taylor inflicted what the U.S. characterized as a crushing defeat on the army of Mexican President Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna at the Battle of Buena Vista. In the encounter known in Mexico as the Battle of La Angostura, Santa Anna brought U.S. forces to near collapse, capturing cannons and flags, and returned to Mexico City, leaving U.S. forces on the field. Santa Anna left to put down a minor insurrection, and recruited a new army.\nBiographer John Eisenhower said the invasion of Mexico through Veracruz was \"up to that time the most ambitious amphibious expedition in human history.\" The operation commenced on March 9, 1847, with the Siege of Veracruz, a joint army-navy operation led by Scott and Commodore David Conner. After safely landing his 12,000-man army, Scott encircled Veracruz and began bombarding it; the Mexican garrison surrendered on March 27. Seeking to avoid a rising by the divided Mexicans against the American invasion, Scott placed a priority on winning the cooperation of the Catholic Church. Among other initiatives designed to show respect for church property and officials, he ordered his men to salute Catholic priests on the streets of Veracruz. After securing supplies and wagons, Scott's army began the march toward Xalapa, a city on the way to Mexico City. Meanwhile, Polk dispatched Nicholas Trist, Secretary of State James Buchanan's chief clerk, to negotiate a peace treaty with Mexican leaders. Though they initially feuded, Scott and Trist eventually developed a strong working relationship.\nIn mid-April, Scott's force met Santa Anna's army at Cerro Gordo, near Xalapa. Santa Anna had established a solid defensive position, but he left his left flank undefended on the assumption that dense trees made the area impassable. Scott decided to attack Santa Anna's position on two fronts, sending a force led by David E. Twiggs against Santa Anna's left flank, while another force, led by Gideon Pillow, would attack Santa Anna's artillery. In the Battle of Cerro Gordo, Pillow's force was largely ineffective, but Twiggs and Colonel William S. Harney captured the key Mexican position of El Telegrafo in hand-to-hand fighting. Mexican resistance collapsed after the capture of El Telegrafo; Santa Anna escaped the battlefield and returned to Mexico City, but Scott's force captured about 3,000 Mexican soldiers. After the battle, Scott continued to press toward Mexico City, cutting him and his army off from his supply base at Veracruz.\nMexico City.\nScott's force arrived in the Valley of Mexico in August 1847, by which time Santa Anna had formed an army of approximately 25,000 men. Because Mexico City lacked walls and was essentially indefensible, Santa Anna sought to defeat Scott in a pitched battle, choosing to mount a defense near the Churubusco River several miles south. The Battle of Contreras began on the afternoon of August 19, when the Mexican army under General Gabriel Valencia attacked and pushed back an American detachment charged with building a road. In the early morning of the following day, an American force led by General Persifor Frazer Smith surprised and decimated Valencia's army. News of the defeat at Contreras caused a panic among the rest of Santa Anna's army, and Scott immediately pressed the attack, beginning the Battle of Churubusco. Despite the strong defense by the Saint Patrick's Battalion and some other units, Scott's force quickly defeated the demoralized Mexican army. After the battle, Santa Anna negotiated a truce with Scott, and the Mexican foreign minister notified Trist that they were ready to begin negotiations to end the war.\nDespite the presence of Scott's army just outside of Mexico City, the Mexican and American delegations remained far apart on terms; Mexico was only willing to yield portions of Alta California and refused to accept the Rio Grande as its northern border. While negotiations continued, Scott faced a difficult issue in the disposition of 72 members of Saint Patrick's Battalion who had deserted from the U.S. Army and were captured while fighting for Mexico. All 72 were court-martialed and sentenced to death. Under pressure from some Mexican leaders and personally feeling that the death penalty was an unjust punishment for some defendants, Scott spared 20, but the rest were executed. In early September, negotiations between Trist and the Mexican government broke down, and Scott exercised his right to end the truce. In the subsequent Battle for Mexico City, Scott launched an attack from the west of the city, capturing the critical fortress of Chapultepec on September 13. Santa Anna retreated from the city after the fall of Chapultepec, and Scott accepted the surrender of the remaining Mexican forces early on the 14th.\nUnrest broke out in the days following the capture of Mexico City, but with the cooperation of civil leaders and the Catholic Church, Scott and the army restored order in the city by the end of the month. Peace negotiations between Trist and the Mexican government resumed, and Scott did all he could to support the talks, ceasing all further offensive operations. As military commander of Mexico City, Scott was held in high esteem by Mexican civil and American authorities alike, primarily owing to the fairness with which he treated Mexican citizens. In November 1847, Trist received orders to return to Washington. Scott received orders to continue the military campaign against Mexico; Polk had grown frustrated at the slow pace of negotiations. With the support of Scott and Mexican president Manuel de la Pe\u00f1a y Pe\u00f1a, Trist defied his orders and continued the negotiations. Trist and the Mexican negotiators concluded the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo on February 2, 1848; it was ratified by the U.S. Senate the following month. In late 1847, Scott arrested Pillow and two other officers after they wrote letters to American newspapers that were critical of Scott. In response, Polk ordered the release of the three officers and removed Scott from command.\nUpon founding the Aztec Club of 1847, a military society of officers who served in Mexico during the war, Scott was elected as one of only two honorary members of the organization.\nTaylor and Fillmore administrations.\nScott was again a contender for the Whig presidential nomination in the 1848 election. Clay, Daniel Webster, and General Zachary Taylor were also candidates for the nomination. As in 1840, Whigs were looking for a non-ideological war hero to be their candidate. Scott's main appeal was to anti-slavery \"conscience Whigs\", who were dismayed by the fact that two of the leading contenders, Clay and Taylor, were enslavers. Ultimately, however, the delegates passed on Scott for a second time, nominating Taylor on the fourth ballot. Many anti-slavery Whigs then defected to support the nominee of the Free-Soil Party, former President Martin Van Buren. Taylor went on to win the general election.\nAfter the war, Scott returned to his administrative duties as the army's senior general. Congress became engaged in a divisive debate over the status of slavery in the territories, and Scott joined with Whig leaders Henry Clay and Daniel Webster in advocating for the passage of what became known as the Compromise of 1850. Meanwhile, Taylor died of an illness in July 1850 and was succeeded by Vice President Millard Fillmore. The Compromise of 1850 and the enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 badly divided the country as a whole and the Whig Party in particular. Northerners strongly objected to the stringent provisions of the act, while Southerners complained bitterly about any perceived slackness in enforcement. Despite Scott's support for the Compromise of 1850, he became the chosen candidate of William Seward, a leading Northern Whig who objected to the Compromise of 1850 partly because of the fugitive slave act.\nPresidential election of 1852.\nBy early 1852, the three leading candidates for the Whig presidential nomination were Scott, whom anti-Compromise Northern Whigs backed; President Fillmore, the first choice of most Southern Whigs; and Secretary of State Webster, whose support was concentrated in New England. The 1852 Whig National Convention convened on June 16, and Southern delegates won approval of a party platform endorsing the Compromise of 1850 as a final settlement of the slavery question. On the convention's first presidential ballot, Fillmore received 133 of the necessary 147 votes, while Scott won 131 and Webster won 29. After the 46th ballot still failed to produce a presidential nominee, the delegates voted to adjourn until the following Monday. Over the weekend, Fillmore and Webster supporters conducted unsuccessful negotiations to unite behind one candidate. On the 48th ballot, Webster delegates began to defect to Scott, and the general gained the nomination on the 53rd ballot. Fillmore accepted his defeat with equanimity and endorsed Scott, but many Northern Whigs were dismayed when Scott publicly endorsed the party's pro-Compromise platform. Despite the party's effort to appeal to southerners by nominating William Alexander Graham of North Carolina for vice president, many Southern Whigs, including Alexander H. Stephens and Robert Toombs, refused to support Scott.\nThe 1852 Democratic National Convention nominated dark horse candidate Franklin Pierce, a Northerner sympathetic to the Southern view on slavery who had served under Scott as a brigadier general during the Mexican War. Pierce had resigned from the U.S. Senate in 1842, and had briefly held only the minor office of United States Attorney for the District of New Hampshire since then, but emerged as a compromise candidate partly because he served under Scott in the Mexican\u2013American War. The Democrats attacked Scott for various incidents from his long public career, including his court-martial in 1809 and the hanging of members of the Saint Patrick's Battalion during the Mexican\u2013American War. Scott proved to be a poor candidate who lacked popular appeal and suffered the worst defeat in Whig history. In the South, distrust and apathy toward Scott led many Southern Whigs to vote for Pierce or to sit out the election, and in the North, many anti-slavery Whigs voted for John P. Hale of the Free Soil Party. Scott won just four states and 44 percent of the popular vote, while Pierce won just under 51 percent of the popular vote and a large majority of the electoral vote.\nPierce and Buchanan administrations.\nAfter the 1852 election, Scott continued his duties as the army's senior officer. He maintained cordial relations with President Pierce but frequently clashed with Pierce's Secretary of War, Jefferson Davis, over issues such as travel expenses. Despite his defeat in the 1852 presidential race, Scott remained broadly popular, and on Pierce's recommendation, in 1855, Congress passed a resolution promoting Scott to brevet lieutenant general. Scott was the first U.S. Army officer since George Washington to hold the rank. He also earned the appellation of the \"Grand Old Man of the Army\" for his long career.\nThe passage of the 1854 Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act and the outbreak of violent confrontations between pro-slavery and anti-slavery forces in Kansas exacerbated sectional tensions and split both major parties. Pierce was denied re-nomination in favor of James Buchanan, while the Whig Party collapsed. In the 1856 presidential election, Buchanan defeated John C. Fr\u00e9mont of the anti-slavery Republican Party and former President Fillmore, the candidate of the nativist American Party. Sectional tensions continued to escalate after the Supreme Court handed down its decision in \"Dred Scott v. Sandford\". Buchanan proved incapable of healing sectional divides, and some leading Southerners became increasingly vocal in their desire to secede from the union. In 1859, Buchanan assigned Scott to lead a mission to settle a dispute with Britain over the ownership of the San Juan Islands in the Pacific Northwest. Scott reached an agreement with British official James Douglas to reduce military forces on the islands, thereby resolving the so-called \"Pig War\".\nIn the 1860 presidential election, the Republicans nominated Abraham Lincoln, while the Democrats split along sectional lines, with Northern Democrats supporting Senator Stephen A. Douglas and Southern Democrats supporting Vice President John C. Breckinridge. Lincoln won the election, taking just 39.7 percent of the popular vote but winning a majority of the electoral vote due to his support in the North despite his name not being on the ballot in many Southern States. Fearing the possibility of imminent secession, Scott advised Buchanan and Secretary of War John B. Floyd to reinforce federal forts in the South. He was initially ignored, but Scott gained new influence within the administration after Floyd was replaced by Joseph Holt in mid-December. With assistance from Holt and newly appointed Secretary of State Jeremiah S. Black, Scott convinced Buchanan to reinforce or resupply Washington, D.C., Fort Sumter (near Charleston, South Carolina), and Fort Pickens (near Pensacola, Florida). Meanwhile, several Southern states seceded, formed the Confederate States of America, and chose Jefferson Davis as president.\nBecause Scott was from Virginia, Lincoln sent an envoy, Thomas S. Mather, to ask whether Scott would remain loyal to the United States and keep order during Lincoln's inauguration. Scott responded to Mather, \"I shall consider myself responsible for [Lincoln's] safety. If necessary, I shall plant cannon at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue, and if any of the Maryland or Virginia gentlemen who have become so threatening and troublesome show their heads or even venture to raise a finger, I shall blow them to hell.\" Scott helped ensure that Lincoln arrived in Washington safely and ensured the security of Lincoln's inauguration, which ultimately was conducted without a major incident.\nLincoln administration.\nBy the time Lincoln assumed office, seven states had declared their secession and had seized federal property within their bounds. Still, the United States retained control of the military installations at Fort Sumter and Fort Pickens. Scott advised evacuating the forts because an attempted re-supply would inflame tensions with the South, and Confederate shore batteries made re-supply impossible. Lincoln rejected the advice and chose to re-supply the forts; although Scott accepted the orders, his resistance to the re-supply mission, along with poor health, undermined his status within the administration. Nonetheless, he remained a critical military adviser and administrator. On April 12, Confederate forces began an attack on Fort Sumter, forcing its surrender the following day. On April 15, Lincoln declared that a state of rebellion existed and called up 75,000 militiamen. On the advice of Scott, Lincoln offered Robert E. Lee command of the Union forces, but Lee ultimately chose to serve the Confederacy.\nScott took charge of molding Union military personnel into a cohesive fighting force. Lincoln rejected Scott's proposal to build up the regular army, and the administration would largely rely on volunteers to fight the war. Scott developed a strategy, later known as the Anaconda Plan, that called for the capture of the Mississippi River and a blockade of Southern ports. By cutting off the eastern states of the Confederacy, Scott hoped to force the surrender of Confederate forces with a minimal loss of life on both sides. Scott's plan was leaked to the public and was derided by most Northern newspapers, which tended to favor an immediate assault on the Confederacy. As Scott was too old for battlefield command, Lincoln selected General Irvin McDowell, an officer whom Scott saw as unimaginative and inexperienced, to lead the main Union army in the eastern theater of the war. Though Scott counseled that the army needed more time to train, Lincoln ordered an offensive against the Confederate capital of Richmond. Irvin McDowell led a force of 30,000 men south, where he met the Confederate Army at the First Battle of Bull Run. The Confederate army dealt the Union a major defeat, ending any hope of a quick end to the war.\nMcDowell took the brunt of public vituperation for the defeat at Bull Run, but Scott, who had helped plan the battle, also received criticism. Lincoln replaced McDowell with McClellan, and the president began meeting with McClellan without Scott in attendance. Frustrated with his diminished standing, Scott submitted his resignation in October 1861. Though Scott favored General Henry Halleck as his successor, Lincoln made McClellan the army's senior officer instead.\nRetirement, consultations, writings, and death.\nScott grew very heavy in his last years of service and could not mount a horse or walk more than a few paces without stopping to rest. He was often in ill health, and suffered from gout, dropsy, rheumatism, and vertigo. After retiring, he traveled to Europe with his daughter, Cornelia, and her husband, H. L. Scott. In Paris, he worked with Thurlow Weed to aid American consul John Bigelow in defusing the \"Trent\" Affair, a diplomatic incident with Britain. On his return from Europe in December 1861, he lived alone in New York City and at West Point, New York, where he wrote his memoirs and closely followed the ongoing civil war.\nOn June 23\u201324, 1862, President Lincoln made an unannounced visit to West Point, where he spent five hours consulting with Scott regarding the handling of the Civil War and the staffing of the War Department. After McClellan's defeat in the Seven Days Battles, Lincoln accepted Scott's advice and appointed General Halleck as the army's senior general. In 1864, Scott sent a copy of his newly published memoirs to Ulysses S. Grant, who had succeeded Halleck as the lead Union general. The copy that Scott sent was inscribed \"from the oldest to the greatest general.\" Following a strategy similar to Scott's Anaconda Plan, Grant led the Union to victory, and Lee's Army of Northern Virginia surrendered in April 1865.\nOn October 4, 1865, Scott was elected as a Companion of the Pennsylvania Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States and was assigned insignia number 27. He is one of the few individuals who belonged to the three most senior military societies of the United States \u2013 the Society of the Cincinnati, the Aztec Club of 1847 and the Loyal Legion.\nScott died at West Point on the morning of May 29, 1866, at age 79. President Andrew Johnson ordered flags flown at half-staff to honor Scott. His funeral was attended by many of the leading Union generals, including Grant, George G. Meade, George H. Thomas, and John Schofield. He is buried at the West Point Cemetery.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nScott holds the record for the greatest length of active service as a general in the U.S. Army, as well as the longest tenure as the army's chief officer. Steven Malanga of \"City Journal\" writes that \"Scott was one of America's greatest generals ... but he had the misfortune to serve in two conflicts\u2014the War of 1812 and the controversial Mexican-American War\u2014bracketed by the far more significant American Revolution and Civil War.\" Biographer John Eisenhower writes that Scott \"was an astonishing man\" who was the country's \"most prominent general\" between the retirement of Andrew Jackson in 1821 and the onset of the Civil War in 1861. The Duke of Wellington proclaimed Scott \"the greatest living general\" after his capture of Mexico City. Robert E. Lee wrote, \"the great cause of our success [in Mexico] was in our leader [Scott]\". Historians Scott Kaufman and John A. Soares Jr. write that Scott was \"an able diplomat who proved crucial in helping avert war between Britain and the United States in period after the War of 1812.\" Fanny Crosby, the hymn writer, recalled that Scott's \"gentle manner did not indicate a hero of so many battles; yet there was strength beneath the exterior appearance and a heart of iron within his breast. But from him I learned that the warrior only it is, who can fully appreciate the blessing of peace.\"\nIn addition to his reputation as a tactician and strategist, Scott was also noteworthy for his concern about the welfare of his subordinates, as demonstrated by his willingness to risk his career in the dispute with Wilkinson over the Louisiana bivouac site. In another example, when cholera broke out among his soldiers while they were aboard the ship during the Black Hawk campaign and the ship's surgeon was incapacitated by the disease, Scott had the doctor tutor him in treatment and risked his health by tending to the sick troops himself.\nScott was the recipient of several honorary degrees. These included a Master of Arts from the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University) in 1814, a Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) from Columbia University in 1850, and an LL.D. from Harvard University in 1861.\nMemorials.\nScott has been memorialized in numerous ways. Various counties are named for him, including Scott County, Iowa; Scott County, Kansas; Scott County, Virginia; Scott County, Minnesota; and Scott County, Tennessee. Communities named for Scott include Winfield, Illinois; Winfield, Indiana; Winfield, Iowa; West Winfield, NY; Winfield, Alabama; and Winfield, Tennessee; Fort Scott, Kansas; and Scott Depot and Winfield, West Virginia. Fort Winfield Scott at the Presidio of San Francisco was part of the coastal defenses of San Francisco Bay from 1861 to 1970, and is now a part of the Fort Point National Historic Site. Other things named for Scott include Lake Winfield Scott in Georgia, Mount Scott in Oklahoma, and the Scott's oriole, a bird.\nA statue of Scott stands at Scott Circle in Washington, D.C. Scott was honored by having his likeness depicted on a U.S. postage stamp. A paddle steamer named \"Winfield Scott\" launched in 1850, and a U.S. Army tugboat in service in the 21st century is named \"Winfield Scott\". Scott is the namesake of various people, including officers Union General Winfield Scott Hancock, Confederate General Winfield Scott Featherston, and Admiral Winfield Scott Schley. The U.S. Army Civil Affairs Association views General Scott as the \"Father of Civil Affairs\" and the regimental award medallions bear his name.\nThe General Winfield Scott House, his home in New York City from 1853 to 1855, was named a National Historic Landmark in 1975. Scott's papers are held by the William L. Clements Library at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, Michigan.\nDates of rank.\nDuring his career, which ended with his retirement on November 1, 1861, Scott was promoted from captain to brevet lieutenant general. The effective dates of his promotions were:\nIn popular culture.\nScott's fame and political career led to publishing various works, including almanacs with titles such as \"Scott &amp; Taylor Almanac\" or \"General Taylor Almanac\" plus multiple musical compositions. In 1848, Boston publisher Hall produced the \"Scott &amp; Taylor Almanac\" to capitalize on the name recognition of the Mexican\u2013American War's two most famous generals while other almanacs including an 1853 almanac with the title of \"The Gen. Scott Almanac\" were published as campaign literature in 1852. In 1852, Huestis and Couzans of New York City published \"Scott and Graham Melodies\", a book of songs used during the 1852 presidential campaign. Another book of songs used by Whig campaigners in 1852, \"The Scott Songster\", was published by Edwards &amp; Goshorn of Cincinnati. In 1861, Stephen Glover created an instrumental music piece in Scott's honor titled \"General Scott's Grand Review March\".\nActor Roy Gordon portrayed Scott in the 1953 film \"Kansas Pacific\". Sydney Greenstreet played Scott in the 1941 film \"They Died with their Boots On.\" Scott was played by Patrick Bergin in the 1999 film \"One Man's Hero\", a drama about the Mexican\u2013American War's Saint Patrick's Battalion.\nScott is mentioned in \"Hour of the Wolf\", a Season 6 episode of the \"Outlander\" TV series. During a scene set during the American Revolution, Jamie asks what will be the fate of the Cherokee people. Brianna, who has traveled back in time from the 1960s, tells Jamie about the Trail of Tears and Scott's role in it.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61404", "revid": "24957525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61404", "title": "Sylvester Stallone", "text": "American actor and filmmaker (born 1946)\nSylvester Gardenzio \"Sly\" Stallone (; born July 6, 1946) is an American actor and filmmaker. In a film career spanning more than fifty years, Stallone has received numerous accolades, including a Golden Globe Award and a Critics' Choice Award, as well as nominations for three Academy Awards and two BAFTA Awards. Stallone is one of only two actors in history (alongside Harrison Ford) to have starred in a box-office No.1 film across six consecutive decades. Films in which he has appeared have grossed over $7.5 billion worldwide.\nStruggling as an actor for a number of years upon moving to New York City in 1969, Stallone found gradual work in films such as \"The Lords of Flatbush\" (1974). He achieved his greatest critical and commercial success starting in 1976 with his iconic role as boxer Rocky Balboa in the first film of the successful \"Rocky\" franchise, which he also wrote. In 1977, he became the third actor in history to be nominated for two Academy Awards for Best Original Screenplay and Best Actor. He portrayed the PTSD-plagued soldier John Rambo in \"First Blood\" (1982), a role he would play across five \"Rambo\" films (1982\u20132019). He received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1984. From the mid-1980s to the late 1990s, Stallone would go on to become one of Hollywood's highest-paid actors acting in action films such as \"Cobra\" (1986), \"Tango and Cash\" (1989), \"Cliffhanger\" (1993), \"Demolition Man\" (1993), and \"The Specialist\" (1994). At the height of his career, Stallone was known for his rivalry with Arnold Schwarzenegger. \nStallone continued his established roles in \"Rocky Balboa\" (2006) and \"Rambo\" (2008) before launching \"The Expendables\" film franchise (2010\u2013present), in which he starred as the mercenary Barney Ross. In 2013, he starred in the successful film \"Escape Plan\" and appeared in its sequels. In 2015, he returned to \"Rocky\" again with \"Creed\", in which a retired Rocky mentors former rival Apollo Creed's son Adonis Creed. The film brought Stallone widespread praise and his first Golden Globe Award, as well as a third Academy Award nomination, having been first nominated for the same role 40 years prior. He also starred in the sequel \"Creed II\" (2018) and portrayed Stakar Ogord in the Marvel Cinematic Universe films \"Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2\" (2017) and \"Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3\" (2023).\nRegarded as an icon of action cinema, Stallone is credited with helping redefine the Hollywood action hero. He has occasionally ventured from the action genre, with mixed results. He starred in the comedies \"Oscar\" (1991) and \"Stop! Or My Mom Will Shoot\" (1992), the first film failed at box office office but the second one had modest success. He also starred in the 1997 drama \"Cop Land\", for which he temporarily shed his sculpted physique and gained weight for his role as a powerless sheriff. In television, he has starred in the Paramount+ crime series \"Tulsa King\" (2022\u2013present). In addition to his film work, Stallone is a noted art collector and painter, and has written books on fitness.\nEarly life and education.\nSylvester Gardenzio Stallone was born in the Hell's Kitchen neighborhood of New York City's Manhattan borough on July 6, 1946, the elder son of celebrity astrologer and women's professional wrestling promoter Jacqueline \"Jackie\" Stallone (n\u00e9e Labofish; 1921\u20132020) and hairdresser Francesco \"Frank\" Stallone Sr. (1919\u20132011), who opened up and ran a group of hair salons in Maryland and was an avid polo player. His mother was an American from Washington, D.C., with Breton French and Ukrainian Jewish ancestry, while his father was an Italian immigrant from Gioia del Colle who moved to the U.S. in the 1930s. His younger brother is actor and musician Frank Stallone. Many biographies of Stallone indicate that his birth name is \"Michael Sylvester Gardenzio Stallone\" and his mother explained in an interview that she originally named him \"Tyrone\" because she admired the actor Tyrone Power, but Stallone's father changed it to \"Sylvester\". His nickname as a child was \"Binky\" but he chose to go by the nickname of Mike/Michael after schoolmates began calling him \"Stinky\". His middle name \"Gardenzio\" is an alteration of the Italian given name \"Gaudenzio\" and he usually shortened it to \"Enzio\".\nComplications during Stallone's birth forced his mother's obstetricians to use two pairs of forceps while delivering him, accidentally severing a nerve in the process. This caused paralysis of the lower left side of his face (including parts of his lip, tongue, and chin) which gave him his signature snarling look and slurred speech. As a result, he was bullied in his childhood, with which he coped by getting into bodybuilding and acting. A guidance counselor once told Stallone's mother: \"Your son is suited to run a sorting machine or to be an assistant electrician, primarily in the area of elevator operations\"; nevertheless, Sylvester aspired to be an actor and a screenwriter.\u201d\nStallone spent part of his infancy in foster and boarding care, rejoining and moving back with his family to Maryland when he was five. In the early 1950s, his father moved the family to his mother's native Washington, D.C. to open a beauty school. In 1954, his mother opened a women's gym called Barbella's. He initially stayed with his father following his parents' divorce when he was 11, but joined his remarried mother in Philadelphia when he was 15.\nAt one point, Stallone was voted \"Most Likely To End Up In The Electric Chair\" in high school; nevertheless, Stallone attended Notre Dame Academy and Abraham Lincoln High School in Philadelphia, and Charlotte Hall Military Academy in Charlotte Hall, Maryland, prior to attending Miami Dade College. He spent two years, from September 1965 to June 1967, at the American College of Switzerland. He returned to the United States to study as a drama major at the University of Miami, from 1967 to 1969, but did not graduate. Decades later, after Stallone's request that his acting and life experiences be accepted in exchange for his remaining needed college credits to graduate, he was granted a Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA) degree by the University of Miami in 1998.\nFilm and stage career.\n1968\u20131976: Early roles to breakthrough.\nUntil 1969, he appeared on the stage under the name Mike Stallone; in 1970, he started using the stage name Sylvester E. Stallone. While attending the University of Miami, Stallone had a role in the drama \"That Nice Boy\" (aka \"The Square Root\"), filmed in 1968. Moreover, he and John Herzfeld worked together in 1969 on a low-budget self-produced film called \"Horses\".\nStallone had his first starring role in the softcore pornography feature film \"The Party at Kitty and Stud's\" (1970). He was paid US$ for two days' work. Stallone later explained that he had done the film out of desperation after being evicted from his apartment and finding himself homeless for several days. He has also said that he slept three weeks in the Port Authority Bus Terminal in New York City prior to seeing a casting notice for the film. In the actor's words, \"it was either do that movie or rob someone, because I was at the end \u2013 the very end \u2013 of my rope\". The film was released several years later as \"Italian Stallion\", in order to cash in on Stallone's newfound fame (the new title was taken from Stallone's nickname since \"Rocky\"). Stallone also starred in the erotic off-Broadway stage play \"Score\" which ran for 23 performances at the Martinique Theatre from October 28 to November 15, 1971, and was later made into the 1974 film \"Score\" by Radley Metzger.\nAfter moving to New York City, Stallone shared an apartment with his girlfriend, Sasha Czack, an aspiring actress who supported them by working as a waitress. Stallone took odd jobs around this time, including being a cleaner at a zoo, and a theater usher; he was fired from the latter for scalping tickets. He furthered his writing skills by frequenting a local library, and became interested in the works of Edgar Allan Poe.\nIn 1972, Stallone was on the verge of giving up on having an acting career; in what he later described as a low point, he tried and failed to get a job as an extra in \"The Godfather\". Instead, he was relegated to a background role in another Hollywood hit, \"What's Up, Doc?\", starring Barbra Streisand. Stallone is hardly visible in his two appearances.\nStallone happened to be acting in a play that a friend invited him to partake in, and an agent in attendance thought that Stallone fit the role of Stanley, a main character in \"The Lords of Flatbush\", which had a start-stop schedule from 1972 to 1974 over budget issues. Stallone, around mid-1973, achieved his first proper starring role, in the independent film \"No Place to Hide\", playing a man who is associated with a New York\u2013based urban terrorist movement, with a jewelry-seller as his love interest. The film was re-cut and retitled \"Rebel\" years later, this second version featuring Stallone as its star. In 1990, this film was re-edited with outtakes from the original film and newly shot matching footage, then redubbed \u2013 in the style of Woody Allen's \"What's Up, Tiger Lily?\" \u2013 into a parody of itself titled \"A Man Called... Rainbo\".\nStallone's other first few film roles were minor, and included brief uncredited appearances in \"M*A*S*H\" (1970), as a soldier sitting at a table; \"Pigeons\" (1970), as a party guest; Woody Allen's \"Bananas\" (1971), as a subway thug; in the psychological thriller \"Klute\" (1971), as an extra dancing in a club; and in the Jack Lemmon film \"The Prisoner of Second Avenue\" (1975), as a youth. In the latter film, Jack Lemmon's character chases, tackles, and mugs Stallone, thinking that Stallone's character is a pickpocket. He had his second starring role in 1974, in \"The Lords of Flatbush\". In 1975, he played supporting roles in \"Farewell, My Lovely\"; \"Capone\"; and \"Death Race 2000\". He made guest appearances on the TV series \"Police Story\" and \"Kojak\". He is also supposedly in \"Mandingo\". It is often said that his scene was deleted.\nStallone gained worldwide fame with his starring role in the smash hit \"Rocky\" (1976), a sports drama about a struggling boxer, Rocky Balboa, taking on heavyweight champion Apollo Creed. On March 24, 1975, Stallone saw the Muhammad Ali vs. Chuck Wepner fight. That night Stallone went home, and after three days he had completed the first draft of \"Rocky\". Stallone subsequently denied that Wepner provided any inspiration for the script; however, Wepner filed a lawsuit which was eventually settled with Stallone for an undisclosed amount. Other possible inspirations for the film may have included Rocky Graziano's autobiography \"Somebody Up There Likes Me\", and the film of the same name. Stallone attempted to sell the script to multiple studios, with the intention of playing the lead role himself. Irwin Winkler and Robert Chartoff became interested and offered Stallone US$ for the rights, but they had their own casting ideas for the lead role, including Robert Redford and Burt Reynolds. Stallone refused to sell unless he played the lead character \u2013 and, eventually, after a substantial budget cut to compromise, it was agreed he could be the star. Upon its release, critic Roger Ebert stated that Stallone could become the next Marlon Brando.\nIn 1977, at the 49th Academy Awards, \"Rocky\" was nominated for ten Oscars, including Best Actor and Best Original Screenplay nominations for Stallone. The film went on to win the Academy Awards for Best Picture, Best Directing, and Best Film Editing. \"Rocky\" has since been inducted into the National Film Registry and had its props placed in the Smithsonian Museum. Stallone's use of the front entrance to the Philadelphia Museum of Art in the \"Rocky\" series led the area to be nicknamed the Rocky Steps, and the city has a statue of the Rocky character placed permanently near the museum. The character was also voted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame.\n1978\u20131989: Subsequent success.\nStallone made his directorial debut and starred in the 1978 film \"Paradise Alley\", a family drama in which he played one of three brothers who get involved in professional wrestling. That same year, he starred in Norman Jewison's \"F.I.S.T.\", a social drama in which he plays a warehouse worker, very loosely modeled on James Hoffa, who becomes involved in labor union leadership. In 1979, he wrote, directed (replacing John G. Avildsen), and starred in \"Rocky II\". The sequel became a major success, grossing US$\u00a0million.\nIn 1981, he starred alongside Michael Caine and soccer star Pel\u00e9 in \"Escape to Victory\", a sports drama in which he plays a prisoner of war involved in a Nazi propaganda soccer game. That same year, he starred in the thriller \"Nighthawks\", in which he plays a New York city cop who plays a cat-and-mouse game with a foreign terrorist, played by Rutger Hauer.\nIn 1982, Stallone starred as Vietnam veteran John Rambo, a former Green Beret, in the action film \"First Blood\", an adaptation of the eponymous novel by David Morell, though the script was significantly altered by Stallone during the film's production, which was both a critical and box-office success. Critics praised Stallone's performance, saying he made Rambo seem human, as opposed to the way he is portrayed in the book of the same name. It launched the Rambo franchise. That year \"Rocky III\" was released in which Stallone wrote, directed, and starred. The second sequel became a box-office success. In preparation for these roles, Stallone embarked upon a vigorous training regimen, which often meant six days a week in the gym and further sit-ups in the evenings. Stallone claims to have reduced his body fat percentage to his all-time low of 2.8% for \"Rocky III\".\nIn 1983, he directed \"Staying Alive\", the sequel to \"Saturday Night Fever\", starring John Travolta. This was the only film Stallone directed that he did not star in. \"Staying Alive\" was universally panned by film critics. Despite being a critical failure, \"Staying Alive\" was a commercial success. The film opened with the biggest weekend for a musical film ever (at the time) with a gross of $12,146,143 from 1,660 screens. Overall, the film grossed nearly $65 million in the US box office against its $22 million budget. Worldwide it grossed $127 million. Though the US box-office intake was significantly less than the $139.5 million earned by \"Saturday Night Fever\", the film nevertheless ranked in the top ten most financially successful films of 1983.\nDuring the 1980s, Stallone was considered one of the biggest action film stars in the world, along with Arnold Schwarzenegger. The Schwarzenegger-Stallone rivalry continued for years; they attacked each other in the press, and tried to surpass the other with more on-screen killings and larger weapons.\nStallone occasionally attempted, albeit unsuccessfully, roles in different genres. In 1984, he co-wrote and starred alongside Dolly Parton in the comedy film \"Rhinestone\", where he played a wannabe country music singer. For the \"Rhinestone\" soundtrack, he performed a song. Stallone turned down the lead male role in \"Romancing the Stone\" in order to make \"Rhinestone\" instead, a decision he later regretted.\nIn 1985, Stallone continued his success with the \"Rocky\" and \"Rambo\" franchises with \"Rocky IV\" and \".\" Stallone has portrayed these two characters in a total of 13 films. Stallone met former Mr. Olympia Franco Columbu to develop his character's appearance for the film \"Rocky IV\", just as if he were preparing for the Mr. Olympia competition. That meant two workouts a day, six days a week. Both films were major financial successes.\nIt was around 1985 that Stallone was signed to a remake of the 1939 James Cagney classic \"Angels with Dirty Faces\". The film would form part of his multi-picture deal with Cannon Films and was to co-star Christopher Reeve and be directed by Menahem Golan. The re-making of such a beloved classic was met with disapproval by \"Variety\" and horror by top critic Roger Ebert. Cannon opted to make the action film \"Cobra\" which was released in 1986 and became a box-office success. It led to the setting up of his production company White Eagle Enterprises.\nIn 1987, he starred in the family drama \"Over the Top\" as a struggling trucker who tries to make amends with his estranged son and enters an arm wrestling competition. This was poorly received by critics and was a box-office failure. In 1989, he co-starred alongside Kurt Russell in the buddy cop action film \"Tango &amp; Cash\", which did solid business domestically and overseas, grossing US$\u00a0million in foreign markets and over US$\u00a0million worldwide. Stallone became a boxing promoter in the 1980s. His boxing promoting company, Tiger Eye Productions, signed world champion boxers Sean O'Grady and Aaron Pryor.\n1990-1999: Career fluctuations.\nStallone began the 1990s starring in the fifth installment of the \"Rocky\" franchise, \"Rocky V\". This film brought back the first film's director, John G. Avildsen, and was intended to be the final installment in the series. It was considered a box-office disappointment and received negative reviews.\nStallone next appeared in John Landis' period comedy \"Oscar\" which was both a critical and box-office failure. In 1992, he appeared in Roger Spottiswoode's action comedy \"Stop! Or My Mom Will Shoot\" which was also both a critical and box-office disaster. Stallone signed onto the film based on rumors that Schwarzenegger was interested in the lead. Schwarzenegger said that, knowing the script's quality was poor, he publicly faked interest in starring for producers to lure Stallone.\nIn 1993, he made a comeback with Renny Harlin's action thriller \"Cliffhanger\", which was a success in the US, grossing US$\u00a0million, and worldwide, grossing US$\u00a0million. Later that year, he starred in the futuristic action film \"Demolition Man\" directed by Marco Brambilla, co-starring Wesley Snipes and Sandra Bullock. On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 60% based on 42 reviews, with an average rating of 5.43/10. The site's consensus reads: \"A better-than-average sci-fi shoot-em-up with a satirical undercurrent, \"Demolition Man\" is bolstered by strong performances by Stallone, Snipes, and Bullock.\" The film debuted at No. 1 at the box office. \"Demolition Man\" grossed $58,055,768 by the end of its box-office run in North America and $159,055,768 worldwide.\nHis string of hits continued with 1994's \"The Specialist\" co-starring Sharon Stone and directed by Luis Llosa, which opened in the U.S. on October 7. While the critical reception was overwhelmingly negative, the film was a commercial success. In its opening weekend it made $14,317,765 and ended up making back its budget with $57,362,582 at the domestic box office while making another $113,000,000 overseas, giving it a worldwide gross of $170,362,582. \nIn 1995, he played the title character (from the British comic book \"2000 AD\") in the science fiction action film \"Judge Dredd\". His overseas box-office appeal saved the domestic box-office disappointment of \"Judge Dredd\", which cost almost US$\u00a0million and barely made its budget back, with a worldwide tally of US$\u00a0million. Despite the film's poor box-office performance, Stallone signed a three-picture deal with Universal Pictures for $60 million, making him the second star after Jim Carrey to receive $20 million per film. The deal expired in February 2000 without him making any films, however, so he received no payment.\nThat year, he also appeared in the thriller \"Assassins\" with Julianne Moore and Antonio Banderas. That same year, Stallone, along with an all-star cast of celebrities, appeared in the Trey Parker and Matt Stone short comedy film \"Your Studio and You\" commissioned by the Seagram Company for a party celebrating their acquisition of Universal Studios and the MCA Corporation. Stallone speaks in his Rocky Balboa voice with subtitles translating what he is saying. At one point, Stallone starts yelling about how can they use his Balboa character, that he left it in the past; the narrator calms him with a wine cooler and calling him \"brainiac.\" In response, Stallone says, \"Thank you very much.\" He then looks at the wine cooler and exclaims, \"Stupid cheap studio!\"\nIn 1996, he starred in the disaster film \"Daylight\" as a disgraced former emergency services chief who attempts to rescue survivors of an underground tunnel explosion. \"Daylight\" also underperformed at the domestic box office, grossing $33 million, but did better overseas and grossed a total of $158 million worldwide. In 1997, Stallone was cast against type as an overweight sheriff in the crime drama \"Cop Land\" in which he starred alongside Robert De Niro and Ray Liotta. The film was critically well-received and was a modest success at the box office, earning $63 million on a $15 million budget, and Stallone's performance earned him the Stockholm International Film Festival Best Actor Award. In 1998, he did voice-over work for the animated film \"Antz\", which was a success domestically.\n2000\u20132005: Declining years.\nIn 2000, Stallone starred in the thriller \"Get Carter\", a remake of the 1971 British film of the same name, but the film was poorly received by both critics and audiences. Stallone's career declined considerably after his subsequent films \"Driven\" (2001), \"Avenging Angelo\" (2002) and \"D-Tox\" (2002) were also critical and commercial failures.\nIn 2003, he played a villainous role in the third installment of the \"Spy Kids\" series: \"\", which was a huge box-office success (almost US$\u00a0million worldwide). Stallone also had a cameo appearance in the 2003 French film \"Taxi 3\" as a passenger. Also that year, Stallone started to regain prominence for his supporting role in the neo-noir crime drama \"Shade\" which was only released in a limited fashion but was praised by critics. He was also attached to star and direct a film tentatively titled \"Rampart Scandal\", which was to be about the murder of rappers Tupac Shakur and The Notorious B.I.G. and the surrounding Los Angeles Police Department corruption scandal. It was later titled \"Notorious\" but was shelved.\nIn 2005, alongside Sugar Ray Leonard, he was the co-presenter of the NBC reality television boxing competition series \"The Contender\". That same year he also made a guest appearance in two episodes of the television series \"Las Vegas\". That year, Stallone also inducted professional wrestling icon Hulk Hogan, who appeared in \"Rocky III\" as a wrestler named Thunderlips, into the WWE Hall of Fame; Stallone was also the person who offered Hogan the cameo in \"Rocky III\". In August, Stallone released his book \"Sly Moves\" which claimed to be a guide to fitness and nutrition as well as a candid insight into his life and works from his own perspective. The book also contained many photographs of Stallone throughout the years as well as pictures of him performing exercises.\n2006\u2013present: Franchise films.\nAfter a three-year hiatus from films, Stallone had a comeback in 2006 with the sixth installment of the \"Rocky\" series, \"Rocky Balboa\", which was a critical and commercial hit. After the critical and box-office failure of the previous installment \"Rocky V\", Stallone had decided to write, direct and star in a sixth installment which would be a more appropriate climax to the series. The total domestic box office came to US$.3\u00a0million (and US$\u00a0million worldwide). The budget of the film was only US$\u00a0million. His performance in \"Rocky Balboa\" has been praised and garnered mostly positive reviews. That year, the development \"Death Wish\" remake began, when Stallone announced that he would be directing and starring in a remake of the 1974 film. Stallone said, \"Instead of the Charles Bronson character being an architect, my version would have him as a very good cop who had incredible success without ever using his gun. So when the attack on his family happens, he's really thrown into a moral dilemma in proceeding to carry out his revenge.\" He later told the publication that he was no longer involved. In a 2009 interview with MTV, though, Stallone stated that he was again considering the project. However the role went to Bruce Willis with Eli Roth as director.\nStallone partnered with a beverage company producing an upscale bottled water brand called Sly Water.\nIn 2006, Stallone expressed his desire to direct a film about \"Musa Dagh,\" adapted by Franz Werfel's novel \"The Forty Days of Musa Dagh,\u201d detailing the genocide of its Armenian community in 1915. \nIn 2008, Stallone reprised his other famous role in the fourth installment of the \"Rambo\" franchise, titled simply \"Rambo\" (\"John Rambo\" in some countries where the first film was titled \"Rambo\"). The film opened in 2,751 theaters on January 25, 2008, grossing US$ on its opening day and US$ over its opening weekend. Its box office was US$ worldwide with a budget of US$\u00a0million.\nIn July 2009, Stallone made a cameo appearance in the Bollywood film \"Kambakkht Ishq\", where he played himself. \nIt was announced on December 7, 2010, that Stallone was voted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in the non-participant category.\nAlso that year, Stallone wrote, directed and starred in the ensemble action film \"The Expendables\". The film, which was filmed during summer/winter 2009, was released on August 13, 2010. Joining him in the film were fellow action stars Jason Statham, Jet Li, and Dolph Lundgren, as well as Terry Crews, Mickey Rourke, Randy Couture, Eric Roberts, and Stone Cold Steve Austin, and cameos by fellow '80s action icons Bruce Willis and Arnold Schwarzenegger. The film took US$ in its opening weekend, going straight in at No. 1 in the US box office. The figure marked the biggest opening weekend in Stallone's career. In summer 2010, Brazilian company O2 Filmes released a statement saying it was still owed more than US$\u00a0million for its work on the film. In 2011, Stallone provided the voice of a lion in Kevin James' comedy \"Zookeeper\".\n\"The Expendables 2\" was released August 17, 2012; the sequel received a positive critical reception of 67% on Rotten Tomatoes, as opposed to the original's 41%. As well as returning cast members from the first film, the ensemble cast also included Jean-Claude Van Damme and Chuck Norris. That year, Stallone co-wrote the book for the of \"Rocky\".\nIn 2013, Stallone starred in the action film \"Bullet to the Head\", directed by Walter Hill, based upon Alexis Nolent's French graphic novel \"Du Plomb Dans La Tete\". Also in 2013, he starred in the action thriller \"Escape Plan\", along with Arnold Schwarzenegger and Jim Caviezel, and in the sports comedy drama \"Grudge Match\" alongside Robert De Niro, harkening back to the \"Rocky\" franchise. Stallone was reported to be developing an English-language remake of the Spanish film \"No Rest for the Wicked\", though the project was shelved. That year Stallone was credited as writer for the Jason Statham action film vehicle \"Homefront.\"\n\"The Expendables 3\", the third installment in the ensemble action film series, was released on August 15, 2014. The returning ensemble cast also added Wesley Snipes, Antonio Banderas, Mel Gibson and Harrison Ford. This film was negatively received by both critics and audiences and became the lowest-grossing film in the series.\nIn 2015, Stallone reprised his role as Rocky Balboa in a spin-off-sequel film, \"Creed\", which focused on Adonis \"Donnie\" Creed, the son of his deceased friend/rival, Apollo Creed, becoming a professional boxer, played by Michael B. Jordan. The film, directed by Ryan Coogler, received critical acclaim. Portraying the iconic cinematic boxer for the seventh time in a span of 40 years, Stallone's portrayal of the character received widespread acclaim and accolades, including the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor, and his third Academy Award nomination, this time for Best Supporting Actor.\nIn 2017, Stallone appeared in \"Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2\" as Stakar Ogord / Starhawk, the leader of a Ravagers faction. In 2018, he co-starred in ' with Dave Bautista which was released straight to home-video. Upon wrapping production, he announced via his social media page that work on the third movie titled ', began immediately thereafter. In July, Stallone announced that he had finished a script for a sequel to \"Creed\", with a plot including the return of Ivan Drago from \"Rocky IV\". That year, Stallone was featured in Derek Wayne Johnson's \"John G. Avildsen: King of the Underdogs\", a documentary about director John G. Avildsen.\n\"Creed II\" went into production in March 2018, with a scheduled release on Thanksgiving 2018. Stallone was originally slated to direct before the appointment of Steven Caple Jr., in his feature film directorial debut. \"Creed II\" was released in the United States by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer on November 21, 2018. The film received generally positive reviews from critics and it went on to debut to $35.3 million in its opening weekend (a five-day total of $55.8 million), marking the biggest debut ever for a live-action release over Thanksgiving.\nOn July 23, 2019, in an interview with \"Variety\", Stallone said that a Rocky sequel and prequel are in development. Producer Irwin Winkler said \"We're very high on it\" and that negotiations are underway for Stallone to write and star in the feature. \"We're very anxious to make it.\" Stallone said the plot of the film would be about Rocky befriending a young fighter who is an undocumented immigrant. \"Rocky meets a young, angry person who got stuck in this country when he comes to see his sister. He takes him into his life, and unbelievable adventures begin, and they wind up south of the border. It's very, very timely.\" Stallone said. Stallone also said there are \"ongoing discussions\" about a Rocky prequel television series, which he hopes will land on a streaming service and the series will likely follow a young Rocky Balboa as a professional boxing hopeful. Stallone said producer Irwin Winkler is hesitant on making the series saying that \"There was some conflict there, yes. He felt in his mind that \"Rocky\" was primarily a feature film, and he didn't see it as being translated for cable, so there was a big bone of contention.\" That year, Stallone hand-picked Derek Wayne Johnson to direct and produce a documentary on the making of the original \"Rocky\", entitled \"40 Years of Rocky\" (2020). The documentary features Stallone narrating behind-the-scenes footage from the making of the film.\nStallone formed a film studio named Balboa Productions with Braden Aftergood in March 2018, where Stallone will serve as co-producer for each of their projects. The studio signed a multi-year collaboration deal with Starlight Culture Entertainment to develop projects for film and television. In May 2018, a fifth installment in the \"Rambo\" franchise was announced, and in August 2018, Adrian Gr\u00fcnberg was confirmed as the director. \"\" began filming by September 2018, with a script co-written by Stallone, who also reprised his role as Vietnam War veteran John Rambo. The plot centers around Rambo infiltrating a Mexican drug cartel to rescue a family friend's daughter. The film, which was released on September 20, 2019, in the United States, grossed $18.9 million in its opening weekend, the best debut of the franchise. The film grossed $91 million worldwide against a production budget of $50 million.\nIn late 2020, Stallone lent his voice as Rambo to the fighting video game \"Mortal Kombat 11\", as part of the game's 2nd Kombat Pack. In 2021, he voiced King Shark in the DC Extended Universe film \"The Suicide Squad\". In 2022, Stallone starred in \"Samaritan\", a dark interpretation of the superhero genre, from a script written by Bragi Schut. In November 2022, Stallone made his streaming television debut in \"Tulsa King\", in which he plays a Mafia boss. The 9-episode series was created by Taylor Sheridan and Terence Winter and premiered on Paramount+. A second season continued thereafter.\nIn May 2023 Stallone and his immediate family (wife and three daughters) starred in a reality television series \"The Family Stallone\". Seven days after launch, the series was renewed for a second season. That same month, Stallone reprised his role as Stakar Ogord in \"Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3\". \"Sly\", a documentary film about Stallone by Thom Zimny, premiered as the closing film of the 2023 Toronto International Film Festival. In October 2023, he reprised role as Barney Ross in \"Expend4bles\", which was a critical and commercial failure, becoming the lowest-grossing film in the franchise.\nUpcoming projects.\nFollowing the releases of \"Creed II\" and \"Rambo V: Last Blood\", Balboa Productions has had an extensive production slate. A film depicting the history of Jack \"Galveston Giant\" Johnson, the first African-American boxing heavyweight champion, is in development. The project was announced after Stallone's instrumental involvement in helping get Johnson a posthumous pardon from US President Donald Trump.\nStallone is also scheduled to star in the film adaptation of \"Hunter\", a story which had originally been planned as the premise for \"Rambo V: Last Blood\". The story centers around Nathaniel Hunter, a professional tracker who is hired to hunt a half-human beast created as an experiment of a secret agency. A feature-length adaptation of the biographical novel \"Ghost: My Thirty Years as an FBI Undercover Agent\" by Michael McGowan and Ralph Pezzullo about McGowan's career of over 50 undercover missions will follow, though there is no screenwriter attached to the project. Additionally, a film centered around black ops troops, being written by retired Army Ranger Max Adams, is also in development. Stallone wrote \"A Working Man\" in collaboration with David Ayer from a book series created by Chuck Dixon, which was initially intended to be a television series, but later became a feature film starring Jason Statham. The television production slate includes a series adaptation of Charles Sailor's \"Second Son\" being written by Rob Williams.\nIn May 2020, Stallone announced that a sequel to 1993's \"Demolition Man\" is in the works: \"I think it's coming. We're working on it right now with Warner Brothers. It's looking fantastic. So, that should come out, that's going to happen\". Stallone has continued to express his passion in directing a film based on Edgar Allan Poe's life, a script he has been preparing for years. He has also mentioned that he would like to adapt Nelson DeMille's novel \"The Lion's Game\".\nMultiple tasks in media.\nIn 1977, for the first \"Rocky\", Stallone became the third man in history to receive the two nominations for best actor and best screenplay, after Charlie Chaplin and Orson Welles. Stallone is known for his recurring roles as Rocky Balboa, John Rambo, and Barney Ross. Stallone wrote and starred in all of six \"Rocky\" films, while directing four of the sequels. Stallone starred in and co-wrote the five films of the \"Rambo\" franchise, and also directed the fourth one. Stallone wrote, directed, and took the lead role in the first installment of \"The Expendables\" films. Stallone directed, wrote, and starred in \"Paradise Alley\". John Travolta starred in \"Staying Alive, \"a sequel of \"Saturday Night Fever\", which Stallone wrote and directed. Stallone wrote and starred in \"Cobra\", and \"Driven\". Stallone co-wrote and starred in \"F.I.S.T.\", \"Rhinestone\", \"Over the Top\", \"Cliffhanger\", and \"Creed II\".\nAsked in February 2008 which of the icons (Rocky or Rambo) he would rather be remembered for, Stallone said \"it's a tough one, but \"Rocky\" is my first baby, so Rocky.\" He also stated that Rocky could be interpreted as the \"conscious\" and Rambo as the \"unconscious\" of the same character.\nStallone has occasionally sung in his films. He sang \"Too Close to Paradise\" for \"Paradise Alley\" (1978), with the music provided by Bill Conti (who also collaborated with Stallone in prior years, having recorded the famous \"Gonna Fly Now\" theme for his Academy Award-nominated film, \"Rocky\" (1976) which was a U.S. No. 1 hit). In \"Rocky III\" (1982), Stallone (as Rocky Balboa) sang \"Take Me Back\" to his on-screen wife, Adrian (Talia Shire), as they lay in bed. The song was first performed by singer and younger brother, Frank, who had a small role in the original \"Rocky\". For \"Rhinestone\" (1984), Stallone sang such songs as \"Drinkenstein\" as well as duets with his co-star, and actual country music star, Dolly Parton. He also performed two songs when he guest-starred on \"The Muppet Show\" in the 1980s, at the height of his career. The last time Stallone sang in a film was in \"Grudge Match\" (2013) when he and Robert De Niro performed \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" together.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and children.\nStallone has been married three times. He has two sons from his first marriage and three daughters from his third marriage.\nAt age 28, on December 28, 1974, he married Sasha Czack. They had two sons, Sage Moonblood Stallone (1976\u20132012), who died of heart disease at age 36, and Seargeoh (b. 1979), who was diagnosed with autism at an early age. The couple divorced on February 14, 1985.\nStallone married model and actress Brigitte Nielsen on December 15, 1985, in Beverly Hills, California. Their marriage (which lasted two years) and their subsequent divorce were highly publicized by the tabloid press.\nIn 1988, Stallone met model Jennifer Flavin and they were in a relationship until 1994, when Stallone told her he was having a child with model Janice Dickinson. After the February 1994 birth, DNA tests confirmed he was not the father and Stallone ended his engagement to Dickinson. After a brief 1995 engagement with model Angie Everhart, he and Flavin rekindled their relationship.\nIn May 1997, Stallone and Jennifer Flavin married. The couple has three daughters, Sophia, Sistine, and Scarlet. His daughters were chosen to share the role of Golden Globe Ambassador at the 74th Golden Globe Awards. On August 19, 2022, Palm Beach County records showed that after 25 years of marriage, Jennifer Flavin had filed for \"dissolution of marriage and other relief\". On September 23, 2022, the couple reconciled.\nFamily and friends.\nStallone maintains a relationship with his brother Frank who contributed the theme songs to \"\", and \"Staying Alive\". In 1983, Frank's song \"Far from Over\", for \"Staying Alive\", reached the #10 U.S. hit. Frank appears in minor roles, bit parts, and provides music in many films starring Sylvester, most notably in the \"Rocky\" films, where Frank played a street corner singer and contributed songs. Stallone's 48-year-old half-sister, Toni Ann Filiti, died of lung cancer on August 26, 2012. Stallone was a close friend of Joe Spinell, but they had a falling out during the shooting of their final collaboration, \"Nighthawks\", in 1981, and Spinell died in 1989.\nInjuries.\nKnown for physically demanding roles and his willingness to do the majority of his own stunts, Stallone has suffered various injuries during his acting career. During the filming of \"Escape to Victory\", he broke a finger trying to save a penalty kick against Pel\u00e9. For a scene in \"Rocky IV\", he told Dolph Lundgren, \"Punch me as hard as you can in the chest.\" He later said, \"Next thing I know, I was in intensive care at St. John's Hospital for four days. It's stupid!\" While filming a fight scene with \"Stone Cold\" Steve Austin for \"The Expendables\", he broke his neck and required the insertion of a metal plate.\nLegal issues.\nIn February 2001, an exotic dancer named Margie Carr filed a lawsuit against Stallone, accusing him of rape while at a Santa Monica fitness center where they both worked out on February 26, 2000. A lawyer for Stallone denied the claim, saying she sold the story to \"Globe\" the month before the lawsuit.\nIn 2007, customs officials in Australia discovered 48 vials of the synthetic human growth hormone Jintropin in Stallone's luggage. In a court hearing on May 15, he pleaded guilty to two charges of possessing a controlled substance.\nIn 2013, it was reported that Stallone paid a $2 million lump-sum settlement alongside a monthly amount and a trust for psychiatric and medical expenses to his half-sister Toni-Ann Filiti in 1987. Filiti threatened to file a lawsuit accusing him of abuse. Representatives for Stallone and Filiti's mother Jacqueline Stallone denied the allegations, accusing Filiti of blackmailing him and being a drug addict. However, Filiti's son, Edd Filiti, supported the claims, saying his mother \"screamed about\" abuse at the hands of her half-brother \"over and over,\" before her death in 2012.\nIn 2016, a report from the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department was published stating that Stallone was accused of sexual assault by a 16-year-old girl while he was shooting a film in Las Vegas in 1986. The teen reportedly said that Stallone, then 40, forced her into a threesome with his bodyguard. A representative for Stallone denied the allegation. Stallone's ex-wife, Brigitte Nielsen, later came to his defense, saying that she was with him at the time of the alleged assault. Stallone's \"Over the Top\" costar David Mendenhall also defended Stallone, denying claims that he introduced Stallone to the girl in question.\nIn November 2017, a woman accused Stallone of sexually assaulting her at his Santa Monica office in the early 1990s. Stallone denied the claim. His attorney revealed the accuser filed a report after an entertainment website declined to pick up the story. Stallone's attorneys also stated that while the actor had a consensual relationship with the accuser in 1987, they had two witnesses who refuted the claims. In June 2018, the Los Angeles District Attorney's office confirmed an investigation, stating that the Santa Monica Police Department had presented a sex crimes case against Stallone to a special prosecution task force for review. In October 2018, the Los Angeles District Attorney's office made the decision not to charge Stallone for the alleged assault, as no witnesses corroborated the allegations. Stallone in turn filed a police report regarding her lying on an official document.\nReligious views.\nStallone was baptized and raised a devout Catholic but stopped going to church as his acting career progressed. He rediscovered his childhood faith when his daughter was born ill in 1996, and he again became a strict Catholic by late 2006. The same year, he was interviewed by Pat Robertson from the Christian Broadcasting Network's \"700 Club\". He stated that he spent much of his previous time in Hollywood \"losing his way\" because temptation abounded, but later put things \"in God's hands\". However, he told \"GQ\" magazine in 2010, \"I'm pretty spiritual; I believe a lot in the spirit of man. I'm certainly not an atheist... I was baptized Catholic, but I don't belong to a structured church. I have no opposition to it. I think there's great nuggets of knowledge in there, some wonderful rules to live by. Then the flip side is the amount of agony that's caused.\"\nPolitics.\nStallone has supported several Republican politicians, but does not identify as a member of the Republican Party. He has also donated to the Democratic National Committee and to Democrats such as Joe Biden and Chris Dodd. He is a staunch advocate of gun control despite his otherwise conservative views, and has been described as \"the most anti-gun celebrity in Hollywood\". In 1994, Stallone contributed $1,000 to the campaign of then-Congressman Rick Santorum, who was then running for the Senate in Pennsylvania. In 2008, Stallone endorsed John McCain for that year's presidential election. In 2015, upon the advice of a Vedic scholar, Stallone performed a Hindu \"Tithi Shradh\" ritual (done for those who died by accident or murder) at Haridwar for his son Sage.\nStallone expresses support for recognition of the Armenian Genocide.\nIn the run-up to the 2016 presidential election, Stallone described Donald Trump as a \"Dickensian character\" and \"larger than life\" but did not endorse Trump or anyone else in the Republican primaries. That same year, he declined an offer to become Chair of the National Endowment for the Arts, citing a desire to work on issues related to veterans. In 2023, Stallone donated $11,600 to independent Senator Kyrsten Sinema's re-election campaign in Arizona. Later that year, he and his family spent time with Pope Francis in a private meeting at the Vatican. After Trump's win in the 2024 election, Stallone attended an event at Mar-a-Lago. During a speech, Stallone praised Trump as a \"mythical character\" and the \"second George Washington\". He also compared him to his character Rocky Balboa.\nOn January 16, 2025, it was announced by Trump that Stallone would serve in a new role as a Special Ambassador to Hollywood, sharing the role with fellow actors Jon Voight and Mel Gibson. Trump stated that he wants these actors to make Hollywood \"stronger than ever before\" by bringing back business lost to \"foreign countries\".\nActing credits and accolades.\nOver the course of his career Stallone has received a Golden Globe Award from three nominations, a Critics' Choice Movie Award, a People's Choice Award, and international prizes from the C\u00e9sar Awards, David di Donatello, and the Venice International Film Festival, as well as nominations for three Academy Awards and two BAFTA Awards.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61405", "revid": "12758594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61405", "title": "University of Girona", "text": "Public university in Girona, Spain\nThe University of Girona ( (); ;) is located in the city of Girona, Catalonia, Spain.\nIts real origin dates back to its creation in 1446, but it was reestablished as a new university in 1991. As of 2021, it consists of several campus and buildings across Girona: \"Montilivi\", \"Barri Vell\", \"Centre\", and \"Parc Cient\u00edfic i Tecnol\u00f2gic.\" A fifth campus, \"Campus de Ci\u00e8ncies de la Salut\", was proposed some time ago. Since its founding, the university has had five presidents (): Josep Maria Nadal i Farreras, from 1991 to 2002, Joan Batlle i Grabulosa from 2002 to 2005, Anna Maria Geli from 2005 to 2013, Sergi Bonet Marull from 2013 to 2017 and Joaquim Salvi since 2017 (still in office).\nOrganization.\nPartnerships and strategic alliances.\nThe UdG has partnered with other universities and research centers (including the University of the Balearic Islands and University of Perpignan Via Domitia) to create the http://.\nThe UdG has joined forces with the University of the Balearic Islands, the Catalan Institute for Water Research and the Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient\u00edficas to create the http://.\nIt is a member of the Florence Network for Nursing and Midwifery and the Vives Network.\nInternal decision-making.\nThe Universitat de Girona uses the open-source software \"Consul\" to let its members propose, debate and decide on issues in administration, teaching and budgeting.\nHistory.\nThe first modern reference of \"Universitat de Girona\" references to the \"Escola Normal de Mestres\" and, specially, the initiative during the 1960s decade to recover university level studies in Girona. In 1969, the \"Col\u00b7legi Universitari de Girona\" and the \"Escola Polit\u00e8cnica Universit\u00e0ria de Girona\" were created, which depended on the already founded universities UAB and UPC, respectively. Later, the \"Estudi General\" was restarted, with the available studies of Humanities, Sciences, Economics and Social science. Finally, on 12 December 1991, the Catalan Parliament created the new and current \"Universitat de Girona\".\nResearch.\nResearch at the UdG mainly focuses on two strategic lines: (1) water science and management, and (2) tourism and sustainability. Furthermore, the UdG pursues research in a few important research and innovation programmes that have attained a prominent role at the university: scientific research, the dissemination of its results and its ensuing social influence are also focussed on computer simulation and applications, food and agriculture, biomedicine, the quality of life and cultural heritage.\nThe University of Girona has 12 research institutes and academic personnel in 24 departments and 107 research groups (58 in science, technology and health fields and 49 in the humanities and social sciences).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61406", "revid": "32657871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61406", "title": "University of Barcelona", "text": "Public university in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain\nThe University of Barcelona (official name in ; UB), formerly also known as Central University of Barcelona is a public research university located in the city of Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. It was established in 1450. With 76,000 students, it is one of the biggest universities in Spain and has also been ranked 1st in the country in most of the 2025 rankings. \nIt has 106 departments and more than 5,000 full-time researchers, technicians and research assistants, most of whom work in the 243 research groups as recognized and supported by the Government of Catalonia. In 2010, the UB was awarded 175 national research grants and 17 European grants and participated in over 500 joint research projects with the business sector, generating an overall research income of 70 million euros. The work of these groups is overseen by the UB's research centres and institutes which collaborate with leading research institutions and networks in Spain and abroad. The UB is also home to three large research foundations: the Barcelona Science Park Foundation (PCB), which includes the Institute of Biomedical Research of Barcelona (IRBB); the August Pi i Sunyer Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBAPS); and the Bellvitge Institute for Biomedical Research (IDIBELL). The UB is also a degree-awarding body of the Institut Barcelona d'Estudis Internacionals (IBEI).\nHistory.\nThe University was founded under the royal prerogative granted by King Alfons el Magn\u00e0nim on 3 November 1450. For forty-nine years prior to this, however, the city had a fledgling medical school (or \"Estudi General\", as the universities were known at that time), founded by King Mart\u00ed of Aragon, but neither the \"Consell de Cent\" (Barcelona's Council of One Hundred) nor the city's other leading institutions had given it their official recognition, considering it an intrusion on their respective jurisdictions. Alfons el Magn\u00e0nim\u2019s prerogative, though, was granted at the petition of the \"Consell de Cent\", and so the council was always to consider the \"Estudi General\" created in 1450 as the city's true university, since it was very much under its control and patronage.\nThe process that culminated in the foundation of the \"Estudi General\" of Barcelona can be traced back to the end of the fourteenth century, with the opening of a number of schools under the patronage of the City Hall, the cathedral schools and the Dominican convent of Santa Caterina, which established itself as a major cultural centre. It was King Mart\u00ed the Humane who set in motion the process that would result in the foundation of the University of Barcelona. In his letter written 23 January 1398, and addressed to the councillors of Barcelona, he informed them that he had sought the Pope's permission to found a university in the city.\nDespite the \"Consell de Cent's\" refusal to accept the concession issued by the King to found an \"Estudi General\", on 10 January 1401, Mart\u00ed founded the \"Estudi General of Medicine\" in Barcelona under his royal prerogative, granting it the same privileges as those enjoyed by the University of Montpellier. In another document, signed in Valencia on 9 May 1402, King Mart\u00ed sought to promote the \"Estudi General of Medicine\" with the appointment of a number of teachers of the liberal arts, without which the study of medicine was virtually useless. From that day forth, the \"Estudi\" was known as the \"Estudi of Medicine and the Arts\".\nThe prerogative granted by King Alphonse the Magnanimous in 1450, authorizing the \"Consell de Cent\" to found a university in Barcelona, was the culmination of the process initiated in 1398.\nFor a number of reasons, in particular the civil war that raged during the reign of John II and the subsequent conflicts involving the peasant farmers, the official \"Estudi General\" of Barcelona did not begin to develop until the reign of Fernando the Catholic; but it was under Charles I, in 1536, that the foundation stone was laid for the new university building at the top end of La Rambla. From that moment on the university began to carry out its work as normal despite financial difficulties and in-fighting between university teachers, though this was not to stop some illustrious professors from making their mark in their respective fields and creating their own schools of academic followers.\nThe 1596 Ordinances once more showed the need for reform. These followed hard on the heels of earlier Ordinances passed in 1539 and 1559, in which the competitive examination system for the appointment of professors had been introduced.\nThis period was brought to a close with the Decree issued on 23 October 1714, by the Royal High Commission for Justice and Government of Catalonia \u2013 created by the Duke of Berwick \u2013 ordering the immediate transfer of the Faculties of Philosophy, Law and Canon Law to Cervera as a punishment for the opposition to Bourbons\u2019 rule. Barcelona was to keep its Faculty of Medicine and the Cordelles School of Humanities, governed by the Jesuits. Plans to open the University of Cervera did not get underway until 1715, and it did not start its academic work until 1717, as the successor to the six Catalan universities closed down by Philip V. The first statutes of the new University of Cervera were passed in 1725.\n\"The University of Barcelona was closed by the Bourbon dynasty after the War of the Spanish Succession from 1714 until 1837.\" The university was restored to Barcelona during the liberal revolution during the reign of Isabella II. In 1837, the University of Cervera was transferred to Barcelona, the capital of the principality. From that moment forth it was recognized as the cultural home of the four Catalonia and the Balearic Islands.\nOn its return the University was housed initially in the Convent of Carme, which had been disestablished a few years earlier. Here the Faculties of Canon Law, Law and Theology were provisionally installed. The Faculty of Medicine took up residence in the Royal Academy of Medicine, next door to the Hospital of Santa Creu. Thus, all the Faculties were now located in just two streets \u2013 carrer Hospital and carrer del Carme.\nThe inadequate nature of these premises soon gave rise to the need to construct a larger home for the University, and in 1863, work began on Elies Rogent's new building, though it would not be fully completed until 1882. Its construction was to have major repercussions for the city, since it was one of the first buildings to be raised outside the ancient city walls.\nWork on the building lasted for more than twenty years, although by 1871 the first lectures were being given there. The clock and the iron bell housed in the tower in the \"Pati de Lletres\"\u2014 the \"Patio of the Arts\"\u2014 were installed in 1881. Complementing the building work, sculptures and paintings were commissioned either directly from artists of repute or awarded in open competition.\nMedical sciences continued to be taught at the former Hospital of Santa Creu i Sant Pau. In 1879, the Faculty of Medicine was presented with a project for a new hospital, and after many changes in the plans and suggested locations, it was eventually installed in the Hospital Clinic on the eastern side of the city's Eixample district in 1900. Today, Medicine is also taught on the Bellvitge Campus and at the Hospital of Sant Joan de D\u00e9u.\nThe natural growth of the University of Barcelona has given rise to the need to undertake large-scale building work to meet the growing demands made by student numbers that were unthinkable in the nineteenth century. In response to this growth, the university district of Pedralbes was begun in 1952. The first building to be completed on this new city campus was the Faculty of Pharmacy in 1956, alongside the Sant Raimond de Penyafort and the Verge de Montserrat Halls of Residence.\nThis was followed by the Faculty of Law in 1958, the University School of Business Studies in 1961, and the Faculty of Economics between 1957 and 1968. Today this district is known as the Pedralbes Campus, while in the nineties the university added the Campus Mundet, housed in some of the buildings of the Llars Mundet. In 2006, the Faculties of History and Geography and the Faculty of Philosophy were moved from the Pedralbes Campus to the historic centre of the city (Ciutat Vella district), in the El Raval neighborhood, and just a short walk from the Historic Building of the University.\nThe University of Barcelona was the only university in Catalonia until 1971, when the Universitat Polit\u00e8cnica de Catalunya, comprising the more technical Faculties and University Schools, became an independent entity. In 1968, the Universitat Aut\u00f2noma of Barcelona became the first of several new universities to be set up in Catalonia.\nFaculties.\nAs of 2013, the University of Barcelona comprises 100 departments grouped in 18 faculties and two university schools, one school and nine attached schools.\nThe UB offers 74 undergraduate programs, 349 graduate programs and 48 doctorate programs to 63,000 students. It also has 30 research centers.\nLibrary.\nThe library holds about 2,000,000 volumes, and is the second-biggest university library in Spain.\nInternational rankings.\nIn 2020, QS World University Rankings by Subject placed the UB in the top 50 for the following subjects: Anatomy and Physiology (14th), Library Science and Information Management (43rd), Philosophy (45th) and Archaeology (47th), while the ShanghaiRanking's Global Ranking of Academic Subjects (ARWU) placed it 48th for Clinical Medicine.\nTHE Europe Teaching Rankings 2019 ranked the UB 29th and THE 2020 Impact Rankings ranked it 91st overall, with 14th for Quality Education and 43rd for Partnerships for the Goals. The QS Graduate Employability Rankings 2020 ranked it 80th.\nOverall, the University of Barcelona has been ranked 1st in Spain in most of the 2024 rankings and is located around the 50th place in Europe.\nNotable alumni.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61407", "revid": "5230605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61407", "title": "Autonomous University of Barcelona", "text": "Public university in Catalonia, Spain\nThe Autonomous University of Barcelona (; Spanish: ; ; UAB) is a public university mostly located in Cerdanyola del Vall\u00e8s, near the city of Barcelona in Catalonia, Spain.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], the university consists of 57 departments in the experimental, life, social and human sciences, spread among 13 faculties/schools. All these centers together award a total of 85 qualifications in the form of first degrees, diplomas, and engineering degrees. Moreover, almost 80 doctoral programmes, and more than 80 other postgraduate programs are offered. UAB has more than 40,000 students and more than 3,600 academic and research staff. UAB is a pioneering institution in terms of fostering research. There are many research institutes in the campus, as well as other research centres, technical support services, and service-providing laboratories, and the ALBA (synchrotron) located in the Barcelona Synchrotron Park is very close to UAB.\nUAB is the best university in Spain according to the 2023 QS World University Rankings, which ranked the university 178th overall in the world. Its subject rankings were: 27th in Veterinary Science, 72nd in Education &amp; Training, 73rd in Linguistics, 78th in Sociology and 88th in Economics &amp; Econometrics. The UAB is also a degree-awarding body of the Institut Barcelona d'Estudis Internacionals (IBEI).\nLocation.\nMost UAB academic activity takes place on the main campus in Cerdanyola del Vall\u00e8s. Several centres exist in Manresa, Sabadell, Terrassa, Sant Cugat del Vall\u00e8s and Barcelona. \nThe UAB campus is about away from the centre of Barcelona. It is accessible by air (flights to Barcelona, Girona, or Reus), by train (Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat, Renfe), by bus (SARBUS) or by car (AP-7 and C-58 motorways).\nHistory.\nThe Autonomous University of Barcelona was officially created by legislative decree on 6 June 1968. Previously, during the Second Spanish Republic, there had been plans for constituting a second university in Barcelona, but the Civil War and the following years of poverty under the early dictatorship did not allow these plans to become a reality until that year.\nOn 27 July, a disposition to the decree was added, starting the creation of the Faculty of Literature, Language, Art and the Humanities, the Faculty of Medicine, the Faculty of Science, and the Faculty of Economical Sciences. Around ten weeks later, on 6 October, the first course of the Faculty of Literature, Language, Art and the Humanities was inaugurated at Sant Cugat del Vall\u00e8s Monastery. During the same month, the Faculty of Medicine was created at the Hospital de Sant Pau in Barcelona.\nIn 1969, an agreement was signed for the acquisition of the land where the university campus is currently located. During that year, the Faculty of Sciences and the Faculty of Economical Sciences started running. During the following three years, several faculties and professional schools were created, and the construction works on the campus land took place. At the end of this period, most existing faculties and schools are settled in the campus.\nAt the end of the dictatorship in 1976, the university introduced a plan to create a model of a democratic, independent university, described in a document known as \"Bellaterra Manifesto\", which included a declaration of principles. Two years later, after the approval of the Catalan Statute, the University Council agreed to recourse to the Generalitat de Catalunya.\nDuring the period between 1985 and 1992, the university underwent several faculty reforms and the creation of several new faculties. In 1993, the University Ville was inaugurated as a student residence integrated inside the campus complex.\nRankings.\nAutonomous University of Barcelona has consistently been ranked in several academic rankings. The 2021 Academic Ranking of World Universities ranked the UAB 201\u2013300 in the world and 2nd in Spain. The 2024 QS World University Rankings ranked the university 149th in the world and 1st in Spain. The 2023 Times Higher Education World University Rankings placed the university 183th in the world, and 2nd in Spain. In \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" 2022 global university rankings, the university placed 144th in its world rankings, and 2nd in Spain. In U-Ranking 2021, the university was ranked 2nd in Spain based on their performance in teaching, research and innovations.\nAutonomous University of Barcelona also placed in numerous rankings that evaluates the employment prospects of graduates. In QS's 2022 graduate employability ranking, the university ranked 151\u2013160 in the world, and sixth in Spain. In the Times Higher Education's 2021 global employability ranking, the university placed 132nd in the world, and 3rd in Spain.\nResidence.\nVila Universit\u00e0ria is the residential complex of the university, located on its campus, which has 812 apartments with a total accommodation capacity for 2,193 people. The apartments at Vila Universit\u00e0ria enjoy a privileged setting: they are located between the campus and the forest and have beautiful views, good train and bus connections and are about 45 minutes from the Pla\u00e7a de Catalunya train station in Barcelona.\nLibrary.\nThe UAB has nine university libraries, eight of which are on the Bellaterra Campus, and the other on the Sabadell Campus.\nComputer Vision Center.\nComputer Vision Center is a computer vision research centre based at UAB. It was established in 1994 by the Generalitat de Catalunya and UAB. In 2002, the commenced publication of Electronic Letters on Computer Vision and Image Analysis. It participated in the Pascal Challenge in 2009.\nPort d'Informaci\u00f3 Cient\u00edfica (PIC).\nThe Port d'Informaci\u00f3 Cient\u00edfica (Catalan for \"Scientific Information Port\") is a research centre and institution at the campus of the Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona. Founded in 2003, its activity has been closely related to the development and exploitation of computing resources for the Worldwide LHC Computing Grid (WLCG). A collaboration of IFAE (High Energy Physics Institute of the Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona) and CIEMAT (Centro de Investigaciones Energ\u00e9ticas Medioambientales and Tecnol\u00f3gicas), it is supported by regional (Catalan) and national (Spanish) research governing authorities.\nThe main scientific project PIC is associated to, in terms of utilisation of computing resources, is the deployment, operations and maintenance of the Spanish Tier 1 site for the WLCG, supporting the ATLAS, CMS and LHCb experiments of the LHC at CERN. PIC researchers and computing experts hence contribute to the development of Grid Computing technologies, as required by the computing needs of these experiments. Other projects in which PIC researchers are involved include computing support for Astrophysics and Cosmology experiments (such as MAGIC, PAU and DES) and computing techniques for medical imaging.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61408", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61408", "title": "Samurai, The Legend of Musashi", "text": ""}
{"id": "61409", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61409", "title": "James Dewey Watson", "text": ""}
{"id": "61410", "revid": "39540191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61410", "title": "Louis Braille", "text": "French educator and inventor of braille (1809\u20131852)\nLouis Braille ( ; ; 4 January 1809 \u2013 6 January 1852) was a French educator and the inventor of a reading and writing system named after him, braille, intended for use by visually impaired people. His system is used worldwide and remains virtually unchanged to this day.\nBraille was blinded in one eye at the age of three. This occurred as a result from an accident with a stitching awl in his father's harness-making shop. Consequently, an infection set in and spread to both eyes, resulting in total blindness. At that time, there were not many resources in place for the blind, but he nevertheless excelled in his education and received a scholarship to France's Royal Institute for Blind Youth. While still a student there, he began developing a system of tactile code that could allow blind people to read and write quickly and efficiently. Inspired by a system invented by Charles Barbier, Braille's new method was more compact and lent itself to a range of uses, including music. He presented his work to his peers for the first time in 1824, when he was fifteen years old.\nIn adulthood, Braille served as a professor at the Institute and had an avocation as a musician, but he largely spent the remainder of his life refining and extending his system. It went unused by most educators for many years after his death, but posterity has recognized braille as a revolutionary invention, and it has been adapted for use in languages worldwide.\nEarly life.\nLouis Braille was born in Coupvray, a small town about twenty miles east of Paris, on 4 January 1809. He and his three elder siblings \u2013 Monique Catherine (b. 1793), Louis-Simon (b. 1795), and Marie C\u00e9line (b. 1797) \u2013 lived with their parents, Simon-Ren\u00e9 and Monique, on three hectares of land and vineyard in the countryside. Simon-Ren\u00e9 maintained a successful enterprise as a leatherer and maker of horse tack.\nAs soon as he could walk, Braille's time was spent playing in his father's workshop. At the age of three, he was playing with some of the tools, trying to make holes in a piece of leather with an awl. Squinting closely at the surface, he pressed down hard to drive the point in, and the awl glanced across the tough leather and stabbed him in one of his eyes. A local physician bound and patched the affected eye and even arranged for Braille to be met the next day in Paris by a surgeon, but no treatment could save the damaged organ. In agony, the young boy suffered for weeks as the wound became severely infected. He eventually lost sight in the other eye, likely due to sympathetic ophthalmia.\nBraille survived the torment of the infection, but by the age of five he was completely blind in both eyes. Due to his young age, he did not realize at first that he had lost his sight, and often asked why it was always dark. His parents made many efforts \u2013 quite uncommon for the era \u2013 to raise their youngest child in a normal fashion, and he prospered in their care. He learned to navigate the village and country paths with canes his father hewed for him, and he grew up seemingly at peace with his disability. Braille's bright and creative mind impressed the local teachers and priests, and he was accommodated with higher education.\nBlind education.\nBraille studied in Coupvray until the age of ten. Because of his intelligence and diligence, Braille was permitted to attend one of the first schools for blind children in the world, the Royal Institute for Blind Youth, since renamed to the National Institute for Blind Youth in Paris. The last of his family's children to leave the household, Braille departed for the school in February 1819. At that time the Royal Institute was an underfunded, ramshackle affair, but it provided a relatively stable environment for blind children to learn and associate together. While a student at the school, Braille made lifelong friends, including Gabriel Gauthier, Hippolyte Coltat, and Jean-Pierre Binet.\nHa\u00fcy system.\nThe children were taught to read using a system devised by the school's founder, Valentin Ha\u00fcy. Not blind himself, Ha\u00fcy was a philanthropist who devoted his life to helping the blind. He designed and manufactured a small library of books for the children by embossing heavy paper with the raised imprints of Latin letters. Readers would trace their fingers over the text, comprehending slowly but in a traditional fashion which Ha\u00fcy could appreciate.\nBraille was helped by Ha\u00fcy's books, but he also despaired over their lack of depth: the amount of information retained in such books was necessarily minor. Because the raised letters were made in a complex artisanal process using wet paper pressed against copper wire, the children could not hope to \"write\" by themselves. So that the young Louis could send letters back home, Simon-Ren\u00e9 provided him with an alphabet made from bits of thick leather. It was a slow and cumbersome process, but the boy could at least trace the letters' outlines and write his first sentences.\nThe handcrafted Ha\u00fcy books all came in uncomfortable sizes and weights for children. They were laboriously constructed, very fragile, and expensive to obtain: when Ha\u00fcy's school first opened, it had a total of three books. Nonetheless, Ha\u00fcy promoted their use with zeal. To him, the books presented a system which would be readily approved by educators and indeed they seemed \u2013 at the time \u2013 to offer the best achievable results. Braille and his schoolmates, however, could detect all too well the books' crushing limitations. Nonetheless, Ha\u00fcy's efforts still provided a breakthrough achievement \u2013 the recognition of the sense of touch as a workable strategy for sightless reading. The Ha\u00fcy system's main drawback, in the opinion of at least one author, was that it was \"talking to the fingers with the language of the eye\".\nTeacher and musician.\nBraille read Ha\u00fcy's books repeatedly, and he was equally attentive to the oral instruction offered by the school. He proved to be a highly proficient student and, after he had exhausted the school's curriculum, he was immediately asked to remain a teacher's aide. By 1833, he was elevated to a full professorship. For much of the rest of his life, Braille stayed at the Institute where he taught history, geometry, and algebra.\nBraille's ear for music enabled him to become an accomplished cellist and organist in classes taught by Jean-Nicolas Marrigues. Later in life, his musical talents led him to play the organ for churches all over France. A devout Catholic, Braille held the position of organist in Paris at the Church of Saint-Nicolas-des-Champs. from 1834 to 1839, and later at the Church of Saint-Vincent-de-Paul.\nBraille system.\nOrigins.\nIn 1821, Braille learned of a communication system devised by Charles Barbier. Barbier, aware of its potential for helping the blind to read and write, wrote to the school to introduce his method. Barbier's invention was a code of up to twelve dots in two columns, impressed into thick paper. These impressions could be interpreted entirely by the fingers. Barbier's code of raised dots inspired Braille to develop a system of his own.\nBraille was determined to invent a system of reading and writing that could bridge the gap in communication between the sighted and the blind. In his own words: \"Access to communication in the widest sense is access to knowledge, and that is vitally important for us if we [the blind] are not to go on being despised or patronized by condescending sighted people. We do not need pity, nor do we need to be reminded we are vulnerable. We must be treated as equals \u2013 and communication is the way this can be brought about.\"\nDesign.\nBraille reworked Barbier's system by simplifying its form and maximizing its efficiency. He made uniform columns for each letter, and reduced the maximum of twelve raised dots to six. His first version used both dots and dashes. He published this version in 1829, but by the second edition in 1837 discarded the dashes because they were too difficult to read. Crucially, Braille's smaller cells were capable of being recognized as letters with a single touch of a finger.\nBraille created his own raised-dot system using Barbier's slate and stylus tools. Barbier had donated many sets of these tools to the school. By soldering metal strips across the slate, Braille created a secure area for the stylus which would keep the lines straight and readable.\nBy these modest means, Braille constructed a robust communication system. \"It bears the stamp of genius,\" wrote Dr. Richard Slating French, former director of the California School for the Blind, \"like the Roman alphabet itself\".\nMusical adaptation.\nThe system was soon extended to include braille musical notation. Passionate about his own music, Braille took meticulous care in its planning to ensure that the musical code would be \"flexible enough to meet the unique requirements of any instrument\". In 1829, he published the first book about his system, \"Method of Writing Words, Music, and Plainsong by Means of Dots, for Use by the Blind and Arranged for Them\". Ironically this book was first printed by the raised letter method of the Ha\u00fcy system.\nPublications.\nBraille produced several written works about braille and as general education for the blind. \"Method of Writing Words, Music, and Plainsong...\" (1829) was revised and republished in 1837; his mathematics guide, \"Little Synopsis of Arithmetic for Beginners\", entered use in 1838; and his monograph \"New Method for Representing by Dots the Form of Letters, Maps, Geometric Figures, Musical Symbols, etc., for Use by the Blind\" was first published in 1839. Many of Braille's original printed works remain available at the Braille birthplace museum in Coupvray.\nDecapoint.\n\"New Method for Representing by Dots...\" (1839) put forth Braille's plan for a new writing system with which blind people could write letters that could be read by sighted people. Called \"decapoint\", the system combined his method of dot-punching with a new specialized grill which Braille devised to overlay the paper. When used with an associated number table (also designed by Braille and requiring memorization), the grill could permit a blind writer to faithfully reproduce the standard alphabet.\nAfter the introduction of decapoint, Braille assisted his friend Pierre-Fran\u00e7ois-Victor Foucault, who invented the Raphigraphe, a device that allowed for more rapid creation of letters made with raised points. Foucault's machine was hailed as a great success and was exhibited at the World's Fair in Paris in 1855. There is a decapoint slate and a raphigraphy on display at the Louis Braille museum.\nLater life.\nDr. Alexandre-Ren\u00e9 Pignier, principal at the school, supported Braille's work and allowed the teaching of Braille's system. However, Pignier was forced out of his position in 1840 by an ambitious younger teacher, Pierre-Armand Dufau, who opposed the teaching of Braille at the school. Fortunately, another teacher, Joseph Guadet, supported Braille, and the system was reintroduced in 1844, at the time of the opening of a new school building on the Boulevard des Invalides.\nBraille had always been a sickly child, and his condition worsened in adulthood. A persistent respiratory illness, long believed to be tuberculosis, dogged him. Despite the lack of a cure at the time, Braille lived with the illness for 16 years. By the age of 40, he was forced to relinquish his position as a teacher. When his condition reached mortal danger, he was admitted to the infirmary at the Royal Institution, where he died in 1852, two days after he turned 43.\nLegacy.\nBecause of the overwhelming insistence of the blind pupils, Braille's system was finally adopted by the Institute in 1854, two years after his death. The system spread throughout the French-speaking world, but was slower to expand in other places. However, by the time of the first all-European conference of teachers of the blind in 1873, the cause of braille was championed by Dr. Thomas Rhodes Armitage and thereafter its international use increased rapidly. By 1882, Dr. Armitage was able to report that \"There is now probably no institution in the civilized world where braille is not used except in some of those in North America.\" Eventually even these holdouts relented: braille was officially adopted by schools for the blind in the United States in 1916, and a universal braille code for English was formalized in 1932.\nNew variations in braille technology continue to grow, including such innovations as braille computer terminals; RoboBraille email delivery service; and Nemeth Braille, a comprehensive system for mathematical and scientific notation. Almost two centuries after its invention, braille remains a system of powerful and enduring utility.\nHonors and tributes.\nThe immense personal legacy of Louis Braille was described in a 1952 essay by T. S. Eliot:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Perhaps the most enduring honor to the memory of Louis Braille is the half-conscious honor we pay him by applying his name to the script he invented \u2013 and, in this country [England], adapting the pronunciation of his name to our own language. We honor Braille when we speak of \"braille\". His memory has in this way a security greater than that of the memories of many men more famous in their day.\nBraille's childhood home in Coupvray is a listed historic building and houses the Louis Braille museum, which contains a portrait miniature of him by Lucienne Filippi. A large monument to him was erected in the town square which was itself renamed Braille Square. On the centenary of his death, his remains were moved to the Panth\u00e9on in Paris. In a symbolic gesture, Braille's hands were left in Coupvray, reverently buried near his home.\nStatues and other memorials to Louis Braille can be found around the world. He has been commemorated in postage stamps worldwide, and the asteroid 9969 Braille was named for him in 1992. The \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" lists him among the \"100 Most Influential Inventors Of All Time\".\nA Google Doodle for Louis Braille's 197th birthday in 2006 was shown on Google's homepage, spelling \"Google\" in braille.\nThe 200th anniversary of Braille's birth in 2009 was celebrated throughout the world by exhibitions and symposiums about his life and achievements. Among the commemorations, Belgium and Italy struck 2-euro coins, India released a set of two commemorative coins (Rs 100 and Rs 2), and the USA struck a one dollar coin, all in Braille's honor.\nWorld Braille Day is celebrated every year on Braille's birthday, 4 January, since 2019.\nIn popular culture.\nBecause of his accomplishments as a young boy, Braille holds a special place as a hero for children, and he has been the subject of a large number of works of juvenile literature. Other appearances in the arts include the American TV special \"Young Heroes: Louis Braille\" (2010); the French TV movie \"Une lumi\u00e8re dans la nuit\" (2008) (released in English as \"The Secret of Braille\"); and the dramatic play \"Braille: The Early Life of Louis Braille\" (1989) by Lola and Coleman Jennings. In music, Braille's life was subject of the song \"Merci, Louis\", composed by the Halifax singer-songwriter Terry Kelly, chair of the Canadian Braille Literacy Foundation. \"The Braille Legacy\", a musical which tells the story of Louis Braille, directed by Thom Southerland and starring J\u00e9r\u00f4me Pradon, debuted at the Charing Cross Theatre in April 2017.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61411", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61411", "title": "The Tomfoolery Show", "text": "1970\u20131971 American animated comedy television series\nThe Tomfoolery Show is a 1970\u20131971 American animated comedy television series, based on the works of Edward Lear which aired on NBC. The animation was done at the Halas and Batchelor Studios in London and Stroud. Though the works of other writers were also used, notably Lewis Carroll and Ogden Nash, Lear's works were the main source, and characters like the Yongy-Bonghy-Bo and the Umbrageous Umbrella Maker were all Lear creations. Other characters included the Enthusiastic Elephant, the Fizzgiggious Fish, and the Scroobious Snake. The show's writing was credited to Lear, Carroll, and Romeo Muller, the latter being responsible for the adaptations of the earlier writers' works. Some original material was also written based on characters created by Lear, although much of the material was a straight recital of poems and limericks or songs using Lear's poems set to music. A recurring joke had a delivery boy running around, trying to deliver a large plant and shouting, \"Plant for Mrs Discobolus!\"\nThe show also included characters from Gelett Burgess' work, including \"The Purple Cow\" and the Goops.\nSome of the gags were based on Abbott and Costello skits which involved one of the regular characters in troubling situations.\nA cooking lesson for a silly recipe was also presented in each episode. Two memorable examples were:-\nThe series was produced by Rankin/Bass, (formerly Videocraft International), who also made the \"Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer\" and \"Frosty the Snowman\" television specials.\n17 episodes were broadcast from September 12, 1970 to September 4, 1971, featuring the voices of Peter Hawkins, Bernard Spear, and the Maury Laws Singers.\nReception.\nIn \"Children's Television: The First Thirty-five Years\", George W. Woolery said, \"A bit too literary and lofty, \"Tomfoolery\" was a noble failure.\" David Perlmutter agreed in \"The Encyclopedia of American Animated TV Shows\", saying that the show was \"a failed attempt... The problem was that the approach to the material did not do it justice \u2014 the program was structured in the style of a revue \u00e0 la \"Rowan &amp; Martin's Laugh-In\" rather than a proper narrative...The odd m\u00e9lange lasted only a year on the air despite its noble intent.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61412", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61412", "title": "Chico", "text": "Chico () means \"small\", \"boy\" or \"child\" in the Spanish language. It is also the nickname for Francisco in the Portuguese language ().\nChico may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61414", "revid": "45201989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61414", "title": "Kerio River", "text": "The Kerio River is a river in Turkana County, Kenya. It flows northward into Lake Turkana. It is one of the longest rivers in Kenya (about ), originating near the equator.\nCourse.\nThe Kerio River rises on the north slopes of the Amasya Hills to the west of Lake Bogoria.\nIt flows northward through the Kerio Valley between Tugen Hills and Elgeyo Escarpment.\nThe Elgeyo Escarpment rises to over above the Kerio valley in places.\nThe Kerio continues northward, often through deep and narrow valleys, to enter Lake Turkana in a delta just south of the delta formed by the Turkwel and Lokichar rivers. \nThe Kerio and Turkwel contribute 98% of the river water flowing into Lake Turkana on Kenyan territory (which makes up only 2% of the total riverine inflow). In their lower courses both these rivers are seasonal.\nNear its source the Kerio River is fed by two major tributaries flowing down the Elgeyo Escarpment: Arror River, and Embobut River.\nLand use.\nThe Lake Kamnarok National Reserve and Kerio Valley National Reserve lie on the east and west sides of the Kerio River in the upper valley. They are undeveloped, but have abundant birdlife and are known for their scenery.\nThe left bank of a section of the river is in the South Turkana National Reserve.\nIn 1999 there were allegations that Fluorspar Mines was dumping toxic waste into the river. These were denied by the responsible Minister for Mineral Exploration.\nThe main locations in Turkana District for irrigated agriculture are along the Turkwel and Kerio rivers. The Lotubai and Morulem irrigation schemes are on the Kerio.\nThe main crops are maize and sorghum, which account for 80% of irrigated crops, as well as green grams, cowpeas, bananas, mangoes, oranges and guavas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61415", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61415", "title": "Sado-masochistic", "text": ""}
{"id": "61416", "revid": "46834214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61416", "title": "Alexander Cartwright", "text": "Baseball club founding member (1820\u20131892)\nAlexander Joy Cartwright Jr. (April 17, 1820 \u2013 July 12, 1892) was a founding member of the New York Knickerbockers Base Ball Club in the 1840s. Although he was an inductee of the Baseball Hall of Fame and he was sometimes referred to as a \"father of baseball\", the importance of his role in the development of the game may have been exaggerated.\nThe rules of the modern game were long considered to have been based on the Knickerbocker Rules developed in 1845 by Cartwright and a committee from the Knickerbockers. However, later research called this scenario into question. The myth of Abner Doubleday having invented baseball was believed by many, but in Cooperstown in 1939, the myth was debunked. Cartwright (unlike Doubleday) was inducted into the Hall of Fame as a pioneering contributor to the game, 46 years after his death. Although it has been stated that Cartwright was officially declared the inventor of the modern game of baseball by the 83rd United States Congress on June 3, 1953, the \"Congressional Record\", the \"House Journal\", and the \"Senate Journal\" from June 3, 1953, did not mention Cartwright.\nEarly life and work.\nCartwright was born in 1820 to Alexander Cartwright Sr. (1784\u20131855), a merchant sea captain, and Esther Rebecca Burlock Cartwright (1792\u20131871). Alexander Jr. had six siblings. He first worked at the age of 16 in 1836 as a clerk for a Wall Street broker, later doing clerical work at the Union Bank of New York. After hours, he played bat-and-ball games in the streets of Manhattan with volunteer firefighters. Cartwright himself was a volunteer, first with Oceana Hose Company No. 36, and then Knickerbocker Engine Company No. 12.\nCartwright's ancestor Thomas Cartwright, of Aynho Park, Northamptonshire was an English landowner and Tory politician, who sat in the English and British House of Commons between 1695 and 1748. As the longest serving member he was dubbed Father of the House.\nA fire destroyed the Union Bank in 1845, forcing Cartwright to find other work. He became a bookseller with his brother, Alfred.\nKnickerbocker Base Ball Club.\nOne of the earliest known established clubs was the Gotham Base Ball Club, who played a brand of bat-and-ball game often called \"town ball\" or \"round ball,\" but in New York more usually \"base ball,\" similar but not identical to the British sport of rounders, on a field at 4th Avenue and 27th Street. In 1837, Gotham member William R. Wheaton drew up rules converting this playground game into a more elaborate and interesting sport to be played by adults. In 1842, Cartwright led the establishment of the Knickerbocker Base Ball Club (named after the Knickerbocker Fire Engine Company), a breakaway group from the Gothams.\nIn 1845, a committee from the new club including Wheaton (but not Cartwright) drew up rules resembling those of the Gothams. The major precepts included the stipulations that foul territories were to be introduced for the first time, and the practice of retiring a runner by hitting him with a thrown ball was forbidden. Cartwright is also erroneously credited for introducing flat bases at uniform distances, three strikes per batter, and nine players in the outfield. However, modern scholarship has cast doubt on the originality of these rules, as information has come to light about the New York clubs that predated the Knickerbockers, in particular the rules devised by William R. Wheaton for the Gotham Club in 1837. Baseball historian Jeffrey Kittel has concluded that none of the Knickerbocker Rules of 1845 was original, with the possible exception of three-out innings. As MLB's Official Historian John Thorn wrote, Cartwright has \"a plaque in the Baseball Hall of Fame on which every word of substance is false. Alex Cartwright did not set the base paths at ninety feet, the sides at nine men, or the game at nine innings.\" (In fact, all three were established by the inter-club Convention of 1857, eight years after Cartwright had left New York).\nThe first clearly documented match between two baseball clubs under these rules took place on June 19, 1846, at Elysian Fields in Hoboken, New Jersey. In this match, the Knickerbockers lost to the \"New York nine\" (probably the parent Gotham Club) by a score of 23 to 1. Some authors have also questioned the supposed \"first game\" under the new rules. The Knickerbockers' scorebook shows intra-club games during 1845; the New York Base Ball Club played at least three games against a Brooklyn club in 1845 also, but the rules used are unknown. Those who have studied the score-book have concluded that the differences in the games of 1845 and 1846, compared with the specifications of the Knickerbocker rules, are minimal.\nHawaii.\nIn 1849, Cartwright headed to California for the gold rush, and then continued on to work and live in the Kingdom of Hawaii. His family came to join him in 1851: wife Eliza Van Wie, son DeWitt (1843\u20131870), daughter Mary (1845\u20131869), and daughter Catherine (Kate) Lee (1849\u20131851). Their sons Bruce Cartwright (1853\u20131919) and Alexander Joy Cartwright III (1855\u20131921) were born in Hawaii. Some secondary sources claim Cartwright set up a baseball field on the island of Oahu at Makiki Field in 1852, but Nucciarone states that before 1866, the modern game of baseball was not known or even played in Honolulu. Also, she states that during Cartwright's lifetime he was not declared or documented as an originator of baseball in Hawaii.\nCartwright served as fire chief of Honolulu from 1850 through June 30, 1863. He was an advisor to King David Kal\u0101kaua and Queen Emma. Cartwright died on July 12, 1892, six months before the overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy in 1893. One of the leaders of the overthrow movement was Lorrin A. Thurston, who played baseball with classmate Alexander Cartwright III at Punahou School. Cartwright was buried in Oahu Cemetery.\nLegacy.\nAfter about two decades of controversy, invention of America's \"national game\" of baseball was attributed to Abner Doubleday by the Mills Commission (1905\u20131907). Some baseball historians promptly cried foul and others joined throughout the 20th century. Cartwright was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1938.\nNew York City librarian Robert W. Henderson documented Cartwright's contributions to baseball in his 1947 book \"Bat, Ball, and Bishop\". Although there is no question that Cartwright was a prominent figure in the early development of baseball, some students of baseball history have suggested that Henderson and others embellished Cartwright's role. The primary complaint is that touting Cartwright as the \"true\" inventor of the modern game was an effort to find an alternative single individual to counter the \"invention\" of baseball by Abner Doubleday.\nCartwright was the subject of a 1973 biography, \"The Man Who Invented Baseball\", by Harold Peterson. He was the subject of two biographies written in 2009. Jay Martin's \"Live All You Can: Alexander Joy Cartwright &amp; the Invention of Modern Baseball\" supports Cartwright as the inventor of baseball, while \"Alexander Cartwright: The Life Behind the Baseball Legend\" by Monica Nucciarone credits Cartwright as one of the game's pioneers but not its sole founder. The 2004 discovery of a newspaper interview with fellow Knickerbocker founder William R. Wheaton cast doubt on Cartwright's role. Wheaton stated that most of the rules long attributed to Cartwright and the Knickerbockers had in fact been developed by the older Gotham Club before the Knickerbockers' founding.\nIn 1938, Makiki Field in Honolulu was renamed Cartwright Field.\nThe Cartwright Cup is awarded to the Hawaii state high school baseball champions each year.\n1857 \"Laws of Base Ball\".\nIn 2016, experts verified the authenticity of a set of documents titled \"Laws of Base Ball\" written in 1857 by New York Knickerbockers president Daniel \"Doc\" Adams after a discussion with executives of 14 other New York-area clubs. The documents established the rules of the game, including - for the first time - nine innings, nine players on the field and 90-foot basepaths. Cartwright was not a participant at the 1857 meeting, as he was living in Hawaii.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61419", "revid": "44424095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61419", "title": "Tokenization (data security)", "text": "Concept in data security\nTokenization, when applied to data security, is the process of substituting a sensitive data element with a non-sensitive equivalent, referred to as a token, that has no intrinsic or exploitable meaning or value. The token is a reference (i.e. identifier) that maps back to the sensitive data through a tokenization system. The mapping from original data to a token uses methods that render tokens infeasible to reverse in the absence of the tokenization system, for example using tokens created from random numbers. A one-way cryptographic function is used to convert the original data into tokens, making it difficult to recreate the original data without obtaining entry to the tokenization system's resources. To deliver such services, the system maintains a vault database of tokens that are connected to the corresponding sensitive data. Protecting the system vault is vital to the system, and improved processes must be put in place to offer database integrity and physical security.\nThe tokenization system must be secured and validated using security best practices applicable to sensitive data protection, secure storage, audit, authentication and authorization. The tokenization system provides data processing applications with the authority and interfaces to request tokens, or detokenize back to sensitive data. \nThe security and risk reduction benefits of tokenization require that the tokenization system is logically isolated and segmented from data processing systems and applications that previously processed or stored sensitive data replaced by tokens. Only the tokenization system can tokenize data to create tokens, or detokenize back to redeem sensitive data under strict security controls. The token generation method must be proven to have the property that there is no feasible means through direct attack, cryptanalysis, side channel analysis, token mapping table exposure or brute force techniques to reverse tokens back to live data.\nReplacing live data with tokens in systems is intended to minimize exposure of sensitive data to those applications, stores, people and processes, reducing risk of compromise or accidental exposure and unauthorized access to sensitive data. Applications can operate using tokens instead of live data, with the exception of a small number of trusted applications explicitly permitted to detokenize when strictly necessary for an approved business purpose. Tokenization systems may be operated in-house within a secure isolated segment of the data center, or as a service from a secure service provider.\nTokenization may be used to safeguard sensitive data involving, for example, bank accounts, financial statements, medical records, criminal records, driver's licenses, loan applications, stock trades, voter registrations, and other types of personally identifiable information (PII). Tokenization is often used in credit card processing. The PCI Council defines tokenization as \"a process by which the primary account number (PAN) is replaced with a surrogate value called a token. A PAN may be linked to a reference number through the tokenization process. In this case, the merchant simply has to retain the token and a reliable third party controls the relationship and holds the PAN. The token may be created independently of the PAN, or the PAN can be used as part of the data input to the tokenization technique. The communication between the merchant and the third-party supplier must be secure to prevent an attacker from intercepting to gain the PAN and the token.\nDe-tokenization is the reverse process of redeeming a token for its associated PAN value. The security of an individual token relies predominantly on the infeasibility of determining the original PAN knowing only the surrogate value\". The choice of tokenization as an alternative to other techniques such as encryption will depend on varying regulatory requirements, interpretation, and acceptance by respective auditing or assessment entities. This is in addition to any technical, architectural or operational constraint that tokenization imposes in practical use.\nConcepts and origins.\nThe concept of tokenization, as adopted by the industry today, has existed since the first currency systems emerged centuries ago as a means to reduce risk in handling high value financial instruments by replacing them with surrogate equivalents. In the physical world, coin tokens have a long history of use replacing the financial instrument of minted coins and banknotes. In more recent history, subway tokens and casino chips found adoption for their respective systems to replace physical currency and cash handling risks such as theft. Exonumia and scrip are terms synonymous with such tokens.\nIn the digital world, similar substitution techniques have been used since the 1970s as a means to isolate real data elements from exposure to other data systems. In databases for example, surrogate key values have been used since 1976 to isolate data associated with the internal mechanisms of databases and their external equivalents for a variety of uses in data processing. More recently, these concepts have been extended to consider this isolation tactic to provide a security mechanism for the purposes of data protection.\nIn the payment card industry, tokenization is one means of protecting sensitive cardholder data in order to comply with industry standards and government regulations.\nTokenization was applied to payment card data by Shift4 Corporation and released to the public during an industry Security Summit in Las Vegas, Nevada in 2005. The technology is meant to prevent the theft of the credit card information in storage. Shift4 defines tokenization as: \"The concept of using a non-decryptable piece of data to represent, by reference, sensitive or secret data. In payment card industry (PCI) context, tokens are used to reference cardholder data that is managed in a tokenization system, application or off-site secure facility.\"\nTo protect data over its full lifecycle, tokenization is often combined with end-to-end encryption to secure data in transit to the tokenization system or service, with a token replacing the original data on return. For example, to avoid the risks of malware stealing data from low-trust systems such as point of sale (POS) systems, as in the http://, cardholder data encryption must take place prior to card data entering the POS and not after. Encryption takes place within the confines of a security hardened and validated card reading device and data remains encrypted until received by the processing host, an approach pioneered by Heartland Payment Systems as a means to secure payment data from advanced threats, now widely adopted by industry payment processing companies and technology companies. The PCI Council has also specified end-to-end encryption (certified point-to-point encryption\u2014P2PE) for various service implementations in various https:// documents.\nThe tokenization process.\nThe process of tokenization consists of the following steps:\nTokenization systems share several components according to established standards.\nDifference from encryption.\nTokenization and \"classic\" encryption effectively protect data if implemented properly, and a computer security system may use both. While similar in certain regards, tokenization and classic encryption differ in a few key aspects. Both are cryptographic data security methods and they essentially have the same function, however they do so with differing processes and have different effects on the data they are protecting.\nTokenization is a non-mathematical approach that replaces sensitive data with non-sensitive substitutes without altering the type or length of data. This is an important distinction from encryption because changes in data length and type can render information unreadable in intermediate systems such as databases. Tokenized data can still be processed by legacy systems which makes tokenization more flexible than classic encryption.\nIn many situations, the encryption process is a constant consumer of processing power, hence such a system needs significant expenditures in specialized hardware and software.\nAnother difference is that tokens require significantly less computational resources to process. With tokenization, specific data is kept fully or partially visible for processing and analytics while sensitive information is kept hidden. This allows tokenized data to be processed more quickly and reduces the strain on system resources. This can be a key advantage in systems that rely on high performance.\nIn comparison to encryption, tokenization technologies reduce time, expense, and administrative effort while enabling teamwork and communication.\nTypes of tokens.\nThere are many ways that tokens can be classified however there is currently no unified classification. Tokens can be: single or multi-use, cryptographic or non-cryptographic, reversible or irreversible, authenticable or non-authenticable, and various combinations thereof.\nIn the context of payments, the difference between high and low value tokens plays a significant role.\nHigh-value tokens (HVTs).\nHVTs serve as surrogates for actual PANs in payment transactions and are used as an instrument for completing a payment transaction. In order to function, they must look like actual PANs. Multiple HVTs can map back to a single PAN and a single physical credit card without the owner being aware of it. Additionally, HVTs can be limited to certain networks and/or merchants whereas PANs cannot.\nHVTs can also be bound to specific devices so that anomalies between token use, physical devices, and geographic locations can be flagged as potentially fraudulent. HVT blocking enhances efficiency by reducing computational costs while maintaining accuracy and reducing record linkage as it reduces the number of records that are compared.\nLow-value tokens (LVTs) or security tokens.\nLVTs also act as surrogates for actual PANs in payment transactions, however they serve a different purpose. LVTs cannot be used by themselves to complete a payment transaction. In order for an LVT to function, it must be possible to match it back to the actual PAN it represents, albeit only in a tightly controlled fashion. Using tokens to protect PANs becomes ineffectual if a tokenization system is breached, therefore securing the tokenization system itself is extremely important.\nSystem operations, limitations and evolution.\nFirst generation tokenization systems use a database to map from live data to surrogate substitute tokens and back. This requires the storage, management, and continuous backup for every new transaction added to the token database to avoid data loss. Another problem is ensuring consistency across data centers, requiring continuous synchronization of token databases. Significant consistency, availability and performance trade-offs, per the CAP theorem, are unavoidable with this approach. This overhead adds complexity to real-time transaction processing to avoid data loss and to assure data integrity across data centers, and also limits scale. Storing all sensitive data in one service creates an attractive target for attack and compromise, and introduces privacy and legal risk in the aggregation of data Internet privacy, particularly in the EU.\nAnother limitation of tokenization technologies is measuring the level of security for a given solution through independent validation. With the lack of standards, the latter is critical to establish the strength of tokenization offered when tokens are used for regulatory compliance. The PCI Council recommends independent vetting and validation of any claims of security and compliance: \"Merchants considering the use of tokenization should perform a thorough evaluation and risk analysis to identify and document the unique characteristics of their particular implementation, including all interactions with payment card data and the particular tokenization systems and processes\"\nThe method of generating tokens may also have limitations from a security perspective. With concerns about security and attacks to random number generators, which are a common choice for the generation of tokens and token mapping tables, scrutiny must be applied to ensure proven and validated methods are used versus arbitrary design. Random-number generators have limitations in terms of speed, entropy, seeding and bias, and security properties must be carefully analysed and measured to avoid predictability and compromise.\nWith tokenization's increasing adoption, new tokenization technology approaches have emerged to remove such operational risks and complexities and to enable increased scale suited to emerging big data use cases and high performance transaction processing, especially in financial services and banking. In addition to conventional tokenization methods, Protegrity provides additional security through its so-called \"obfuscation layer.\" This creates a barrier that prevents not only regular users from accessing information they wouldn't see but also privileged users who has access, such as database administrators.\nStateless tokenization allows live data elements to be mapped to surrogate values randomly, without relying on a database, while maintaining the isolation properties of tokenization.\nNovember 2014, American Express released its token service which meets the EMV tokenization standard. Other notable examples of Tokenization-based payment systems, according to the EMVCo standard, include Google Wallet, Apple Pay, Samsung Pay, Microsoft Wallet, Fitbit Pay and Garmin Pay. Visa uses tokenization techniques to provide a secure online and mobile shopping.\nUsing blockchain, as opposed to relying on trusted third parties, it is possible to run highly accessible, tamper-resistant databases for transactions. With help of blockchain, tokenization is the process of converting the value of a tangible or intangible asset into a token that can be exchanged on the network.\nThis enables the tokenization of conventional financial assets, for instance, by transforming rights into a digital token backed by the asset itself using blockchain technology. Besides that, tokenization enables the simple and efficient compartmentalization and management of data across multiple users. Individual tokens created through tokenization can be used to split ownership and partially resell an asset. Consequently, only entities with the appropriate token can access the data.\nNumerous blockchain companies support asset tokenization. In 2019, eToro acquired Firmo and renamed as eToroX. Through its Token Management Suite, which is backed by USD-pegged stablecoins, eToroX enables asset tokenization.\nThe tokenization of equity is facilitated by STOKR, a platform that links investors with small and medium-sized businesses. Tokens issued through the STOKR platform are legally recognized as transferable securities under European Union capital market regulations.\nBreakers enable tokenization of intellectual property, allowing content creators to issue their own digital tokens. Tokens can be distributed to a variety of project participants. Without intermediaries or governing body, content creators can integrate reward-sharing features into the token.\nApplication to alternative payment systems.\nBuilding an alternate payments system requires a number of entities working together in order to deliver near field communication (NFC) or other technology based payment services to the end users. One of the issues is the interoperability between the players and to resolve this issue the role of trusted service manager (TSM) is proposed to establish a technical link between mobile network operators (MNO) and providers of services, so that these entities can work together. Tokenization can play a role in mediating such services.\nTokenization as a security strategy lies in the ability to replace a real card number with a surrogate (target removal) and the subsequent limitations placed on the surrogate card number (risk reduction). If the surrogate value can be used in an unlimited fashion or even in a broadly applicable manner, the token value gains as much value as the real credit card number. In these cases, the token may be secured by a second dynamic token that is unique for each transaction and also associated to a specific payment card. Example of dynamic, transaction-specific tokens include cryptograms used in the EMV specification.\nApplication to PCI DSS standards.\nThe Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard, an industry-wide set of guidelines that must be met by any organization that stores, processes, or transmits cardholder data, mandates that credit card data must be protected when stored. Tokenization, as applied to payment card data, is often implemented to meet this mandate, replacing credit card and ACH numbers in some systems with a random value or string of characters. Tokens can be formatted in a variety of ways. Some token service providers or tokenization products generate the surrogate values in such a way as to match the format of the original sensitive data. In the case of payment card data, a token might be the same length as a Primary Account Number (bank card number) and contain elements of the original data such as the last four digits of the card number. When a payment card authorization request is made to verify the legitimacy of a transaction, a token might be returned to the merchant instead of the card number, along with the authorization code for the transaction. The token is stored in the receiving system while the actual cardholder data is mapped to the token in a secure tokenization system. Storage of tokens and payment card data must comply with current PCI standards, including the use of https://.\nStandards (ANSI, the PCI Council, Visa, and EMV).\nTokenization is currently in standards definition in ANSI X9 as http://. X9 is responsible for the industry standards for financial cryptography and data protection including payment card PIN management, credit and debit card encryption and related technologies and processes. The PCI Council has also stated support for tokenization in reducing risk in data breaches, when combined with other technologies such as Point-to-Point Encryption (P2PE) and assessments of compliance to PCI DSS guidelines. Visa Inc. released Visa Tokenization Best Practices for tokenization uses in credit and debit card handling applications and services. In March 2014, http:// released its first payment tokenization specification for EMV. PCI DSS is the most frequently utilized standard for Tokenization systems used by payment industry players.\nRisk reduction.\nTokenization can render it more difficult for attackers to gain access to sensitive data outside of the tokenization system or service. Implementation of tokenization may simplify the requirements of the PCI DSS, as systems that no longer store or process sensitive data may have a reduction of applicable controls required by the PCI DSS guidelines.\nAs a security best practice, independent assessment and validation of any technologies used for data protection, including tokenization, must be in place to establish the security and strength of the method and implementation before any claims of privacy compliance, regulatory compliance, and data security can be made. This validation is particularly important in tokenization, as the tokens are shared externally in general use and thus exposed in high risk, low trust environments. The infeasibility of reversing a token or set of tokens to a live sensitive data must be established using industry accepted measurements and proofs by appropriate experts independent of the service or solution provider.\nRestrictions on token use.\nNot all organizational data can be tokenized, and needs to be examined and filtered.\nWhen databases are utilized on a large scale, they expand exponentially,\u00a0causing the search process to take longer, restricting system performance, and increasing backup processes. A database that links sensitive information to tokens is called a vault. With the addition of new data, the vault's maintenance workload increases significantly.\nFor ensuring database consistency, token databases need to be continuously synchronized.\nApart from that, secure communication channels must be built between sensitive data and the vault so that data is not compromised on the way to or from storage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61421", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61421", "title": "112 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 112 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Drusus and Caesoninus (or, less frequently, year 642 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Fifth Year of Yuanding. The denomination 112 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n* L\u00fc Jia, Premier of the Han vassal state of Nanyue, opposes increased Han control and refuses to appear before the king of Nanyue and the envoys of Han. He rebels against the Han when Emperor Wu sends an armed force of 2,000 men to kill him and his allies. L\u00fc kills king Zhao Xing and his regent, Queen Dowager Jiu, massacres the Han force, and installs Zhao Jiande as king.\n* Autumn \u2013 Emperor Wu launches a major invasion of Nanyue, sending five riverine fleets to invade under Lu Bode, Yang Pu and three former Yue generals.\n* The king of Dongyue, Zou Yushan, sends an army to link up with Yang Pu, but he secretly sends an envoy to Zhao Jiande and halts the transport fleet to await the war's outcome, claiming that the weather is preventing its advance.\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61422", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61422", "title": "People's Democratic Republic of Algeria", "text": ""}
{"id": "61423", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61423", "title": "Republic of Angola", "text": ""}
{"id": "61424", "revid": "40429064", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61424", "title": "Republic of Benin (1967)", "text": "Former country in West Africa\nThe Republic of Benin was a short-lived unrecognized secessionist state in West Africa that existed for seven hours in 1967. It was established on 19 September 1967 during the Nigerian Civil War as a puppet state of Biafra, following its occupation of Nigeria's Mid-Western Region, and named after its capital, Benin City, with Albert Nwazu Okonkwo as its head of government.\nThe new state was an attempt by Biafra to prevent non-Igbo residents of the neighbouring Mid-Western Region from siding with Nigeria following regional ethnic tensions early in the war. The Republic of Benin was officially declared even as the Nigerian federal forces were reconquering the region and ended the following day as they entered Benin City. The occupation of the Mid-Western Region turned residents against the secessionist cause and was used by the Nigerian government as justification to escalate the war against Biafra.\nBackground and prelude.\nIn the lead-up to the Nigerian Civil War, residents of the ethnically diverse Mid-Western Region attempted to take a neutral position. Shortly before Biafra announced its secession from Nigeria, leaders in the Mid-Western Region sponsored a peace conference near Benin City, and officials refused to permit Nigerian federal troops to invade Biafra through the region. In August 1967, Biafran forces occupied the Mid-Western Region and took control of the regional government, with American-educated doctor Albert Okonkwo as the new head of government under the title governor. Initially, the Igbo population welcomed Biafran control, while non-Igbos generally were unhappy but decided to wait for the restoration of federal control rather than resist. Initial relations between the new administration and non-Igbos were peaceful but uneasy. To improve relations, Okonkwo's administration saturated homes and streets with news from the Biafran position. However, the mass media campaign began to fill the state with news about the oppression of the Igbo in Nigeria, and as the days passed, only increased the region's ethnic divide. The endless public relations campaign destroyed non-Igbo sympathy for the pro-Biafran secessionist cause instead of converting them to outright support, with most adopting neutral or pro-Nigerian sympathies. As relations between the occupational government and non-Igbos continued to deteriorate, Biafran President C. Odumegwu Ojukwu visited the Mid-Western Region to raise support and met with leaders of the previously banned National Convention of Nigerian Citizens (NCNC). Although the visit prompted increased support among former NCNC partisans, their former intra-party discord reawakened. At the same time NCNC partisans began to clash with supporters of other parties. The non-Igbo rejection of the invasion was solidified. As Okonkwo's administration continued to lose the support of the Mid-Western Region's populace, they became desperate.\nProclamation.\nOn 19 September 1967, the Biafrans rebranded the region by proclaiming the Republic of Benin, an independent state separate from Biafra, as a last-ditch effort. It was believed that even if it could not win non-Igbo support, the new state might at least physically divide Biafra from the Nigerian federal forces. Citing the deaths of Mid-Western residents in the northern riots and the region's antebellum support for a confederate government in Nigeria, Okonkwo declared that the Republic of Benin would support Biafra in all causes and would participate in organisations such as the Commonwealth of Nations and the Organisation of African Unity. However, Okonkwo and other officials had discussed an independence declaration two weeks earlier on 5 September without coming to an agreement, and the announcement was recorded in a short lull as he and his military forces retreated in the face of a federal government military advance. Later in the same day, government troops reached Benin City, the Republic of Benin's capital city, and the British high commissioner reported crowds lining the streets to celebrate the reconquest. Meanwhile, Biafran President Ojukwu offered no comment on the declaration, concentrating instead on Biafran soldiers' failure to stop the government's advance. Biafra had won limited recognition from some foreign states, but all gains were unrelated to the proclamation of Benin. The Biafran occupation of the Mid-Western Region failed to achieve its objectives and severely damaged domestic support for the secessionist cause among non-Igbos, and was perceived by the Nigerian federal government as justification to escalate the minor conflict into full-fledged war.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61426", "revid": "11526809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61426", "title": "Earendil", "text": ""}
{"id": "61427", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61427", "title": "Republic of Botswana", "text": ""}
{"id": "61428", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61428", "title": "Republic of Burundi", "text": ""}
{"id": "61429", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61429", "title": "Republic of Cameroon", "text": ""}
{"id": "61430", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61430", "title": "Republic of Cape Verde", "text": ""}
{"id": "61431", "revid": "15955403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61431", "title": "Republic of Chad", "text": ""}
{"id": "61432", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61432", "title": "Republic of Cote d'Ivoire", "text": ""}
{"id": "61433", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61433", "title": "Republic of Djibouti", "text": ""}
{"id": "61434", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61434", "title": "Republic of Equatorial Guinea", "text": ""}
{"id": "61435", "revid": "33", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61435", "title": "Republic of The Gambia", "text": ""}
{"id": "61436", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61436", "title": "Republic of Ghana", "text": ""}
{"id": "61437", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61437", "title": "Republic of Guinea", "text": ""}
{"id": "61438", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61438", "title": "Republic of Guinea Bissau", "text": ""}
{"id": "61439", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61439", "title": "Republic of Kenya", "text": ""}
{"id": "61440", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61440", "title": "Republic of Liberia", "text": ""}
{"id": "61441", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61441", "title": "Republic of Madagascar", "text": ""}
{"id": "61442", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61442", "title": "Republic of Malawi", "text": ""}
{"id": "61443", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61443", "title": "Republic of Mali", "text": ""}
{"id": "61444", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61444", "title": "Islamic Republic of Mauritania", "text": ""}
{"id": "61445", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61445", "title": "Republic of Mauritius", "text": ""}
{"id": "61446", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61446", "title": "Republic of Mozambique", "text": ""}
{"id": "61447", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61447", "title": "Republic of Namibia", "text": ""}
{"id": "61448", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61448", "title": "Republic of Niger", "text": ""}
{"id": "61449", "revid": "48189908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61449", "title": "Federal Republic of Nigeria", "text": ""}
{"id": "61450", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61450", "title": "Republic of Rwanda", "text": ""}
{"id": "61451", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61451", "title": "Republic of Sao Tome and Principe", "text": ""}
{"id": "61452", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61452", "title": "Republic of Senegal", "text": ""}
{"id": "61453", "revid": "48281269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61453", "title": "Republic of Seychelles", "text": ""}
{"id": "61454", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61454", "title": "Republic of Sierra Leone", "text": ""}
{"id": "61455", "revid": "40305475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61455", "title": "Republic of Somalia", "text": ""}
{"id": "61456", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61456", "title": "Republic of Sudan", "text": ""}
{"id": "61457", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61457", "title": "Republic of Tunisia", "text": ""}
{"id": "61458", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61458", "title": "Republic of Uganda", "text": ""}
{"id": "61459", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61459", "title": "Republic of Zambia", "text": ""}
{"id": "61460", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61460", "title": "Republic of Zimbabwe", "text": ""}
{"id": "61462", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61462", "title": "The Rings of Power", "text": ""}
{"id": "61463", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61463", "title": "Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya", "text": ""}
{"id": "61464", "revid": "972012026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61464", "title": "Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia", "text": ""}
{"id": "61465", "revid": "27233032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61465", "title": "State of Eritrea", "text": ""}
{"id": "61467", "revid": "15955439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61467", "title": "Gabonese Republic", "text": ""}
{"id": "61469", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61469", "title": "United Republic of Tanzania", "text": ""}
{"id": "61470", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61470", "title": "Togolese Republic", "text": ""}
{"id": "61471", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61471", "title": "Federal Islamic Republic of the Comoros", "text": ""}
{"id": "61473", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61473", "title": "113 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 113 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caprarius and Carbo (or, less frequently, year 641 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Fourth Year of Yuanding. The denomination 113 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;"}
{"id": "61475", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61475", "title": "Erich von Daniken", "text": ""}
{"id": "61476", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61476", "title": "Radius of convergence", "text": "Domain of convergence of power series\nIn mathematics, the radius of convergence of a power series is the radius of the largest disk at the center of the series in which the series converges. It is either a non-negative real number or formula_1. When it is positive, the power series converges absolutely and uniformly on compact sets inside the open disk of radius equal to the radius of convergence, and it is the Taylor series of the analytic function to which it converges. In case of multiple singularities of a function (singularities are those values of the argument for which the function is not defined), the radius of convergence is the shortest or minimum of all the respective distances (which are all non-negative numbers) calculated from the center of the disk of convergence to the respective singularities of the function.\nDefinition.\nFor a power series \"f\" defined as:\n formula_2\nwhere\nThe radius of convergence \"r\" is a nonnegative real number or formula_1 such that the series converges if\n formula_4\nand diverges if\n formula_5\nSome may prefer an alternative definition, as existence is obvious:\n formula_6\nOn the boundary, that is, where |\"z\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\"| = \"r\", the behavior of the power series may be complicated, and the series may converge for some values of \"z\" and diverge for others. The radius of convergence is infinite if the series converges for all complex numbers \"z\".\nFinding the radius of convergence.\nTwo cases arise:\nTheoretical radius.\nThe radius of convergence can be found by applying the root test to the terms of the series. The root test uses the number\n formula_8\n\"lim\u00a0sup\" denotes the limit superior. The root test states that the series converges if \"C\"\u00a0&lt;\u00a01 and diverges if\u00a0\"C\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a01. It follows that the power series converges if the distance from \"z\" to the center \"a\" is less than\n formula_9\nand diverges if the distance exceeds that number; this statement is the Cauchy\u2013Hadamard theorem. Note that \"r\"\u00a0=\u00a01/0 is interpreted as an infinite radius, meaning that \"f\" is an entire function.\nThe limit involved in the ratio test is usually easier to compute, and when that limit exists, it shows that the radius of convergence is finite.\n formula_10\nThis is shown as follows. The ratio test says the series converges if\n formula_11\nThat is equivalent to\n formula_12\nPractical estimation of radius in the case of real coefficients.\nUsually, in scientific applications, only a finite number of coefficients formula_7 are known. Typically, as formula_14 increases, these coefficients settle into a regular behavior determined by the nearest radius-limiting singularity. In this case, two main techniques have been developed, based on the fact that the coefficients of a Taylor series are roughly exponential with ratio formula_15 where formula_16 is the radius of convergence.\nRadius of convergence in complex analysis.\nA power series with a positive radius of convergence can be made into a holomorphic function by taking its argument to be a complex variable. The radius of convergence can be characterized by the following theorem:\n The radius of convergence of a power series \"f\" centered on a point \"a\" is equal to the distance from \"a\" to the nearest point where \"f\" cannot be defined in a way that makes it holomorphic.\nThe set of all points whose distance to \"a\" is strictly less than the radius of convergence is called the \"disk of convergence\".\n\"The nearest point\" means the nearest point in the complex plane, not necessarily on the real line, even if the center and all coefficients are real. For example, the function\n formula_39\nhas no singularities on the real line, since formula_40 has no real roots. Its Taylor series about 0 is given by\n formula_41\nThe root test shows that its radius of convergence is 1. In accordance with this, the function \"f\"(\"z\") has singularities at\u00a0\u00b1\"i\", which are at a distance 1 from\u00a00.\nFor a proof of this theorem, see analyticity of holomorphic functions.\nA simple example.\nThe arctangent function of trigonometry can be expanded in a power series:\n formula_42\nIt is easy to apply the root test in this case to find that the radius of convergence is 1.\nA more complicated example.\nConsider this power series:\n formula_43\nwhere the rational numbers \"B\"\"n\" are the Bernoulli numbers. It may be cumbersome to try to apply the ratio test to find the radius of convergence of this series. But the theorem of complex analysis stated above quickly solves the problem. At \"z\" = 0, there is in effect no singularity since the singularity is removable. The only non-removable singularities are therefore located at the \"other\" points where the denominator is zero. We solve\n formula_44\nby recalling that if \"z\" = \"x\" + \"iy\" and \"e\"\"iy\" = cos(\"y\") + \"i\" sin(\"y\") then\n formula_45\nand then take \"x\" and \"y\" to be real. Since \"y\" is real, the absolute value of cos(\"y\") + \"i\" sin(\"y\") is necessarily 1. Therefore, the absolute value of \"e\"\"z\" can be 1 only if \"e\"\"x\" is 1; since \"x\" is real, that happens only if \"x\" = 0. Therefore \"z\" is purely imaginary and cos(\"y\") + \"i\" sin(\"y\") = 1. Since \"y\" is real, that happens only if cos(\"y\") = 1 and sin(\"y\") = 0, so that \"y\" is an integer multiple of\u00a02\u03c0. Consequently the singular points of this function occur at\n \"z\" = a nonzero integer multiple of\u00a02\u03c0\"i\".\nThe singularities nearest 0, which is the center of the power series expansion, are at \u00b12\u03c0\"i\". The distance from the center to either of those points is 2\u03c0, so the radius of convergence is\u00a02\u03c0.\nConvergence on the boundary.\nIf the power series is expanded around the point \"a\" and the radius of convergence is \"r\", then the set of all points \"z\" such that |\"z\" \u2212 \"a\"| = \"r\" is a circle called the \"boundary\" of the disk of convergence. A power series may diverge at every point on the boundary, or diverge on some points and converge at other points, or converge at all the points on the boundary. Furthermore, even if the series converges everywhere on the boundary (even uniformly), it does not necessarily converge absolutely.\nExample 1: The power series for the function \"f\"(\"z\") = 1/(1 \u2212 \"z\"), expanded around \"z\" = 0, which is simply\n formula_46 \nhas radius of convergence 1 and diverges at every point on the boundary.\nExample 2: The power series for \"g\"(\"z\") = \u2212ln(1 \u2212 \"z\"), expanded around \"z\" = 0, which is\n formula_47 \nhas radius of convergence 1, and diverges for \"z\" = 1 but converges for all other points on the boundary. The function \"f\"(\"z\") of Example 1 is the derivative of \"g\"(\"z\").\nExample 3: The power series\n formula_48 \nhas radius of convergence 1 and converges everywhere on the boundary absolutely. If \"h\" is the function represented by this series on the unit disk, then the derivative of \"h\"(\"z\") is equal to \"g\"(\"z\")/\"z\" with \"g\" of Example 2. It turns out that \"h\"(\"z\") is the dilogarithm function.\nExample 4: The power series\n formula_49\nhas radius of convergence 1 and converges uniformly on the entire boundary |\"z\"| = 1, but does not converge absolutely on the boundary.\nRate of convergence.\nIf we expand the function\n formula_50\naround the point \"x\" = 0, we find that the radius of convergence of this series is formula_1, meaning that this series converges for all complex numbers. However, in applications, one is often interested in the precision of a numerical answer. Both the number of terms and the value at which the series is to be evaluated affect the accuracy of the answer. For example, if we want to calculate sin(0.1) accurate up to five decimal places, we only need the first two terms of the series. However, if we want the same precision for \"x\" = 1 we must evaluate and sum the first five terms of the series. For sin(10), one requires the first 18 terms of the series, and for sin(100) we need to evaluate the first 141 terms.\nSo for these particular values the fastest convergence of a power series expansion is at the center, and as one moves away from the center of convergence, the rate of convergence slows down until you reach the boundary (if it exists) and cross over, in which case the series will diverge.\nAbscissa of convergence of a Dirichlet series.\nAn analogous concept is the abscissa of convergence of a Dirichlet series\n formula_52\nSuch a series converges if the real part of \"s\" is greater than a particular number depending on the coefficients \"a\"\"n\": the abscissa of convergence.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61477", "revid": "962108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61477", "title": "Convergence radius", "text": ""}
{"id": "61478", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61478", "title": "Analytic function", "text": "Type of function in mathematics\nIn mathematics, an analytic function is a function that is locally given by a convergent power series. There exist both real analytic functions and complex analytic functions. Functions of each type are infinitely differentiable, but complex analytic functions exhibit properties that do not generally hold for real analytic functions.\nA function is analytic if and only if for every formula_1 in its domain, its Taylor series about formula_1 converges to the function in some neighborhood of formula_1. This is stronger than merely being infinitely differentiable at formula_1, and therefore having a well-defined Taylor series; the Fabius function provides an example of a function that is infinitely differentiable but not analytic.\nDefinitions.\nFormally, a function formula_5 is \"real analytic\" on an open set formula_6 in the real line if for any formula_7 one can write\nformula_8\nin which the coefficients formula_9 are real numbers and the series is convergent to formula_10 for formula_11 in a neighborhood of formula_12.\nAlternatively, a real analytic function is an infinitely differentiable function such that the Taylor series at any point formula_12 in its domain\nformula_14\nconverges to formula_10 for formula_11 in a neighborhood of formula_12 pointwise. The set of all real analytic functions on a given set formula_6 is often denoted by formula_19, or just by formula_20 if the domain is understood.\nA function formula_5 defined on some subset of the real line is said to be real analytic at a point formula_11 if there is a neighborhood formula_6 of formula_11 on which formula_5 is real analytic.\nThe definition of a \"complex analytic function\" is obtained by replacing, in the definitions above, \"real\" with \"complex\" and \"real line\" with \"complex plane\". A function is complex analytic if and only if it is holomorphic i.e. it is complex differentiable. For this reason the terms \"holomorphic\" and \"analytic\" are often used interchangeably for such functions.\nIn complex analysis, a function is called analytic in an open set \"U\" if it is (complex) differentiable at each point in \"U\" and its complex derivative is continuous on \"U\".\nExamples.\nTypical examples of analytic functions are\nTypical examples of functions that are not analytic are\nAlternative characterizations.\nThe following conditions are equivalent:\nComplex analytic functions are exactly equivalent to holomorphic functions, and are thus much more easily characterized.\nFor the case of an analytic function with several variables (see below), the real analyticity can be characterized using the Fourier\u2013Bros\u2013Iagolnitzer transform.\nIn the multivariable case, real analytic functions satisfy a direct generalization of the third characterization. Let formula_42 be an open set, and let formula_43.\nThen formula_5 is real analytic on formula_45 if and only if formula_46 and for every compact formula_47 there exists a constant formula_38 such that for every multi-index formula_49 the following bound holds\nformula_50\nProperties of analytic functions.\nA polynomial cannot be zero at too many points unless it is the zero polynomial (more precisely, the number of zeros is at most the degree of the polynomial). A similar but weaker statement holds for analytic functions. If the set of zeros of an analytic function \u0192 has an accumulation point inside its domain, then \u0192 is zero everywhere on the connected component containing the accumulation point. In other words, if (\"rn\") is a sequence of distinct numbers such that \u0192(\"r\"\"n\")\u00a0=\u00a00 for all \"n\" and this sequence converges to a point \"r\" in the domain of \"D\", then \u0192 is identically zero on the connected component of \"D\" containing \"r\". This is known as the identity theorem.\nAlso, if all the derivatives of an analytic function at a point are zero, the function is constant on the corresponding connected component.\nThese statements imply that while analytic functions do have more degrees of freedom than polynomials, they are still quite rigid.\nAnalyticity and differentiability.\nAs noted above, any analytic function (real or complex) is infinitely differentiable (also known as smooth, or formula_54). (Note that this differentiability is in the sense of real variables; compare complex derivatives below.) There exist smooth real functions that are not analytic: see non-analytic smooth function. In fact there are many such functions.\nThe situation is quite different when one considers complex analytic functions and complex derivatives. It can be proved that any complex function differentiable (in the complex sense) in an open set is analytic. Consequently, in complex analysis, the term \"analytic function\" is synonymous with \"holomorphic function\".\nReal versus complex analytic functions.\nReal and complex analytic functions have important differences (one could notice that even from their different relationship with differentiability). Analyticity of complex functions is a more restrictive property, as it has more restrictive necessary conditions and complex analytic functions have more structure than their real-line counterparts.\nAccording to Liouville's theorem, any bounded complex analytic function defined on the whole complex plane is constant. The corresponding statement for real analytic functions, with the complex plane replaced by the real line, is clearly false; this is illustrated by\nformula_55\nAlso, if a complex analytic function is defined in an open ball around a point \"x\"0, its power series expansion at \"x\"0 is convergent in the whole open ball (holomorphic functions are analytic). This statement for real analytic functions (with open ball meaning an open interval of the real line rather than an open disk of the complex plane) is not true in general; the function of the example above gives an example for \"x\"0\u00a0=\u00a00 and a ball of radius exceeding\u00a01, since the power series 1 \u2212 \"x\"2 + \"x\"4 \u2212 \"x\"6... diverges for |\"x\"|\u00a0\u2265\u00a01.\nAny real analytic function on some open set on the real line can be extended to a complex analytic function on some open set of the complex plane. However, not every real analytic function defined on the whole real line can be extended to a complex function defined on the whole complex plane. The function \"f\"(\"x\") defined in the paragraph above is a counterexample, as it is not defined for \"x\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u00b1i. This explains why the Taylor series of \"f\"(\"x\") diverges for |\"x\"|\u00a0&gt;\u00a01, i.e., the radius of convergence is 1 because the complexified function has a pole at distance 1 from the evaluation point 0 and no further poles within the open disc of radius 1 around the evaluation point.\nAnalytic functions of several variables.\nOne can define analytic functions in several variables by means of power series in those variables (see power series). Analytic functions of several variables have some of the same properties as analytic functions of one variable. However, especially for complex analytic functions, new and interesting phenomena show up in 2 or more complex dimensions:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61479", "revid": "40511069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61479", "title": "Michael Caine", "text": "English actor (born 1933)\nSir Michael Caine (born Maurice Joseph Micklewhite; 14 March 1933) is an English actor, retired as of 2023. Known for his distinct Cockney accent, he has appeared in more than 130 films over a career that spanned eight decades and is considered a British cultural icon. He has received numerous awards including two Academy Awards, a BAFTA Award, three Golden Globe Awards, and a Screen Actors Guild Award. As of 2017, the films in which Caine has appeared have grossed over $7.8 billion worldwide. Caine is one of only five male actors to be nominated for an Academy Award for acting in five different decades. In 2000, he received a BAFTA Fellowship and was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II.\nOften playing a cockney, Caine made his breakthrough in the 1960s with starring roles in British films such as \"Zulu\" (1964), \"The Ipcress File\" (1965), \"The Italian Job\" (1969), and \"Battle of Britain\" (1969). During this time he established a distinctive visual style wearing thick horn-rimmed glasses combined with sharp suits and a laconic vocal delivery; he was recognised as a style icon of the 1960s. He solidified his stardom with roles in \"Get Carter\" (1971), \"The Last Valley\" (1971), \"The Man Who Would Be King\" (1975), \"The Eagle Has Landed\" (1976), and \"A Bridge Too Far\" (1977).\nCaine received two Academy Awards for Best Supporting Actor for his roles as Elliot in Woody Allen's dramedy \"Hannah and Her Sisters\" (1986), and as Dr. Wilbur Larch in Lasse Hallstr\u00f6m's drama \"The Cider House Rules\" (1999). His other Oscar-nominated film roles were in \"Alfie\" (1966), \"Sleuth\" (1972), \"Educating Rita\" (1983), and \"The Quiet American\" (2002)\u2014all four of which were for the leading actor category. Other notable performances occurred in the films \"California Suite\" (1978), \"Dressed to Kill\" (1980), \"Mona Lisa\" (1986), \"Little Voice\" (1998), \"Quills\" (2000), \"Children of Men\" (2006), \"Harry Brown\" (2009), and \"Youth\" (2015).\nCaine is also known for his performance as Ebenezer Scrooge in \"The Muppet Christmas Carol\" (1992), and for his comedic roles in \"Dirty Rotten Scoundrels\" (1988), \"Miss Congeniality\" (2000), \"Austin Powers in Goldmember\" (2002), and \"Secondhand Lions\" (2003). Caine portrayed Alfred Pennyworth in Christopher Nolan's \"Batman\" trilogy (2005\u20132012). He has also had roles in five other Nolan films: \"The Prestige\" (2006), \"Inception\" (2010), \"Interstellar\" (2014), \"Dunkirk\" (2017), and \"Tenet\" (2020). He announced his retirement from acting in October 2023 and his final film was \"The Great Escaper\", which came out in the same month.\nEarly life.\nMichael Caine was born Maurice Joseph Micklewhite at St Olave's Hospital in the Rotherhithe district of London on 14 March 1933, the son of cook and charwoman Ellen Frances Marie (n\u00e9e Burchell; 1900\u20131989) and a fish market porter also called Maurice Joseph Micklewhite (1899\u20131956). His father was from a Catholic Irish Traveller family background. Caine was raised in his mother's Protestant faith. He had a younger brother, Stanley (1935\u20132013), who also became an actor, and an older maternal half-brother named David Burchell. He grew up in London's Southwark district; during the Second World War, he was evacuated to North Runcton, Norfolk, where he made his acting debut at the village school and had a pet horse called Lottie.\nAfter the war, Caine's father was demobilised and the family were rehoused by the council in Marshall Gardens in London's Elephant and Castle area, where they lived in a prefabricated house made in Canada as much of London's housing stock had been destroyed during the Blitz in 1940 and 1941. Caine later wrote in his autobiography, \"The prefabs, as they were known, were intended to be temporary homes while London was reconstructed, but we ended up living there for eighteen years\u2014and for us, after a cramped flat with an outside toilet, it was luxury.\"\nAt the age of 10, Caine acted in a school play as the father of the ugly sisters in \"Cinderella\". His trousers' zipper was undone, prompting the audience to laugh, which inspired him to pursue an acting career. In 1944, he passed his eleven-plus examination, winning a scholarship to Hackney Downs School. After a year there, he moved to Wilson's School in Camberwell, which he left at age 16 after gaining School Certificates in six subjects. He then worked briefly as a filing clerk and messenger for a film company in Victoria, London and film producer Jay Lewis on Wardour Street.\nMilitary service.\nIn 1951, Caine was called up to do his national service with the British Army. After basic training and 12 months in the Queen's Royal Regiment, from 1952 he served with the Royal Fusiliers, first at the British Army of the Rhine Headquarters in Iserlohn, West Germany, and then on active service in the Korean War. Having contracted malaria, he was sent home in 1953 and discharged from the service.\nCaine, seeing first-hand how the Chinese used human wave tactics, was left with the sense that the communist Maoist government did not care about its citizens. Having been previously sympathetic towards the ideals of communism, Caine was left repelled by it. He experienced a situation in which he thought he was going to die, the memory of which stayed with him and \"formed his character\". In his 2010 autobiography \"The Elephant to Hollywood\", he wrote that \"The rest of my life I have lived every bloody moment from the moment I wake up until the time I go to sleep.\"\nCaine has said that he would like to see the return of national service in Britain, to help combat youth violence, stating: \"I'm just saying, put them in the Army for six months. You're there to learn how to defend your country. You belong to the country. Then, when you come out, you have a sense of belonging, rather than a sense of violence.\"\nActing career.\n1950\u20131963: Acting debut and early roles.\nCaine's film debut was an uncredited walk-on role in \"Morning Departure\" (1950). A few years later in Horsham, Sussex, he responded to an advertisement in \"The Stage\" for an assistant stage manager who would also perform bit parts for the Horsham-based Westminster Repertory Company, who were performing at the Carfax Electric Theatre. Adopting the stage name Michael Scott, in July 1953 he was cast as the drunkard Hindley in the company's production of \"Wuthering Heights\". He moved to the Lowestoft Repertory Company in Suffolk for a year when he was 21. It was here that he met his first wife, Patricia Haines. He has described the first nine years of his career as \"really, really brutal\" as well as \"more like purgatory than paradise\". He appeared in nine plays during his time at the Lowestoft Rep at the Arcadia Theatre with Jackson Stanley's Standard Players.\nWhen his career took him to London in 1954 after his provincial apprenticeship, his agent informed him that there was already a Michael Scott performing as an actor in London and that he had to come up with a new name immediately. Speaking to his agent from a telephone booth in Leicester Square, London, he looked around for inspiration, noted that \"The Caine Mutiny\" was being shown at the Odeon Cinema, and decided to change his name to Michael Caine. He joked on television in 1987 that, had a tree partly blocking his view been a few feet to the left, he might have been called \"Michael Mutiny\". He also later joked in interviews that, had he looked the other way, he would have ended up as \"Michael One Hundred and One Dalmatians\". In 1958, Caine played the minor role of a court orderly in a BBC Television adaptation of the story, \"The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial\".\nCaine moved in with another rising cockney actor, Terence Stamp, and began hanging out with him and Peter O'Toole in the London party scene after he had become O'Toole's understudy in Lindsay Anderson's West End staging of Willis Hall's \"The Long and the Short and the Tall\" in 1959. Caine took over the role when O'Toole left to make \"Lawrence of Arabia\" and went on to a four-month tour of the UK and Ireland. Caine's first film role was as one of the privates in George Baker's platoon in the 1956 film \"A Hill in Korea\". The stars of the film were Baker, Harry Andrews, Stanley Baker and Michael Medwin, with Stephen Boyd and Ronald Lewis; Robert Shaw also had a small part. Caine also appeared regularly on television in small roles. His first credited role on the BBC was in 1956, where he played Boudousse in the Jean Anouilh play \"The Lark\". Other parts included three roles in \"Dixon of Dock Green\" in 1957, 1958 and 1959, prisoner-of-war series \"Escape\" (1957), and the crime/thriller drama \"Mister Charlesworth\" (1958).\nCaine continued to appear on television, in serials \"The Golden Girl\" and \"No Wreath for the General\", but was then cast in the play \"The Compartment\", written by Johnny Speight, a two-hander also starring Frank Finlay. This was followed by main roles in other plays including the character Tosh in \"Somewhere for the Night\", a \"Sunday-Night Play\" written by Bill Naughton televised on Sunday 3 December 1961, another two-hander by Johnny Speight, \"The Playmates\", and two editions of BBC plays strand \"First Night\", \"Funny Noises with Their Mouths\" and \"The Way with Reggie\" (both 1963). He also acted in radio plays, including Bill Naughton's \"Looking for Frankie\" on the BBC Home Service (1963). A big break came for Caine when he was cast as Meff in James Saunders' Cockney comedy \"Next Time I'll Sing To You\", when this play was presented at the New Arts Theatre in London on 23 January 1963. Scenes from the play's performance were featured in the April 1963 issue of \"Theatre World\" magazine.\n1964\u20131975: Stardom and acclaim.\nWhen this play moved to the Criterion in Piccadilly with Michael Codron directing, he was visited backstage by Stanley Baker, one of the four stars in Caine's first film, \"A Hill in Korea\", who told him about the part of a Cockney private in his upcoming film \"Zulu\", a film Baker was producing and starring in. Baker told Caine to meet the director, Cy Endfield, who informed him that he had already given the part to James Booth, a fellow Cockney who was Caine's friend, because he \"looked more Cockney\" than Caine did. Endfield then told the tall Caine that he did not look like a Cockney but like an officer, and offered him a screen test for the role of a snobbish, upper class officer after Caine assured him that he could do a posh accent. Caine believes Endfield offered him, a Cockney, the role of an aristocrat because, being American, he did not have the endemic British class-prejudice. Though he tested poorly, Endfield gave him the part that would make him a film star.\nLocation shooting for \"Zulu\" took place in Natal, South Africa, for 14 weeks in 1963. According to his 2010 autobiography \"The Elephant to Hollywood\", Caine had been signed to a seven-year contract by Joseph E. Levine, whose Embassy Films was distributing \"Zulu\". After the return of the cast to England and the completion of the film, Levine released him from the contract, telling him, \"I know you're not, but you gotta face the fact that you look like a queer on screen.\" Levine gave his contract to his \"Zulu\" co-star James Booth. Subsequently, Caine's agent got him cast in the BBC production \"Hamlet at Elsinore\" (1964) as Horatio, in support of Christopher Plummer's Hamlet. Horatio was the only classical role which Caine, who had never received dramatic training, would ever play. Caine wrote, \"... I decided that if my on-screen appearance was going to be an issue, then I would use it to bring out all Horatio's ambiguous sexuality.\"\nCaine's roles as effete-seeming aristocrats were to contrast with his next projects, in which he was to become notable for using a regional accent, rather than the Received Pronunciation then considered proper for film actors. At that time his working-class Cockney speech stood out to American and British audiences alike, as did the Beatles' Liverpudlian accents. \"Zulu\" was followed by two of Caine's best-known roles: the rough-edged petty-crook-turned-spy Harry Palmer in \"The Ipcress File\" (1965) and the titular womanising young Cockney in \"Alfie\" (1966). In a 2016 interview Caine cited \"Alfie\" as his favourite film of his career, saying, \"it made me a star in America as well, and it was my first nomination for an Academy Award\". He went on to play Harry Palmer in a further four films, \"Funeral in Berlin\" (1966), \"Billion Dollar Brain\" (1967), \"Bullet to Beijing\" (1995) and \"Midnight in Saint Petersburg\" (1996). Caine made his first film in Hollywood in 1966, after an invitation from Shirley MacLaine to play opposite her in \"Gambit\". During the first two weeks, whilst staying at the Beverly Hills Hotel, he met long-term friends John Wayne and agent \"Swifty\" Lazar. Wayne was a fan of Caine's performance in \"Alfie\" and suggested to Caine, \"Speak slow and speak low\". Caine was always grateful for that advice. Caine starred in the film \"The Magus\" (1968) which, although BAFTA-nominated for Best Cinematography, failed at the box office.\nCaine starred in the 1969 comedy caper film \"The Italian Job\" as Charlie Croker, the leader of a Cockney criminal gang released from prison with the intention of doing a \"big job\" in Italy to steal gold bullion from an armoured security truck. One of the most celebrated roles of his career, in a 2002 poll his line \"You're only supposed to blow the bloody doors off!\" was voted the second-funniest line in film (after \"He's not the Messiah, he's a very naughty boy\" from Monty Python's \"Life of Brian\"), and favourite one-liner in a 2003 poll of 1,000 film fans. Culminating in a cliffhanger, \"The Italian Job\" has one of the most discussed end scenes in film; what happened to the coachload of gold teetering over the edge of a cliff has been debated in the decades since the film was released.\nAfter working on \"The Italian Job\" with No\u00ebl Coward, and a role as RAF fighter pilot squadron leader Canfield in the all-star cast of \"Battle of Britain\" (both 1969), Caine played the lead in \"Get Carter\" (1971), a British gangster film. Caine also starred in a comedy thriller, \"Pulp\" (1972). Caine continued with successes including \"Sleuth\" (1972) opposite Laurence Olivier, and John Huston's \"The Man Who Would Be King\" (1975) co-starring Sean Connery, which received widespread acclaim. Martyn Palmer of \"The Times\" applauded the \"lovely double act of Caine and Connery, clowning to their doom\", while Huston paid tribute to Caine's improvisation as an actor: \"Michael is one of the most intelligent men among the artists I've known. I don't particularly care to throw the ball to an actor and let him improvise, but with Michael it's different. I just let him get on with it.\" In 1974, Caine appeared in \"The Black Windmill\", co-starring Donald Pleasence.\n1976\u20131997: Established star.\nIn 1976, Caine appeared in Tom Mankiewicz's screen adaptation of the Jack Higgins novel \"The Eagle Has Landed\" as \"Oberst\" (Colonel) Kurt Steiner, the commander of a Luftwaffe paratroop unit disguised as Polish paratroopers, whose mission was to kidnap or kill the then-British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, alongside co-stars Donald Sutherland, Robert Duvall, Jenny Agutter and Donald Pleasence. Caine also was part of an all-star cast in \"A Bridge Too Far\" (1977). In 1978, Caine starred in \"Silver Bears\", an adaptation of Paul Erdman's 1974 novel of the same name, and co-starred in the Academy Award-winning \"California Suite\". In the late 1970s, Caine's choice of roles was frequently criticised\u2014something to which he has referred with self-deprecating comments about taking parts strictly for the money. He averaged two films a year, but these included such films as \"The Swarm\" (1978) (although critically panned it was Academy Award-nominated for Best Costume Design), \"Ashanti\" (1979) and \"Beyond the Poseidon Adventure\" (1979).\nIn the early 1980s Caine appeared in \"The Island\" (1980), \"The Hand\" (1981), and had a reunion with his \"Sleuth\" co-star Laurence Olivier in \"The Jigsaw Man\" (1982). During the 1980s Caine enjoyed further acclaimed roles and awards attention. He co-starred with Julie Walters in \"Educating Rita\" (1983), for which he won a BAFTA and a Golden Globe Award. In 1986, he portrayed the neurotic Elliot in Woody Allen's ensemble comedy \"Hannah and Her Sisters\", starring Barbara Hershey, Dianne Wiest, and Mia Farrow. For his performance he won his first Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. Peter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" wrote in 2011, \"Caine's performance, so fervent, so agonisingly dedicated, actually gains in force and touching sincerity with the years.\" Caine also played a suave English conman, opposite a clumsy American played by Steve Martin, in the crime comedy \"Dirty Rotten Scoundrels\" (1988), directed by Frank Oz. The film earned him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy nomination, losing to Tom Hanks in \"Big\" (1988).\nCaine's other successful films (critically or financially) were the 1980 Golden Globe-nominated slasher film \"Dressed to Kill\", the 1981 war film \"Escape to Victory\" featuring Sylvester Stallone and footballers from the 1960s and 1970s, including Pel\u00e9 and Bobby Moore, the 1982 film \"Deathtrap\", and \"Mona Lisa\" (1986). In 1987, Caine narrated \"Hero\", the official film of the 1986 FIFA World Cup. That year he starred in the thriller and spy film \"The Fourth Protocol\" alongside Pierce Brosnan. In 1988 he played Chief Insp. Frederick Abberline in the two-part TV drama \"Jack the Ripper\", which co-starred Jane Seymour and was produced to coincide with the 100th anniversary of the Jack the Ripper murder spree in Victorian London. Despite his success in the 1980s, Caine also appeared in some poorly received films such as \"Blame It on Rio\" (1984), the Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais comedy \"Water\" (1985), the fourth and final film in the \"Jaws\" franchise, \"\" (1987), and \"Without a Clue\" (1988) (portraying Sherlock Holmes). Caine's commitment to filming \"Jaws: The Revenge\" in the Bahamas meant that he was unable to receive his Academy Award for \"Hannah and Her Sisters\" in person and Dianne Wiest accepted it on his behalf. Caine said of \"Jaws: The Revenge\", \"I have never seen the film, but by all accounts it was terrible. However, I have seen the house that it built, and it is terrific.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"It was absolutely perfect at that time for what I wanted. I could make it, and my daughter could see it. That's why I did it. And it was lovely.\"\n\u2015Caine on playing Ebenezer Scrooge in \"The Muppet Christmas Carol\".\nIn the 1990s, Caine found good parts harder to come by. He played the mysterious bartender Mike in \"Mr. Destiny\" in 1990 and appeared with Roger Moore in \"Bullseye!\" (1990). He played Ebenezer Scrooge in \"The Muppet Christmas Carol\" (1992). Having been chosen by Brian Henson, Caine stated: \"I'm going to play this movie like I'm working with the Royal Shakespeare Company. I will never wink, I will never do anything Muppety. I am going to play Scrooge as if it is an utterly dramatic role and there are no puppets around me.\" He played the beleaguered stage director Lloyd Fellowes in the film adaptation of \"Noises Off\" (1992). He also played a villain in the Steven Seagal film \"On Deadly Ground\" (1994). He starred in two straight to video Harry Palmer sequels and a few television films.\n1998\u20132014: Career resurgence.\nCaine's performance in \"Little Voice\" (1998) won him a Golden Globe Award. Better parts followed, including \"The Cider House Rules\" (1999), for which he won his second Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. In the 2000s, Caine appeared in the comedy \"Miss Congeniality\" (2000) as the refined pageant coach opposite Sandra Bullock as the undercover FBI agent. The film was a massive box office success and Caine earned praise for his comic turn. That same year Caine also appeared in Philip Kaufman's controversial yet acclaimed film \"Quills\" (2000) as Dr. Royer-Collard opposite Geoffrey Rush, Kate Winslet, and Joaquin Phoenix. In 2001, Caine starred in the ensemble dramedy \"Last Orders\" starring Helen Mirren, Bob Hoskins, and Tom Courtenay. Caine's next film \"The Quiet American\" (2002) won him great critical acclaim with Roger Ebert writing, \"[it's] a performance that seems to descend perfectly formed. There is no artifice in it, no unneeded energy, no tricks, no effort\". Caine earned his sixth Academy Award nomination as well as a Golden Globe Award and British Academy Film Award for his performance.\nSeveral of Caine's classic films have been remade, including \"The Italian Job\", \"Get Carter\", \"Alfie\" and \"Sleuth\". Caine appeared in \"Get Carter\" the 2000 American action thriller film directed by Stephen Kay; a remake of his 1971 film \"Get Carter\", in which a younger Michael Caine played the title role. Here in the 2000 remake, Caine's role was originally relegated to a one-scene cameo appearance, which he agreed to do as a favor to his friend Sylvester Stallone. However, after a test screening, additional scenes were scripted and shot to expand his role. The film was released in the U.S. on 6 October 2000. Critical reaction was negative, and the film flopped at the box office, with worldwide earnings of approximately only $19 million against a production budget of nearly $64 million. Stallone said: \"Believe it or not, I think \"Get Carter\" was really underrated. That was a big disappointment. I learned the hard way that [remakes], even if you do it better than the original, there\u2019s a tremendous nostalgia attached to the original. And quite often they\u2019re not done as well.\" In the 2007 remake of \"Sleuth\", Caine took over the role Laurence Olivier played in the 1972 version and Jude Law played Caine's original role. Caine is one of the few actors to have played a starring role in two versions of the same film. In an interview with CNN, Law spoke of his admiration for Caine: \"I learned so much just from watching how he monitored his performance, and also how little he has to do. He's a master technician and sometimes he was doing stuff I didn't see, I couldn't register. I'd go back and watch it on the monitor, it was like 'Oh my God, the amount of variety he's put in there is breathtaking\".\nCaine also starred in multiple comedies during this time, including playing Austin's father in \"Austin Powers in Goldmember\" (2002). In 2003 he co-starred with Robert Duvall, and Haley Joel Osment in the family comedy \"Secondhand Lions\". Caine played family elder Henry Lair in the 2004 film \"Around the Bend\". Also in 2005, he played as Isabel's (Nicole Kidman) father in \"Bewitched\" alongside Will Ferrell and Shirley MacLaine. In 2005, he was cast as Bruce Wayne's butler Alfred Pennyworth in \"Batman Begins\", the first film in the new Batman film series known as \"The Dark Knight\" Trilogy. In 2006, he appeared in Alfonso Cuaron's acclaimed dystopian drama \"Children of Men\" alongside Clive Owen and Julianne Moore as well as Nolan's mystery thriller \"The Prestige\" starring Hugh Jackman and Christian Bale. In 2007 he appeared in \"Flawless\", and in 2008 and 2012 he reprised his role as Alfred in Christopher Nolan's critically acclaimed \"Batman\" sequels \"The Dark Knight\" and \"The Dark Knight Rises\" as well as starring in the British drama \"Is Anybody There?\", which explores the final days of life. It was reported by \"Empire\" magazine that Caine had said that \"Harry Brown\" (released on 13 November 2009) would be his last lead role. Caine later clarified that he had no intention of retiring, stating that \"You don't retire in this business; the business retires you.\"\nCaine appeared in Christopher Nolan's science fiction thriller \"Inception\" as Prof. Stephen Miles, Cobb's (Leonardo DiCaprio) mentor and father-in-law. The film was a financial and critical success, earning 8 Academy Award nominations including Best Picture. He voiced Finn McMissile in Pixar's 2011 film \"Cars 2\" and also voiced a supporting role in the animated film \"Gnomeo &amp; Juliet\". He also starred in the 2012 film ', as Josh Hutcherson's character's grandfather; the film also featured Dwayne Johnson and Vanessa Hudgens. Caine reprised his role as Alfred Pennyworth in the Batman sequel \"The Dark Knight Rises\", which was released in July 2012. Caine later called \"The Dark Knight\" Trilogy, \"one of the greatest things I have done in my life.\" In 2013, Caine appeared in the heist thriller \"Now You See Me\" starring alongside Jesse Eisenberg, Mark Ruffalo, Isla Fisher, Woody Harrelson, and Morgan Freeman. Caine played the role of Arthur Tressler, an insurance magnate and the Four Horsemen's sponsor. The film, despite receiving mixed reviews from critics, was a financial success at the box office and spawned a sequel, \"Now You See Me 2\" (2016). He appeared in Nolan's 2014 science-fiction film \"Interstellar\" as Professor Brand, a high-ranking NASA scientist, ideator of Plan A, former mentor of Cooper and father of Amelia. The film starred Matthew McConaughey, Anne Hathaway, and Jessica Chastain. In 2015, Caine co-starred in Matthew Vaughn's action spy comedy ' starring Colin Firth, Taron Egerton, and Samuel L. Jackson.\n2015\u20132023: Final roles and retirement.\nIn May 2015, Caine starred in Paolo Sorrentino's Italian comedy-drama film \"Youth\" alongside Harvey Keitel, Rachel Weisz, Paul Dano, and Jane Fonda. Caine appeared in the lead role of retired composer Fred Ballinger, where he and the film won great acclaim at its debut at the Cannes Film Festival. Caine received a London Film Critics' Circle Award for British Actor of the Year nomination for his performance. In October 2015, Caine read Hans Christian Andersen's \"Little Claus and Big Claus\" for the children's fairytales app GivingTales in aid of UNICEF, together with Sir Roger Moore, Stephen Fry, Ewan McGregor, Dame Joan Collins, Joanna Lumley, David Walliams, Charlotte Rampling and Paul McKenna.\nIn 2017, Caine was cast in a spoken cameo role in Christopher Nolan's action-thriller \"Dunkirk\" (2017), based on the Dunkirk evacuation of World War II, as a Royal Air Force Spitfire pilot, as a nod to his role of RAF fighter pilot Squadron Leader Canfield in \"Battle of Britain\" (1969). In 2018, Caine starred as Brian Reader in \"King of Thieves\", which was based on the Hatton Garden safe deposit burglary of 2015.\nIn May 2019, Caine was cast as Sir Michael Crosby, a British Intelligence officer, in Christopher Nolan's \"Tenet\" (2020). The film starred John David Washington, Robert Pattinson, Elizabeth Debicki and Kenneth Branagh. The film received an American release during the COVID-19 pandemic in September 2020 after being delayed multiple times and became a box office disappointment, despite receiving positive reviews. Caine also appeared in the children's fantasy film, \"Come Away\" (2020) starring Angelina Jolie, David Oyelowo, and Gugu Mbatha-Raw. The film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival to mixed reviews, with critics praising its performances and lavish production design. In the 2021 film \"Twist\", an adaptation of Charles Dickens' \"Oliver Twist\" set in the present day, Caine plays Fagin. In interviews promoting the 2021 film \"Best Sellers\", Caine suggested that he would not make another film, citing difficulty in walking and his new interest in novel-writing developed during the COVID-19 lockdowns. However, his representatives told \"Variety\" that he was not retiring from acting. In 2022, Caine filmed \"The Great Escaper\", a British-French feature film starring Caine and Glenda Jackson, based on the true-life story of a British World War II veteran who 'broke out' of his nursing home to attend the 70th anniversary D-Day commemorations in France, in June 2014. The film was released on 6 October 2023.\nCaine officially confirmed his retirement from acting on 13 October 2023, mainly because of the decreasing likelihood of him getting any more leading roles. Caine announced his retirement from acting in a BBC \"Today\" radio programme interview with Martha Kearney. Referring to \"The Great Escaper\" he said, \"I keep saying I'm going to retire, well I am now, because I figured, I've had a picture which is \u2014 I played the lead and it's got incredible reviews. The only parts I'm liable to get now are old men, 90-year-old men, and I thought well I might as well leave with all this. I've got wonderful reviews. What am I going to do to beat this?\"\nIn popular culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I kept my cockney accent in order to let other working class boys know that if I made it, they could do it too.\"\n\u2014Caine speaking to CNN's \"The Screening Room\" in 2007 on retaining his accent.\nCaine is regarded as a British cultural icon, with Mairi Mackay of CNN stating: \"Michael Caine has been personifying British cool since the swinging sixties. He has brought some of British cinema's most iconic characters to life and introduced his very own laid-back cockney gangster into pop culture. He doggedly retained a regional accent at a time when the plummy tones of Received Pronunciation were considered obligatory. It is a sweet irony that his accent has become his calling card.\" In 2015 \"The Times\" called Caine \"the epitome of Sixties cool in his first outing as the secret agent Harry Palmer\". A trailer for his second role as Palmer described him as possessing \"horn rims, cockney wit and an iron fist\".\nWith his distinctive voice and manner of speaking, Caine is a popular subject for impersonators and mimics. Most Caine impressions include the catchphrase \"Not a lot of people know that.\" The catchphrase emanates from Caine's habit of informing people of obscure \"interesting facts\" that he has collected. Referring to Caine as being the \"biggest mine of useless information\", Peter Sellers initiated the catchphrase when he appeared on BBC1's \"Parkinson\" show on 28 October 1972 and said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Not many people know that. This is my Michael Caine impression. You see, Mike's always quoting from the \"Guinness Book of Records\". At the drop of a hat he'll trot one out. 'Did you know that it takes a man in a tweed suit five-and-a-half seconds to fall from the top of Big Ben to the ground?' Now there's not many people who know that!\nCaine later spoke of how Sellers used his impression of him as his answering machine message in the 1970s: \"I called Peter one day, he wasn't in. And there was me saying, 'My name is Michael Caine. I just want you to know that Peter Sellers is not in. Not many people know that.' He invented that 'not many people know that.' And then everybody who rang him, they got me saying, 'Not many people know that.'\" Over the years Caine himself had parodied his catchphrase and his \"interesting facts\", and has imitated others' impressions of him. In an interview with Michael Parkinson in 2007, Caine commented on the impersonations of his voice, \"I can do it. 'Hello. My name is Michael Caine. Not many people know that.' I sound like a bloody moron. You know where they've got me now? On birthday cards. 'It's your birthday today. Not many people know that'. Now they've got me on Satellite navigation. It's me going, 'take the second turn on the right, and you'll wind up right in the shit.'\" In 1983, Caine used his \"not a lot of people know that\" phrase as a joke in the film \"Educating Rita\".\nThe comedy sketch show \"Harry Enfield's Television Programme\" included a series of sketches in which Paul Whitehouse played a character called Michael Paine; an amalgam of previous Michael Caine impressions, who in a reference to Caine's character Harry Palmer from \"The Ipcress File\" wears oversized, thick-rimmed glasses and a trench coat. He introduces himself with the line, \"My name is Michael Paine, and I am a nosy neighbour\" and in a spoof of the stakeout at the beginning of \"The Ipcress File\", recounts to the camera the \"suspiciously\" mundane behaviour of his neighbours, before saying, \"Not a lot of people know that I know that\". Caine's Harry Palmer character (with the glasses, the girls, and disregard for authority) was among the many British pop cultural influences for Mike Myers' \"Austin Powers\" films. At Myers' request, Caine himself starred in \"Austin Powers in Goldmember\" (2002), with his portrayal of Nigel Powers, father of Austin Powers, spoofing Harry Palmer.\nA parody of Caine appears in the animated series \"Ugly Americans\", in the episode \"The Dork Knight\", which also parodies the film \"The Dark Knight\". In the episode, Caine appears as himself, portrayed in the light of his Alfred Pennyworth interpretation, and constantly annoys the protagonists with endless anecdotes of his career.\nThe 2010 television series \"The Trip\", starring Rob Brydon and Steve Coogan, featured improvised scenes in which the two leads argue over who can do the better Michael Caine impression. Among the lines they repeat in their attempts to outdo each other are, \"You were only supposed to blow the bloody doors off!\" and, \"She was only sixteen years old\"\u2014from \"The Italian Job\" and \"Get Carter\", respectively. Coogan and Brydon later did their impressions from a balcony at the Royal Albert Hall during a celebration of Caine's work, only to be interrupted by the real Caine informing them that they were out of shape: \"For me, it's a full-time job.\"\nCraig Ferguson ran segments on his show where he parodied Caine, usually while wearing a space suit. In a 2010 interview with \"The Telegraph\", Caine spoke of the impersonations and how everyone he meets quotes lines at him, to the point he quotes them quoting him. When asked whether he is ever tired of telling his anecdotes, Caine stated: \"I enjoy making people laugh. The trick is to tell them against yourself. If you praise yourself your stories aren't funny.\"\nIn 2018, Caine starred in a British Airways pre-flight safety video, appearing with six other British celebrities, including actresses Olivia Colman and Naomie Harris. Promoting the Flying Start children's charity partnership between BA and Comic Relief, they are featured 'auditioning' in humorous sketches while also highlighting important safety messages.\nOther pursuits.\nIn 1976, Caine became part owner of Langan's Brasserie. At one point, he had ownership in seven restaurants in the UK and US. \nCaine has published three volumes of memoirs, \"What's It All About?\" in 1992, \"The Elephant to Hollywood\" in 2010 and \"Blowing the Bloody Doors Off: And Other Lessons in Life\" in 2018. He has also written trivia books, including: \"Not Many People Know That!\", \"And Not Many People Know This Either!\", \"Michael Caine's Moving Picture Show\", and \"Not a Lot of People Know This Is 1988\". Proceeds from the books went to the National Playing Fields Association, a UK charity for which Caine served as vice president, and which aims to protect and promote open spaces for sports and recreation in British cities and towns. \nCaine is a fan of chill-out music, and he released a compilation CD, \"Cained\", in 2007 on the UMTV record label. While discussing musical tastes with his friend Elton John, Caine remarked that he had been creating chillout mix tapes as an amateur for years. Caine and Elton John had also appeared on the same episode of \"Parkinson\", during which they sang an impromptu version of the pub tune \"Knees Up Mother Brown\". Also in music, Caine provided vocal samples for the ska-pop band Madness for their 1984 song \"Michael Caine\", as his daughter was a fan. He has sung in film roles as well, including \"Little Voice\" and for the 1992 musical film \"The Muppet Christmas Carol\".\nPersonal life.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], Caine divides his time between residences in Chelsea Harbour and Wimbledon, London. He previously lived in Leatherhead, Surrey, in a house with a theatre which cost him \u00a3100,000 to build. He was patron to the Leatherhead Drama Festival. He has also lived in North Stoke, Oxfordshire; Clewer, Berkshire and Lowestoft, Suffolk. Caine owns a flat at the Apogee in Miami Beach, Florida. He still keeps a small flat near where he grew up in London. \nCaine was married to actress Patricia Haines from 1954 to 1958. They had a daughter, Dominique (b. 14 August 1957). He dated Edina Ronay, Nancy Sinatra, Natalie Wood, Candice Bergen, Bianca Jagger, Jill St. John, \u00c9lisabeth Ercy and Fran\u00e7oise Pascal. Caine has been married to actress and model Shakira Baksh since 8 January 1973. They met after Caine saw her in a Maxwell House coffee commercial and a friend gave him her telephone number. He called her every day for ten days until she finally agreed to meet him. They have a daughter, Natasha Haleema (b. 15 July 1973). Baksh is a Muslim while Caine is a Christian. He reflected in 2009, \"My wife is a Muslim and she does Muslim stuff; I'm a Christian and I do Christian stuff, and no questions ever come up. The media view of Muslims is different from mine, which is very benign and peaceful\".\nProud of his working-class roots, Caine has discussed the opportunities his film career gave him: \"I got to play football with Pel\u00e9, for God's sake. And I danced with Bob Fosse.\" He also became close friends with John Lennon, stating: \"With John and I it was a case of bonding because we were both working class and we shared a sense of humour. We were pretending we weren't who people thought we were.\" His closest friends included two James Bond actors, Sean Connery and Roger Moore. At the 61st Academy Awards, the three of them presented the prize for Best Supporting Actor (which Caine and Connery have also won) to Kevin Kline.\nIn July 2014, Caine was reported to have been a celebrity investor in a tax avoidance scheme called Liberty.\nTwo years after his mother died, Caine and his younger brother Stanley learned from a news reporter working on a mental health article that they had an elder half-brother, David Burchell. Born six years before Michael's mother met Michael's father, David suffered from severe epilepsy and was a wheelchair user due to a childhood hip injury. He had been in and out of institutions most of his youth before residing permanently in Cane Hill Hospital, a mental health facility, since age 17. Although their mother visited David \"nearly every Monday for five decades\" at the hospital, even her husband did not know of David's existence. She told Michael that she was sometimes visiting a cousin at the facility. David died in 1992.\nCaine quit his 80-cigarettes-a-day smoking habit in the early 1970s after a lecture from actor Tony Curtis. Caine is a supporter of the football club Chelsea FC. Caine is also a fan of cricket.\nIn July 2016, Caine changed his name by deed poll to his long-time stage name to simplify security checks at airports. Caine stated that because the security guard often recognised him but was unaware of his real name, it would waste a considerable amount of his time as he tried to prove that he and \"Maurice Joseph Micklewhite\" were the same person. \"[A security guard] would say, 'Hi Michael Caine,' and suddenly I'd be giving him a passport with a different name on it. I could stand there for an hour. So I changed my name.\"\nPolitical views.\nCaine has often been outspoken about his political views, referring to himself as a \"left-wing Tory\" influenced by both his working class background and Korean War service. He left the United Kingdom for the United States in the late 1970s, citing the income tax levied on top earners by the Labour government of James Callaghan, which then stood at 83%. He lived in Beverly Hills during that time, but returned to the UK eight years later when taxes had been lowered by the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I realised that's not a socialist country, it's a communist country without a dictator, so I left and I was never going to come back. Maggie Thatcher came in and put the taxes back down and in the end, you know, you don't mind paying tax. What am I going to do? Not pay tax and drive around in a Rolls-Royce, with cripples begging on the street like you see in some countries?\nFollowing the launch of his film \"Harry Brown\" in 2009, Caine called for the reintroduction of national service in the UK to give young people \"a sense of belonging, rather than a sense of violence\".\nIn 2009, Caine publicly criticised the Labour government of Gordon Brown for its new 50% income tax rate on top earners and threatened to return to the United States if his taxes were increased further. During the run up to the 2010 general election, Caine publicly endorsed the Conservative Party and appeared with then-party leader David Cameron for the launch of a civilian non-compulsory \"National Service\" for sixteen-year-olds, although Caine stated he had previously supported New Labour under the leadership of Tony Blair in 1997.\nCaine voted in favour of Brexit in the 2016 European Referendum, stating he would rather be a \"poor master than a rich servant\". He said he was a reluctant Leaver; \"I don't know what to vote for. Both are scary. To me, you've now got in Europe a sort of government-by-proxy of everybody, who has now got carried away. Unless there is some extremely significant changes, we should get out.\"\nIn November 2024, following the election of Labour Party leader Sir Keir Starmer as prime minister in the July of that year, Caine supported the petition on the UK Parliament petitions website that demanded a new general election in the UK by sharing it on his X account.\nIn a 2010 Classic FM interview, Caine said that he had requested a doctor to deliberately give his father a fatal overdose when he was dying from liver cancer in 1955 and endorsed voluntary euthanasia.\nFilmography.\nPartial filmography \nAwards and honours.\nCaine has been nominated for an Oscar six times, winning his first Academy Award for the 1986 film \"Hannah and Her Sisters\", and his second in 2000 for \"The Cider House Rules\", in both cases as a supporting actor. His performance in \"Educating Rita\" in 1983 earned him the BAFTA and Golden Globe Award for Best Actor. Caine is one of only two actors nominated for an Academy Award for acting in every consecutive decade from the 1960s to 2000s (the other one being Jack Nicholson); Laurence Olivier was also nominated for an acting Oscar in five consecutive decades (from the 1930s through the 1970s) as was Denzel Washington (from the 1980s to the 2020s). Paul Newman received acting Oscar nominations at least once per each of five distinct decades (from the 1950s to the 2000s)\u2014albeit not consecutively, having been overlooked throughout the 1970s. \nCaine appeared in seven films that were ranked in the BFI's 100 greatest British films of the 20th century.\nCaine was appointed as Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1992 Birthday Honours, and in the 2000 Birthday Honours he was knighted (as \"Sir Maurice Micklewhite, CBE\") by Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace for his contribution to cinema. In a tribute to his background, he stated: \"I was named after my father and I was knighted in his name because I love my father. I always kept my real name\u2014I'm a very private and family-orientated person.\" In 2000 he received a BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award.\nIn 2008, Caine was awarded the prize for Outstanding Contribution to Showbusiness at the Variety Club Awards. On 5 January 2011 he was honored as Commander of the by France's culture minister, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Mitterrand. In May 2012, Caine was awarded the Honorary Freedom of the London Borough of Southwark as a person of distinction and eminence of the borough. In 2017, Caine was the recipient of the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. His Golden Plate was presented by Awards Council member Peter Jackson.\nPublished works.\nCaine has written four memoirs across several decades. He published the first, \"What's It All About?\", in 1992. Its title is a quote from the title song from his 1966 hit film \"Alfie\". The book was reviewed negatively in \"The New York Times\", which called it an \"archetypal show-business memoir\" that was engaging but tainted by the book's \"name-dropping, the sexual boasting, the sensitivity to slights\". His second memoir, \"The Elephant to Hollywood\", was published in 2010. Its title refers to his journey from working-class roots in the Elephant and Castle neighborhood of London to Hollywood success. Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" reviewed it positively, calling Caine a \"charming raconteur\" and \"wittily self-deprecating\". His third memoir, \"Blowing the Bloody Doors Off\", was published in 2018. Its title references a quote from his 1969 hit film \"The Italian Job\". His fourth memoir, \"Don't Look Back, You'll Trip Over: My Guide to Life\", was published in 2024.\nCaine's first novel, a thriller entitled \"Deadly Game\", was published in November 2023.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61480", "revid": "42366806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61480", "title": "Broadway Melody of 1936", "text": "1935 film by W. S. Van Dyke, Roy Del Ruth\nBroadway Melody of 1936 is a musical film released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1935. It was a follow-up of sorts to the successful \"The Broadway Melody\", which had been released in 1929, although, there is no story connection with the earlier film beyond the title and some music.\nThe film was written by Harry W. Conn, Moss Hart, Jack McGowan and Sid Silvers. It was directed by Roy Del Ruth and starred Jack Benny, Eleanor Powell, Robert Taylor, June Knight, Frances Langford, Sid Silvers, Buddy Ebsen and Vilma Ebsen (in their film debut). It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. In New York, it opened at the Capitol Theatre, the site of many prestigious MGM premieres.\nPlot.\nIrene Foster (Eleanor Powell) tries to convince her high school sweetheart, Broadway producer Robert Gordon (Robert Taylor), to give her a chance to star in his new musical, but he is too busy with the rich widow (June Knight) backing his show. Irene tries to show Gordon that she has the talent to succeed, but he will not hire her. Things become complicated when she begins impersonating a French dancer, who was actually the invention of a gossip columnist (Jack Benny, parodying Walter Winchell).\nCast.\nThis was Powell's first leading role, and her first film for MGM. She would appear in the next two entries in the Broadway Melody series: \"Broadway Melody of 1938\" and \"Broadway Melody of 1940\". (These films were not related to each other in terms of storyline.) This also marked Ebsen's film debut. Though she was dubbed in this film by Marjorie Lane, Eleanor recorded \"You Are My Lucky Star\" with Tommy Dorsey and His Orchestra (Victor 25158).\nDon Wilson, Jack Benny's regular announcer on \"The Jack Benny Program\", is not credited in \"Broadway Melody of 1936\", but his presence in the movie is evident at the beginning where he is the radio show host.\nAccolades.\nThe film was nominated for three Oscars at the 8th Academy Awards: Best Picture, Best Writing (Original Story), and Best Dance Direction, winning the last one. As this film is the second in a film series (though not a direct continuation), it could be viewed as the first \"sequel\" to ever be nominated for Best Picture.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nBox office.\nAccording to MGM records, the film earned $1,655,000 in the US and Canada and $1,216,000 elsewhere resulting in a profit of $691,000.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61481", "revid": "36112485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61481", "title": "Captain Blood (1935 film)", "text": "1935 film by Michael Curtiz\nCaptain Blood is a 1935 American black-and-white swashbuckling pirate film from First National Pictures and Warner Bros. Pictures, produced by Harry Joe Brown and Gordon Hollingshead (with Hal B. Wallis as executive producer), directed by Michael Curtiz and starring Errol Flynn, Olivia de Havilland, Basil Rathbone, and Ross Alexander.\nWith a screenplay by Casey Robinson, the film is based on the 1922 novel \"Captain Blood\" by Rafael Sabatini and concerns an imprisoned doctor and his fellow prisoners who escape their cruel island captivity to become West Indies pirates. An earlier 1924 Vitagraph silent film version of \"Captain Blood\" starred J. Warren Kerrigan as Peter Blood. The Oscar-nominated score by Erich Wolfgang Korngold started a trend for full-length symphonic scores.\nWarner Bros. risked pairing two relatively unknown performers in the lead roles. Flynn's performance made him a major Hollywood star and established him as the natural successor to Douglas Fairbanks and a \"symbol of an unvanquished man\" during the Great Depression. \"Captain Blood\" also established de Havilland, in just her fourth screen appearance, as a major star and was the first of eight films costarring Flynn and de Havilland. In 1962, Flynn's son Sean starred in \"The Son of Captain Blood\".\nPlot.\nIn England in 1685, Irish doctor Peter Blood is summoned to aid Lord Gildoy, a wounded patron who participated in the Monmouth Rebellion. Arrested while performing his duties as a physician, he is convicted of treason against King James II and sentenced to death by the infamous Judge Jeffreys. By the whim of the king, upon his advisor Lord Sunderland's counsel, Blood and the surviving rebels are transported to the West Indies to be sold into slavery.\nIn Port Royal, Blood is bought by Arabella Bishop, the beautiful niece of local military commander Colonel Bishop. Attracted by Blood's rebellious nature, Arabella tries to improve his situation by recommending him as the physician to the colony's governor, Steed, who continually suffers from painful gout. Outwardly resentful toward Arabella, yet silently appreciative for her efforts on his behalf, Blood develops an escape plan for himself and his fellow prisoners. The plan is almost uncovered by the suspicious Colonel Bishop, who has one of Blood's men, Jeremy Pitt, flogged and interrogated. Blood is spared a similar fate when a Spanish man-o'-war attacks Port Royal. During the raid, Blood and his fellow prisoners seize the Spanish ship from its drunken night watch and sail away to begin lives of piracy in 1687.\nCaptain Blood's crew quickly achieve great fame among the buccaneers of the Brotherhood of the Coast, with Blood himself deemed the greatest captain of the coast. When Governor Steed is unable to contain the pirate menace, Colonel Bishop is appointed governor. He sends Arabella to England on an extended holiday, but three years later, she returns to the Caribbean. Her ship, also carrying royal emissary Lord Willoughby, is captured by Blood's treacherous partner, the French buccaneer Captain Levasseur, who plans to hold them for ransom. Blood forces Levasseur to sell them to him, relishing the opportunity to turn the tables on Arabella. When Levasseur vehemently objects, despite having accepted Blood's payment, the two pirate captains duel, with Blood killing Levasseur. Blood offers Arabella valuable jewelry from his conquests as a sign of his love for her. Ungrateful for her \"rescue,\" Arabella is indignant at having been purchased by Blood and calls him a thief and a pirate. Although angered by her rejection, he orders his men to set sail for Port Royal, where he will deliver Arabella and Lord Willoughby, despite the danger to himself and his crew.\nAs they approach Port Royal, they sight two French warships attacking the city; Bishop has left it undefended in his single-minded pursuit of Blood. With England now at war with France, Lord Willoughby pleads with Blood to save the colony, but the captain and his crew refuse to fight for the corrupt king. Willoughby reveals that James was kicked out of England and fled to France and is in hiding; England's new king, William III, has sent Willoughby to offer Blood and his men full pardons and commissions in the Royal Navy. This startling news quickly changes the pirates' minds, and they prepare for battle with the French.\nAfter having had Arabella ferried ashore, Blood and his men approach Port Royal flying French colors, but soon that ensign is replaced with the British Union Jack. A pitched ship-to-ship battle ensues, leading to frenzied hand-to-hand deck combat. Blood and his men defeat the French frigates, saving the colony, but not before losing their ship in the battle. As a reward for his daring action, Blood is appointed the new governor of Port Royal by Lord Willoughby, after which Arabella confesses that she loves him. Blood also has the pleasure of dealing with his hostile predecessor, having now returned from his pirate hunt and under arrest for abandoning his post in a time of war. As Arabella playfully pleads with the new governor to spare her uncle's life, Blood finally reveals his face to the astonished Bishop, greeting him with the phrase \"Good morning, Uncle\".\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Errol Flynn as Peter Blood\nProduction.\nWarner Bros. was inspired to remake the film, which it had first produced as a silent picture in 1923, after the popularity of \"Treasure Island\" (1934) and \"The Count of Monte Cristo\" (1934) revived the Hollywood swashbuckler genre.\nSome of the film's sea-battle footage was taken from the silent film \"The Sea Hawk\" (1924).\nScript.\nThe job of writing the script was given to Casey Robinson who recalled that they stuck close to the novel's historical background but they humanized the movie more:\nWe got inside the character of a young man who was a doctor in England, who was unjustly accused of conspiring against the throne, and who went into virtual slavery with a great feeling of the injustice done to him This led immediately to the theme of man\u2019s injustice to man, because Morgan was not alone; he was with a lot of others who were transported to the Indies. And that theme, which was completely absent from the Sabatini novel, contributed greatly, I would say, to the success of the film. We humanized all the characters. Sabatini drew historical characters that, if they had been translated directly to the screen, would have been merely wooden figures, puppets moving in costume. This is the great danger in making costume pictures; this is the thing that has to be avoided.\nPart of this also involved humanizing the character played by Olivia de Havilland to make her more identificiable, her father and adding two comic doctors.\nMusic score.\n\"Captain Blood\" features a stirring and romantic musical score, the first of its type for a sound film, by Austrian composer Erich Wolfgang Korngold. In 1935, Warner Bros. asked Korngold to score the film, but he declined, feeling that a story about pirates was outside his range of interest. However, Korngold changed his mind after watching the filming.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Korngold not only had the background but also had the gift of melody, an innate sense of theater, and the skills to manipulate sentiment, emotion, humor, and excitement. In short, if Jack L. Warner had been praying for such a composer, then his prayers had been answered\". --Film historian, Tony Thomas\nKorngold was required to compose more than an hour of symphonic music in only three weeks. The short time frame forced him to borrow portions of symphonic poems by Franz Liszt, which constituted approximately ten percent of the score. As such, Korngold was unwilling to take credit for the entire film score, insisting instead that his credit be for \"musical arrangement\" only.\n\"Captain Blood\" became an immediate hit, with an Oscar nomination for the score. As Korngold's first fully symphonic film score, it marked a milestone in his career, as he became the first composer of international stature to sign a contract with a film studio. It also launched Flynn's film career and gave a major boost to that of de Havilland, who would appear in another seven features with Flynn. Korngold would score six more starring Flynn. The film also opened the way for other costumed, romantic film adventures, which had not been seen since the silent era.\nBudget.\nThe film's production budget was US$.\nCasting.\nThe lead role was originally offered to Robert Donat, who had starred in the successful 1934 film \"The Count of Monte Cristo\". The asthmatic Donat turned down the role, concerned that the action sequences would be too strenuous for him. A series of screen tests with various actors led to Flynn, an unknown Australian actor. In January 1935, Warner Bros. signed Flynn and brought him to Hollywood after seeing him in the British B picture \"Murder at Monte Carlo\". For the female lead role, Jean Muir was originally chosen to play opposite Donat, but after Muir declined the role, the studio focused on the 19-year-old de Havilland, who had starred in three previous films that same year, including \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" for director Max Reinhardt.\nFilming locations.\nMost of the film was shot on a sound stage in the summer of 1935. Some exterior scenes, such as the sword fight between Rathbone and Flynn on a Caribbean shore, were shot at Laguna Beach, California. The final battle sequence between Blood's pirate crew and the French ships employed one of the largest technical crews assembled for a film, requiring 2,500 extras.\nDuring filming, Flynn collapsed from a bout of malaria that he had contracted in New Guinea.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film was a box-office success, earning Warner Bros. a profit of $1.462 million. According to Warner Bros., it earned $1,357,000 domestically and $1,733,000 overseas.\nCritical response.\n\"Captain Blood\" premiered on December 26, 1935, at the Mark Strand Theatre in New York City and was released in the United States on December 28, 1935. The film received positive reviews and notices and wide public approval. However, \"Variety's\" review cited weaknesses in the storyline:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'Blood' is a spectacular cinematic entry, which, while not flawless, is quite compelling. Its sundry little discrepancies, however, count against a more satisfying final tally. The inconsistencies, while not frequent, are rather prominent and at times irritating. \nAs, for instance, the climactic sea battle of the lone pirate ship (Blood's), now a volunteer in the cause of England, against the two French vessels. One French frigate stands idly by until Blood's corsair conquers one and then directs his attack on the other. The finale with the discomfited governor, in whose place Blood is appointed, is rather tent-twent-thirt [excessively melodramatic].\nAnd underlying it all, as a productionary shortcoming, is the false premise of the titular Capt. Blood. Here is a gallant, engaging young blade who, under pirate's colors, repels the very aspects which first cement his brave appeal.\nDespite also finding flaws in the \"scripting\" of \"Captain Blood\" and in the presentation of some battle sequences, \"Variety\" called Flynn's performance \"impressive\" and predicted that his work in the film would provide him with \"future big marquee values.\"\nWriting for \"The Spectator\" in 1936, Graham Greene offered a tepid review, describing the film as his favorite of those that he had reviewed that week but describing it as \"a fine spirited mix-up\" and noting the \"magnificently wrong characterization\" of King James. Greene also wrote that much of the film included anachronistic details related to clothing and setting.\n\"FilmInk\" magazine later wrote: \"Flynn was lucky \u2013 not just in being at the right place at the right time with the right lack of competition, but with his collaborators on Captain Blood.\"\nAwards and honors.\nThe film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture and, despite not being nominated, Michael Curtiz received the second-highest number of votes for Best Director as a write-in candidate. Erich Wolfgang Korngold and Casey Robinson, also unnominated, received substantially more write-in votes than did most of the official nominees.\nThe film was also nominated in the categories Music (Scoring), Sound Recording (Nathan Levinson) and Writing (Screenplay).\n\"Captain Blood\" has been recognized by the American Film Institute in these lists:\nCultural references.\nA clip of the film was used in the 1985 film \"The Goonies\".\nRadio adaptation.\n\"Captain Blood\" was adapted as a radio play on the February 22, 1937 broadcast of Lux Radio Theater with Flynn, de Havilland and Rathbone reprising their film parts. The radio version is included among the special features of the 2005 DVD version.\nHome media.\nLong available on VHS and DVD, The Criterion Collection is set to release the film in Ultra HD Blu-ray and the high-definition Blu-ray for the first time on January 20, 2026.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61483", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61483", "title": "The Informer (1935 film)", "text": "1935 film by John Ford\nThe Informer is a 1935 American drama thriller film directed and produced by John Ford, adapted by Dudley Nichols from the 1925 novel of the same title by Irish novelist Liam O'Flaherty. Set in 1922, the plot concerns the underside of the Irish War of Independence and centers on a disgraced Republican man, played by Victor McLaglen, who anonymously informs on his former comrades and spirals into guilt as his treachery becomes known. Heather Angel, Preston Foster, Margot Grahame, Wallace Ford, Una O'Connor and J. M. Kerrigan co-star. The novel had previously been adapted for a British film of the same name in 1929.\nAlong with \"Mutiny on the Bounty\", \"The Informer\" was a big contender at the 8th Academy Awards, competing directly in all six categories they were nominated for (though \"Mutiny\" got eight nominations in total, given its three Best Actor nominations). \"The Informer\" won four Oscars: Best Director for Ford, Best Actor for McLaglen, Best Writing Screenplay for Nichols, and Best Score for Max Steiner.\nIn 2018, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nIn Dublin in 1922, Gypo Nolan has been kicked out of the outlaw Irish Republican Army (IRA) for not killing a Black and Tan who killed an IRA man. He becomes angry when he sees his streetwalker girlfriend Katie Madden trying to pick up a customer. After he throws the man into the street, Katie laments that she does not have \u00a310 for passage to America to start afresh.\nGypo later runs into his friend and IRA comrade Frankie McPhillip, a fugitive with a \u00a320 bounty on his head. Frankie, tired of hiding for six months, is on his way home to visit his mother and sister Mary under cover of the foggy night. The slow-witted Gypo decides to turn informer for the \u00a320 reward, enough for passage to America for the both of them. The Black and Tans find Frankie at his house, and Frankie is killed in the ensuing gunfight. The British contemptuously give Gypo his blood money and let him go.\nGypo subsequently buys a bottle of whiskey and tells Katie that he obtained money by beating up an American sailor. He goes to Frankie's wake, and acts suspiciously when coins fall out of his pocket. The men there tell him that they do not suspect Gypo of informing, but he then meets with several of his former IRA comrades, who wonder who informed on Frankie. Gypo claims it was a man named Mulligan. Though Gypo is drunk and talking nonsense, the others begin to suspect him but do not have enough evidence as yet. Gypo leaves and gives out \u00a31 notes to a blind man and some bar patrons, but people wonder why he had such a sudden influx of cash. Meanwhile, Mary tells the IRA that the only person Frankie talked to that day was Gypo, and the men decide to hold an inquest into the death.\nGypo goes to an upper-class party to look for Katie, but gets drunk and buys rounds of drinks. Gypo is then taken away by his former IRA comrades when they figure out he was likely the informant. He is taken to a kangaroo court, where Mulligan is questioned and is accused once again by Gypo. However, the comrades do not believe Gypo, and give him a detailed accounting of where he spent his entire \u00a320 reward. Gypo then confesses to ratting out Frankie.\nGypo is locked up, but before he can be killed, he escapes through a hole in the ceiling. He runs to Katie's apartment, where he tells her that he informed on Frankie. Katie goes to see the commissioner who presided over the trial, Dan Gallagher, to beg him to leave Gypo alone. The rigid Gallagher says he cannot do anything, and Gypo might turn in the entire organization to the police if he is allowed to live. Other IRA members, having overheard Katie, go to her apartment and shoot Gypo, much to Katie's horror as she hears the shots. Gypo wanders into a church where Frankie's mother is praying and begs forgiveness as he confesses to her. She does forgive him, telling him that he did not know what he was doing, and the absolved Gypo dies content on the floor of the church after calling out to Frankie with joy.\nPolitical context and censorship.\nThe film did not mention the IRA by name and, like Carol Reed's \"Odd Man Out\" (1947), only \"casually touched on the underlying conflict.\" Writing in \"The IRA in Film and Television: A History,\" author Mark Connelly observes that both films share a common \"jaundiced view of Irish nationalism and its adherents.\" The IRA was portrayed as little more than a criminal gang \"whose principal activities were robbery, murder and vigilante reprisals.\" Gypo Nolan was largely unmotivated by ideology, instead wishing to rejoin the \"Organization\" to regain \"security, status, and a sense of belonging.\" Instead, the films used the backdrop of The Troubles for morality tales designed to appeal to the broadest possible audience.\nPolitics and the cause of Irish nationalism was avoided to \"circumvent controversy and pass the censors\" in both the U.S. and Great Britain. With an eye toward distribution of the film in Britain, Joseph Breen of the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America, submitted the script of \"The Informer\" to the British Board of Film Censors, which requested numerous changes to omit references to the Anglo-Irish conflict.\n\"Odd Man Out\" and \"The Informer\" are also similar in being \"dramatic portrayals of lapsed Catholics rediscovering their lost faith,\" and \"end with their dying protagonists assuming Christ-like poses.\"\nReception.\nWriting for \"The Spectator\" in 1935, Graham Greene praised the film as \"a memorable picture\" the substance of which made \"superb material for the screen\". Greene singled out the acting of Victor McLaglen for specific praise, noting that he had \"never given an abler performance\".\nThe film was popular at the box office, earning a profit of $325,000 and remains one of John Ford's most widely referenced films.\nAwards and nominations.\nAcademy Awards \u2013 1935.\nThe film was nominated for six Academy Awards, winning four. McLaglen won Best Actor for his portrayal of Gypo Nolan, beating out Charles Laughton, Clark Gable, and Franchot Tone for the better-remembered \"Mutiny on the Bounty\", and Ford won Best Director. Dudley Nichols won Best Writing, Adapted Screenplay, but turned it down because of union disagreements. It was the first time an Oscar was declined, though he claimed it three years later. The film also won the Oscar for Best Score; Max Steiner won for the first time. The film was nominated for Outstanding Production, as well as for Best Film Editing.\nOther awards and nominations:\nReputation.\nCirca 1950, \"The Informer\" graced many lists of the top films ever made, and many critics at the time considered it the greatest American sound film. The movie's reputation as one of the all-time greats has declined considerably since then.\nAdaptations in other media.\n\"The Informer\" was adapted as a radio play on the July 10, 1944, and October 17, 1950, episodes of \"The Screen Guild Theater\", the March 28, 1948, episode of the \"Ford Theatre\". On the Academy Award Theater's May 25, 1946, episode, McLaglen reprised his role.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61484", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61484", "title": "The Lives of a Bengal Lancer (film)", "text": "1935 film by Henry Hathaway\nThe Lives of a Bengal Lancer is a 1935 American adventure film starring Gary Cooper, directed by Henry Hathaway, and written by Grover Jones, William Slavens McNutt, Waldemar Young, John L. Balderston, and Achmed Abdullah. The setting and title come from the 1930 autobiography of the British soldier Francis Yeats-Brown.\nThe story, which has little in common with Yeats-Brown's book, tells of a group of British cavalrymen and high-ranking officers desperately trying to defend their stronghold and headquarters at Bengal against the rebellious natives during the days of the British Raj. Cooper plays Lieutenant Alan McGregor, Franchot Tone, Lieutenant John Forsythe, Richard Cromwell, Lieutenant Donald Stone, Guy Standing, Colonel Tom Stone, and Douglass Dumbrille plays the rebel leader Mohammed Khan, who speaks the now often-misquoted line \"We have ways to make men talk.\"\nThe film was produced and released by Paramount Pictures. Planning began in 1931, and Paramount had expected the film to be released that same year. However, most of the location footage deteriorated due to the high temperatures, and the project was delayed. It was eventually released in the US in 1935.\nIt met with positive reviews and good box office results, and was nominated for seven Academy Awards, winning Assistant Director, with other nominations including Best Adapted Screenplay and Best Picture. The film grossed $1.5 million in worldwide theatrical rentals.\nPlot.\nOn the northwest frontier of India during the British Raj, Scottish Canadian Lieutenant Alan McGregor, in charge of newcomers, welcomes two replacements to the 41st Bengal Lancers: Lieutenant John Forsythe and Lieutenant Donald Stone, the son of the unit's commander, Colonel Tom Stone. Lieutenant Stone, a \"cub\" (meaning a newly commissioned officer), eagerly anticipated serving on the Indian frontier, particularly because he specifically was requested and assumed that his father sent for him; Lieutenant Forsythe, an experienced cavalrymen and something of a teasing character, was sent out as a replacement for an officer who was killed in action.\nAfter his arrival Lieutenant Stone discovers that his father keeps him at arms length, wanting to treat him the same as he treats all of the other men. He also reveals that he did \"not\" request his son serve in his regiment, a discovery that breaks his heart and leads to him going on a drunken bender. Attempting to show impartiality, the colonel treats his son indifferently. The Colonel's commitment to strictly military behavior and adherence to protocol is interpreted by young Stone as rejection. He had not seen his father since he was a boy and had looked forward to spending time with him.\nLieutenant Barrett, disguised as a native rebel in order to spy on Mohammed Khan, reports that Khan is preparing an uprising against the British. He plans to intercept and hijack a military convoy transporting two million rounds of ammunition. When Khan discovers that Colonel Stone knows of his plan, he orders Tania Volkanskaya, a beautiful Russian agent, to seduce and kidnap Lieutenant Stone in an attempt to extract classified information about the ammunition caravan from him, or use him as leverage to attract his father. When the colonel refuses to attempt his son's rescue, McGregor and Forsythe, appalled by the seeming lack of concern the colonel has for his own son, leave the camp at night without orders. Disguised as native merchants trying to sell blankets, they successfully get inside Khan's fortress. However, they are recognized by Tania, who had met the two men at a social event. McGregor and Forsythe are taken prisoner.\nDuring interrogation, Khan wants to know when and where the munitions will be transported so that he can attack and steal the arms. He has the prisoners tortured for the information. Bamboo shoots are shoved under their fingernails and set on fire. McGregor and Forsythe refuse to talk, but the demoralized Stone, feeling rejected by his father, cracks and reveals what he knows. As a result, the ammunition convoy is captured.\nAfter receiving news of the stolen ammunition, Colonel Stone takes the 41st to battle Khan. From their cell, the captives see the overmatched Bengal Lancers deploy to assault Khan's fortress. They manage to escape and blow up the ammunition tower, McGregor manning a machine gun and dying in the assault. Young Stone redeems himself by killing Khan with a dagger. With their ammunition gone, their leader dead, and their fortress in ruins, the remaining rebels surrender.\nIn recognition of their bravery and valor in battle, Lieutenants Forsythe and Stone are awarded the Distinguished Service Order. McGregor posthumously receives the Victoria Cross, Great Britain's highest award for military valor, with Colonel Stone pinning the medal to the saddle cloth of McGregor's horse in the custom in the 41st Lancers.\nProduction.\nStock crisis.\nParamount originally planned to produce the film in 1931 and sent cinematographers Ernest B. Schoedsack and Rex Wimpy to India to film location shots such as a tiger hunt. However, much of the film stock deteriorated in the hot sun while on location, so when the film was eventually made, much of the production took place in the hills surrounding Los Angeles, where Northern Paiute people were used as extras.\nAccording to Hathaway, Schoedack struggled with the studio so was replaced by Stephen Roberts, who began spending more money than Paramount were willing to, so he was fired. Gary Cooper had director approval and he suggested Henry Hathaway, whose Westerns the actor admired \u2013 it was Hathaway's entry into big budget films. The director had been to India for nine months and remembered everything being white so insisted on that in the film.\nFilming.\nAmong the filming locations were Lone Pine, Calif., Buffalo Flats in Malibu, Calif., the Paramount Ranch in Agoura, Calif., and the Iverson Movie Ranch in Chatsworth, Calif. For the climactic half-hour battle sequence at the end of the film, an elaborate set was built in the Iverson Gorge, part of the Iverson Movie Ranch, to depict Mogala, the mountain stronghold of Mohammed Khan.\nRelease.\nBox office.\nThe film was released in American cinemas in January 1935. It was a big success at the box office and kicked off a cycle of Imperial adventure tales, including \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\" (1936), \"Another Dawn\" (1937), \"Gunga Din\" (1939), \"The Four Feathers\" (1939), and \"The Real Glory\" (1939). The film had theatrical rentals of about $1 million in the U.S. and Canada, and $1.5 million worldwide.\nIt was the second most popular film at the British box office in 1935\u201336. (Another account stated it was the most popular.)\nThe film was successful enough that it led to Gary Cooper being booked to star in a number of films of similar plots that were also set in \"exotic\" locales, including \"Beau Geste\", \"The Real Glory\", \"North West Mounted Police\" and \"Distant Drums\".\nCritical reception and influence.\nLaura Elston from the magazine \"Canada\" wrote that \"The Lives of a Bengal Lancer\" did \"more glory to the British traditions than the British would dare to do for themselves.\" In response to the film success, Frederick Herron of the Motion Picture Association of America wrote \"Hollywood is doing a very good work in selling the British Empire to the world.\"\nWriter John Howard Reid noted in his book \"Award-Winning Films of the 1930s\" that the film is considered \"one of the greatest adventure films of all time\" and highly praised Hathaway's work by saying \"the film really made his reputation.\" It also received a praised review in \"Boys' Life\" magazine, starting off the review with the words \"You will be immensely pleased with \"The Lives of a Bengal lancer\"\" and went on to compare the style and class of the three main characters to that of \"The Three Musketeers\". The film holds an overall approval rating of 100% on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 9 reviews, with a rating average of 8 out of 10.\nCritic Otis Ferguson said he was \"taken by the show, imperialism and all.\" Andre Sennwald of \"The New York Times\" said the film \"glorified the British Empire better than any film produced in Britain for that purpose.\" Sennwald added that Paramount's \"Kiplingesque\" movie \"ought to prove a blessing to Downing Street.\" The film proved so popular in the United States that it spurred a series of imperial films that continued throughout the decade and into the next decade. Frank S. Nugent, also of \"The New York Times\", wrote that \"England need have no fears for its empire so long as Hollywood insists upon being the Kipling of the Pacific.\" Nugent commented that movies such as \"The Lives of a Bengal Lancer\" and \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\" were far more pro-British than actual British filmmakers would ever dare to be: \"In its veneration of British colonial policy, in its respect for the omniscience and high moral purpose of His, or Her, Majesty's diplomatic representatives and in its adulation of the courage, the virtue and the manly beauty of English soldiery abroad, Hollywood yields to no one\u2014not even to the British filmmakers themselves.\"\nIn Fascist Italy, Mussolini's motion picture bureau had the movie banned, as well as several other British-themed American movies, including \"Lloyd's of London\" and \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\", on the grounds that they were \"propaganda\".\nAccording to Ivone Kirkpatrick, who met Adolf Hitler at Berchtesgaden in 1937, one of Hitler's favorite films was \"The Lives of a Bengal Lancer\", which he had watched three times. He liked the film because \"it depicted a handful of Britons holding a continent in thrall. That was how a superior race must behave and the film was a compulsory viewing for the S.S.\"\nAlso, his valet recalled that Hitler enjoyed the film.\nIt was one of the eleven US movies that, from 1933 to 1937, were considered \"artistically valuable\" by the Nazi authorities.\nThe film led to a cycle of pro-Empire Hollywood films, including \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\", \"Gunga Din\", \"The Real Glory\" (about America in the Philippines), and \"The Sun Never Sets\". Britain produced \"Rhodes of Africa\", \"The Drum\" and \"The Four Feathers\". Australia made \"Forty Thousand Horsemen\".\nIn 2025, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" listed \"The Lives of a Bengal Lancer\" as having the best stunts of 1935.\nPlot discrepancies.\nThe film shares nothing with the source book, except the setting. Reid noted in \"Award-Winning Films of the 1930s\" that \"none of the characters in the book appear in the screenplay, not even Yeats-Brown himself. The plot of the film is also entirely different.\"\nHome media.\nThe Paramount picture was distributed to home media on VHS on March 1, 1992, and on DVD on May 31, 2005. It has since been released in multiple languages and is included in several multi-film collections.\nAwards.\nThe film was nominated for the following Academy Awards, winning in one category:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61485", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61485", "title": "Lives of a Bengal Lancer", "text": ""}
{"id": "61486", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61486", "title": "IsiZulu", "text": ""}
{"id": "61487", "revid": "43520964", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61487", "title": "Zulu language", "text": "Nguni language of eastern South Africa and neighbouring countries\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nZulu ( ), or isiZulu as an endonym, is a Southern Bantu language of the Nguni branch spoken in, and indigenous to, Southern Africa. Nguni dialects are regional or social varieties of the Nguni language, distinguished by vocabulary, pronunciation, grammar, and other linguistic features. So, Zulu is one of the Nguni dialects which is spoken by the Zulu people, with about 13.56 million native speakers, who primarily inhabit the province of KwaZulu-Natal in South Africa. The word \"KwaZulu-Natal\" translates into English as \"Home of the Zulu Nation is Natal\". Zulu is the most widely spoken home language in South Africa (24% of the population), and it is understood by over 50% of its population. It became one of South Africa's 12 official languages in 1994.\nAccording to Ethnologue, it is the second-most widely spoken of the Bantu languages, after Swahili. Like many other Bantu languages, it is written with the Latin alphabet.\nIn South African English, the language is often referred to in its native form, \"isiZulu\".\nGeographical distribution.\nZulu migrant populations have taken it to adjacent regions, especially Zimbabwe, where the Northern Ndebele language (isiNdebele) is closely related to Zulu.\nXhosa, the predominant language in the Eastern Cape, is often considered mutually intelligible with Zulu, as is Northern Ndebele.\nMaho (2009) lists four dialects: central KwaZulu-Natal Zulu, northern Transvaal Zulu, eastern coastal Qwabe, and western coastal Cele.\nHistory.\nLike Xhosa and other Nguni people, the Zulu have lived in South Africa for hundreds of years. The Zulu language possesses several click sounds typical of Southern African languages, which are not found in the rest of Africa. The Nguni people have coexisted with other Southern tribes like the San and Khoi.\nZulu, like most indigenous Southern African languages, was not a written language until the arrival of European missionaries, who documented the language using the Latin script. The first grammar book of the Zulu language was published in Norway in 1850 by the Norwegian missionary Hans Schreuder. The first written document in Zulu was a Bible translation that appeared in 1883. In 1901, John Dube (1871\u20131946), a Zulu from Natal, created the Ohlange Institute, the first native educational institution in South Africa. He was also the author of \"Insila kaShaka\", the first novel written in Zulu (1930). Another pioneering Zulu writer was Reginald Dhlomo, author of several historical novels of the 19th-century leaders of the Zulu nation: \"U-Dingane\" (1936), \"U-Shaka\" (1937), \"U-Mpande\" (1938), \"U-Cetshwayo\" (1952) and \"U-Dinizulu\" (1968). Other notable contributors to Zulu literature include Benedict Wallet Vilakazi and, more recently, Oswald Mbuyiseni Mtshali.\nThe written form of Zulu was controlled by the Zulu Language Board of KwaZulu-Natal. This board has now been disbanded and superseded by the Pan South African Language Board which promotes the use of all eleven official languages of South Africa.\nContemporary usage.\nEnglish and Afrikaans (earlier Dutch) were the only official languages used by South African governments before 1994. However, in the Kwazulu bantustan, the Zulu language was widely used. All education in the country at the high school level was in English or Afrikaans. Since the fall of apartheid in 1994, Zulu has been enjoying a marked revival. Zulu-language television was introduced by the SABC in the early 1980s and it broadcasts news and many shows in Zulu. Zulu radio is very popular and newspapers such as \"isoLezwe\", \"Ilanga\" and \"UmAfrika\" in the Zulu language are available in Kwazulu-Natal province and Johannesburg. In January 2005 the first full-length feature film in Zulu, \"Yesterday\", was nominated for an Oscar.\nIn the 1994 film \"The Lion King\", in the \"Circle of Life\" song, the phrases \"Ingonyama nengw' enamabala\" (English: \"A lion and a leopard spots\"), \"Nans' ingonyama bakithi Baba\" (English: \"Here comes a lion, Father\") and \"Siyonqoba\" (English: \"We will conquer\") was used. In some movie songs, like \"This Land\", the voice says \"Busa leli zwe bo\" (\"Rule this land\") and \"Busa ngothando bo\" (\"Rule with love\") were used too.\nThe song \"Siyahamba\" is a South African hymn originally written in the Zulu language that became popular in North American churches in the 1990s.\nThe remix of the 2019 song \"Jerusalema\" contains lyrics in Zulu.\nStandard vs Urban Zulu.\nStandard Zulu as it is taught in schools, also called \"deep Zulu\" (\"isiZulu esijulile\"), differs in various respects from the language spoken by people living in cities (Urban Zulu, \"isiZulu sasedolobheni\"). Standard Zulu tends to be purist, using derivations from Zulu words for new concepts, whereas speakers of Urban Zulu use loan words abundantly, mainly from English. For example: \nThis situation has led to problems in education because standard Zulu is often not understood by young people.\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nThe vowel system of Zulu consists of five vowels.\n and are pronounced [] and [], respectively, if the following syllable contains the [+ATR] vowels or . They are and otherwise:\nThere is limited vowel length in Zulu, as a result of the contraction of certain syllables. For example, the word \"ithambo\" \"bone\", is a contraction of an earlier \"ilithambo\" , which may still be used by some speakers. Likewise, \"uphahla\" \"roof\" is a contraction of the earlier \"uluphahla\" . In addition, the vowel of the penultimate syllable is allophonically lengthened phrase- or sentence-finally.\nConsonants.\nThe use of click consonants is one of the most distinctive features of Zulu. This feature is shared with several other languages of Southern Africa, but it is very rare in other regions. There are three basic articulations of clicks in Zulu:\nEach articulation covers five click consonants, with differences such as being slack-voiced, aspirated or nasalised, for a total of 15.\nPhonotactics.\nZulu syllables are canonically (N)C(w)V, and words must always end in a vowel. Consonant clusters consist of any consonant, optionally preceded by a homorganic nasal consonant (so-called \"prenasalisation\", described in more detail below) and optionally followed by the consonant .\nIn addition, syllabic occurs as a reduction of former , and acts like a true syllable: it can be syllabic even when not word-initial, and can also carry distinctive tones like a full syllable. It does not necessarily have to be homorganic with the following consonant, although the difference between homorganic nonsyllabic and syllabic is distinctive, e.g. \"umpetshisi\" \"peach tree\" (5 syllables) versus \"impoko\" \"grass flower\" (3 syllables). Moreover, sequences of syllabic \"m\" and homorganic \"m\" can occur, e.g. \"ummbila\" \"maize\" (4 syllables).\nRecent loanwords from languages such as English may violate these constraints, by including additional consonant clusters that are not native to Zulu, such as in \"igremu\" \"gram\". There may be some variation between speakers as to whether clusters are broken up by an epenthetic vowel or not, e.g. \"ikhompiyutha\" or \"ikhompyutha\" \"computer\".\nProsody.\nStress.\nStress in Zulu words is mostly predictable and normally falls on the penultimate syllable of a word. It is accompanied by an allophonic lengthening of the vowel. When the final vowel of a word is long due to contraction, it receives the stress instead of the preceding syllable.\nLengthening does not occur on all words in a sentence, however, but only those that are sentence- or phrase-final. Thus, for any word of at least two syllables, there are two different forms, one with penultimate length and one without it, occurring in complementary distribution. In some cases, there are morphemic alternations that occur as a result of word position as well. The remote demonstrative pronouns may appear with the suffix \"-ana\" when sentence-final, but only as \"-\u0101\" otherwise. Likewise, the recent past tense of verbs ends in \"-ile\" sentence-finally, but is reduced to \"-\u0113\" medially. Moreover, a falling tone can only occur on a long vowel, so the shortening has effects on tone as well.\nSome words, such as ideophones or interjections, can have stress that deviates from the regular pattern.\nTone.\nLike almost all other Bantu and other African languages, Zulu is tonal. There are three main \"tonemes\": low, high and falling. Zulu is conventionally written without any indication of tone, but tone can be distinctive in Zulu. For example, the words \"priest\" and \"teacher\" are both spelt \"umfundisi\", but they are pronounced with different tones: for the \"priest\" meaning, and for the \"teacher\" meaning.\nIn principle, every syllable can be pronounced with either a high or a low tone. However, low tone does not behave the same as the other two, as high tones can \"spread\" into low-toned syllables while the reverse does not occur. A low tone is therefore better described as the \"absence\" of any toneme; it is a kind of default tone that is overridden by high or falling tones. The falling tone is a sequence of high-low and occurs only on long vowels. The penultimate syllable can also bear a falling tone when it is long due to the word's position in the phrase. However, when it shortens, the falling tone becomes disallowed in that position.\nIn principle, every morpheme has an inherent underlying tone pattern which does not change regardless of where it appears in a word. However, like most other Bantu languages, Zulu has word tone, meaning that the pattern of tones acts more like a template to assign tones to individual syllables, rather than a direct representation of the pronounced tones themselves. Consequently, the relationship between underlying tone patterns and the tones that are pronounced can be quite complex. Underlying high tones tend to surface rightward from the syllables where they are underlyingly present, especially in longer words.\nDepressor consonants.\nThe breathy consonant phonemes in Zulu are depressor consonants or depressors for short. Depressor consonants have a lowering effect on pitch, adding a non-phonemic low-tone onset to the normal tone of the syllable. Thus, in syllables with depressor consonants, high tones are realised as rising, and falling tones as rising-then-falling. In both cases, the pitch does not reach as high as in non-depressed syllables. The possible tones on a syllable with a voiceless consonant like \"hla\" are , and the possible tones of a breathy consonant syllable, like \"dla\", are . A depressor does not affect a syllable that's already low, but it blocks assimilation to a preceding high tone so that the tone of the depressor syllable and any following low-tone syllables stays low.\nPhonological processes.\nPrenasalisation.\nPrenasalisation occurs whenever a consonant is preceded by a homorganic nasal, either lexically or as a consequence of prefixation. The most notable case of the latter is the class 9 noun prefix \"in-\", which ends in a homorganic nasal. Prenasalisation triggers several changes in the following consonant, some of which are phonemic and others allophonic. The changes can be summed as follows:\nTone assimilation.\nZulu has tonic assimilation: high tones tend to spread allophonically to following low-tone syllables, raising their pitch to a level just below that of adjacent high-tone syllables. A toneless syllable between a high-tone syllable and another tonic syllable assimilates to that high tone. That is, if the preceding syllable ends on a high tone and the following syllable begins with a high tone (because it is high or falling), the intermediate toneless syllable has its pitch raised as well. When the preceding syllable is high but the following is toneless, the medial toneless syllable adopts a high-tone onset from the preceding syllable, resulting in a falling tone contour.\nFor example, the English word \"spoon\" was borrowed into Zulu as , phonemically . The second syllable assimilates to the surrounding high tones, raising its pitch, so that it is pronounced sentence-finally. If tone pitch is indicated with numbers, with 1 highest and 9 lowest pitch, then the pitches of each syllable can be denoted as 2-4-3-9. The second syllable is thus still lower in pitch than both of the adjacent syllables.\nTone displacement.\nDepressor consonants have an effect called \"tone displacement\". Tone displacement occurs whenever a depressor occurs with a high tone, and causes the tone on the syllable to shift rightward onto the next syllable. If the next syllable is long, it gets a falling tone, otherwise a regular high tone. If the penultimate syllable becomes high (not falling), the final syllable dissimilates and becomes low if it was not already. Tone displacement is blocked under the following conditions:\nWhenever tone displacement is blocked, this results in a depressor syllable with a high tone, which will have the low-tone onset as described above. When the following syllable already has a high or falling tone, the tone disappears from the syllable as if it had been shifted away, but the following syllable's tone is not modified.\nSome examples:\nPalatalization.\nPalatalization is a change that affects labial and alveolar consonants whenever they are immediately followed by . While palatalization occurred historically, it is still productive and occurs as a result of the addition of suffixes beginning with . A frequent example is the diminutive suffix .\nMoreover, Zulu does not generally tolerate sequences of a labial consonant plus . Whenever follows a labial consonant, it changes to , which then triggers palatalization of the consonant. This effect can be seen in the locative forms of nouns ending in or , which change to and respectively in the locative. If a labial consonant immediately precedes, palatalization is triggered. The change also occurs in nouns beginning in with a stem beginning with a vowel.\nThe following changes occur as a result of palatalization:\nOrthography.\nZulu employs the 26 letters of the ISO basic Latin alphabet. However, some of the letters have different pronunciations than in English. Additional phonemes are written using sequences of multiple letters. Tone, stress and vowel length are not indicated.\nReference works and older texts may use additional letters. A common former practice was to indicate the implosive using the special letter , while the digraph would then be simply written as . Some references may also write after letters to indicate that they are of the depressor variety, e.g. , , , a practice that is standard in Xhosa orthography.\nVery early texts, from the early 20th century or before, tend to omit the distinction between plain and aspirated voiceless consonants, writing the latter without the .\nNouns are written with their prefixes as one orthographical word. If the prefix ends with a vowel (as most do) and the noun stem also begins with a vowel, a hyphen is inserted in between, e.g. . This occurs only with loanwords.\nMorphology.\nHere are some of the main features of Zulu:\n\"All the strong people on the farm are felling (trees).\"\nThe various agreements that qualify the word \"abantu\" (people) can be seen in effect.\nSuffixes are also put into common use to show the causative or reciprocal forms of a verb stem.\nMorphology of root \"Zulu\".\nThe root can be combined with several prefixes and thus create other words. For example, here is a table with some words constructed from the roots - and (the root for \"person/people\"):\nSample phrases and text.\nThe following is a list of phrases that can be used when one visits a region whose primary language is Zulu:\nThe following is from the preamble to the Constitution of South Africa:\nTranslation:\nCounting in Zulu.\nCounting from 1 to 10.\nThe digital numerical counting etiquette on the fingers begins with the little finger of the left hand to the left thumb and then continues with the right-hand thumb towards the right little finger. Starting with a closed left hand, each finger is extended with each subsequent number from one to five. Once the left hand is open, then counting continues on the right hand with each finger opening in turn. It is noteworthy that in Zulu, the names for the numbers six to nine reflect either the anatomical name of the digit (six, , means \"thumb\"), action (seven, , means \"the one that points out\"), or position/placement (eight or , means \"two remaining\", and nine or , indicating \"one remaining\").\nMonths.\nMonths in Zulu\nOral literature.\nProverbs.\nIn 1912, Franz Mayr, an Austrian missionary in southern Africa from 1890 until his death in 1914, published a collection of 150 proverbs in Zulu with an English translation. The proverbs include:\nJohn Colenso also included a selection of Zulu proverbs with English translations in his \"https://,\" first published in 1884. Here are some of those proverbs:\nTales.\nIn 1868, Henry Callaway published a collection of traditional Zulu tales told by storytellers in the Colony of Natal; the book includes the Zulu text accompanied by an English translation. The stories include the Tale of Uhlakanyana, a long cycle narrating the adventures of the famous Zulu trickster figure; the story of the Zulu hero Usikulumi and his family; the story of Usitungusohenthle who was carried away by pigeons; and the legend of the mythical bird that gave milk, along with an account of the very real honeyguide bird, called \"inhlamvu\" in Zulu.\nThere are many cannibal stories, including \"Itshe Likantunjambili\", \"The Cannibal's Cave;\" \"Intombi Namazimu\", \"The Girl and the Cannibals;\" \"Umbadhlanyana and the Cannibal;\" and \"Amazimu,\" \"Cannibals,\" along with an appendix on cannibalism. Women are the main characters in many of the stories, such as \"Ugungqu-Kubantwana,\" the popular folktale of the old woman who must seek a pond of clear water; the tale of Princess Umkxakaza-Wakogingqwayo; the tale of Princess Umdhlubu; and the tale of Princess Untombi-Yapansi, along with the story of \"Ununana-Bosele\", the woman who defeated a swallowing monster in the form of an elephant. Some stories, like \"Ubongopa-Kamagadhlela\",\nfeature numerous songs in Zulu, for which Callaway provides the lyrics but not the music.\nIn 1870, Callaway published \"https://\" which also contains Zulu texts and English translations, including \"Unkulunkulu\", \"The Tradition of Creation,\" along with lengthy Zulu testimony regarding ancestor worship, dream interpretation, divination, and medicine.\nRiddles.\nCallaway's 1868 collection of Zulu texts also contains 12 riddles in Zulu with an English translation. The riddles include:\nThere are six Zulu riddles reported in the \"Folklore Journal\" of the South African Folklore Society in 1880. Here are two of them: \nSongs.\nIn 1920, Madikane \u010cele contributed Zulu song lyrics and music to Natalie Curtis Burlin's book \"https://\". Zulu texts and English translations, plus commentary, are provided for \"Ingoma yeMpi,\" \"A Song of War;\" \"Ingoma yaBantwana,\" \"A Song of Children\" (lullaby); \"Ingoma yokuSina,\" \"A Dance-Song;\" \"Ingoma yoThando,\" \"A Love-Song,\" along with the music for the songs.\nZulu words in South African English.\nSouth African English has absorbed many words from the Zulu language. Others, such as the names of local animals ( and are both Zulu names) have made their way into standard English. A few examples of Zulu words used in South African English:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61488", "revid": "49092793", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61488", "title": "List of counties of New Brunswick", "text": "County of New Brunswick, Canada\nThe Canadian province of New Brunswick has 15 counties, originating in the British tradition of local courts for civil and judicial administration that were officiated by the colony's appointed magistrates. \nCounties, parishes and shiretowns are delineated in the Territorial Division Act. While no longer administrative divisions, they continue to define regional communities and have many legacy functions and provincial applications. They figure prominently in residents' sense of place and continue as significant threads in the Province of New Brunswick's cultural fabric (i.e., most citizens always know which county they are in).\nCounties are used as the basis of census divisions by Statistics Canada in the national census, while their parishes are the basis for census subdivisions.\nHistory.\nThe push for responsible government would see the municipal system of elective local government replace the magistracy, and in 1877 it was made mandatory that the province's county courts of sessions would municipalize.\n\"Sweeping\" reforms of the Robichaud premiership in 1966 ceased all county local government function, consequent to the government's New Brunswick Equal Opportunity program which brought about dissolution of county entities in favour of a ministerial upper tier, among other reforms local government related or otherwise.\nCounties were not replaced with another form of regional local government. Instead, many small village municipalities were created, with the surrounding predominantly rural areas financing local services and facilities through local service districts until the reform of local governance in 2023.\nOrigin.\nThe partitioning of Nova Scotia at the close of the American Revolutionary War was discreetly attributed by the British to the distance between the St. John river communities and the administrative centre at Halifax. The arrival of American Loyalist refugees saw the population in the colony grow abruptly, with many directed to Sunbury county's Wolastoq/Saint John river.\nInitially, when Nova Scotia's authorities established counties for the first time in 1759, the vast territory of former Acadia to the north of Kings County was erected as Cumberland, until in April 30, 1765, when the county was sectioned for the residents of the townships along the coastline and in the lower Saint John River valley. The new county was called Sunbury.\nIt would not be until 24 May 1770 that a boundary would be established between the two counties. Sunbury\u2019s western boundary was described as starting at the head of the St. Croix River, following the north line to the Saint John River and then to the southern Canadian border. This description actually overlapped a part of Maine\u2019s territory, as you would have needed to go far west, towards the area near the source of the Chaudi\u00e8re River. On the east the boundary with Cumberland ran north by the magnet from a point 20 miles up from Mispec. No further changes would be made until 1785, when the recently partitioned New Brunswick province's government established new counties.\nCreation.\nNew Brunswick was created on June 18, 1784. The province was divided into eight counties by decree of Governor Carleton: Charlotte, Kings, Northumberland, Queens, Saint John, Sunbury, Westmorland and York. In January 1786, the first session of the New Brunswick Legislative Assembly was held in Saint John, at which the MLA\u2019s passed \"An Act for the better ascertaining and confirming the Boundaries of Several Counties within this Province, and for subdividing them into Towns or Parishes\". As the council worked on developing the original county lines, they desperately needed maps of the province, which, at the time, they seemingly lacked. As a result, they relied on two maps by Joseph Frederick Wallet DesBarres from 1780, the best candidates for a map of New Brunswick at the time. As the new boundaries were established, the former counties of Cumberland and Sunbury were disregarded, with the exception of the starting point of the boundary between Westmorland and Northumberland counties, which shared a resemblance to the old boundaries, though this might have been a coincidence.\nThe county lines were strategically drawn to align with the watersheds, a logical decision given that New Brunswick's settlements were developed along waterways. Additionally, the counties were able to be divided into three groups: the Bay of Fundy, the Saint John River and the North Shore.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61489", "revid": "44573545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61489", "title": "Les Mis\u00e9rables", "text": "1862 novel by Victor Hugo\nLes Mis\u00e9rables (, ) is a French epic historical novel by Victor Hugo, first published on 31 March 1862, that is considered one of the greatest novels of the 19th century. \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" has been popularized through numerous adaptations for film, television, and the stage, including a musical.\nIn the English-speaking world, the novel is usually referred to by its original French title. However, several alternatives have been used, including \"The Miserables\", \"The Wretched\", \"The Miserable Ones\", \"The Poor Ones\", \"The Wretched Poor\", \"The Victims\", and \"The Dispossessed\". Beginning in 1815 and culminating in the 1832 June Rebellion in Paris, the novel follows the lives and interactions of several characters, particularly the struggles of ex-convict Jean Valjean and his experience of redemption.\nExamining the nature of law and grace, the novel elaborates upon the history of France, the architecture and urban design of Paris, politics, moral philosophy, antimonarchism, justice, religion, and the types and nature of romantic and familial love.\nHugo's sources.\nAn incident Hugo witnessed in 1829 involved three strangers and a police officer. One of the strangers was a man who had stolen a loaf of bread, similar to Jean Valjean, being taken to the coach by a police officer. Nearby, two onlookers, a mother and daughter, had stopped to watch the thief. They became the inspiration for Fantine and Cosette. Hugo imagined the life of the man in jail and the mother and daughter taken away from each other.\nValjean's character is loosely based on the life of the ex-convict Eug\u00e8ne Fran\u00e7ois Vidocq. Vidocq became the head of an undercover police unit and later founded France's first private detective agency. He was also a businessman and was widely noted for his social engagement and philanthropy. Vidocq also inspired Hugo's \"Claude Gueux\" and \"Le Dernier jour d'un condamn\u00e9\" (\"The Last Day of a Condemned Man\").\nIn 1828, Vidocq, already pardoned, saved one of the workers in his paper factory by lifting a heavy cart on his shoulders as Valjean does. Hugo's description of Valjean rescuing a sailor on the \"Orion\" draws almost word for word on a Baron La Ronci\u00e8re's letter describing such an incident. Hugo used Bienvenu de Miollis (1753\u20131843), the Bishop of Digne during the time in which Valjean encounters Myriel, as the model for Myriel.\nHugo had used the departure of prisoners from the Bagne of Toulon in one of his early stories, \"Le Dernier Jour d'un Condamn\u00e9\". He went to Toulon to visit the Bagne in 1839 and took extensive notes, though he did not start writing the book until 1845. On one of the pages of his notes about the prison, he wrote in large block letters a possible name for his hero: \"JEAN TR\u00c9JEAN\". When the book was finally written, Tr\u00e9jean became Valjean.\nIn 1841, Hugo saved a prostitute from arrest for assault. He used a short part of his dialogue with the police when recounting Valjean's rescue of Fantine in the novel. On 22 February 1846, when he had begun work on the novel, Hugo witnessed the arrest of a bread thief while a duchess and her child watched the scene pitilessly from their coach. He spent several vacations in Montreuil-sur-Mer.\nDuring the 1832 revolt, Hugo walked the streets of Paris, saw the barricades blocking his way at points, and had to take shelter from gunfire. He participated more directly in the 1848 Paris insurrection, helping to smash barricades and suppress both the popular revolt and its monarchist allies.\nVictor Hugo drew his inspiration from everything he heard and saw, writing it down in his diary. In December 1846, he witnessed an altercation between an old woman scavenging through rubbish and a street urchin who might have been Gavroche. He also informed himself by personal inspection of the Paris Conciergerie in 1846 and Waterloo in 1861, by gathering information on some industries, and on working-class people's wages and living standards. He asked his mistresses, L\u00e9onie d'Aunet and Juliette Drouet, to tell him about life in convents. He also slipped personal anecdotes into the plot. For instance, Marius and Cosette's wedding night (Part V, Book 6, Chapter 1) takes place on 16 February 1833, which is also the date when Hugo and his lifelong mistress Juliette Drouet made love for the first time.\nHugo also took inspiration from Eug\u00e8ne Sue's \"Les Myst\u00e8res de Paris\" (\"The Mysteries of Paris\"), a serialized novel that enjoyed great success when it was published during 1842 and 1843. Both novels view contemporary Paris from the perspective of the most-downtrodden members of society, and \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" even borrows some plot elements from \"Les Myst\u00e8res de Paris\".\nNovel form.\nUpton Sinclair described the novel as \"one of the half-dozen greatest novels of the world\" and remarked that Hugo set forth the purpose of \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" in the preface:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;So long as there shall exist, by reason of law and custom, a social condemnation, which, in the face of civilization, artificially creates hells on earth, and complicates a destiny that is divine with human fatality; so long as the three problems of the age\u2014the degradation of man by poverty, the ruin of women by starvation, and the dwarfing of childhood by physical and spiritual night\u2014are not solved; so long as, in certain regions, social asphyxia shall be possible; in other words, and from a yet more extended point of view, so long as ignorance and misery remain on earth, books like this cannot be useless.\nTowards the end of the novel, Hugo explains the work's overarching structure:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The book which the reader has before him at this moment is, from one end to the other, in its entirety and details\u00a0... a progress from evil to good, from injustice to justice, from falsehood to truth, from night to day, from appetite to conscience, from corruption to life; from bestiality to duty, from hell to heaven, from nothingness to God. The starting point: matter, destination: the soul. The hydra at the beginning, the angel at the end.\nThe novel contains various subplots, but the main thread is the story of ex-convict Jean Valjean, who becomes a force for good in the world but cannot escape his criminal past. The novel is divided into 5 volumes, each divided into several books and subdivided into chapters, for a total of 48 books and 365 chapters. Each chapter is relatively short, commonly no longer than a few pages.\nThe novel as a whole is one of the longest ever written, with 655,478 words in the original French. Hugo explained his ambitions for the novel to his Italian publisher:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I don't know whether it will be read by everyone, but it is meant for everyone. It addresses England as well as Spain, Italy as well as France, Germany as well as Ireland, the republics that harbour slaves as well as empires that have serfs. Social problems go beyond frontiers. Humankind's wounds, those huge sores that litter the world, do not stop at the blue and red lines drawn on maps. Wherever men go in ignorance or despair, wherever women sell themselves for bread, wherever children lack a book to learn from or a warm hearth, \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" knocks at the door and says: \"open up, I am here for you\".\nDigressions.\nMore than a quarter of the novel\u2014by one count 955 of 2,783 pages\u2014is devoted to essays that argue a moral point or display Hugo's encyclopedic knowledge but do not advance the plot, nor even a subplot, a method Hugo used in such other works as \"The Hunchback of Notre-Dame\" and \"Toilers of the Sea\". One biographer noted, \"The digressions of genius are easily pardoned\". The topics Hugo addresses include cloistered religious orders, the construction of the Paris sewers, argot, and the street urchins of Paris. The one about convents he titles \"Parenthesis\" to alert the reader to its irrelevance to the storyline.\nHugo devotes another 19 chapters (Volume II, Book I) to an account\u2014and meditation on the place in history\u2014of the Battle of Waterloo, the battlefield of which Hugo visited in 1861 and where he finished writing the novel. It opens volume II with such a change of subject as to seem the beginning of an entirely different work. The fact that this \"digression\" occupies such a large part of the text demands that it be read in the context of the \"overarching structure\" discussed above. Hugo draws his own personal conclusions, taking Waterloo to be a pivot point in history but definitely not a victory for the forces of reaction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Waterloo, by cutting short the demolition of European thrones by the sword, had no other effect than to cause the revolutionary work to be continued in another direction. The slashers have finished; it was the turn of the thinkers. The century that Waterloo was intended to arrest has pursued its march. That sinister victory was vanquished by liberty.\nOne critic has called this \"the spiritual gateway\" to the novel, as its chance encounter of Th\u00e9nardier and Colonel Pontmercy foreshadows so many of the novel's encounters \"blending chance and necessity\", a \"confrontation of heroism and villainy\".\nEven when not turning to other subjects outside his narrative, Hugo sometimes interrupts the straightforward recitation of events, his voice and control of the storyline unconstrained by time and sequence. The novel opens with a statement about the bishop of Digne in 1815 and immediately shifts: \"Although these details in no way essentially concern that which we have to tell...\" Only after 14 chapters does Hugo pick up the opening thread again, \"In the early days of the month of October 1815...\", to introduce Jean Valjean.\nCharacters.\nFriends of the ABC.\nA revolutionary student club. In French, the letters \"ABC\" are pronounced identically to the French word , \"the abased\".\nThe narrator.\nHugo does not give the narrator a name and allows the reader to identify the narrator with the novel's author. The narrator occasionally injects himself into the narrative or reports facts outside the time of the narrative to emphasize that he is recounting historical events, not entirely fiction. He introduces his recounting of Waterloo with several paragraphs describing the narrator's recent approach to the battlefield: \"Last year (1861), on a beautiful May morning, a traveller, the person who is telling this story, was coming from Nivelles\u00a0...\" The narrator describes how \"[a]n observer, a dreamer, the author of this book\" during the 1832 street fighting was caught in the crossfire: \"All that he had to protect him from the bullets was the swell of the two half columns which separate the shops; he remained in this delicate situation for nearly half an hour.\" At one point, he apologizes for intruding\u2014\"The author of this book, who regrets the necessity of mentioning himself\"\u2014to ask the reader's understanding when he describes \"the Paris of his youth\u00a0... as though it still existed\". This introduces a meditation on memories of past places that his contemporary readers would recognize as a self-portrait written from exile: \"You have left a part of your heart, of your blood, of your soul, in those pavements.\" He describes another occasion when a bullet shot \"pierced a brass shaving-dish suspended\u00a0... over a hairdresser's shop. This pierced shaving-dish was still to be seen in 1848, in the Rue du Contrat-Social, at the corner of the pillars of the market.\" As evidence of police double agents at the barricades, he writes, \"The author of this book had in his hands, in 1848, the special report on this subject made to the Prefect of Police in 1832.\"\nPlot.\nVolume I: Fantine.\nIn 1815 Digne, the peasant Jean Valjean, just released from 19 years' imprisonment in the Bagne of Toulon\u2014five for stealing bread for his starving sister and her family and fourteen more for numerous escape attempts\u2014is turned away by innkeepers because his yellow passport marks him as a former convict. He sleeps on the street, angry and bitter.\nDigne's benevolent Bishop Myriel gives him shelter. At night, Valjean runs off with Myriel's silverware. When the police capture Valjean, Myriel pretends that he has given the silverware to Valjean and presses him to take two silver candlesticks as well, as if he had forgotten to take them. The police accept his explanation and leave. Myriel tells Valjean that his soul has been purchased for God and that he should use money from the silver candlesticks to make an honest man of himself.\nValjean broods over Myriel's words. When opportunity presents itself, purely out of habit, he steals a 40-sou coin from 12-year-old Petit Gervais and chases the boy away. He quickly repents and panics, searching the city for Gervais. At the same time, his theft is reported to the authorities. Valjean hides as they search for him because if he is apprehended, he will be returned to the galleys for life as a repeat offender.\nSix years pass, and Valjean, using the alias Monsieur Madeleine, has become a wealthy factory owner and is appointed mayor of Montreuil-sur-Mer. Walking down the street, he sees a man named Fauchelevent pinned under the wheels of a cart. When no one volunteers to lift the cart, even for pay, he decides to rescue Fauchelevent himself. He crawls underneath the cart, manages to lift it, and frees him. The town's police inspector, Inspector Javert, who was an adjutant guard at the Bagne of Toulon during Valjean's incarceration, becomes suspicious of the mayor after witnessing this remarkable feat of strength. He has known only one other man, a convict named Jean Valjean, who could accomplish it.\nYears earlier in Paris, a grisette named Fantine was very much in love with F\u00e9lix Tholomy\u00e8s. His friends, Listolier, Fameuil, and Blachevelle, were also paired with Fantine's friends Dahlia, Z\u00e9phine, and Favourite. The men abandon the women, treating their relationships as youthful amusements. Fantine must draw on her own resources to care for her and Tholomy\u00e8s's daughter, Cosette. When Fantine arrives at Montfermeil, she leaves Cosette in the care of the Th\u00e9nardiers, a corrupt innkeeper and his selfish, cruel wife.\nFantine is unaware that they are abusing her daughter and using her as forced labor for their inn and continues to try to meet their growing, extortionate, and fictitious demands. She is later fired from her job at Jean Valjean's factory because of the discovery of her daughter, who was born out of wedlock. Meanwhile, the Th\u00e9nardiers' monetary demands continue to grow. In desperation, Fantine sells her hair and two front teeth and resorts to prostitution to pay the Th\u00e9nardiers. Fantine is slowly dying from an unspecified disease.\nA dandy named Bamatabois harasses Fantine in the street, and she reacts by striking him. Javert arrests Fantine. She begs to be released so that she can provide for her daughter, but Javert sentences her to six months in prison. Valjean (Mayor Madeleine) intervenes and orders Javert to release her. Javert resists, but Valjean prevails. Valjean, feeling responsible because his factory turned her away, promises Fantine that he will bring Cosette to her. He takes her to a hospital.\nJavert comes to see Valjean again. Javert admits that after being forced to free Fantine, he reported him as Valjean to the French authorities. He tells Valjean he realizes he was wrong because the authorities have identified someone else as the real Jean Valjean, have him in custody, and plan to try him the next day. Valjean is torn but decides to reveal himself to save the innocent man, whose real name is Champmathieu. He travels to attend the trial and there reveals his true identity. Valjean returns to Montreuil to see Fantine, followed by Javert, who confronts him in her hospital room.\nAfter Javert grabs Valjean, Valjean asks for three days to bring Cosette to Fantine, but Javert refuses. Fantine discovers that Cosette is not at the hospital and fretfully asks where she is. Javert orders her to be quiet and then reveals to her Valjean's real identity. Weakened by the severity of her illness, she falls back in shock and dies. Valjean goes to Fantine, speaks to her in an inaudible whisper, kisses her hand, and then leaves with Javert. Later, Fantine's body is unceremoniously thrown into a public grave.\nVolume II: Cosette.\nValjean escapes, is recaptured, and is sentenced to death. The king commutes his sentence to penal servitude for life. While imprisoned in the Bagne of Toulon, Valjean, at great personal risk, rescues a sailor caught in the ship's rigging. Spectators call for his release. Valjean fakes his death by allowing himself to fall into the ocean. Authorities report him dead and his body lost.\nValjean arrives at Montfermeil on Christmas Eve. He finds Cosette fetching water in the woods alone and walks with her to the inn. He orders a meal and observes how the Th\u00e9nardiers abuse her while pampering their own daughters, \u00c9ponine and Azelma, who mistreat Cosette for playing with their doll. Valjean leaves and returns to give Cosette a present of an expensive new doll, which, after some hesitation, she happily accepts. \u00c9ponine and Azelma are envious. Madame Th\u00e9nardier is furious with Valjean, while her husband makes light of Valjean's behavior, caring only that he pays for his food and lodging.\nThe next morning, Valjean informs the Th\u00e9nardiers that he wants to take Cosette with him. Madame Th\u00e9nardier immediately accepts while Th\u00e9nardier pretends to love Cosette and be concerned for her welfare, reluctant to give her up. Valjean pays the Th\u00e9nardiers 1,500 francs, and he and Cosette leave the inn. Th\u00e9nardier, hoping to swindle more out of Valjean, runs after them, holding the 1,500 francs, and tells Valjean he wants Cosette back. He informs Valjean that he cannot release Cosette without a note from the child's mother. Valjean hands Th\u00e9nardier Fantine's letter authorizing the bearer to take Cosette. Th\u00e9nardier then demands that Valjean pay a thousand crowns, but Valjean and Cosette leave. Th\u00e9nardier regrets that he did not bring his gun and turns back towards home.\nValjean and Cosette flee to Paris. Valjean rents new lodgings at the Gorbeau House, where he and Cosette live happily. However, Javert discovers Valjean's lodgings there a few months later. Valjean takes Cosette, and they try to escape from Javert. They soon find shelter in the Petit-Picpus convent with the help of Fauchelevent, the man Valjean once rescued from being crushed under a cart and who has become the convent's gardener. Valjean also becomes a gardener, and Cosette becomes a student at the convent school.\nVolume III: Marius.\nEight years later, the Friends of the ABC, led by Enjolras, are preparing an act of anti-Orl\u00e9anist civil unrest (i.e., the Paris uprising on 5\u20136 June 1832, a setting contrary to the popular notion that the book is set in the 1789 French Revolution) following the death of Lamarque, a popular general known for his sympathy towards the working class. Lamarque was a victim of a major cholera epidemic that had ravaged the city, particularly its poor neighborhoods, arousing suspicion that the government had been poisoning wells. The Friends of the ABC are joined by the poor of the \"Cour des miracles\", including the Th\u00e9nardiers' eldest son, Gavroche, who is a street urchin.\nOne of the students, Marius Pontmercy, has become alienated from his family (especially his royalist grandfather, M. Gillenormand) because of his Bonapartist views. After the death of his father, Colonel Georges Pontmercy, Marius discovers a note from him instructing his son to provide help to a sergeant named Th\u00e9nardier who saved his life at Waterloo\u2014in reality, Th\u00e9nardier was looting corpses and only saved Pontmercy's life by accident; he had called himself a sergeant under Napoleon to avoid exposing himself as a robber.\nAt the Luxembourg Garden, Marius falls in love with the now grown and beautiful Cosette. The Th\u00e9nardiers have also moved to Paris and now live in poverty after losing their inn. They live under the surname Jondrette at the Gorbeau House (coincidentally, the same building Valjean and Cosette briefly lived in after leaving the Th\u00e9nardiers' inn). Marius lives there as well, next door to the Th\u00e9nardiers.\n\u00c9ponine, now ragged and emaciated, visits Marius at his apartment to beg for money. To impress him, she tries to prove her literacy by reading aloud from a book and by writing \"The Cops Are Here\" on a sheet of paper. Marius pities her and gives her some money. After \u00c9ponine leaves, Marius observes the \"Jondrettes\" in their apartment through a crack in the wall. \u00c9ponine comes in and announces that a philanthropist and his daughter are arriving to visit them. In order to look poorer, Th\u00e9nardier puts out the fire and breaks a chair. He also orders Azelma to punch out a window pane, which she does, resulting in cutting her hand (as Th\u00e9nardier had hoped).\nThe philanthropist and his daughter\u2014actually Valjean and Cosette\u2014enter. Marius immediately recognizes Cosette. After seeing them, Valjean promises to return with rent money for them. After he and Cosette leave, Marius asks \u00c9ponine to retrieve her address for him. \u00c9ponine, who is in love with Marius herself, reluctantly agrees. The Th\u00e9nardiers have also recognized Valjean and Cosette, and vow their revenge. Th\u00e9nardier enlists the aid of Patron-Minette, a well-known and feared gang of murderers and robbers.\nMarius overhears Th\u00e9nardier's plan and goes to Javert to report the crime. Javert gives Marius two pistols and instructs him to fire one into the air if things get dangerous. Marius returns home and waits for Javert and the police to arrive. Th\u00e9nardier sends \u00c9ponine and Azelma outside to look out for the police. When Valjean returns with rent money, Th\u00e9nardier, with Patron-Minette, ambushes him, revealing his true identity. Marius recognizes Th\u00e9nardier as the man who saved his father's life at Waterloo and is caught in a dilemma.\nHe tries to find a way to save Valjean while not betraying Th\u00e9nardier. Valjean denies knowing Th\u00e9nardier and tells him that they have never met. Valjean tries to escape through a window but is subdued and tied up. Th\u00e9nardier orders Valjean to pay him 200,000 francs. He also orders Valjean to write a letter to Cosette to return to the apartment, saying they will keep her with them until he delivers the money. After Valjean writes the letter and informs Th\u00e9nardier of his address, Th\u00e9nardier sends out Mme. Th\u00e9nardier to get Cosette. Mme. Th\u00e9nardier comes back alone and announces the address is a fake.\nIt is during this time that Valjean manages to free himself. Th\u00e9nardier decides to kill Valjean. While he and Patron-Minette are about to do so, Marius remembers the scrap of paper that \u00c9ponine wrote on earlier. He throws it into the Th\u00e9nardiers' apartment through the wall crack. Th\u00e9nardier reads it and thinks \u00c9ponine threw it inside. He, Mme. Th\u00e9nardier, and Patron-Minette try to escape, only to be stopped by Javert.\nHe arrests all the Th\u00e9nardiers and Patron-Minette (except Claquesous, who escapes during his transportation to prison, and Montparnasse, who stops to run off with \u00c9ponine instead of joining in on the robbery). Valjean manages to escape the scene before Javert sees him.\nVolume IV: The Idyll in the Rue Plumet and the Epic in the Rue St. Denis.\nAfter \u00c9ponine's release from prison, she finds Marius at \"the Field of the Lark\" and sadly tells him that she found Cosette's address. She leads him to Valjean and Cosette's house on Rue Plumet, and Marius watches the house for a few days. He and Cosette then finally meet and declare their love for one another. Th\u00e9nardier, Patron-Minette, and Brujon manage to escape from prison with the aid of Gavroche (a rare case of Gavroche helping his family in their criminal activities). One night, during one of Marius's visits with Cosette, the six men attempt to raid Valjean and Cosette's house. However, \u00c9ponine, who has been sitting by the gates, threatens to scream and awaken the whole neighbourhood if the thieves do not leave. Hearing this, they reluctantly retire. Meanwhile, Cosette informs Marius that she and Valjean will be leaving for England in a week, which greatly troubles the pair.\nThe next day, Valjean is sitting in the Champ de Mars. He is feeling troubled about seeing Th\u00e9nardier in the neighbourhood several times. Unexpectedly, a note lands in his lap. It says, \"Move Out.\" He sees a figure running away in the dim light. He goes home, tells Cosette they will be staying at their other house on Rue de l'Homme-Arm\u00e9, and restates that they will be moving to England. Marius tries to get permission from M. Gillenormand to marry Cosette. His grandfather seems stern and angry but has been longing for Marius's return. When tempers flare, he refuses to consent to the marriage, telling Marius to make Cosette his mistress instead. Insulted, Marius leaves.\nThe following day, the students revolt and erect barricades in the narrow streets of Paris. Gavroche spots Javert and informs Enjolras that he is a spy. When Enjolras confronts Javert about this, he admits his identity and his orders to spy on the students. Enjolras and the other students tie him to a pole in the Corinth restaurant. Later that evening, Marius returns to Valjean and Cosette's house on Rue Plumet but finds it no longer occupied. He then hears a voice telling him that his friends are waiting for him at the barricade. Distraught to find Cosette gone, he heeds the voice and goes.\nWhen Marius arrives at the barricade, the revolution has already started. When he stoops down to pick up a powder keg, a soldier comes up to shoot him. However, a man covers the muzzle of the soldier's gun with his hand. The soldier fires, fatally wounding the man while missing Marius. Meanwhile, the soldiers are closing in. Marius climbs to the top of the barricade, holding a torch in one hand, and a powder keg in the other, and threatens to the soldiers that he will blow up the barricade. After confirming this, the soldiers retreat from the barricade.\nMarius decides to go to the smaller barricade, which he finds empty. As he turns back, the man who took the fatal shot for him earlier calls him by his name. Marius discovers this man is \u00c9ponine, dressed in men's clothes. As she lies dying on his knees, she confesses that she was the one who told him to go to the barricade, hoping they would die together. She also confesses to saving his life because she wanted to die before he did.\nThe author also tells the reader that \u00c9ponine anonymously threw the note to Valjean. \u00c9ponine then tells Marius that she has a letter for him. She also confesses to having obtained the letter the day before, originally not planning to give it to him but deciding to do so for fear he would be angry at her about it in the afterlife. After Marius takes the letter, \u00c9ponine then asks him to kiss her on the forehead when she is dead, which he promises to do. With her last breath, she confesses that she was \"a little bit in love\" with him, and dies.\nMarius fulfills her request and goes into a tavern to read the letter. It is from Cosette. He learns Cosette's whereabouts and writes a farewell letter to her. He sends Gavroche to deliver it to her, but Gavroche leaves it with Valjean. Valjean, learning that Cosette's lover is fighting, is at first relieved, but an hour later, he puts on a National Guard uniform, arms himself with a gun and ammunition, and leaves his home.\nVolume V: Jean Valjean.\nValjean arrives at the barricade and immediately saves a man's life. He is still uncertain if he wants to protect Marius or kill him. Marius recognizes Valjean at first sight. Enjolras announces that they are almost out of cartridges. When Gavroche goes outside the barricade to collect more ammunition from the dead National Guardsmen, he is shot dead.\nValjean volunteers to execute Javert himself, and Enjolras grants permission. Valjean takes Javert out of sight and then shoots into the air while letting him go. Marius mistakenly believes that Valjean has killed Javert. As the barricade falls, Valjean carries off the injured and unconscious Marius. All the other students are killed. Valjean escapes through the sewers, carrying Marius's body. He evades a police patrol and reaches an exit gate but finds it locked. Th\u00e9nardier emerges from the darkness. Valjean recognizes Th\u00e9nardier, but Th\u00e9nardier doesn't recognize Valjean. Thinking Valjean a murderer lugging his victim's corpse, Th\u00e9nardier offers to open the gate for money. As he searches Valjean's and Marius's pockets, he surreptitiously tears off a piece of Marius's coat so he can determine his identity later. Th\u00e9nardier takes the thirty francs he finds, opens the gate, and allows Valjean to leave, expecting Valjean's emergence from the sewer to distract the policeman who has been pursuing him.\nUpon exiting, Valjean encounters Javert and requests time to return Marius to his family before surrendering to him. Surprisingly, Javert agrees, assuming that Marius will be dead within minutes. After leaving Marius at his grandfather's house, Valjean asks for a brief visit to his own home, and Javert agrees. There, Javert tells Valjean he will wait for him in the street, but when Valjean scans the street from the landing window, he finds Javert has gone. Javert walks down the street, realizing that he is caught between his strict belief in the law and the mercy Valjean has shown him. He feels he can no longer give Valjean up to the authorities but cannot ignore his duty to the law either. Unable to cope with this dilemma, Javert commits suicide by throwing himself into the Seine.\nMarius slowly recovers from his injuries. As he and Cosette make wedding preparations, Valjean endows them with a fortune of nearly 600,000 francs. As their wedding party winds through Paris during Mardi Gras festivities, Valjean is spotted by Th\u00e9nardier, who then orders Azelma to follow him. After the wedding, Valjean confesses to Marius that he is an ex-convict. Marius is horrified, assumes the worst about Valjean's moral character, and contrives to limit Valjean's time with Cosette. Valjean accedes to Marius's judgment and his separation from Cosette. Valjean loses the will to live and retires to his bed.\nTh\u00e9nardier approaches Marius in disguise, but Marius recognizes him. Th\u00e9nardier attempts to blackmail Marius with what he knows of Valjean, but in doing so, he inadvertently corrects Marius's misconceptions about Valjean by revealing all the good he has done. He tries to convince Marius that Valjean is a murderer and presents the piece of coat he tore off as evidence. Stunned, Marius recognizes the fabric as part of his own coat and realizes that it was Valjean who rescued him from the barricade. Marius pulls out a fistful of notes and flings it at Th\u00e9nardier's face. He then confronts Th\u00e9nardier about his crimes and offers him an immense sum to depart and never return. Th\u00e9nardier accepts the offer, and he and Azelma travel to America, where he becomes a slave trader.\nAs they rush to Valjean's house, Marius tells Cosette that Valjean saved his life at the barricade. They arrive to find Valjean near death and reconcile with him. Valjean tells Cosette her mother's story and name. He dies content and is buried beneath a blank slab in P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery.\nContemporary reception.\nThe appearance of the novel was a highly anticipated event, as Victor Hugo was considered one of France's foremost poets in the middle of the nineteenth century. \"The New York Times\" announced its forthcoming publication as early as April 1860. Hugo forbade his publishers from summarizing his story and refused to authorize the publication of excerpts in advance of publication. He instructed them to build on his earlier success and suggested this approach: \"What Victor H. did for the Gothic world in \"Notre-Dame of Paris\" [\"The Hunchback of Notre-Dame\"], he accomplishes for the modern world in \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\"\". A massive advertising campaign preceded the release of the first two volumes of \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" in Brussels on 30 or 31 March and in Paris on 3 April 1862. The remaining volumes appeared on 15 May 1862.\nCritical reactions were wide-ranging and often negative. Some critics found the subject matter immoral, others complained of its excessive sentimentality, and others were disquieted by its apparent sympathy with the revolutionaries. L. Gauthier wrote in \"Le Monde\" on 17 August 1862, \"One cannot read without an unconquerable disgust all the details Monsieur Hugo gives regarding the successful planning of riots.\" The Goncourt brothers judged the novel artificial and disappointing. Flaubert found \"neither truth nor greatness\" in it. He complained that the characters were crude stereotypes who all \"speak very well \u2013 but all in the same way\". He deemed it an \"infantile\" effort and brought an end to Hugo's career like \"the fall of a god\". In a newspaper review, Charles Baudelaire praised Hugo's success in focusing public attention on social problems, though he believed that such propaganda was the opposite of art. In private, he castigated it as \"repulsive and inept\" (\"immonde et inepte\").\nThe work was a commercial success and has been a popular book ever since it was published. Translated the same year it appeared into several foreign languages, including Italian, Greek, and Portuguese, it proved popular not only in France but across Europe and abroad.\nAdaptations.\nSince its original publication, \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" has been the subject of a large number of adaptations in numerous types of media, such as books, films, musicals, plays and games.\nNotable examples of these adaptations include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61491", "revid": "47505063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61491", "title": "Les Mis\u00e9rables (1935 film)", "text": "1935 American film based on the novel of the same name directed by Richard Boleslawski\nLes Mis\u00e9rables is a 1935 American drama film starring Fredric March and Charles Laughton based upon the 1862 Victor Hugo novel of the same name. The movie was adapted by W. P. Lipscomb and directed by Richard Boleslawski. This was the last film for Twentieth Century Pictures before it merged with Fox Film Corporation to form 20th Century-Fox. The plot of the film mostly follows Hugo's novel \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\", but there are many differences.\nThe film was nominated for the Oscar for Best Picture, the Academy Award for Best Assistant Director, the Academy Award for Best Cinematography, and the Academy Award for Best Film Editing. The National Board of Review named the film the sixth best of 1935.\nDifferences from the novel.\nThis adaptation made a lot of changes, many of which can also be found in later adaptations:"}
{"id": "61492", "revid": "1316769771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61492", "title": "Jean Valjean", "text": "Fictional character in Les Mis\u00e9rables\nJean Valjean () is the protagonist of Victor Hugo's 1862 novel \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\". The story depicts the character's struggle to lead a normal life and redeem himself after serving a 19-year-long prison sentence for stealing bread to feed his sister's starving children and attempting to escape from prison. Valjean is also known in the novel as Monsieur Madeleine, Ultime Fauchelevent (once called Tranchelevent by Monsieur Gillenormand), Monsieur Leblanc, and Urbain Fabre.\nJean Valjean and police Inspector Javert, who repeatedly encounters Valjean and attempts to return him to prison, have become archetypes in literary culture.\nOutline of the novel.\nAs a parolee, Valjean is issued a yellow passport with marching orders to Pontarlier, where he will be forced to live under severe restrictions. This document, often called a \"passeport jaune\" (yellow passport), identifies him to all as a former convict and immediately brands Valjean an outcast wherever he travels. His life turns around when Bishop Myriel of Digne, from whom he steals valuable silverware, tells the police that he has given the treasure to Valjean. Out of this encounter, Valjean becomes a repentant, honorable, and dignified man. He becomes kind, a devoted father-figure to a girl, Cosette, who loses her mother, and a benefactor to those in need.\nAlthough a known criminal and a parolee, Valjean yet grows morally to represent the best traits of humanity. Bishop Myriel tells him in Volume I that \"if you emerge from that sad place with thoughts of hatred and of wrath against mankind, you are deserving of pity; if you emerge with thoughts of good-will and of peace, you are more worthy than any one of us.\" A few books later Victor Hugo describes that \"[w]hat the Bishop had wished to make of him, that he carried out. It was more than a transformation; it was a transfiguration [...][he had] henceforth only two thoughts,\u2014to conceal his name and to sanctify his life; to escape men and to return to God.\" Whenever Valjean's desire to remain concealed conflicts with his desire to sanctify his life, \"[he] d[oes] not hesitate to sacrifice the first to the second\u2014his security to his virtue.\" By the end of the novel, even the police officer Inspector Javert acknowledges that Valjean is \"kneeling on the heights of virtue, more nearly akin to an angel than to a man.\"\nHis character foil, the police officer Inspector Javert, persecutes him throughout the novel. After Valjean saves his life, Inspector Javert is forced to reconsider the authoritarian worldview he has adopted all his life; there \"takes place in him a sentimental revelation entirely distinct from legal affirmation, his only standard of measurement hitherto. (...) justice according to God, running in an inverse sense to justice according to men.\" This revelation that \"authority might be put out of countenance, that the rule might be inadequate in the presence of a fact, that everything could not be framed within the text of the code\" leads to his eventual suicide.\nIn the novel.\nPart One: Fantine.\nVictor Hugo devotes the novel's first book to Bishop Myriel, a kind-hearted old clergyman in the town of Digne. The second book opens with the arrival of a stranger to the town of Digne, who is gradually revealed to be the ex-convict Jean Valjean. He searches for a place to stay the night and is repeatedly turned away because of his yellow passport, which marks him as a criminal. At last, he is taken in by the bishop, who trusts him, feeds him supper, and gives him a bed for the night.\nHugo then details Valjean's background. He was born sometime in 1769 in a small town and orphaned as a child. He became a pruner and helped support his widowed sister and her seven children. In the winter of 1795, when resources were scarce, Valjean stole a loaf of bread from a local baker by breaking the window. He was caught and imprisoned for five years in the Bagne of Toulon. He attempted to escape three times, and each time his sentence was lengthened by three years; he also received an extra two years for once resisting recapture during his second escape. After nineteen years in prison, he was released, but by law must carry a yellow passport that announces he is an ex-convict.\nDuring the night, he awakens and steals the bishop's silverware and silver plates, and runs off. He is arrested and brought back to the bishop. However, the Bishop admonishes Valjean (in front of the police) for forgetting to also take the silver candlesticks that he'd given Valjean, reminding Valjean of his \"promise\" to use the silver to become an honest man, claiming to have bought Valjean's soul with it, withdrawing it from evil and giving it to God. Despite the Bishop's words, it is later revealed that the police marked the event down in Valjean's permanent record.\nBewildered and not understanding what the bishop is talking about, Valjean heads back out into the nearby mountains and meets a young traveling worker from Savoy named Petit Gervais. Valjean places his foot on a coin that Petit Gervais drops, then refuses to return it, despite Gervais' protests, and threatens to beat him. When the boy flees the scene and Valjean comes to his senses, remembering what the bishop told him, he is ashamed of what he has done and searches for the boy in vain.\nHugo introduces Fantine and explains how she came to be abandoned by her child's father. In late 1815, Valjean, now using the name Madeleine, arrives in Montreuil-sur-Mer. He revolutionizes the town's manufacturing and earns a fortune, which he spends mostly for the town's good, paying for the maintenance (including required staff) of hospital beds, orphanages and schools. He is appointed mayor after refusing the first time. He declines the king's offer to make him a Knight of the Legion of Honor.\nMadeleine (Valjean) saves an old man named Fauchelevent from death. Fauchelevent had fallen beneath his wagon as his horse fell and broke two of its legs. Madeleine offers to pay anyone who could raise the wagon but nobody wants to risk his life climbing under the wagon. Madeleine turns pale, but gets down into the mud and lifts the wagon off Fauchelevent. Javert, who witnessed the scene, tells Madeleine that he had only known of one man capable of doing such a feat, and that was a convict doing forced labor in Toulon. Since Fauchelevent had earlier lost his business and now had a broken kneecap, Madeleine (Valjean) arranges a job at a convent for Fauchelevent. Valjean also buys the broken cart and horse as an excuse to give Fauchelevent money.\nLater, Javert arrests Fantine, who has become a prostitute, when he sees her scratch and try to hit a Dandy named Bamatabois, who had taunted Fantine and thrown snow down her dress while she walked back and forth trying to get business. Valjean was told what had happened and knew that Bamatabois should have been the one arrested and ordered Fantine free. Javert knew only what he'd seen and was furious with Valjean for interfering with police work. When Valjean orders Javert to leave in front of Javert's squad, Javert leaves and denounces \"Madeleine\" to the prefect of police at Paris, saying that he suspects Madeleine is Valjean. Javert is told that he must be incorrect because the \"real\" Jean Valjean (who is in reality Champmathieu) had just been found.\nValjean takes Fantine to the local hospital (which is on the side of the mayor's house) and has her cared for. He learns of Cosette, Fantine's daughter, and tries to pay off the Th\u00e9nardiers (who are abusing Cosette).\nJavert then apologizes to \"M. Madeleine\", and tells him that the \"real\" Jean Valjean has been found and is to be tried the next day. Javert also asks that he be dismissed in disgrace by Valjean from his job for acting out of revenge incorrectly, saying that since he had been hard on others he could not be less harsh on himself but after Valjean repeatedly refuses, Javert says he will continue acting as police chief until a replacement can be found.\nIt is only here that the novel finally reveals Madeleine to be Valjean, a fact which was heavily foreshadowed before.\nThat night, Valjean has a terrific struggle within himself, but finally decides to go to the trial and reveal his identity in order to free Champmathieu (for, if he gave himself up, who would care for Fantine or rescue Cosette?). He gives his evidence and proves that he is the real Jean Valjean, but nobody wants to arrest him, so Valjean says that they know where to find him and he returns to Montreuil-sur-Mer. The judge at the trial, although quite impressed with M. Madeleine's work and reputation, is shocked that Valjean, while mentioning a date that another convict had tattooed on himself (in order to prove that M. Madeleine was actually Jean Valjean) called Napoleon Bonaparte \"the Emperor\" instead of \"Bonaparte\" and orders Valjean arrested for robbing Petit Gervais. Javert comes to arrest him the next day while Valjean is in Fantine's room. Valjean asks for three days to get Cosette from Montfermeil and give her to Fantine before he is arrested and Javert refuses, saying that it would be too easy for Valjean to escape. Fantine (who'd been told by the doctors that Valjean, who'd been at the trial, had been getting her daughter) was shocked to find that her daughter was not there already and that her savior was being arrested, and died of shock (her body had been greatly weakened by her poor living conditions and long illness, probably tuberculosis).\nValjean allows Javert to arrest him, but quickly escapes. It is hinted that Valjean escaped with the help of a file hidden in a coin, an item he is later proved to possess. Valjean returns to his house to pack his clothes and hides behind the door when Javert comes looking for him. Sister Simplice, one of the hospital nuns, who had a reputation for never having told a lie in her life, twice lied to Javert that there was nobody there but her to protect Valjean. Javert believed her and left, giving Valjean an opportunity to escape the town.\nPart Two: Cosette.\nA short chapter, mainly consisting of two newspaper articles, informs the reader that Valjean has been re-arrested while getting into the stagecoach to Montfermeil (on his way to get Fantine's eight-year-old daughter, Cosette, whom he had promised to rescue). In July 1823, he was condemned to death for the 40-sous theft and the escape from the jail in Montreuil-sur-Mer, as the prosecutor claims that Valjean was part of a gang of street robbers and the latter refuses to defend himself. His sentence was graciously reduced by the king to only life in prison instead of death. Before he was captured, Valjean had already traveled near to Montfermeil and buried all the money he'd saved as M. Madeleine\u2014a chapter tells of a worker in Montfermeil, a former Toulon convict, who claims having seen, according to a local fairy tale, the devil burying his treasure in the forest. No further explanation is ever given as to why, having buried his money near Montfermeil, Valjean had traveled back to Paris and then attempted to travel back to Montfermeil.\nValjean was assigned a new number of 9430, but escapes from a sailing vessel after only a few months' imprisonment, on 16 November 1823, by apparently falling into the sea after a daring rescue of a sailor who had gotten stuck in a dangerous situation up in the ship's rigging. Thereafter he is officially presumed dead.\nValjean goes to Montfermeil, where he meets Cosette alone in the forest on Christmas Eve, 1823. He accompanies her back to the inn; and watches that evening as the Th\u00e9nardiers mistreat her very badly. He sees the Th\u00e9nardiers' daughters \u00c9ponine and Azelma acting unkindly to her as well, tattling on her to their mother when she tries to play with their temporarily abandoned doll. After seeing this, Valjean briefly leaves the inn and returns with a beautiful new doll to give to Cosette, which she happily accepts. This makes Mme. Th\u00e9nardier furious with Valjean, affronted that he would do such a thing for Cosette instead of her own daughters. M. Th\u00e9nardier tells her that Valjean can do as he wishes as long as he pays them. That evening, Mme. Th\u00e9nardier insists that Cosette will be turned out onto the street the next day.\nThe next morning, Christmas Day, Valjean offers to take Cosette with him. Mme. Th\u00e9nardier immediately accepts, but M. Th\u00e9nardier haggles for a compensation and gets 1500 francs in the end. Valjean takes Cosette with him. Only now does the book confirm that the mysterious man Cosette met is actually Valjean. M. Th\u00e9nardier is soon overcome with grief at having sold Cosette too cheaply and runs after them. When M. Th\u00e9nardier demands more money, Valjean gives him the note Fantine signed before she died, saying that the bearer of the note was authorized to take Cosette. M. Th\u00e9nardier tries to continue following Valjean, but is soon frightened back to the inn.\nValjean takes Cosette to Paris, where they live in No. 50-52 Boulevard de l'H\u00f4pital, in the so-called \"Gorbeau House\". They cannot live calmly for long\u2014in Spring 1824, Javert, who has been promoted to the police in Paris, finds the house. He has heard of a \"kidnapping\" from Montfermeil and remembers Valjean's request of three days. He has also heard of a man, poorly dressed, who gives money to other poor people, the \"beggar who gives alms\", who had a granddaughter with him and who has been heard to say that she came from Montfermeil. Javert goes undercover, discovers that it is Valjean, and makes plans to arrest him.\nValjean recognizes Javert, and taking Cosette, walks out of the house and leaves. They barely manage to get away from Javert, who allowed Valjean to leave the house, believing that Valjean would take him to meet other criminals. Valjean managed to steal a rope from a streetlamp, climb a wall to a convent and pull Cosette up after him. They then climbed down a shed roof into a garden. it turned out that this was the convent where Fauchelevent worked, who wanted to return the favor and save Valjean's life this time. After almost burying Valjean alive in a scheme to get him out of the convent so that he could openly walk back into the convent, Fauchelevent was able to bring in his \"brother\" Ultimas (fr. Ultime) Fauchelevent (the real name of Fauchelevent's deceased brother). Cosette was admitted to the convent school.\nPart Three: Marius.\nDuring this whole part, Valjean and Cosette are unnamed, as the action is seen from Marius Pontmercy's point of view. They are described only as a father and daughter, whom Marius notices on his daily walks in the Jardin du Luxembourg. He ignores them at first, but later he and Cosette fall in love. Marius stalks the two until Valjean is alerted that someone is stalking them and moves from his house in Rue de l'Ouest (today Rue d'Assas).\nThey meet again by pure luck, six months later: Valjean is known for his generosity. As \"the generous man from the St-\u00c9tienne-church\", Th\u00e9nardier, Marius' neighbour, asks for charity. He recognises Valjean and decides to build a trap for him. Marius, overhearing the plans, denounces the plot to the police, unfortunately meeting Javert. Valjean walks right into the trap and attempts to escape Th\u00e9nardier once he realizes this. Th\u00e9nardier forces Valjean to write a letter to Cosette, instructing her to come with the bearer. Valjean, however, gives Th\u00e9nardier a false name and address and manages to free himself of the ropes tying him with the help of a file concealed in a hollowed-out coin, which is found afterwards. He berates the gang for thinking that they could force him to tell something he does not want to tell and burns his own left forearm with the poker Th\u00e9nardier had used to threaten him before surrendering to the gang. It is at that moment that Javert enters the scene. There are a lot of people and confusion in the room, and the room is dimly lit allowing Valjean to escape through an open window before Javert recognizes him.\nPart Four: Saint-Denis.\nOnly now is when Valjean's and Cosette's life during the last years revealed: They lived in the convent until Fauchelevent's death, and left in 1829; Cosette is fourteen years old. Valjean buys three houses (so that he will always have somewhere to flee to) in Rue de l'Ouest (today Rue D'Assas), Rue Plumet (today Rue Oudinot) and No. 7 Rue de l'Homme-Arm\u00e9 (today 40, rue des Archives), mostly living in Rue Plumet.\nValjean does not know that Cosette returns Marius' love and does not understand why Cosette seems less attached to \"her grandfather\" than before. He is happy to see that the brand wound he got during the attack makes her worry and care for him more. During one of their walks, they witness the passing of a chain gang being taken from Paris south. The event leaves a profound impression on Cosette and makes Valjean even more determined to stop his ward from learning about his past.\nMarius, through \u00c9ponine, finds Cosette, stalks her house, leaves his daily love journal for her to find then one evening leaps over the gate and surprises her in the garden. They begin meeting every evening to gaze into each other's eyes. But it is also \u00c9ponine, jealous, who throws Valjean an anonymous note, telling him to move. Valjean, feeling threatened since the incident with Th\u00e9nardier and since he believes there has been a man hiding in his garden, decides to move to England. He takes Cosette to the house in the Rue de l'Homme-Arm\u00e9. This takes places during the first days of June 1832.\nIt is only there that he learns of Cosette's love for Marius when a young boy (Gavroche) delivers a letter from Marius to Cosette, which mentions that Marius is at the barricade and will die as he promised her, since she left without a forwarding address. Valjean has another long inward struggle, at first feeling relief about Marius' certain death, then guilt about his former feeling. He joins the rebellion without an actual decision about his following actions.\nPart Five: Valjean.\nValjean plays his part in the insurrection and proves an excellent shot. To thank him, Enjolras, the barricade's leader, offers him anything he wants. Valjean asks that he be allowed to kill Javert, who has been captured as a spy. The request is granted and Valjean takes Javert out of sight to kill him but instead of executing him, sets him free, though Javert warns that he will still be bound to arrest Valjean. Valjean agrees and gives Javert his address. After Valjean releases Javert, the fighters on the barricades are all killed with the exception of Marius, whom Valjean carries to safety through miles of Parisian sewers. Valjean finds the sewer exit to the Grand-Caillou locked. Th\u00e9nardier is there and has the key. He offers Valjean the key in return for payment, believing that Valjean had killed Marius for his money. Valjean gives the few sous he has to Th\u00e9nardier and unlocks the sewer gate. He encounters Javert, now returned to duty and in pursuit of Th\u00e9nardier. Valjean requests that Javert help him carry Marius to safety and Javert summons his carriage. Valjean asks permission to return home to say goodbye to Cosette and Javert agrees, saying that he will wait out front. As he walks up the stairs, Valjean looks out the window and notices that Javert is gone. Javert confronts his life spent in pursuit of a criminal who has demonstrated a sense of justice outside of the one that Javert has upheld his entire life. Unable to accept this, he commits suicide.\nAfter recovering from his injuries, Marius receives permission from his grandfather to marry Cosette and they wed. The day after the wedding, Valjean reveals to Marius that he is an ex-convict. Marius, horrified, assumes the worst about Valjean's character and begins pushing him out of Cosette's life. After this, Valjean's previously habitual visits to Cosette at Marius' grandfather's house become shorter and shorter, until he ceases to visit at all, having become bedridden with loss of will to live. Some time after he stops coming, Th\u00e9nardier visits Marius and claims that Valjean is a murderer and shows Marius several newspaper articles to prove this. Marius sees through Th\u00e9nardier's disguise and, in an attempt to show Marius something that he does not already know, Th\u00e9nardier shows newspaper clippings proving that M. Madeleine and Jean Valjean are the same person, and that Javert committed suicide. Marius is then told that Valjean was the man who had \"assassinated\" one of Marius' relatives, carrying the body through the sewers on 6 June. Realizing that Th\u00e9nardier had seen Valjean saving him, Marius finishes with Th\u00e9nardier and hurries with Cosette to Valjean's flat. Unfortunately, they are too late and find Valjean is dying. Valjean makes peace with Marius, with whom he had uneasy relations, and tells Cosette the name of her mother, Fantine. He dies content, under the light of the Bishop's candlesticks, and it is stated that an angel awaits to carry his soul to Heaven. He is buried in an unmarked grave, per his request, after death. An unknown person writes in pencil these four lines on the gravestone:\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"Il dort. Quoique le sort f\u00fbt pour lui bien \u00e9trange,\"\n\"Il vivait. Il mourut quand il n'eut plus son ange;\"\n\"La chose simplement d'elle-m\u00eame arriva,\"\n\"Comme la nuit se fait lorsque le jour s'en va.\"&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nTranslation:\nHe sleeps. Although his fate was very strange, \nHe lived. He died when he no longer had his angel. \nThe thing came to pass simply, of itself, \nAs the night comes when day is gone.&lt;/poem&gt;\nHugo's sources.\nValjean's character is loosely based on the life of Eug\u00e8ne Fran\u00e7ois Vidocq, an ex-convict who became a successful businessman widely noted for his social engagement and philanthropy. Vidocq helped Hugo with his research for Claude Gueux and \"Le Dernier jour d'un condamn\u00e9\" (\"The Last Day of a Condemned Man\"). In 1828, Vidocq saved one of the workers in his paper factory by lifting a heavy cart on his shoulders as Valjean does. Hugo's description of Valjean rescuing a sailor on the \"Orion\" drew almost word for word on a friend's letter describing such an incident. On 22 February 1846, when he had begun work on the novel, Hugo witnessed the arrest of a bread thief while a duchess and her child watched the scene pitilessly from their coach.\nThe revolt of the university students is based on the 1832 June Rebellion.\nIn 1871, when Hugo was living in Brussels during the radical revolt known as the Paris Commune, anti-revolutionary mobs attacked his house and broke windows shouting \"Down with Jean Valjean!\"\nMusical.\nLes Mis\u00e9rables became an Award Winning musical in London, 1985.\nDifferences in the musical.\nGiven the high range of the role, particularly in parts of Bring Him Home, Valjean is most often played by a tenor.\nAdaptations.\nSince the original publication of \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" in 1862, the character of Jean Valjean has been in a large number of adaptations in numerous types of media based on the novel, such as books, films, musicals, plays and games.\nMany notable actors have portrayed the role on screen, including Fredric March, Jean Gabin, Frank Finlay, Georges G\u00e9ret, Richard Jordan, Lino Ventura, Liam Neeson, G\u00e9rard Depardieu, Dominic West and Hugh Jackman, the last of whom received his first nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for playing Valjean in the 2012 film adaptation of the musical.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61493", "revid": "25922293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61493", "title": "114 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 114 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Balbus and Cato (or, less frequently, year 640 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Third Year of Yuanding. The denomination 114 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia Minor.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61494", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61494", "title": "Naughty Marietta (film)", "text": "1935 American operetta film\nNaughty Marietta is a 1935 American romantic musical film based on the 1910 operetta of the same name by Victor Herbert. Jeanette MacDonald stars as a princess who flees an arranged marriage. She sails for New Orleans and is rescued from pirates by Captain Richard Warrington (Nelson Eddy). Five of Herbert's most famous songs come from the score of \"Naughty Marietta\", with words by lyricist Rida Johnson Young: \"Ah! Sweet Mystery of Life\", \"Italian Street Song\", \"Neath the Southern Moon\", \"I'm Falling in Love with Someone\" and \"Tramp! Tramp! Tramp! (Along the Highway)\". Additional lyrics for several of Herbert's songs were penned for the film by Gus Kahn. The film was written by Frances Goodrich, Albert Hackett, John Lee Mahin and Rida Johnson Young.\nPlot.\nTo avoid an arranged marriage to Don Carlos, an elderly Spanish duke, Princess Marie masquerades as her uncle's former servant, Marietta, and escapes from France on a ship with casquette girls who are traveling to New Orleans to marry colonists. On board, Marietta befriends Julie.\nEn route, the women discuss what type of man they want to marry. \"Marietta\" shocks the other girls by stating that she does not intend to marry anyone. Shortly after, the ship is boarded by pirates, who kill the entire crew and take the girls ashore.\nAfter the pirates divide the loot, they turn their attention to the girls. Just then, singing is heard (\"Tramp! Tramp! Tramp!\"). The pirates extinguish their torches and fire to try to avoid detection, but Marietta takes one of the torches and runs towards the sound of the singing, crying out \"help, help\". Mercenaries rout the pirates and rescue the women.\nThe mercenaries' leader, Captain Richard Warrington, sings \"Neath a Southern Moon\" to Marietta. Despite his attraction to her, however, Warrington declares that he does not intend to marry.\nWarrington and his men take the casquette girls to New Orleans, where they are welcomed by the governor. The women are housed in the convent while they get to know their potential husbands. When some men approach Marietta, she declares that she does not want to marry any of them. The governor feels that he has seen Marietta before in Paris, but she denies it. When she pretends to have a disreputable past, the governor orders a pair of soldiers to escort her away in disgrace. Warrington relieves them of their duty and finds her a place to stay, even paying the first month's rent. Though Marietta tries to rid herself of Warrington, he is undaunted. Just then, a group of gypsies stroll by, advertising their Marionette Theater. The gypsy leader, Rodolpho, has his daughter sing, and Warrington joins in (\"Italian Street Song\"). Stung by Warrington's remark that she might not be able to sing as well as the gypsy, Marietta surprises him by doing so beautifully. While he is distracted getting rid of three would-be suitors, she slips away.\nThe following day, Warrington discovers that Marietta is working at the Marionette Theater. When he visits her after the performance, he receives a warmer reception. Soon after, however, a large award is offered for information about her whereabouts. Warrington persuades her to trust him, and takes her away by boat. During this time together, they discover that they are falling in love with each other (\"I'm Falling in Love with Someone\"). Later, however, they are found by French soldiers, and her true identity is revealed. Her uncle and Don Carlos are expected on the next ship to take her back.\nMarietta is to attend a ball arranged by the governor in her honor. Julie comes to see her; she tells Marietta that Warrington had been ordered to leave New Orleans that day, but intends to come to the ball. Her uncle warns her that \"if Warrington attempted to see her again, he would be arrested for treason and shot\". Marietta asks Julie to stop Warrington from coming, but they realize it is too late when they hear him and his men singing (\"Tramp! Tramp! Tramp!\").\nWhen Warrington enters the ballroom, the governor tries to get him to leave in order to save his life. Marietta pretends to have been toying with him to deceive her uncle. As Warrington is leaving, Marietta sings \"Ah, Sweet Mystery of Life\", joined by Warrington. The lovers then flee to the wild frontier.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Jeanette MacDonald as Princess Marie de Namour de la Bonfain (Marietta Franini)\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Naughty Marietta\" grossed a total (domestic and foreign) of US$2,057,000 (): $1,058,000 from the US and Canada and $999,000 elsewhere. It made a profit of $407,000.\nAccolades.\nThe film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. Douglas Shearer won the Academy Award for Best Sound Recording for his work on the picture. It also won the \"Photoplay\" Medal of Honor for the Best Picture of 1935. In 2003, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61496", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61496", "title": "Les Miserables", "text": ""}
{"id": "61497", "revid": "263599", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61497", "title": "Southsea", "text": "Seaside resort in Portsmouth, Hampshire, England\nSouthsea is a seaside resort and a geographic area of Portsmouth, Portsea Island in the ceremonial county of Hampshire, England. Southsea is located 1.8 miles (2.8\u00a0km) to the south of Portsmouth's inner city-centre. \nSouthsea began as a fashionable 19th-century Victorian seaside resort named \"Croxton Town\", after a Mr Croxton who owned the land. As the resort grew, it adopted the name of nearby Southsea Castle, a seafront fort constructed in 1544 to help defend the Solent and approaches to Portsmouth Harbour.\nIn 1879, South Parade Pier was opened by Princess Edward of Saxe-Weimar in Southsea. The pier began operating a passenger steamer service across the Solent to the Isle of Wight. This service gave rise to the idea of linking Southsea and its pier to Portsmouth's railway line, and for tourists to bypass the busy town of Portsmouth and its crowded harbour. East Southsea railway station, along with the Southsea Railway and Fratton railway station were jointly opened on 1 July 1885 by Lady Ada Mary Willis (n\u00e9e Neeld), wife of General Sir George Willis, the Lieutenant Governor of Portsmouth.\nSouthsea subsequently grew into a dense residential suburb and large, distinct commercial and entertainment area, separate from the town of Portsmouth up until Southsea and the whole of Portsea Island were incorporated into the town borough of Portsmouth in 1904.\nDue to declining use and World War I, the Southsea Railway line and its East Southsea station were closed on 6 August 1914. To maintain Southsea's tourism, the Southsea station name was moved and merged with Portsmouth's main town centre railway station in 1925, officially becoming known as Portsmouth &amp; Southsea railway station. A year later in 1926, Portsmouth was granted official city status, while its main railway station retained its \"Portsmouth &amp; Southsea\" name, which has led many non-locals and visitors to wrongly assume that Southsea is still a separate town near to Portsmouth.\nThe areas of Southsea surrounding Albert Road, Palmerston Road, and Osborne Road contain many bars, restaurants and independent shops. Palmerston Road is the main High Street of Southsea and contains various shops and restaurants, as well as the local library, and Southsea Community Cinema and Arts Centre. Albert Road is a distinct street containing shopping and cultural venues, which include The Wedgewood Rooms, and the Kings Theatre, a regional theatre built in 1907.\nSouthsea retains its own post town status (PO4 and PO5), even though the actual town of Southsea was merged into Portsmouth in 1904.\nHistory.\nThe history of Southsea is generally part of the history of Portsmouth, as Southsea started with the growth of Portsmouth dockyard and of the city, with the expansion of British maritime power during the British Empire. Before the 16th century Southsea was principally composed of small farms, open grassland and undrained marshland (morass), outside the main naval base and the city itself. However the growing expectation of a possible French attack on the naval base led Henry VIII to order the building of Southsea Castle in 1544, adjacent to the channel approaches to Portsmouth Harbour. Southsea was first recorded as a place name in a Royal plan in 1577. Henry VIII visited Southsea Castle in 1545, from where he witnessed the sinking of the warship Mary Rose in the Solent.\nThe first references to the development of the suburb appear in the Portsea Poor Rate returns of 1790 and describe small areas of building and farming plots. Most of the land was undeveloped and open grass and marshland still dominated the area. In the early 19th century, development continued on land owned by Thomas Croxton, and the community became known as Croxton Town. The first houses were built by 1809 for skilled workers in what were called the \"mineral\" streets (such as Silver Street and Nickel Street). Around 1810, streets such as Hampshire Terrace, Landport Terrace, King's Terrace, Wish Street (which later became King's Road and Elm Grove), Jubilee Terrace and Bellevue Terrace were built adjacent to the old walls of the city. Although the streets still exist, many of them were among the most heavily bombed areas of Portsmouth in the Second World War, and like much of Southsea they experienced significant redevelopment in Postwar Britain.\nThe development of Southsea continued during the Napoleonic era and as the dockyard continued to grow, new homes were required for the increasing personnel, and many houses, villas and apartments were built. The architect and builder Thomas Ellis Owen created many of these, and the surviving buildings retain a coherent late Georgian and early Victorian style, and form a conservation area today, with many of the buildings having listed status. Owen built properties in Kent Road, Queen's Terrace, Sussex Terrace, Elm Grove, Beach Road, Grove Road South, Clarendon Road, Osborne Road and Portland Terrace. The area between Castle Road and Victoria Road South was built up between 1835 and 1860. In 1851 St Jude's CofE church was built on Kent Road to a design by Thomas Ellis Owen.\nDuring the same period, Southsea grew as a leisure and bathing destination. In 1816 a pump room and baths were erected near the present day Clarence Pier, and by 1820 a large complex was developed including vapour baths, showers, and card playing and assembly rooms. The remaining marshland, known locally as \"The Great Morass\" was drained, leading to the creation of \"Southsea Common\", some 480 acres (about 2\u00a0km2) of open grassland. Due to military requirements for clear lines of fire adjacent to Southsea Castle, the area was developed and remains today as a park and garden. Apartments and hotels were constructed towards the common and waterfront, along Southsea Terrace, Western Parade and Clarence Parade. The first large hotel was the Portland Hotel (destroyed in the Second World War) near Kent Road. Others soon followed, including the purpose-built Queens Hotel (1861), Pier Hotel (1865) and Beach Mansions Hotel (1866). In 1852 the Clarence Esplanade and a memorial were erected by public subscription, and development of the resort led in 1861 to Clarence Pier being constructed as a promenade pier and landing place for steamers. \nIn August 1874, a series of riots broke out over access to a section of Southsea beach. Lasting over 4 days, this became known as the \"Battle of Southsea\". The Riot Act was eventually invoked with soldiers from the 9th Regiment dispersing the crowd from Southsea Common. Other piers were also built, including the Victoria and Albert Piers, with the construction of South Parade Pier in 1879 marking the culmination of seafront development in the Victorian period. \nBy the 1860s the suburb of Southsea had grown along Clarendon Road as far as Granada Road. In 1857 Southsea gained its own Improvement Commissioners responsible for paving, street cleaning and public lighting. The Southsea Railway came in 1885 and brought further development to the area, although it was to be financially unsuccessful and eventually closed in 1914. By the mid to late Victorian era, Southsea had become recognised as a largely middle-class neighbourhood, with many naval officers and other professionals taking up residence. During this time the writer Sir Arthur Conan Doyle lived in Portsmouth, moving to Southsea in June 1882 with less than \u00a310 (\u00a3 today) to his name. He set up a medical practice at 1 Bush Villas in Elm Grove, Southsea. Areas of Southsea suffered from the rapid development of the suburb; certain streets suffered from poverty and there was a major cholera outbreak in 1848. The works of the commission helped bring about some improvements and eventually led to the setting up of the Southsea Improvement Association.\n20th century.\nSouthsea continued to grow eastwards in the early 20th century, extending to the area of Eastney. During this time significant local public buildings were constructed including the Queens Hotel, in the Edwardian Baroque style built in 1903 and the Kings Theatre built in 1907. The onset of World War I saw an increase in fortifications on the seafront. Parades were held on Southsea Common. Southsea continued to thrive as a resort destination and a suburb of Portsmouth in the inter-war years, with many visitors in summer. At that time parts of the Common were converted into ornamental gardens and the Ladies' Mile was set out in 1925. However World War II had an immense impact on the urban and social fabric of the area. Huge areas of Southsea were destroyed by bombing during The Blitz. Although some of Victorian Southsea escaped the bombing, areas such as the Kings Road and Elm Grove were extensively damaged and the Palmerston Road shopping areas were completely destroyed. The beachfront, piers and promenades were closed for the duration of the war. Following the end of the war, in 1945 Southsea and the rest of Portsmouth embarked on a massive clearance and rebuilding scheme. Many areas of destroyed, damaged and intact low-income housing were cleared to make way for new building schemes. The Kings Road Estate and Roslyn House, among others, were developed between 1945 and the 1970s. Palmerston Road shopping area was developed in the 1950s and still stands today. Although visitor numbers to the resort area never recovered, Southsea continued to develop throughout the 20th century and today remains a mixed residential area and leisure destination.\nRecent history.\nOn 15 September 2000, parts of Southsea were flooded when a month's worth of rain fell in 12 hours. The Eastney pumping station then failed due to the flood water. On 9 August 2011 a fire broke out at the former Joanna's Nightclub, then derelict and later demolished, opposite South Parade Pier. A contemporary local newspaper report states that the incident was not linked to then-ongoing riots.\nSouthsea Common.\nSouthsea Common is a large expanse of mown grassland parallel to the shore from Clarence Pier to Southsea Castle. The Common owes its existence to the demands of the military in the early nineteenth century for a clear range of fire from the harbour defences at any enemy ships which dared to approach Portsmouth and its dockyard. In 1874, the Southsea Pier Company closed public access to part of Southsea beach which lead to four days of rioting. These riots became known as the \"Battle of Southsea\". The police and army eventually dispersed the crowd but the development plans were abandoned.\nThe common is a popular recreation ground, and also serves as the venue for a number of annual events, including the Southsea Show, Para Spectacular, Military Vehicle Show, Kite Festival, Victorious Festival and a variety of circuses including the Moscow State Circus and Chinese State Circus. It was also the place where fans of Portsmouth F.C. gathered to celebrate their victory in the 2008 FA Cup Final. It also hosts the annual Portsmouth Pride celebrations, where in 2024 an estimated 20,000 people were in attendance. The Portsmouth Pride dates for 2025 is on 7 June 2025, starting at The Briny restaurant. \nOn 6 June 1994 a drumhead service was held on Southsea Common in front of the Portsmouth Naval Memorial to commemorate the 50th anniversary of D-Day. The service was attended by all the heads of the states which had participated in the allied landings, notably HM Queen Elizabeth II and US President Bill Clinton. The service was also witnessed by over 100,000 members of the public. Historically, a blessing before battle was offered during a drumhead service which is conducted in the field with the drums forming the altar and the colours serving as the altar cloth.\nOn 28 June 2005 the Common was a venue for the Trafalgar 200 celebrations, the seafront an ideal point from which to witness the International Fleet Review and evening firework display.\nIn August 2010, \"Ultrasauros\", a life-size (52\u00a0ft high) model of an ultrasauros dinosaur was erected on the common in conjunction with the Portsmouth's Aspex Gallery. The sculpture was destroyed by a fire, thought to have been caused by an electrical fault, on 1 October.\nIn 2013 Victorious Festival moved from the Portsmouth Historic Dockyard to Southsea Common. The annual festival was extended to a 3-day event in 2017.\nIn September 2013, it was announced that a new Parkrun would begin along Southsea seafront in October 2013. As of February 2025 the Southsea Parkrun has hosted 525 events with an average finish time of 28 minutes and 50 seconds.\nIn July 2015 and 2016 Southsea Common hosted the America's Cup World Series sailing event. The British sailing team Land Rover BAR is based in nearby Old Portsmouth.\nTrees.\nThe common is home to a collection of mature elm trees, believed to be the oldest and largest surviving in Hampshire, which have escaped Dutch elm disease owing to their isolation. The majority of the larger trees are Huntingdon Elms planted in the 1920s, but nearer the entrance to the Skate Park there is a fine example of a hybrid of the Siberian Elm \"Ulmus pumila\". Huntingdon Elms once lined the Ladies' Mile\u2014an avenue through the centre of the Common\u2014but many were lost in the Great Storm of 1987 and replaced by the Dutch hybrid elm cultivar 'Lobel'.\nThe Ladies' Mile is also home to several semi-mature Canary Island date palms \"Phoenix canariensis\". Planted in 1996, these palms are now some of the largest in the UK and for the last few years have fruited and produced viable seed, the first time this species of palm has been recorded doing so in the UK. Other palms growing close to the Common include \"Trachycarpus fortunei\", (Ladies' Mile, Rock Gardens and Rose Garden), \"Chamaerops humilis\" (in front of the Pyramids Centre), \"Butia capitata\" (in Burgoyne Gardens) and \"Brahea armata\", (Canoe Lake and D-Day Island). Many \"Cordyline australis\" are also planted in the area, though these are not true palms, but more closely related to yuccas and agaves.\nTourist attractions.\nCanoe Lake.\nCanoe Lake is the last remnant of an area of marsh and open water known as the Great Morass, drained in 1886, on which much of Southsea now sits. The lake is topped up from the sea by a sluice gate at high tide. Some marine wildlife can be spotted in the lake, including fish, crabs, moon jellyfish, and reportedly even small sharks.\nMute swans and mallard can be seen regularly, with less frequent visits from tufted duck, Mediterranean gull, cormorant, little grebe and occasionally a lone feral black swan. Pedalos can be rented on the lake in the summer.\nSince 2006 Canoe Lake has been a venue for the Lake of Lights Memorial Service, held each December, when thousands of lights are floated on the lake to commemorate loved ones in the local community who have been lost to cancer.\nAlbert Road.\nAlbert Road is a well known road of the hosts a range of independent bars, restaurants, cafes and live music venues. It also hosts a range of cultural events. It is also houses the Kings Theatre and The Wedgewood Rooms.\nMap mural.\nA large map of the area was painted on the side of a house at the junction of\nWaverley Road and Clarendon Road, in 1997-1998. Due to water damage it was removed, the wall rendered and a new version painted in 2010. The artist, Mark Lewis, acquired a 99 year lease on the wall to ensure the mural's longevity. In 2021 the celebrated map mural received a \u00a35,000 grant to maintain and update it.\nClimate.\nSouthsea features a mild oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") that borderlines the warm-summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csb\"), with warm summers and relatively mild, damp winters. Due to its southerly location and sheltering of northerly winds from Portsdown Hill, Southsea enjoys one of the mildest winters in the United Kingdom, and experiences higher temperatures than areas surrounding it, as well as higher sunshine hours. Summers tend to be warm with fewer extreme high temperatures than other areas in the South East of England.\nSouthsea Town Council.\nOn 1 April 1999 following a successful submission to the UK Government under the Local Government and Rating Act 1997 Southsea became a civil parish. The Parish Council later became the Southsea Town Council. At the 2001 census (the last before the abolition of the parish), Southsea had a population of 18,514.\nThe initial creation of the town council was opposed by Portsmouth City Council. There was a long-standing campaign to disband the town council. In a poll of local residents in February 2010, 66.3 per cent voted to abolish it. The parish was abolished on 23 April 2010. It is now in the unparished area of Portsmouth.\nThe town council had limited powers and a small budget funded by the local precept. It campaigned on local issues, seeking to influence the unitary authority Portsmouth City Council, awarded funds to local causes and funded infrastructure improvements in the local area. Until 2007 it had a small office open to the public in Southsea town centre.\nTransport links.\nHovertravel operates a regular hovercraft service to Ryde on the Isle of Wight from Southsea seafront. \nIn 1898 a railway branch called the Southsea Railway was opened from platform 3 at Fratton Station, terminating at East Southsea Station (near to The Strand). Two unstaffed halts were added at Albert Road and Jessie Road/Devonshire Avenue. The line was not able to compete with the Portsmouth corporation tram services. It was closed in 1914 and never re-opened. The line itself and the station have since been demolished and replaced with houses. Southsea is now served by stations at Fratton and Portsmouth and Southsea station and on to Portsmouth Harbour (also called The Hard), with regular trains to London Waterloo and London Victoria.\nThere is a Hayling Island Ferry service linking Eastney and Ferry Point, on Hayling Island.\nSport.\nSouthsea is the birthplace of underwater hockey. The town is home to the UK's most successful club, winning 21 out of 53 national championships as of 2023, in addition to 16 out of 36 Nautilus Tournaments as of 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61498", "revid": "7219497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61498", "title": "David Copperfield (1935 film)", "text": "1935 film by George Cukor\nDavid Copperfield is a 1935 American film released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer based upon Charles Dickens' 1850 novel \"The Personal History, Adventures, Experience, &amp; Observation of David Copperfield the Younger\" (though a number of characters and incidents from the novel were omitted).\nThe story was adapted by Hugh Walpole from the Dickens novel, and the film was directed by George Cukor from a screenplay by Howard Estabrook and Lenore J. Coffee, who was not credited.\nThe novel was adapted for three silent film versions prior to this, the first sound production.\nPlot.\nDavid's father dies before his birth and therefore the young man is forced to spend his childhood without the presence of a father figure. He finds valid support in his mother and housekeeper Peggotty. David's mother, however, feels the need to have a husband and therefore marries Mr. Murdstone, a severe and insensitive man, and welcomes his sister into the house; she proves to be even more insensitive than her brother.\nWhen David's mother dies, Murdstone sends David to London to work in his family's wine bottling plant. During this time he is assisted by the Micawber family and forms a close friendship with its members. Mr. Micawber, with his courtly language and with his head a little in the air, is unable to look after the expenses of the house and gets into debt; at this point David decides to run away from London. After many adventures, he reaches Dover on foot, where his great-aunt, Betsie Trotwood, lives. His aunt welcomes him together with her roommate Mr. Dick and they send him to boarding school in Canterbury, where he rents a room with the lawyer Wickfield and forms a sincere friendship with Wickfield's daughter, Agnes.\nDavid meets Dora Spenlow at the ballet and falls in love, eventually marrying her. Dora is young and flighty and inept at running a household, and dies not long after their marriage. David and Micawber then help to unmask Uriah Heep as the forger and cheat that he is and return Wickfield's firm to its rightful owner. David and Agnes end the film finally expressing their love for each other.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCast notes:\nProduction.\nDavid O. Selznick dearly wanted to film \"David Copperfield\", as his Russian father, Lewis J. Selznick, had learned English through it, and read it to his sons every night. After failing to dissuade Selznick from the project, Louis B. Mayer, his father-in-law and employer, agreed that MGM would underwrite the production provided his star child contract actor Jackie Cooper was cast in the role of the young David. Selznick fought to remain true to the novel's origins and prevailed, and the role went to Freddie Bartholomew after an extensive talent search in Canada and Great Britain by Selznick and George Cukor.\nCedric Gibbons designed a recreation of 19th century London on the MGM backlot. The scenes set outside Aunt Betsey's house atop the white cliffs of Dover were filmed at Malibu. MGM even filmed the exterior of Canterbury Cathedral, which only appears in the film for less than a minute. Special effects, including many matte shots, were by Slavko Vorkapi\u0107.\nCharles Laughton was originally cast in the role of Mr. Micawber, and was authentically made up with a bald cap, since Dickens describes the character as hairless. After two days' work, he disliked his performance in the dailies and asked to be replaced. It was said at the time that \"he looked as though he were about to molest the child.\"\nSelznick released Laughton, who, in turn, recommended comedian and Dickens aficionado W. C. Fields for the part. A clause in Fields' contract stated that he had to play the part with a British accent, but as he had difficulty learning the lines and had to read off cue cards he thus speaks in his own accent in the role. His defense: \"My father was an Englishman and I inherited this accent from him! Are you trying to go \"against\" nature?!\" This is the only film where Fields does not ad lib, and he plays the character in a straightforward manner (although he did want to add a juggling sequence; when this was denied, he wanted to add an anecdote about snakes, which was also denied). Director George Cukor said that when Fields did make a suggestion for a visual bit, such as accidentally dipping his quill in a teacup instead of an inkwell, it was always within the parameters of the character. The result was one of the finest performances of that year.\nReception.\nThe film was well-received upon its release in January 1935. Andre Sennwald of \"The New York Times\" called it \"the most profoundly satisfying screen manipulation of a great novel the camera has ever given us.\" \"Variety\" wrote that it had \"one of the most evenly good casts ever to have been assembled\", with staging and costumes that were \"almost always excellent.\" John Mosher of \"The New Yorker\" found the first half of the film \"one of the superb things of the movies\" and the second half more conventional, though \"all of it is good.\" Mosher also praised the casting and opined that Freddie Bartholemew put on \"one of the prettiest performances ever given on the screen by a youngster.\" \"David Copperfield\" topped the \"Film Daily\" year-end poll of 451 critics around the country as the best film of 1935.\n\"David Copperfield\" was nominated for three Academy Awards, including Academy Award for Best Picture, Best Film Editing (Robert J. Kern), and Best Assistant Director (Joseph M. Newman), and was nominated for the Mussolini Cup for Best Foreign Film at the Venice Film Festival (losing out to \"Anna Karenina\").\nIt was the 20th most popular film at the British box office in 1935-1936 after \"Modern Times\", \"Lives of a Bengal Lancer\", \"Mutiny on the Bounty\", \"Top Hat\", \"The Great Ziegfeld\", \"The Scarlet Pimpernel\", \"Mr Deeds Goes to Town\", \"Show Boat\", \"The Iron Duke\", \"Love Me Forever\", \"Sanders of the River\", \"Dark Angel\", \"The Ghost Goes West\", \"Follow the Fleet\", \"Swing Time\", \"Things to Come\", \"The 39 Steps\", \"Clive of India\", and \"Escape Me Never\".\nThere were several notable differences in the film from the book. For instance, in the film David never attends Salem House boarding school, and so the characters he met there do not appear, with the exception of Steerforth, who is instead introduced as head boy of the school David attends after going to live with Betsey Trotwood.\nIt is shown in many countries on television at Christmas. It is rated with four out of four stars every year in \"Halliwell's Film Guide\".\nThis was selected by \"The New York Times\" as one of the 1000 greatest movies ever made.\nThe film is referred to in the \"Dad's Army\" episode \"The Deadly Attachment\".\nBox office.\nAccording to MGM records the film earned $2,969,000 at the box office worldwide and made a profit of $686,000. It earned an additional $95,000 from a reissue in 1937\u20131938.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61499", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61499", "title": "Ruggles of Red Gap", "text": "1935 film by Leo McCarey\nRuggles of Red Gap is a 1935 American comedy film directed by Leo McCarey and starring: Charles Laughton, Mary Boland, Charlie Ruggles and ZaSu Pitts and featuring Roland Young and Leila Hyams. It was based on the best-selling 1915 novel by Harry Leon Wilson, adapted by Humphrey Pearson, with a screenplay by Walter DeLeon and Harlan Thompson.\nThe story concerns a British gentleman's gentleman who discovers a \"new birth of freedom\" in a small Western American town in the early 20th century.\n\"Ruggles of Red Gap\" was \"an immense commercial hit\" and confirmed Leo McCarey's stature as Paramount's outstanding comedy filmmaker of his day.\nPlot.\nMarmaduke Ruggles is valet to the Earl of Burnstead in 1908. Earl tells Ruggles that he has gambled him away in a drunken game of poker, and he is to report to his new masters \u2013 \"nouveau riche\" American millionaires Egbert and Effie Floud \u2013 immediately. Ruggles bemoans the idea of being relegated to \"the land of slavery,\" but he takes his new occupation in stride.\nEgbert slips away from Effie and takes Ruggles to a Parisian caf\u00e9. He explains to the valet that, in America, everyone is equal, and Ruggles should behave like a friend rather than a deferential servant. Ruggles is dismissive, but after a night of drinking with Egbert and his wild friend Jeff Tuttle, his \"stiff upper lip\" falls away as he follows the examples of Egbert and Tuttle. The three embark on an alcohol-fueled trip across Paris which ends with them returning to the Floud's hotel room. The next day Ruggles is embarrassed, and he apologizes to Effie for his behavior.\nThe Flouds return to the town of Red Gap in America. Ruggles meets the extended family of the Flouds, including \"Ma\" Pettingill, Effie's mother, and Charles Belknap-Jackson, a snooty relative of Effie's who treats Ruggles with disdain. A party held to receive the Flouds inadvertently turns into a warm welcome for Ruggles after Ruggles is mistaken for a wealthy retired Englishman. Ruggles also meets Mrs. Judson, a widowed housewife and cook. When Belknap-Jackson chastises Ruggles for dancing at the party with Mrs. Judson, Ruggles kicks him in the behind. He is almost fired, but his job is saved as a newspaper article describing Ruggles as an \"honored houseguest\" of the Flouds makes him a local celebrity.\nRuggles becomes a fixture in society, as Effie and Belknap-Jackson use his status to advance socially. He begins a relationship with Mrs. Judson and reads about the history of the United States. One day, after the rest of the family have left on a trip, Belknap-Jackson fires Ruggles. While waiting for the train, Ruggles wanders into the local saloon where he finds Mrs. Judson, Egbert, and Ma. Egbert laughs off Belknap-Jackson's actions, but Ruggles explains that he wants to live as a free and independent person and, because of that, he won't return to work for the Flouds. Egbert compares this to \"what Lincoln said at Gettysburg\", but neither he, nor any of the other people in the saloon can remember the words. As they each try to remind themselves of what it says, Ruggles stands up and recites the entire Gettysburg Address from memory.\nRuggles decides to open a restaurant in Red Gap. As he is preparing the restaurant space with Mrs. Judson, Effie arrives with troubling news: the Earl of Burnstead is visiting Red Gap to buy Ruggles back from the Flouds. Ruggles reluctantly agrees to return to the Flouds, but Mrs. Judson is disgusted by his deference to his former employers. On the night of a party in the Earl's honor, Ruggles goes missing. Egbert convinces the Earl to slip out to another, more raucous party hosted by the beautiful young Nell Kenner, to whom the Earl instantly takes an interest. They eventually return to the Floud house, just as Ruggles returns and informs the Earl of his decision to \"be someone\" and live independently, on his own terms.\nThe restaurant opening proves to be a great success. All the friends he has made on his journey from England to America attend its gala opening. Belknap-Jackson also attends and insults Ruggles and his cooking to his face, so Ruggles throws him out. Ruggles retreats to the kitchen, sure that he has ruined his social standing in Red Gap. Outside, the diners begin to sing \"For He's a Jolly Good Fellow,\" but Ruggles doesn't realize they are singing for him. Egbert pulls him out of the kitchen, saying: \"Why, you old plate of soup, they're singing it for you!\" As the song crescendos, Egbert pushes Ruggles back into the kitchen so that he can celebrate privately with Mrs. Judson.\nProduction.\nBased on the best-selling 1915 novel by Harry Leon Wilson, Ruggles of Red Gap was adapted to screen by Humphery Pearson, with a screenplay by Walter DeLeon and Harlan Thompson. The story had twice been adapted to film in the silent era: in 1918 and again in 1923.\nRegarded as the most outstanding comedy director with Paramount at the time, studio executives provided Leo McCarey with top quality talent for the picture. Indeed, the \"A\" film or high production period of McCarey's career can be dated from \"Ruggles of Red Gap.\"\"\nAccording to film historian Wes D. Gehring, McCarey cast Charles Laughton in the lead role when he detected a \"comedic flourish\" in the actor's Academy Award-winning performance as the English king, in \"The Private Life of Henry VIII\" (1933).\nThe film was shot on locations in Humboldt County, California.\nReception.\nBoth director Leo McCarey and actor Charles Laughton received overwhelming critical accolades for their work in \"Ruggles of Red Gap\". Film historian Wes D. Gehring reports that \"The press was so good on \"Ruggles\" that references to the picture began to turn up in reviews of other pictures.\"\nThe \"Hollywood Reporter\" titled their effusive review of the picture \"McCarey, Laughton and Ruggles Tops.\" Richard Watts, Jr. at the \"New York Herald Tribune\" described Laughton's Ruggles as \"the most sympathetic hero since Rip Van Winkle, and Laughton's acting was favorably compared to that of Charlie Chaplin.\nThe \"New York Tribune\"'s Howard Barnes wrote: \"Leo McCarey, who may be remembered gratefully for \"Ruggles of Red Gap\", has produced and directed the film with courage, power and imagination.\"\nSo consistently positive were the reviews that Paramount simply issued a statement directing the public to refer to press reports concerning the movie, without further comment.\nBox office.\nIt was one of the most popular films at the British box office in 1935.\nRetrospective appraisal.\nDescribing the film as \"an odd little masterpiece,\" MoMA film curator Charles Silver places \"Ruggles of Red Gap\" within the realm of screwball produced during the 1930s and praises \"McCarey's genius for directing actors and his exquisite sense of timing.\" Silver adds that \"the film's dramatic high point is Laughton's barroom recitation of the Gettysburg Address and its assertion of \"a new birth of freedom.\"\nLeland Poague declares that \"\"Ruggles\" is arguably McCarey's most \"personal\", most \"social\", and most \"idealistic\" film\" in his \"oeuvre\".\nTheme.\nMcCarey locates the film's central thematic element in the natural discord between \"personal and social imperatives\" and the struggle to bring these into balance. \"Ruggles of Red Gap\" demonstrates the reciprocity required to allow the flourishing of each in a democratic republic. \"In \"Ruggles\", McCarey explores the relationship between personality and society and does so in an idealistic literary context which asserts the essential (and necessary) identity of personal and social imperatives.\"\nGettysburg address scene.\nFilm historian Wes D. Gehring describes \"Ruggles of Red Gap\" as \"the story of a proper British butler, lost in a poker game to a \"nouveau riche\" American, evolves into a free man.\"\nThe origins of the film sequence arose from an event in McCarey's own life. During an alcohol-fueled social gathering, the topic of the Gettysburg Address came up; everyone agreed as to its importance, but no one present could recite a word of the iconic document.\nThe film fully takes shape as a \"populist classic\" with the sequence in which Laughton, the former body servant to a wealthy English gentleman, recites the Gettysburg Address, a speech delivered by Abraham Lincoln in 1863, announcing a \"new birth of freedom\" for the people of the American republic.\nRuggles, an immigrant to the United States, delivers the speech in the Silver Dollar saloon occupied entirely by \"All-American Western types.\" The moving content of the address comes as a revelation and a liberation to most of the denizens of Red Gap.\nAwards and nominations.\nCharles Laughton won the New York Film Critics' Circle Awards for \"Ruggles of Red Gap\" (with \"Mutiny on the Bounty\") in 1935. The National Board of Review named the film the ninth best of 1935. That year, Laughton's other two films, \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" and \"Mutiny on the Bounty\", were sixth and eighth on the list, respectively. The film was nominated for the Oscar for Best Picture and competed against two other Laughton films that were also nominated: \"Mutiny on the Bounty\" (which won the award) and \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\".\nIn 2014, the film was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.\nOther adaptations.\nHarry Leon Wilson's novel \"Ruggles of Red Gap\" was adapted for the Broadway stage as a musical in 1915, the same year that it was published. It was first made into a silent film in 1918 and again in 1923 (the latter with Edward Everett Horton as Ruggles).\nA musical adaptation called \"Fancy Pants\" starring Bob Hope and Lucille Ball was released in 1950.\n\"Ruggles of Red Gap\" was adapted as a radio play several times. First on the July 10, 1939 episode of \"Lux Radio Theater\"; second on the December 17, 1945 episode of \"The Screen Guild Theater\"; and third on the June 8, 1946 episode of \"Academy Award Theater\". All of these adaptations found Charles Laughton and Charlie Ruggles reprising their film parts.\nA television musical version was produced on \"Producer's Showcase\" in 1957, starring Michael Redgrave, Peter Lawford, David Wayne and Jane Powell. The songs were created by Jule Styne and Leo Robin.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nStreaming audio"}
{"id": "61500", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61500", "title": "Patriarchs of Constantinople", "text": ""}
{"id": "61501", "revid": "48296011", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61501", "title": "Top Hat", "text": "1935 film by Mark Sandrich\nTop Hat is a 1935 American musical comedy film, in which Fred Astaire plays an American tap dancer named Jerry Travers, who arrives in London to star in a show produced by Horace Hardwick (Edward Everett Horton). He meets and attempts to impress Dale Tremont (Ginger Rogers) to win her affection. The film also features Eric Blore as Hardwick's valet Bates, Erik Rhodes as Alberto Beddini, a fashion designer and rival for Dale's affections, and Helen Broderick as Hardwick's long-suffering wife Madge.\nThe film was directed by Mark Sandrich, and was written by Allan Scott and Dwight Taylor, with songs by Irving Berlin. \"Top Hat, White Tie and Tails\" and \"Cheek to Cheek\" have become American song classics. It has been nostalgically referred to\u2014particularly its \"Cheek to Cheek\" segment\u2014in cinema, including films as diverse as \"The Purple Rose of Cairo\" (1985), \"The Green Mile\" (1999), and \"The Boss Baby\" (2017).\nAstaire and Rogers made nine films together at RKO Pictures; the others include \"The Gay Divorcee\" (1934), \"Roberta\" (1935), \"Follow the Fleet\" (1936), \"Swing Time\" (1936), \"Shall We Dance\" (1937), and \"Carefree\" (1938). \"Top Hat\" was the most successful picture of Astaire and Rogers' partnership (and Astaire's second most successful picture after \"Easter Parade\"), achieving second place in worldwide box-office receipts for 1935. While some dance critics maintain that \"Swing Time\" contained a finer set of dances, \"Top Hat\" remains, to this day, the partnership's best-known work.\n\"Top Hat\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress in its second year, 1990, as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The film has also been recognized by the American Film Institute on various lists commemorating the best of American cinema; the film appeared on their list of the twenty five greatest film musicals at number 15, and \"Cheek to Cheek\" appeared on their list of the one hundred greatest songs of American cinema, also at number 15.\nPlot.\nAmerican dancer Jerry Travers comes to London to star in a show produced by the bumbling Horace Hardwick. While practicing a tap dance routine in his hotel bedroom, he awakens Dale Tremont on the floor below. She storms upstairs to complain, whereupon Jerry falls hopelessly in love with her and proceeds to pursue her all over London.\nDale mistakes Jerry for Horace, who is married to her friend Madge. Following the success of Jerry's opening night in London, Jerry follows Dale to Venice, where she is visiting Madge and modelling/promoting the gowns created by Alberto Beddini, a dandified Italian fashion designer with a penchant for malapropisms.\nJerry proposes to Dale, who, while still believing that Jerry is Horace, is disgusted that her friend's husband could behave in such a manner and agrees instead to marry Alberto. Fortunately, Bates, Horace's meddling English valet, disguises himself as a priest and conducts the ceremony; Horace had sent Bates to keep tabs on Dale.\nOn a trip in a gondola, Jerry manages to convince Dale and they return to the hotel where the previous confusion is rapidly cleared up. The reconciled couple dance off into the Venetian sunset, to the tune of \"The Piccolino\".\nProduction.\n\"Top Hat\" began filming on April 1, 1935, and cost $620,000 to make. Shooting ended in June and the first public previews were held in July. These led to cuts of approximately ten minutes, mainly in the last portion of the film: the carnival sequence and the gondola parade which had been filmed to show off the huge set were heavily cut. A further four minutes were cut before its premiere at the Radio City Music Hall, where it broke all records, went on to gross $3 million on its initial release, and became RKO's most profitable film of the 1930s. After \"Mutiny on the Bounty\", it made more money than any other film released in 1935.\nScript development.\nDwight Taylor was the principal screenwriter in this, the first screenplay written specially for Astaire and Rogers. Astaire reacted negatively to the first drafts, complaining that \"it is patterned too closely after \"The Gay Divorcee\"\", and \"I am cast as ... a sort of objectionable young man without charm or sympathy or humour\". Allan Scott, for whom this movie served as his first major project, and who would go on to serve on six of the Astaire-Rogers pictures, was hired by Sandrich to do the rewrites and never actually worked with Taylor, with Sandrich acting as script editor and advisor throughout. Allegedly Ben Holmes, Ralph Spence, and K\u00e1roly N\u00f3ti were further contributors to the script. The story itself was later said to have been inspired by two sources: \"Scandal in Budapest\" by S\u00e1ndor Farag\u00f3, and \"A Girl Who Dares\" by Aladar LaszloIt.\nThe Hays Office insisted on only minor changes, including probably the most quoted line of dialogue from the film: Beddini's motto \"For the women the kiss, for the men the sword\", which originally ran \"For the men the sword, for the women the whip\". Of his role in the creation of \"Top Hat\", Taylor recalled that with Sandrich and Berlin he shared \"a kind of childlike excitement. The whole style of the picture can be summed up in the word \"inconsequentiality\". When I left RKO a year later, Mark said to me, 'You will never again see so much of yourself on the screen.'\" On the film's release, the script was panned by many critics, who alleged it was merely a rewrite of \"The Gay Divorcee\".\nMusical score and orchestration.\nThis was composer Irving Berlin's first complete film score since 1930 and he negotiated a unique contract, retaining the copyrights to the score with a guarantee of ten percent of the profits if the film earned in excess of $1,250,000. Eight songs from the original score were discarded as they were not considered to advance the film's plot. One of these, \"Get Thee Behind Me, Satan\", was also used in \"Follow the Fleet\" (1936). All five songs eventually selected became major hits and, in the September 28, 1935 broadcast of \"Your Hit Parade\", all five featured in the top fifteen songs selected for that week.\nAstaire recalled how this success helped restore Berlin's flagging self-confidence. Astaire had never met Berlin before this film, although he had danced on stage to some of his tunes as early as 1915. There ensued a lifelong friendship with Berlin contributing to more Astaire films (six in total) than any other composer. Of his experience with Astaire in \"Top Hat\" Berlin wrote: \"He's a real inspiration for a writer. I'd never have written \"Top Hat\" without him. He makes you feel so secure.\"\nAs Berlin could not read or write music and could only pick out tunes on a specially designed piano that transposed keys automatically, he required an assistant to make up his piano parts. Hal Borne\u2014Astaire's rehearsal pianist\u2014performed this role in \"Top Hat\" and recalled working nights with him in the Beverly Wilshire Hotel: \"Berlin went 'Heaven...' and I went \"dah dah dee\" 'I'm in Heaven' \"(dah-dah-dee)\". He said, 'I love it, put it down.'\" These parts were subsequently orchestrated by a team comprising Edward Powell, Maurice de Packh, Gene Rose, Eddie Sharp, and Arthur Knowlton who worked under the overall supervision of Max Steiner.\nBerlin broke a number of the conventions of American songwriting in this film, especially in the songs \"Top Hat, White Tie and Tails\" and \"Cheek to Cheek\". According to Rogers, the film became the talk of Hollywood as a result of its score.\nSet design.\nIn an Astaire-Rogers picture, the Big White Set\u2014as these Art Deco-inspired creations were known\u2014took up the largest share of the film's production costs, and \"Top Hat\" was no exception. A winding canal\u2014spanned by two staircase bridges at one end and a flat bridge on the other\u2014was built across two adjoining sound stages. Astaire and Rogers dance across this flat bridge in \"Cheek to Cheek\". Around the bend from this bridge was located the main piazza, a giant stage coated in red bakelite that was the location for \"The Piccolino\". This fantasy representation of the Lido of Venice was on three levels comprising dance floors, restaurants and terraces, all decorated in candy-cane colors, with the canal waters dyed black. The vast Venetian interiors were similarly inauthentic, reflecting instead the latest Hollywood tastes.\nCarroll Clark, who worked under the general supervision of Van Nest Polglase, was the unit art director on all but one of the Astaire-Rogers films. He managed the team of designers responsible for the scenery and furnishings of \"Top Hat\".\nWardrobe: The \"feathers\" incident.\nAlthough Bernard Newman was nominally in charge of dressing the stars, Rogers was keenly interested in dress design and make-up. For the \"Cheek to Cheek\" routine, she was determined to use her own creation: \"I was determined to wear this dress, come hell or high water. And why not? It moved beautifully. Obviously, no one in the cast or crew was willing to take sides, particularly not my side. This was all right with me. I'd had to stand alone before. At least my mother was there to support me in the confrontation with the entire front office, plus Fred Astaire and Mark Sandrich.\"\nDue to the enormous labor involved in sewing each ostrich feather to the dress, Astaire\u2014who normally approved his partner's gowns and suggested modifications if necessary during rehearsals\u2014saw the dress for the first time on the day of the shoot, and was horrified at the way it shed clouds of feathers at every twist and turn, recalling later: \"It was like a chicken attacked by a coyote, I never saw so many feathers in my life.\" According to choreographer Hermes Pan, Astaire lost his temper and yelled at Rogers, who promptly burst into tears, whereupon her mother, Lela, \"came charging at him like a mother rhinoceros protecting her young.\"\nAn additional night's work by seamstresses resolved much of the problem; however, careful examination of the dance on film reveals feathers floating around Astaire and Rogers and lying on the dance floor. Later, Astaire and Pan presented Rogers with a gold feather for her charm bracelet, and serenaded her with a ditty parodying Berlin's tune:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThereafter, Astaire nicknamed Rogers \"Feathers\"\u2014also a title of one of the chapters in his autobiography\u2014and parodied his experience in a song and dance routine with Judy Garland in \"Easter Parade\" (1948).\nAstaire also chose and provided his own clothes. He is widely credited with influencing 20th century male fashion and, according to \"Forbes\" male fashion editor, G. Bruce Boyer, the \"Isn't It a Lovely Day?\" routine: \"shows Astaire dressed in the style he would make famous: soft-shouldered tweed sports jacket, button-down shirt, bold striped tie, easy-cut gray flannels, silk paisley pocket square, and suede shoes. It's an extraordinarily contemporary approach to nonchalant elegance, a look Ralph Lauren and a dozen other designers still rely on more than six decades later. Astaire introduced a new style of dress that broke step with the spats, celluloid collars, and homburgs worn by aristocratic European-molded father-figure heroes.\"\nMusical numbers and choreography.\nThe choreography, in which Astaire was assisted by Hermes Pan, is principally concerned throughout with the possibilities of using taps to make as much noise as possible. In the film, Astaire suffers from what Rogers terms an \"affliction\": \"Every once in a while I suddenly find myself dancing.\" Astaire introduces the film's tap motif when he blasts a tap barrage at the somnolent members of a London Club. There are eight musical numbers.\nIn the \"Opening Sequence\", after the RKO logo appears, Astaire, shown only from the waist down, dances onto a polished stage floor, backed by a male chorus sporting canes. On pausing his name appears. Rogers then follows suit and the two dance together as the picture dissolves to reveal a top hat. A similar concept was used in the opening sequence of \"The Barkleys of Broadway\" (1949).\nThe second is \"No Strings (I'm Fancy Free)\". On retiring to his hotel suite, Horton advises him to get married. Astaire declares his preference for bachelorhood and the song\u2014this number was the brainchild of scriptwriter Dwight Taylor and is found in his earliest drafts\u2014emerges naturally and in mid-sentence. Astaire sings it through twice and during the last phrase leaps into a ballet jump, accompanied by leg beats, and launches into a short solo dance that builds in intensity and volume progressing from tap shuffles \"sur place\", via traveling patterns, to rapid-fire heel jabs finishing with a carefree tour of the suite during which he beats on the furniture with his hands. On his return to the center of the room, where he noisily concentrates his tap barrage, the camera cranes down to discover Rogers in bed, awake and irritated. As she makes her way upstairs, Horton fields telephone complaints from hotel management. Astaire incorporates this into his routine, first startling him with a tap burst then escorting him ostentatiously to the telephone. As Horton leaves to investigate, Astaire continues to hammer his way around the suite, during which he feigns horror at seeing his image in a mirror\u2014a reference to his belief that the camera was never kind to his face. The routine ends as Astaire, now dancing with a statue, is interrupted by Rogers' entrance, a scene which, as in \"The Gay Divorcee\" and \"Roberta\", typifies the way in which Astaire inadvertently incurs the hostility of Rogers, only to find her attractive and wear down her resistance.\nIn \"No Strings (reprise)\", Rogers, after storming upstairs to complain, returns to her room at which point Astaire, still intent on dancing, nominates himself her \"sandman\", sprinkling sand from a cigarette receptacle and lulling her, Horton and eventually himself to sleep with a soft and gentle sand dance, to a \"diminuendo\" reprise of the melody, in a scene which has drawn considerable admiration from dance commentators, and has been the subject of affectionate screen parodies.\nIn \"Isn't This a Lovely Day (to be Caught in the Rain)\", while Rogers is out riding, a thunderstorm breaks and she takes shelter in a bandstand. Astaire follows her and a conversation about clouds and rainfall soon gives way to Astaire's rendering of this, one of Berlin's most prized creations. Astaire sings to Rogers' back, but the audience can see that Rogers' attitude towards him softens during the song, and the purpose of the ensuing dance is for her to communicate this change to her partner. The dance is one of flirtation and, according to Mueller, deploys two choreographic devices common to the classical minuet: sequential imitation (one dancer performs a step and the other responds) and touching. Initially, the imitation is mocking in character, then becomes more of a casual exchange, and ends in a spirit of true cooperation. Until the last thirty seconds of this two and a half minute dance the pair appear to pull back from touching, then with a crook of her elbow Rogers invites Astaire in. The routine, at once comic and romantic, incorporates hopping steps, tap spins with barrages, loping and dragging steps among its many innovative devices. The spirit of equality which pervades the dance is reflected in the masculinity of Rogers' clothes and in the friendly handshake they exchange at the end.\nFor \"Top Hat, White Tie and Tails\", probably Astaire's most celebrated tap solo, the idea for the title song came from Astaire who described to Berlin a routine he had created for the 1930 Ziegfeld Broadway flop \"Smiles\" called \"Say, Young Man of Manhattan\", in which he gunned down a chorus of men\u2014which included a young Bob Hope and Larry Adler\u2014with his cane. Berlin duly produced the song from his trunk and the concept of the film was then built around it. In this number Astaire had to compromise on his one-take philosophy, as Sandrich acknowledged: \"We went to huge lengths to make the 'Top Hat' number look like one take, but actually it's several.\" Astaire's remarkable ability to change the tempo within a single dance phrase is extensively featured throughout this routine and taken to extremes\u2014as when he explodes into activity from a pose of complete quiet and vice versa. This routine also marks Astaire's first use of a cane as a prop in one of his filmed dances. The number opens with a chorus strutting and lunging in front of a backdrop of a Parisian street scene. They make way for Astaire who strides confidently to the front of the stage and delivers the song, which features the famous line: \"I'm stepping out, my dear, to breathe an atmosphere that simply reeks with class,\" trading the occasional tap barrage with the chorus as he sings. The dance begins with Astaire and chorus moving in step. Astaire soon lashes out with a swirling tap step and the chorus responds timidly before leaving the stage in a sequence of overlapping, direction-shifting, hitch steps and walks. In the first part of the solo which follows, Astaire embarks on a circular tap movement, embellished with cane taps into which he mixes a series of unpredictable pauses. As the camera retreats the lights dim and, in the \"misterioso\" passage which follows, Astaire mimes a series of stances, ranging from overt friendliness, wariness, surprise to watchful readiness and jaunty confidence. Jimmy Cagney attended the shooting of this scene and advised Astaire, who claims to have ad-libbed much of this section. The chorus then returns in a threatening posture, and Astaire proceeds to dispatch them all, using an inventive series of actions miming the cane's use as a gun, a submachine gun, a rifle and, finally, a bow and arrow.\nAstaire's first seduction of Rogers in \"Isn't This a Lovely Day\" falls foul of the mistaken-identity theme of the plot, so he makes a second attempt, encouraged by Broderick, in the number \"Cheek to Cheek\". As in \"No Strings\", the song emerges from Astaire's mid-sentence as he dances with the hesitant Rogers on a crowded floor. Berlin wrote the words and music to this enduring classic in one day, and, at 72 measures, it is the longest song he ever wrote. He was very appreciative of Astaire's treatment of the song: \"The melody keeps going up and up. He crept up there. It didn't make a damned bit of difference. He made it.\" As he navigates through this difficult material, Rogers looks attracted and receptive and, at the end of the song, they dance cheek to cheek across a bridge to a deserted ballroom area nearby. According to Mueller's analysis, the duet that follows\u2014easily the most famous of all the Astaire-Rogers partnered dances\u2014reflects the complexity of the emotional situation in which the pair find themselves. No longer flirting, as in \"Isn't This a Lovely Day?\", the pair are now in love. But Rogers feels guilty and deceived and would prefer to avoid Astaire's advances\u2014in effect, fall out of love with him. Therefore, Astaire's purpose here is to make her put aside her misgivings (which are a mystery to him) and surrender completely to him. The choreographic device introduced to reflect the progress of this seduction is the supported backbend, exploiting Rogers' exceptionally flexible back. The main dance begins with the first of two brief passages which reuse the device of sequential imitation introduced in \"Isn't This a Lovely Day?\" The pair spin and lean, dodging back and forth past each other before moving into a standard ballroom position where the first hints of the supported backbend are introduced. The first backbend occurs at the end of a sequence where Astaire sends Rogers into a spin, collects her upstage and maneuvers her into a linked-arm stroll forward, repeats the spin but this time encircles her while she turns and then takes her in his arms. As the music becomes more energetic, the dancers flow across the floor and Rogers, moving against the music, suddenly falls into a deeper backbend, which is then repeated, only deeper still. The music now transitions to a quiet recapitulation of the main melody during which the pair engage in a muted and tender partnering, and here the second passage involving sequential imitation appears. With the music reaching its grand climax Astaire and Rogers rush toward the camera, then away in a series of bold, dramatic manoeuvers culminating in three ballroom lifts which showcase Rogers' dress before abruptly coming to a halt in a final, deepest backbend, maintained as the music approaches its closing bars. They rise, and after a couple of turns dancing cheek to cheek for the first time since the dance began, come to rest next to a wall. Rogers, having conducted the dance in a state of dreamlike abandon now glances uneasily at Astaire before walking away, as if reminded that their relationship cannot proceed.\nBy now, Rogers has learned Astaire's true identity although neither of them yet know that her impulsive marriage to Rhodes is null and void. Dining together during carnival night in Venice, and to help assuage her guilt, Astaire declares: \"Let's eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we have to face him\", which serves as the cue for the music of \"The Piccolino\", the film's big production number. A gondola parade is followed by the entry of a dancing chorus who perform a series of ballroom poses and rippling-pattern routines choreographed by Hermes Pan. Berlin, who lavished a great deal of effort on the song designed it as a pastiche of \"The Carioca\" from \"Flying Down to Rio\" (1933) and \"The Continental\" from \"The Gay Divorcee\" (1934), and the lyric communicates its fake origin: \"It was written by a Latin/A gondolier who sat in/his home out in Brooklyn/and gazed at the stars.\" It is a song about a song and Rogers sings it to Astaire after which an off-camera chorus repeats it while the dance ensemble is photographed, Busby Berkeley-style, from above. The camera then switches to Rogers and Astaire who bound down to the stage to perform a two-minute dance\u2014all shot in one take\u2014with the Astaire-Pan choreography separately referencing the basic melody and the Latin vamp in the accompaniment. They dance to the accompaniment as they descend the steps and glide along the dance floor, then, when the melody enters, they halt and perform the Piccolino step, which involves the feet darting out to the side of the body. The rest of the dance involves repetitions and variations of the Piccolino step and the hopping steps associated with the vamp, leading to some complex amalgamations of the two. On the vamp melody's final appearance, the dancers perform a highly embellished form of the Piccolino step as they travel sideways back to their table, sinking back into their chairs and lifting their glasses in a toast.\n\"The Piccolino (reprise)\": After the various parties confront each other in the bridal suite, with Rogers' \"marriage\" to Rhodes revealed as performed by a fake clergyman, the scene is set for Astaire and Rogers to dance into the sunset, which they duly do, in this fragment of a much longer duet\u2014the original was cut after the July 1935 previews\u2014but not before they parade across the Venetian set and reprise the Piccolino step.\nRelease.\nThe film opened at Radio City Music Hall in New York in a pre-release engagement on August 29, 1935, before being released throughout the United States the following week.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Top Hat\" set a house record at Radio City Music Hall with a gross of $134,800 in its first week. Twenty-five policemen were deployed to control the crowds. It also set house records in the opening week at B.F. Keith Memorial Theatre in Boston ($33,000); Hollywood Pantages Theatre ($19,000) and at Hillstreet Theatre in Los Angeles ($17,000). In its 3 weeks at the Music Hall, it grossed $350,000 and was the highest-grossing film in the United States in September. Overall, the film earned rentals of $1,782,000 in the US and Canada and $1,420,000 elsewhere. RKO made a profit of $1,325,000, making it the studio's most profitable film of the 1930s.\nIt was the fourth most popular film at the British box office in 1935\u201336.\nCritical response.\nReviews for \"Top Hat\" were mainly positive. The \"Los Angeles Evening Herald Express\" praised the film, exclaiming \"\"Top Hat\" is the tops! With Fred Astaire dancing and singing Irving Berlin tunes! Well, one (in his right mind) couldn't ask for much more\u2014unless, of course, it could be a couple of encores.\" \"The New York Times\" praised the film's musical numbers, but criticized the storyline, describing it as \"a little on the thin side,\" but also stating that \"it is sprightly enough to plug those inevitable gaps between the shimmeringly gay dances. \"Top Hat\" is worth standing in line for. From the appearance of the lobby yesterday afternoon, you probably will have to.\"\n\"Variety\" also singled out the storyline as well as the cast, stating \"the danger sign is in the story and cast. Substitute Alice Brady for Helen Broderick and it's the same lineup of players as was in \"The Gay Divorc\u00e9e\". Besides which the situations in the two scripts parallel each other closely\". Nevertheless, it concluded that \"Top Hat\" was a film \"one can't miss\".\nWriting for \"The Spectator\" in 1935, Graham Greene gave the film a generally positive review, describing the film as \"a vehicle for Fred Astaire's genius\", and noting that Astaire's performance eliminated any concern over the fact that \"the music and lyrics are bad\" or that Astaire \"has to act with human beings [who cannot match] his freedom, lightness, and happiness\".\nAs of 2022[ [update]], the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that the film had a 100% \"fresh\" approval rating based on 42 reviews, with an average rating of 8.70/10. The website's critical consensus reads, \"A glamorous and enthralling depression-era diversion, \"Top Hat\" is nearly flawless, with acrobatics by Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers that make the hardest physical stunts seem light as air.\"\nAwards and honors.\nThe film was nominated for the Oscar for Best Picture, as well as Art Direction (Carroll Clark and Van Nest Polglase), Original Song (Irving Berlin for \"Cheek to Cheek\"), and Dance Direction (Hermes Pan for \"Piccolino\" and \"Top Hat\"). In 1990, \"Top Hat\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The film ranked number 15 on the 2006 American Film Institute's list of best musicals.\nThe February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"Top Hat\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars\".\nIn popular culture.\n\"Top Hat\" has been nostalgically referenced\u2014particularly its \"Cheek to Cheek\" segment\u2014in many films, including \"The Purple Rose of Cairo\" (1985), \"The English Patient\" (1996), \"The Green Mile\" (1999), \"La La Land\" (2016) and the animated film \"The Boss Baby\" (2017).\nTop Hat's movie poster appeared in Stephen Chow's movie Kung Fu Hustle. British-Irish singer-songwriter Chris de Burgh referenced the movie in his 1986 hit, \"The Lady in Red\", wherein he and the eponymous lady in the song danced \"Cheek to Cheek\".\nThe film is the namesake for the seventh episode of the DC Studios miniseries \"The Penguin\", a spin-off of the 2022 film \"The Batman\". In the episode, a young Oz Cobb and his mother Francis watch the film in a flashback. In the present, Francis is kidnapped by Oz's rival Sofia Gigante, who she tells that she believes Oz will kill her, and when he does, \"[she'll] be tap dancing on [her] grave like Ginger fuckin' Rogers\".\nStage adaptation.\nThe film has been adapted into a stage musical that began touring the UK during late 2011. The cast included Summer Strallen as Dale, Tom Chambers as Jerry and Martin Ball as Horace. The show opened at Milton Keynes Theatre on August 19, 2011, before touring to other UK regional theatres including Leeds, Birmingham and Edinburgh. The production transferred to the West End's Aldwych Theatre on April 19, 2012, opening on May 9, 2012. It won three Olivier Awards in 2013, including for Best New Musical.\nHome media.\nIn 2003, a digitally restored version of \"Top Hat\" was released separately, and as part of \"The Fred and Ginger Collection, Vol. 1\" from Universal Studios, which controls the rights to the RKO Astaire-Rogers pictures in the UK. In both releases, the film features an introduction by Ava Astaire McKenzie.\nIn 2005, a digitally restored version of \"Top Hat\", different from the Region 2 restoration, was released on Region 1 DVD separately and as part of \"The Astaire &amp; Rogers Collection, Vol.1\" from Warner Home Video. In both cases, the film features a commentary by Astaire's daughter, Ava Astaire McKenzie, and Larry Billman, author of \"Fred Astaire, a Bio-bibliography.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "61502", "revid": "4166864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61502", "title": "List of popes", "text": "This chronological list of the popes of the Catholic Church corresponds to that given in the under the heading \"\" (The Roman Supreme Pontiffs), excluding those that are explicitly indicated as antipopes. Published every year by the Roman Curia, the no longer identifies popes by regnal number, stating that it is impossible to decide which pope represented the legitimate succession at various times. The 2001 edition of the introduced \"almost 200 corrections to its existing biographies of the popes, from St Peter to John Paul II\". The corrections concerned dates, especially in the first two centuries, birthplaces and the family name of one pope.\nThe term \"pope\" () is used in several churches to denote their high spiritual leaders (for example Coptic pope). This title is usually used in English to refer to the head of the Catholic Church. The Catholic pope uses various titles by tradition, including , , and . Each title has been added by unique historical events, and unlike other papal prerogatives, is not incapable of modification.\nHermannus Contractus may have been the first historian to number the popes continuously. His list ends in 1049 with Leo IX as number 154. Several changes were made to the list during the 20th century. Christopher was considered a legitimate pope for a long time but was removed due to how he obtained the papacy. Pope-elect Stephen was listed as Stephen II until the 1961 edition, when his name was removed. The decisions of the Council of Pisa (1409) were reversed in 1963 in a reinterpretation of the Western Schism, extending Gregory XII's pontificate to 1415 and classifying rival claimants Alexander V and John XXIII as antipopes.\nA significant number of these popes have been recognized as saints, including 48 out of the first 50 consecutive popes, and others are in the sainthood process. Of the first 31 popes, 28 died as martyrs.\nChronological list of popes.\n1st millennium.\n1st century.\nThe chronology of the early popes is heavily disputed. The first ancient lists of popes were not written until the late 2nd century, after the monarchical episcopate had already developed in Rome. These first lists combined contradictory traditions, and even the succession of the first popes is disputed. The first certain dates are AD 222 and 235, the elections of Urban I and Anterus. The years given for the first 30 popes follow the work of Richard Adelbert Lipsius, which often show a 3-year difference with the traditional dates given by Eusebius of Caesarea. These are also the dates used by the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\".\nReligious orders.\nFifty-one popes and six antipopes (in italics) have been members of religious orders, including 12 members of third orders. They are listed by order as follows:\nNumbering of popes.\nRegnal numbers follow the usual convention for European monarchs. Antipopes are treated as pretenders, and their numbers are reused by those considered to be legitimate popes. However, there are anomalies in the numbering of the popes. Several numbers were mistakenly increased in the Middle Ages because the records were misunderstood. Several antipopes were also kept in the sequence, either by mistake or because they were previously considered to be true popes. (As a note, the first pope who chooses a unique name is not identified by an ordinal, only assuming a number after a second Pope takes that same name: like how Francis thus far is only referred to as \"Francis\", but when there is a second one, they will be (respectively) \"Francis I\" and \"Francis II\". John Paul I is conspicuous as the only exception: having personally chosen to be called \"John Paul the First\" from the very beginning of his pontificate; which is merely a footnote given his short reign and the fact that he was followed immediately by John Paul II.)\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61503", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61503", "title": "Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople", "text": "First among equals of leaders in the Orthodox Church\nThe Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople () is the archbishop of Constantinople and (first among equals) among the heads of the several autocephalous churches that comprise the Eastern Orthodox Church. The ecumenical patriarch is regarded as the representative and spiritual leader of the Eastern Orthodox Christians worldwide. The term \"ecumenical\" in the title is a historical reference to the Ecumene, a Greek designation for the civilised world, i.e. the Roman Empire, and it stems from Canon 28 of the Council of Chalcedon.\nThe patriarch's see, the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, is one of the most enduring institutions in the world and has had a prominent part in world history. The ecumenical patriarchs in ancient times helped in the spread of Christianity and the resolution of various doctrinal disputes. In the Middle Ages, they played a major role in the affairs of the Eastern Orthodox Church, as well as in the politics of the Orthodox world, and in spreading Christianity among the Slavs. Currently, in addition to the expansion of the Christian faith and the Eastern Orthodox doctrine, the patriarchs are involved in ecumenism and interfaith dialogue, charitable work, and the defense of Orthodox Christian traditions.\nWithin the five apostolic sees of the Pentarchy, the ecumenical patriarch is regarded as the successor of Andrew the Apostle. The current holder of the office is Bartholomew I, the 270th bishop of that see.\nStatus in the Orthodox Church.\nThe ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople is first among equals, or first in honor among all Eastern Orthodox bishops, who presides in person\u2014or through a delegate\u2014over any council of Orthodox primates or bishops in which he takes part and serves as primary spokesman for the Orthodox communion especially in ecumenical contacts with other Christian denominations. He has no direct jurisdiction over the other patriarchs or the other autocephalous Orthodox churches, but he, alone among his fellow primates, enjoys the right of convening extraordinary synods consisting of them or their delegates to deal with \"ad hoc\" situations and has also convened well-attended pan-Orthodox synods in the last 40 years. His unique role often sees the ecumenical patriarch referred to as the spiritual leader of the Orthodox Church in some sources, though this is not an official title of the patriarch nor is it usually used in scholarly sources on the patriarchate. The Orthodox Church is entirely decentralized: it has no central authority, earthly head, or single bishop in a leadership role. Because it has a synodical system canonically, it is significantly distinguished from the hierarchically organized Catholic Church, whose doctrine is papal supremacy and whose head is the pope. His titles \"primus inter pares\". 'first among equals', and \"ecumenical patriarch\" are of honor rather than authority, and in fact the ecumenical patriarch has no real authority over churches other than the Constantinopolitan.\nThe ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople is the direct administrative superior of dioceses and archdioceses serving millions of Greek, Ukrainian, Rusyn and Albanian believers in North and South America, Western Europe, Australia and New Zealand, South Korea, as well as parts of modern Greece which, for historical reasons, do not fall under the jurisdiction of the Church of Greece.\nHis actual position is patriarch of the Orthodox Church of Constantinople, one of the fourteen autocephalous and several autonomous churches and the most senior (though not oldest) of the four orthodox ancient primatial sees among the five patriarchal Christian centers comprising the ancient Pentarchy of the undivided Church. In his role as head of the Orthodox Church of Constantinople, he is known as the \"archbishop of Constantinople, New Rome\".\nThe Ecumenical Patriarchate is also sometimes called the Greek Patriarchate of Constantinople to distinguish it from the Armenian Patriarchate and the extinct Latin Patriarchate, which was created after the Latin capture of Constantinople in 1204, during the Fourth Crusade.\nHistory.\nThe see of Byzantium, whose foundation was later ascribed to Andrew the Apostle, was originally a common bishopric. It gained importance when Emperor Constantine elevated Byzantium to a second capital alongside Rome and named it Constantinople. The see's ecclesiastical status as the second of five patriarchates was developed by the Ecumenical Councils of Constantinople in 381 and Chalcedon in 451.\nThe Turkish government recognizes him as the spiritual leader of the Greek minority in Turkey, but does not recognize the title \"Ecumenical Patriarch\", instead referring to him as the Roman (literally \"R\u00fbm\") Orthodox patriarch of Fener (). The patriarch was subject to the authority of the Ottoman Empire after the conquest of Constantinople in 1453, until the declaration of Turkish Republic in 1923. Today, according to Turkish law, he is subject to the authority of the state of Turkey and is required to be a citizen of Turkey to be patriarch.\nThe patriarch of Constantinople has been dubbed the ecumenical patriarch since the sixth century. The exact significance of the style, which has been used occasionally for other prelates since the middle of the fifth century, is nowhere officially defined but, according to the Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, the title has been criticized in the Catholic Church as incompatible with the claims of the Holy See.\nMount Athos.\nThe monastic communities of Mount Athos are stauropegic and they are directly under the jurisdiction of the ecumenical patriarch, the only bishop who has jurisdiction over them. Athos, officially the \"Autonomous Monastic State of the Holy Mountain\" (), is a self-governed polity within the Greek state subject to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in its political aspect and to the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople as regards to its religious aspect and is home to 20 monasteries and numerous other monastic communities.\nEpiscopacy role.\nThe ecumenical patriarch has a unique role among Eastern Orthodox bishops, though it is not without controversy. He is (\"first among equals\"), as he is senior among all Orthodox bishops. This primacy, expressed in canonical literature as \"presbeia\" (\"prerogatives\", literally: \"seniorities\"), grants to the ecumenical patriarch the right to preside at pan-Orthodox synods.\nAdditionally, the canonical literature of the Orthodox Church grants to the ecumenical patriarch the right to hear appeals in cases of dispute between bishops. However, whether these canonical rights are limited only to his own patriarchate or are universal throughout the Orthodox Church is the subject of debate, especially between the Ecumenical Patriarchate and the Russian Orthodox Church.\nHistorically, the ecumenical patriarch has heard such appeals and sometimes was invited to intervene in other churches' disputes and difficulties. This still occurs today, as when in 2006 the patriarchate was invited to assist in declaring Chrysostomos I of Cyprus, the archbishop of the Church of Cyprus, incompetent due to his having Alzheimer's disease. Additionally, in 2005, the Ecumenical Patriarchate convoked a pan-Orthodox synod to express the Orthodox world's confirmation of the deposition of Patriarch Irenaios of Jerusalem. In 2006, the patriarchate was invited to hear the appeal of a Russian Orthodox bishop in the United Kingdom in a dispute with his superior in Moscow, though the result of that appeal \u2013 and the right to make it \u2013 were both rejected by the latter.\nThe ecumenical patriarch has no direct jurisdiction outside the Patriarchate of Constantinople granted to him in Orthodox canonical literature, but his primary function regarding the whole Orthodox Church is one of dealing with relations between autocephalous and autonomous churches. That is, his primary role is one of promoting and sustaining Church unity.\nThis unique role often sees the ecumenical patriarch referred to as the \"spiritual leader\" of the Orthodox Church in some sources, though this is not an official title of the patriarch nor is it usually used in scholarly sources on the patriarchate. Such a title is acceptable if it refers to this unique role, but it sometimes leads to the mistaken belief that the office is thus the equivalent of an Orthodox pope. There is, however, no Orthodox notion equivalent to the papacy: the Orthodox churches operate in the synodical system, whereby ecclesiastical matters are settled by the competent synod of bishops, in which each bishop has one vote. The five patriarchs of the ancient Pentarchy (Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, in that order) are to be given the seniority of honour, but have no actual power over other bishops other than the power of the synod they are chairing (and in which they also wield one vote).\nIn 2007, the patriarch gave his approval to the Ravenna Document, a Catholic\u2013Orthodox document re-asserting that the bishop of Rome is indeed the \"pr\u014dtos\" (\"first\") of the Church, as in \"first among equals\", although future discussions are to be held on the concrete ecclesiological exercise of papal primacy. According to \"Lumen Gentium\", the patriarch is a validly consecrated bishop in Roman ecclesiology, and there is merely an imperfect ecclesial communion between Constantinople and Rome, which exists nevertheless and which may be improved at some point in history.\nTitle.\nThe Ecumenical Patriarch bears the name: \"(name), by the grace of God Archbishop of Constantinople, New Rome and Ecumenical Patriarch\".\nEarly history.\nThe (arch)bishopric of Constantinople has had a continuous history since the founding of the city in AD 330 by Constantine the Great. After Constantine the Great had enlarged Byzantium to make it into a second capital city in 330, it was thought appropriate that its bishop, once a suffragan of the Exarch of Thrace and Macedonia, the Metropolitan of Heraclea, should be elevated to an archbishopric. For many decades, the heads of the church of Rome opposed this ambition, due to their existing papal claims, and because they defended the 'Petrine principle' by which all Patriarchates were derived from Saint Peter and were unwilling to violate the old order of the hierarchy for political reasons.\nIn 381, the First Council of Constantinople declared that \"The Bishop of Constantinople shall have the primacy of honour after the Bishop of Rome, because it is New Rome\" (canon iii). The prestige of the office continued to grow not only because of the obvious patronage of the Byzantine Emperor but because of its overwhelming geographical importance.\nThe Council of Chalcedon in 451 established Constantinople as a patriarchate with ecclesiastical jurisdiction over Asia Minor (the dioceses of Asiane and Pontus) and Thrace as well as over the barbaric territories, non-converted lands outside the defined area of the Western Patriarchate (Old Rome) and the other three patriarchates, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem, gave it appellate jurisdiction extraterritorially over canon law decisions by the other patriarchs and granted it honours equal to those belonging to the first Christian see, Rome, in terms of primacy, Rome retaining however its seniority (canon xxviii). Leo I refused to accept this canon, basing himself on the fact that it was made in the absence of his legates. In the sixth century, the official title became that of \"archbishop of Constantinople, New Rome, and ecumenical patriarch\".\nThe current patriarch (since 1991) is Bartholomew I who has become better-known than any of his predecessors in modern times as a result of his numerous pastoral and other visits to numerous countries in five continents and his setting up of a permanent representative to the European Union, in addition to enhancing the long-established Patriarchal Centre in Pregny-Chamb\u00e9sy, Switzerland, and also his ecological pursuits which have won him the epithet of \"the Green Patriarch\".\nOttoman ethnarchy.\nWhen the Ottoman Turks conquered Constantinople in 1453, the patriarchate ceased to function. The Patriarchate was restored by the conquering ruler, Sultan Mehmed II, who wished to establish his dynasty as the direct heirs of the Eastern Roman emperors, and who adopted the imperial title \"Kayser-i-R\u00fbm\" \"caesar of the Romans\", one of his subsidiary titles but a significant one. In 1454 he bestowed the office upon an illustrious Byzantine scholar-monk who was well known for his opposition to union with the Latin West, Gennadius Scholarius, who became Patriarch Gennadius II.\nThe patriarch was designated \"millet-ba\u015f\u0131\" (ethnarch) of the Millet of \"Rum\", which included all Orthodox Christians under Ottoman rule, regardless of their ethnicity in the modern sense. This role was carried out by ethnic Greeks at their great peril, in the midst of enormous difficulties and traps and inevitably with mixed success. Several patriarchs were summarily executed by the Ottoman authorities, most notably Gregory V, who was lynched on Easter Monday 1821 in revenge for the outbreak of the Greek Revolution.\nIn the 19th century, the rising tide of nationalism and secularism among the Balkan Christian nations led to the establishment of several autocephalous national churches, generally under autonomous patriarchs or archbishops, leaving the ecumenical patriarch only direct control over the ethnically Greek-originated Orthodox Christians of Turkey, parts of Greece and the archdioceses in North America, Asia, Africa and Oceania where growing Greek and other migrant communities have gradually constituted a significant orthodox diaspora.\nRelationship with the Republic of Turkey.\nAfter the proclamation of the Republic of Turkey on 29 October 1923, the Turkish state only recognises the patriarch as the spiritual leader of the Greek minority in Turkey, and officially refers to him as the \"Greek Orthodox Patriarch of the Phanar\" or \"Roman Orthodox Patriarch of Constantinople\" (; Phanar is the neighbourhood in Istanbul where the patriarchate is located). According to Turkish law, still in force today, he is subject to the authority of the Republic of Turkey; however, Turkey allows the Standing Synod of Metropolitan Bishops to elect the patriarch. To be electable, Turkish law requires the candidates to be Turkish citizens. Since the establishment of modern Turkey, the position of the ecumenical patriarch has been filled by Turkish-born citizens of Greek ethnicity. As nearly all Greek Orthodox have left Turkey (see Population exchange between Greece and Turkey and Istanbul Pogrom), this considerably narrows the field of candidates for succession.\nHuman rights groups have long protested against conditions placed by the secular government of Turkey on the ecumenical patriarch, a religious office. The same policy also applied to the institution of the Islamic Caliphate, which was abolished by Turkey. For example, the ecumenical status accorded him traditionally within Eastern Orthodoxy, and recognized previously by the Ottoman governments, has on occasion been a source of controversy within the Republic of Turkey. This policy results in problems in the function of the patriarchate, since clergy coming from abroad are not eligible to apply for residence and work permits. In its early days the Turkish state promoted a rival Turkish Orthodox Patriarchate, whose congregation, however, has remained limited.\nExpropriation of Church property and the conditions of state control imposed on the Orthodox Theological School of Halki that have led to its closure by the Patriarchate, are also cited by human rights groups. However, in 2004 Patriarch Bartholomew, with the help of the Turkish government, succeeded, after eighty years, in altering the composition of the twelve-member Standing Synod of Metropolitan Bishops in Constantinople so that it can include six bishops from outside Turkey. He has also been convening biennially in Constantinople convocations of all bishops in his jurisdiction.\nThe Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople has suffered attacks from 1993 to 2004, including desecration of patriarchal cemeteries as well as assaults on the ecumenical patriarch.\nAfter the protests from Turkey, the signature of the Ecumenical Patriarchate has been removed from the statement of the June 2024 Ukraine peace summit.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61504", "revid": "20176275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61504", "title": "List of ecumenical patriarchs of Constantinople", "text": "The following is a chronological list of bishops and ecumenical patriarchs of Constantinople. The historical data on the first 25 bishops is limited with modern scholars debating their authenticity. The Foundation of the See by Andrew the Apostle is met with similar amounts of skepticism with scholars believing it to be a later tradition. The list is mostly based on the compilation made by Demetrius Kiminas, but there is no single \"official\" numbering of bishops. The official website of the patriarchate has a list of holders but gives them no numeral.\nArchbishops/Patriarchs of Constantinople.\nThe official title of the bishop became \"archbishop of Constantinople, New Rome, and ecumenical patriarch\" in the 6th century, but scholars often use the terms \"archbishop\" and \"patriarch\" for earlier bishops. The First Council of Constantinople (381) concluded that \"the bishop of Constantinople, however, shall have the prerogative of honor after the bishop of Rome\", while the Council of Chalcedon (451) concluded that \"the bishop of New Rome shall enjoy the same privileges as the bishop of Old Rome\". Modern scholars use the term \"patriarch\" after either 381 or 451. The chronology mostly follows Demetrius Kiminas (2009), who mostly uses the dates established by Venance Grumel (1958). See also the lists in the \"Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium\" (1991) and the \"Encyclopedia of the Byzantine Empire\" (2015).\n450\u2013800.\nDuring the 16th session of the Council of Chalcedon (October\u2013November 451), also known as the Fourth Ecumenical Council, a resolution was passed elevating the See of Constantinople to a status equal to Rome in ecclesiastical matters, granting it second place after Rome. The resolution was formally rejected by the Pope Leo I and the Western church; however, it was largely accepted in the East, becoming known as Canon 28. This canon would later become the foundation of the Pentarchy of patriarchates.\n800\u20131060.\nIn 1054, the Eastern Orthodox Church cut ties to the Roman Catholic Church as a result of the Great East\u2013West Schism.\n1208\u20131261 (in Nicaea).\nOn 12 April 1204, the Fourth Crusade sacked and conquered Constantinople. The Crusaders established their own line of Catholic patriarchs in the city, while the former Orthodox patriarch John X fled in exile to Thrace. John X died in Thrace in the spring of 1206.\nAfter 1204, various Byzantine warlords struggled to establish their legitimacy and sought to reconquer Constantinople. One of the major contenders, Theodore I Laskaris of Nicaea, sought legitimacy through religion. He invited John X to Nicaea, though the deposed patriarch refused the invitation up until his death. After John's death, Laskaris sent letters to Pope Innocent III in hopes of authorizing Orthodox clerics to elect a new Orthodox patriarch and seeking recognition of himself as the supreme head of the Orthodox community, though both requests were ignored by the pope. In 1208, Laskaris nevertheless appointed his own new patriarch, Michael IV of Constantinople, who in turn formally crowned Laskaris as emperor. The status of the \"Patriarchs of Constantinople\" based in Nicaea remained disputed outside of the Empire of Nicaea until the reconquest of Constantinople in 1261.\nConstantinople was captured by the Empire of Nicaea on 25 July 1261. The Emperor and his court arrived to Constantinople the next month. The Latin (Catholic) Patriarchate of Constantinople continued in exile until 1964.\n1261\u20131453.\nOn 29 May 1453 Constantinople fell to the Ottoman Turks, thus marking the end of the Byzantine Empire. The Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople became subject to the Ottoman Empire.\n1453\u20131466.\nThere are different suggestions by scholars for the succession of the Patriarchs from 1462 to 1466, all of whom resigned. The main positions are the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n1466\u20131822.\nThe chronology up to the year 1595 is somewhat disputed by authors.\n1822\u20131923.\nGreece, which was recognized as an independent country in 1830, adopted the modern Gregorian calendar in 1923, followed by Turkey in 1926. The difference between the Gregorian and Julian calendars is of 12 days, meaning that some sources may give a different date depending on the calendar used (see also Old Style and New Style dates). The list follows the Julian dates used at the time in Greece and the Ottoman Empire.\nOn 23 July 1833, the Church of Greece declared itself autocephalous. It was followed by the Romanian Orthodox Church in 1864, the Bulgarian Exarchate in 1872, and the Serbian Orthodox Church in 1879, thus reducing the territorial extent of the Ecumenical Patriarchate's jurisdiction.\nOn 24 July 1923, the Ottoman Empire was dissolved and replaced by the Republic of Turkey.\nLengths of tenure.\nLongest-reigning patriarchs\nShortest-reigning patriarchs\nPatriarchal names.\nThe most frequently used patriarchal name is John, with 14 ecumenical patriarchs taking this name. There have also been 74 patriarchal names that have only been used once. The number of all patriarchs to the present is 269.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61505", "revid": "2835992", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61505", "title": "Anthony Adverse", "text": "1936 film directed by Mervyn LeRoy\nAnthony Adverse is a 1936 American epic historical drama film directed by Mervyn LeRoy and starring Fredric March and Olivia de Havilland. The screenplay by Sheridan Gibney draws elements of its plot from eight of the nine books in Hervey Allen's 1933 historical novel, \"Anthony Adverse.\" Abandoned at a convent as an infant, Anthony comes of age in the tumultuous turn of the 18th to the 19th century, the age of Napoleon. The audience is privy to many truths in Anthony's life, including the tragic story of his origins and the fact that the wealthy merchant who adopts him is his grandfather. Most important of all, Anthony believes that his beloved Angela abandoned him without a word, when in fact she left a note telling him that the theatrical troupe was going to Rome. The gust of wind that blows the note away is one of many fateful and fatal events in Anthony's story.\nThe film received four Academy Awards, including the inaugural Academy Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role, given to Gale Sondergaard for her performance as the villainous Faith Paleologus.\nPlot.\nIn 1773, young Scottish woman Maria Bonnyfeather is the new bride of middle-aged Spanish\u00a0Marquis Don Luis. The consummation of their marriage is postponed until he is cured of gout at a famous spa. Meanwhile, Maria's true love, Denis Moore, follows them and stays near their ch\u00e2teau. While the marquis is away taking the cure, they meet in the woods, and after three months Maria tells him she is carrying his child. The marquis returns home, cured, and Maria is horrified at what awaits her. The lovers plan to flee that night, but the marquis discovers Maria waiting for Denis. Don Luis takes her away, but Denis pursues them to an inn, where Don Luis kills him in a sword duel.\nMonths later, Maria dies giving birth to her son at a chalet in the Italian Alps. Don Luis leaves the infant in the foundling wheel of a convent near Leghorn.\u00a0The nuns christen him Anthony because he was found on the feast day of St. Anthony the Great. Don Luis lies to Maria's father, wealthy merchant John Bonnyfeather, telling him that the infant also died. Ten years later, by chance, Anthony is apprenticed to Bonnyfeather, who discovers his relationship to the boy but keeps it a secret. The only explanation for Don Luis\u2019 behavior is that Maria's child was illegitimate, and Bonnyfeather cannot bear to have his daughter\u2014or his grandson\u2014bear that stigma. He gives the boy the surname Adverse acknowledging the difficult start in life.\nAnthony and the cook's daughter, Angela Guisseppi fall in love. Angela wants to become a great singer. Anthony wants to serve Bonnyfeather and marry Angela, but Angela's father wins the lottery and the family leaves Leghorn. Years later, Anthony finds her, singing in the opera chorus. Eventually, they wed. Soon after the ceremony, Bonnyfeather sends Anthony to\u00a0Havana to save Bonnyfeather's fortune from a laggard debtor, the trading firm Gallego &amp; Sons. On the day his ship sails, he and Angela are supposed to meet at the convent, but she arrives first, and he is late. Unable to wait any longer, she leaves a note outside the convent to inform him that she is leaving for Rome with her opera company, but the note is blown away. Confused and upset, he sails without her. Meanwhile, assuming he has abandoned her, she continues her career.\nGallego has quit Havana. Anthony leaves to take control of Gallego &amp; Sons' only remaining asset\u2014a slave trading post on the Pongo River in Africa, so he can recover Bonnyfeather's debt. Three years in the slave trade corrupts him, and he takes slave girl Neleta into his bed. After his friend, Brother Fran\u00e7ois, is crucified and killed by natives, Anthony returns to Italy to find Bonnyfeather has died. His housekeeper, Faith Paleologus (Don Luis' longtime co-conspirator and now wife), has inherited Bonnyfeather's fortune.\nAnthony goes to Paris to claim his inheritance and is reunited with his friend, banker Vincent Nolte.\u00a0He saves Nolte from bankruptcy by loaning him his entire fortune, having learned from Brother Fran\u00e7ois that \"There's something besides money and power\". Meanwhile, all Paris is buzzing with gossip about Mademoiselle Georges, the famous opera star and mistress of Napoleon Bonaparte, and the diamond necklace he has given to her, although Josephine wanted it.\nImpresario Debrulle reunites Anthony with Angela, who bore him a son. A delighted Angela tells him that she is singing at the opera, and he goes, with Nolte. Searching the program in vain for her name, he hears her voice coming from the stage. He exclaims, \u201cThat's Angela\u201d and Nolte replies, \u201cThat's Mademoiselle Georges!\u201d Angela continues the aria and emerges from the shadows, descending a staircase. Wearing Napoleon's gift, she whispers \u201cGoodbye, Anthony,\u201d as he stands and leaves the box.\nShaken, he returns home to find his son, with a letter from Angela saying that Anthony is better suited to raise the boy. Anthony and the boy sail for America hoping for a better life.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nBefore casting Fredric March to costar with Olivia de Havilland, Warner Bros. considered Robert Donat, Leslie Howard, and George Brent for the title role. The studio during preproduction also intended to cast Errol Flynn in support of March, but Flynn became so popular with moviegoers after his performance in \"Captain Blood\" in 1935 that Warner Bros. assigned him to star instead in the 1936 film \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\".\nBilly Mauch plays the young Anthony Adverse in the earlier scenes. Warner Bros. discovered Mauch had a twin, and it put them both under contract. They were given a starring vehicle in \"The Prince and the Pauper\".\nFilm editor Ralph Dawson provided some statistics: a shooting script of 250 pages; 1,098 camera set-ups, plus another 200 scenes prepared by special effects (including superimposed titles); 600,000+ feet of positive print film delivered to his cutting room, yielding a finished film of 12,250 feet.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nIn his 1936 review, \"The New York Times\" critic Frank S. Nugent panned \"Warner's gargantuan film\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Speaking for ourselves, we found it a bulky, rambling and indecisive photoplay which has not merely taken liberties with the letter of the original but with its spirit...For all its sprawling length, [the novel] was cohesive and well rounded. Most of its picaresque quality has been lost in the screen version; its philosophy is vague, its characterization blurred and its story so loosely knit and episodic that its telling seems interminable. A few years back we devoted the better part of a British week-end to the reading of Mr. Allen's little pamphlet and we enjoyed it. Yesterday we spent only a fraction more than two hours watching its progress on the screen and we squirmed like a small boy in Sunday school.\nWriting for \"The Spectator\", Graham Greene expressed similar views, acerbically noting of the film that it \"goes on too long, otherwise it might have been the funniest film since \"The Crusades\"\". \"Variety\" described it as \"a bit choppy\" and \"a bit long-winded\" as well; but the popular trade magazine praised Fredric March's performance, adding that he was \"an ace choice, playing the role to the hilt.\" \"Film Daily\" wrote that \"Anthony Adverse\" \"easily ranks among the leading pictures of the talking screen\" and called the production's acting \"flawless\". \"I don't think Mr. March has done any better piece of work than this\", noted John Mosher in his positive review for \"The New Yorker\".\nThe film was named one of the National Board of Review's Top Ten pictures of the year and ranked eighth in the \"Film Daily\" annual critics' poll. In a much later review, however, Reverend Austin Spencer also found the film adaptation\u2014when compared to the novel\u2014inadequate, especially in its portrayal of the personal challenges that confronted the story's protagonist:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the book as written and published, Anthony Adverse's far-ranging life was clearly intended to be a spiritual journey at least as much as a physical one. Befitting with his name, he goes through great adversity to emerge a better man - renouncing material possessions in general and the owning of slaves in particular, and aspiring with increasing success to emulate the saintly, martyred Brother Fran\u00e7ois. In the film, all this was chopped off and amputated by cutting off the book's plotline in the middle. The film's Anthony Adverse is in effect denied the spiritual redemption which his literary creator intended for him. Possibly this was simply due to the fact that a normal length film could not accommodate so many adventures and changes of fortune over three continents. But I have a sneaking suspicion that some of the film-makers considered 'too much Christianity' as endangering a film's box office success. Anyway, I strongly recommend to anyone seeing the film to also read the book and find for themselves what they missed.\nOn TCM, film critic Leonard Maltin gives the picture a positive review of 3.5/4 stars, praising the \"Blockbuster filmization of Hervey Allen bestseller ... of young man gaining maturity through adventures in various parts of early 19th-century Europe, Cuba, and Africa\" and the film's cinematography and \"rousing musical score\", both winners of Academy Awards.\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 11 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 4.3/10. It is the lowest-rated film to ever be nominated for Best Picture film on the website.\nBox office.\nThe film was Warner Bros.' most popular release of 1936. It was also the studio's most expensive production that year, with an overall budget of $1,192,000. That hefty expense, however, proved to be a wise investment, for \"Anthony Adverse\" generated $1,558,000 in profits at the box office for Warner Bros., earning the studio $1,783,000 domestically and $967,000 in foreign markets.\nCultural references.\nThe initial theme of the second movement of Erich Wolfgang Korngold's violin concerto was drawn from the music he composed for the film.\nEnglish singer Julia Gilbert adopted the name of the film's main character when recording for the London-based \u00e9l record label in the late 1980s.\nScreen legend Tony Curtis (1925\u20132010), who was born Bernard Schwartz, named himself for the titular character: The novel from which this film was adapted was the actor's favorite. Curtis, who was established as a star in \"The Prince Who Was a Thief\" (1951), was buried with a Stetson hat, an Armani scarf, driving gloves, an iPhone and a copy of his favorite novel \"Anthony Adverse\".\nJack Benny parodied \"Anthony Adverse\" on the October 11 and 18 episodes of his \"Jell-O Show\" in 1936.\nIn the 1934 short comedy \"What, No Men!\", when their plane lands in \"Indian Country\" and Gus (El Brendel) is told to throw out the anchor, he tosses out a rope attached to a huge book titled \"Anthony Adverse\".\nIn the 1949 cartoon \"Hare Do\", a marquee at a theater advertises the movie.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61506", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61506", "title": "Dodsworth (novel)", "text": "1929 novel by Sinclair Lewis\nDodsworth is a satirical novel by American writer Sinclair Lewis, first published by Harcourt Brace &amp; Company on March 14, 1929. Its subject, the differences between US and European intellect, manners, and morals, is one that frequently appears in the works of Henry James. In 1936 it was made into a movie, \"Dodsworth\", which received seven Academy Award nominations and has been regarded as historically significant by the Library of Congress.\nPlot.\nThe novel is set in the period between late 1925 and late 1927. Samuel ('Sam') Dodsworth is an ambitious and innovative automobile designer, who builds his fortunes in fictional Zenith, Winnemac, through the success of his Revelation Motor Company. Along the way, he courted and won the hand of Frances 'Fran' Voelker, a beautiful young socialite. Deciding to retire while he is still capable of enjoying his leisure, he sells out at fifty and sets out to pursue a dream he'd never allowed himself the time to realize: a leisurely trip to Europe with his wife, with aspirations to visit some manufacturing plants looking for his next challenge. His forty-one-year-old wife, however, motivated by her own vanity and fear of lost youth, is dissatisfied with married life and small town Zenith, and wants to live in Europe permanently as an expatriate, not just visit for a few months. The Dodsworths leave for Europe with Fran. Her disparate motivations for the trip become quickly known.\nIn their extensive travels across Europe, they are soon caught up in vastly different lifestyles. Fran falls in with a crowd of frivolous socialites, while Sam plays more of an independent tourist. 'With his red Baedeker guide book in hand, he visits such well-known tourist attractions as Westminster Abbey, Notre Dame Cathedral, Sanssouci Palace, and the Piazza San Marco. But the historic sites that he sees prove to be far less significant than the American expatriates that he meets on his extensive journeys across Great Britain and continental Europe' He meets Edith Cortright, an expatriate American widow in Venice, who is everything his wife is not: self-assured, self-confident, selfless, and self-reliant. As Sam and Fran follow their own pursuits, their relationship is strained to the breaking point. Both are forced to choose between marriage and the new lifestyles they have embraced.\nThe novel includes detailed descriptions of Sam and Fran's tours across Europe. They leave for the Continent via steam liner from New York, landing first in England. They take in London and are invited by Major Clyde Lockert to join a weekend trip to the countryside. Later, after Lockert has made an indecent proposal to Fran, they depart for Paris, where she soon engages in a busy social life and Sam takes up sightseeing. When he decides to go back to America for his college reunion in New Haven, Fran spends the summer months on the Alpine lakes near Montreux and Stresa, where she has a romance with Arnold Israel. Once Sam has picked her up in Paris, they agree to continue their travels together, touring France, Italy, Spain, Austria, Hungary and Germany. Fran next falls in love with nobleman Kurt von Obersdorf in Berlin, and stays on with him while Sam criss-crosses Europe attempting to cope with the breakdown of his marriage. When he happens to run into Edith in Venice, she persuades him to accompany her on a visit to a village in the vicinity of Naples. Von Obersdorf calls off the marriage, and Sam joins Fran on her voyage back to New York. Three days later, he is back on the next ship to meet Edith in Paris.\nAdaptations.\nThe novel was adapted for the stage in 1934 by Sidney Howard and filmed by producer Samuel Goldwyn in 1936 and directed by William Wyler. It starred Walter Huston, Ruth Chatterton and Mary Astor. A 1995 musical adaptation that was staged in Fort Worth, Texas with Hal Linden and Dee Hoty.\nCritique.\nIn his analysis of the novel, Martin R. Ausmus has described \"Dodsworth\" as Lewis' \"most sympathetic yet most savage\", \"most real\" and \"truest picture of the middle class\" of America at the time. Michael Augspurger has noted the influence of the ideas of Thorstein Veblen in his analysis of the presence of ideas and ideology related to business in the novel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61507", "revid": "36112485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61507", "title": "Libeled Lady", "text": "1936 film by Jack Conway\nLibeled Lady is a 1936 American screwball comedy film directed by Jack Conway and starring Jean Harlow, William Powell, Myrna Loy, and Spencer Tracy. The screenplay was written by Maurine Dallas Watkins, Howard Emmett Rogers, and George Oppenheimer, from a story by Wallace Sullivan. This was the fifth of fourteen films in which Powell and Loy were teamed, inspired by their success in the \"Thin Man\" series.\n\"Libeled Lady\" was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. The film was remade in 1946 as \"Easy to Wed\" with Esther Williams, Van Johnson, and Lucille Ball.\nPlot.\nWealthy Connie Allenbury is falsely accused of breaking up a marriage and sues the \"New York Evening Star\" newspaper for $5 million for libel. Warren Haggerty, the managing editor, turns in desperation to former reporter and suave ladies' man Bill Chandler for help. Bill's scheme is to maneuver Connie into being alone with him when his wife shows up, so that the suit will have to be dropped. Bill is not married, so Warren volunteers his long-suffering fianc\u00e9e, Gladys Benton, to marry Bill in name only, over her loud protests.\nBill arranges to return to the United States from England on the same ocean liner as Connie and her father J. B. He pays some men to pose as reporters and harass Connie at the dock, so that he can \"rescue\" her and become acquainted. On the voyage, Connie initially treats him with contempt, assuming that he is just the latest in a long line of fortune hunters after her money, but Bill gradually overcomes her suspicions.\nComplications arise when Connie and Bill actually fall in love. They get married, but Gladys decides that she prefers Bill to a marriage-averse newspaperman and interrupts their honeymoon to reclaim her husband. Bill reveals that he found out that Gladys was married before and that her Yucat\u00e1n divorce was invalid, thus rendering their own marriage invalid. But Gladys reveals she obtained a second divorce in Reno, so she and Bill are legally husband and wife. Connie and Bill manage to show Gladys that she really loves Warren.\nCast.\nHattie McDaniel, who frequently played maids, makes an uncredited appearance as a hotel cleaner.\nProduction.\nThe film went into production in mid-July 1936 and wrapped on September 1. Location shooting took place in Sonora, California. Lionel Barrymore was originally cast as Mr. Allenbury, and Rosalind Russell was originally considered to play Connie Allenbury.\nHarlow and Powell were an off-screen couple, and Harlow wanted to play Connie Allenbury, so that her character and Powell's wound up together. MGM insisted, however, that the film be another William Powell-Myrna Loy vehicle, as they originally intended. Harlow had already signed on to do the film but had to settle for the role of Gladys Benton. Nevertheless, as Gladys, top-billed Harlow got to play a wedding scene with Powell. During filming, Harlow changed her legal name from Harlean Carpenter McGrew Bern Rosson to Jean Harlow. She made only two more films before dying at the age of 26 in 1937.\nTracy had previously been enamoured with Loy, who was newly married to Arthur Hornblow Jr. at the time of this production. Loy\u2019s autobiography recounted the humorous atmosphere on the set. For example, Tracy set up an \"I hate Hornblow\" table in the studio commissary, reserved for men who claimed to have been romantically rejected by Loy.\nTwo passenger liners made cameos as the ship in the film, the SS \"Queen Anne\": Cunard's RMS \"Berengaria\" (in the pierside view) and France's SS \"Normandie\" in an aerial shot.\nReception.\nBox Office.\nThe film was released on 9 October 1936, and earned $2.7 million at the box office \u2014 $1,601,000 in the U.S. and Canada and $1,122,000 in other markets, resulting in a profit of $1,189,000. It was one of the top twenty box-office successes of the year.\nCritical response.\nPauline Kael wrote: \"A wisecracking newspaper comedy... The director, Jack Conway, deeps up the fast pace by a lot of shouting and busywork\u2014people are always rushing in and out, and practically every line is meant to be funny. Some of them are, and the others are, at least, perky. The picture isn't bad\u2014it's enjoyable, but it's rather charmless.\" Leonard Maltin gave it four of four stars: \"Wonderful comedy with the four stars working at full steam... Sit back and enjoy.\" Leslie Halliwell gave it two of four stars: \"Lively four-star romantic comedy which sums up its era as well as any.\"\nIt received an Academy Award nomination for 1936 Best Picture.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61508", "revid": "50943311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61508", "title": "Mr. Deeds Goes to Town", "text": "1936 film\nMr. Deeds Goes to Town is a 1936 American comedy-drama romance film directed by Frank Capra and starring Gary Cooper and Jean Arthur in her first featured role. Based on the 1935 short story \"Opera Hat\" by Clarence Budington Kelland, which appeared in serial form in \"The American Magazine\", the screenplay was written by Robert Riskin in his fifth collaboration with Capra.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlot.\nLongfellow Deeds is the co-owner of a tallow works, part-time greeting card poet, and tuba-playing inhabitant of the hamlet of Mandrake Falls, Vermont. During the Great Depression he inherits 20 million dollars from his uncle, Martin Semple. Semple's scheming attorney, John Cedar, locates Deeds and brings him to New York City. Cedar gives his cynical troubleshooter, ex-newspaperman Cornelius Cobb, the task of keeping reporters away from Deeds.\nCobb is outfoxed by star reporter Louise \"Babe\" Bennett, who appeals to Deeds' romantic fantasy of rescuing a damsel in distress by masquerading as a poor worker named Mary Dawson. She pretends to faint from exhaustion after \"walking all day to find a job\" and worms her way into his confidence. Bennett proceeds to write a series of enormously popular newspaper articles on Longfellow, portraying him as a madcap yokel who has suddenly inherited riches, giving him the nickname \"Cinderella Man\".\nCedar tries to get Deeds' power of attorney in order to keep his own financial misdeeds secret. Deeds, however, proves to be a shrewd judge of character, easily fending off Cedar and other greedy opportunists. He wins Cobb's wholehearted respect and eventually Babe's love, falling for her himself and proposing in a poem. She quits her job in shame, but before she can tell Deeds the truth about herself, Cobb finds out and tells Deeds. Deeds is left heartbroken and decides to return to Mandrake Falls.\nAfter he has packed and is about to leave, a dispossessed farmer stomps into his mansion and threatens him with a gun. He expresses his scorn for the seemingly heartless, ultra-rich man, who feeds doughnuts to horses but will not lift a finger to help the multitudes of desperate poor. After the intruder comes to his senses, Deeds realizes that he can put his troublesome fortune to good use. He decides to provide 2,000 fully equipped farms free to homeless families if they will work the land for three years.\nCedar joins forces with Deeds' only other relative, Semple, and his shrewish wife, in an attempt to have Deeds declared mentally incompetent. A sanity hearing is scheduled to determine who should control the fortune. During the hearing, Cedar calls an expert who diagnoses Deeds with manic depression based on Babe's articles and witnesses to his recent behavior. As he has since been taken into custody, Deeds continues to refuse to speak.\nBabe speaks up passionately on his behalf, blaming herself for what she did to him. When he realizes that she truly loves him, he begins speaking, systematically punching holes in Cedar's case and then punching Cedar in the face. The judge declares him to be not only sane, but \"the sanest man who ever walked into this courtroom.\" Victorious, Deeds and Babe embrace and kiss, Deeds sweeping her up into his arms and carrying her off.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Gary Cooper as Longfellow Deeds\nUncredited:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Margaret Seddon as Jane\nProduction.\nOriginally, Frank Capra intended to make \"Lost Horizon\" after \"Broadway Bill\" (1934), but lead actor Ronald Colman could not get out of his other filming commitments. Thus, Capra began adapting \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\". As production began, the two lead actors were cast: Gary Cooper as Longfellow Deeds and Jean Arthur as Louise \"Babe\" Bennett/Mary Dawson. Cooper was Capra's \"first, last and only choice\" for the pivotal role of the eccentric Longfellow Deeds.\nArthur was not the first choice for the role, but Carole Lombard, the original female lead, quit the film just three days before principal photography, in favor of a starring role in \"My Man Godfrey\". The first scenes shot on the Fox Studios' New England street lot were in place before Capra found his replacement heroine in a rush screening. The opening sequences had to be reshot when Capra decided against the broad comedy approach that had originally been written.\nDespite his penchant for coming in \"under budget,\" Capra spent an additional five shooting days in multiple takes, testing angles and \"new\" perspectives, treating the production as a type of workshop exercise. Due to the increased shooting schedule, the film came in at $38,936 more than the Columbia budget for a total of $806,774. Throughout pre-production and early principal photography, the project still retained Kelland's original title, \"Opera Hat\", although Capra tried out some other titles including \"A Gentleman Goes to Town\" and \"Cinderella Man\" before settling on a name that was the winning entry in a contest held by the Columbia Pictures publicity department.\nReception.\nThe film was generally treated as likable fare by critics and audiences. Novelist Graham Greene, then also a film critic, was effusive in his praise, stating that this was Capra's finest film to date and describing Capra's treatment as \"a kinship with his audience, a sense of common life, a morality\". \"Variety\" noted \"a sometimes too thin structure [that] the players and director Frank Capra have contrived to convert ... into fairly sturdy substance. \"\nThis was the first Capra film to be released separately to exhibitors and not \"bundled\" with other Columbia features. On paper, it was his biggest hit, easily surpassing \"It Happened One Night.\"\nIt was the seventh most popular film at the British box office in 1935\u201336. In a 2004 listing compiled by the British Film Institute, \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" was placed at number 88 in their all-time chart based on cinema admissions in the UK, with an estimate attendance of 8.3 million.\nAwards and honors.\n\"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nAdaptations.\nA radio adaptation of \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" was originally broadcast on February 1, 1937, on \"Lux Radio Theater\". In that broadcast, Gary Cooper, Jean Arthur and Lionel Stander reprised their roles from the 1936 film.\nA planned sequel, titled \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Washington\", eventually became \"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington\" (1939). Although the latter's screenplay was actually based on an unpublished story, \"The Gentleman from Montana\", the film was, indeed, meant to be a sequel to \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\", with Gary Cooper reprising his role as Longfellow Deeds. Because Cooper was unavailable, Capra then \"saw it immediately as a vehicle for Jimmy Stewart and Jean Arthur\", and Stewart was borrowed from MGM.\nThe second animated feature film from Fleischer Studios, \"Mr. Bug Goes to Town\", was inspired by \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\".\nA short-lived ABC television series of the same name ran from 1969 to 1970, starring Monte Markham as Longfellow Deeds.\n\"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" was loosely remade as \"Mr. Deeds\" in 2002, starring Adam Sandler and Winona Ryder.\nThe Bengali movie \"Raja-Saja\" (1960) starring Uttam Kumar, Sabitri Chatterjee, and Tarun Kumar, and directed by Bikash Roy was a Bengali adaptation of this film.\nThe 1994 comedy \"The Hudsucker Proxy\" had several plot elements borrowed from this film.\nA Japanese manga adaption of \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" was made in 2010 by Ogata Hiromi, titled \"Bara no Souzokunin\".\nThe 1949 Tamil movie \"Nallathambi\" starring N S Krishnan was an adaptation of \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\", aimed at promoting social justice and education.\nThe 1983 Turkish movie inspired from the movie.\nDigital restoration.\nIn 2016, \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" was re-released with a 4K-digital restoration for the film's 80th anniversary.\nIn popular culture.\nThe bucolic Vermont town of Mandrake Falls, home of Longfellow Deeds, is now considered to be an archetype of small town America, with Clarence Budington Kelland, the author of the original story, having created a type of \"cracker-barrel\" view of rural values contrasted with that of sophisticated \"city folk\". The word \"pixilated\", previously limited to New England (and attested there since 1848), \"had a nationwide vogue in 1936\" thanks to its prominent use in the film, although its use in the screenplay may not be an accurate interpretation.\nThe word \"doodle\", in its modern specific sense of drawing on paper rather than in its older more general sense of 'fooling around', may also owe its origin \u2013 or at least its entry into common usage \u2013 to the final courtroom scene in this film. The Longfellow Deeds character, addressing the judge, explains the concept of a \"doodler\" \u2013 which the judge has not heard before \u2013 as being \"a word we made up back home to describe someone who makes foolish designs on paper while they're thinking.\"\nThe courtroom scene inspired the publication in the year after its release of a book that incorporated both words, \"Everybody's Pixillated: A Book of Doodles\".\nThe lyrics to the 1977 Rush song \"Cinderella Man\" on the \"A Farewell to Kings\" album are based on the story of \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\".\nIn the movie \"Baby Boom\", a babysitter refers to her hometown of Mandrake Falls.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nStreaming audio"}
{"id": "61509", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61509", "title": "115 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 115 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Scaurus and Metellus (or, less frequently, year 639 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Second Year of Yuanding. The denomination 115 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nMiddle East.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61510", "revid": "39471746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61510", "title": "116 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 116 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Geta and Eburnus (or, less frequently, year 638 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the First Year of Yuanding. The denomination 116 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nEgypt.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61511", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61511", "title": "117 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 117 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Diadematus and Augur (or, less frequently, year 637 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Sixth Year of Yuanshou. The denomination 117 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61512", "revid": "1291680215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61512", "title": "118 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 118 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cato and Rex (or, less frequently, year 636 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Fifth Year of Yuanshou. The denomination 118 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61513", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61513", "title": "119 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 119 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Dalmaticus and Cotta (or, less frequently, year 635 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Fourth Year of Yuanshou. The denomination 119 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n*Battle of Mobei: Wei Qing crosses the Gobi Desert, defeats Yizhixie Chanyu and kills or captures 19,000 Xiongnu.\n*Huo Qubing crosses the eastern Gobi, defeats and executes Bijuqi, defeats the Tuqi (Worthy Prince) of the Left (East), and captures three kings. He reaches as far as Lake Baikal.\n* Failing to reconnoiter with Wei Qing's army, general Li Guang commits suicide after learning that Wei has prepared charges against him.\n* Emperor Wu creates the rank of Grand Marshal and gives it to both Wei Qing and Huo Qubing, thereby making Huo's rank and salary equal to that of Wei.\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61514", "revid": "20126179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61514", "title": "The Story of Louis Pasteur", "text": "1936 film by William Dieterle\nThe Story of Louis Pasteur is a 1936 American black-and-white biographical film from Warner Bros., produced by Henry Blanke, directed by William Dieterle, that stars Paul Muni as the renowned French scientist Louis Pasteur, who developed major advances in microbiology which revolutionized agriculture and medicine. The film's screenplay\u2014which tells a highly fictionalized version of Pasteur's life\u2014was written by Pierre Collings and Sheridan Gibney, as well as Edward Chodorov (uncredited).\nMuni won an Academy Award for Best Actor, while Collings and Gibney won for Best Screenplay and Best Story. The film was also nominated for Best Picture. Muni won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor from the Venice Film Festival in 1936.\nPlot.\nIn 1860 Paris, a distraught man murders his wife's doctor. Chemist Louis Pasteur (Paul Muni) has publicized the theory that microbes cause diseases. Therefore, doctors should avoid spreading by washing their hands and sterilizing their instruments in boiling water. The doctor did not do this, and the wife died of puerperal fever after giving birth.\nFrance's medical academy dismisses Pasteur\u2014notably his most vocal critic, Dr. Charbonnet (Fritz Leiber Sr.)\u2014as a crank whose recommendations are tantamount to witchcraft. Pasteur frankly calls attention to the risks of Charbonnet's non-sterile methods and correctly predicts that a member of Napoleon III's royal family who Charbonnet is attending will die of puerperal fever. Pasteur is considered dangerous because his ideas have led to murder. When the Emperor comes down against him, Pasteur leaves Paris and moves to Arbois.\nIn the 1870s, when the new French government tries to restore the economy after the Franco-Prussian War, they learn that many sheep are dying of anthrax, except around Arbois. They send representatives who realize that, after working with a small group of loyal researchers, Pasteur developed an anthrax vaccine.\nThe medical academy still opposes him and says Arbois must be free of anthrax, so the government buys land there and invites sheep farmers to use it. Pasteur objects strongly, saying the soil is full of anthrax spores, and eventually proposes an experiment. He will vaccinate 25 of the newly arrived sheep; then they and a control group of 25 others will be injected with blood from a sheep with anthrax.\nJoseph Lister (Halliwell Hobbes), the pioneer of antiseptic surgery in England, is interested enough to attend. He witnesses Pasteur's success as all the vaccinated sheep remain healthy after the other 25 die. At this point, Jean Martel (Donald Woods), a young doctor who was formerly Charbonnet's assistant but now follows Pasteur, becomes engaged to Pasteur's daughter Annette (Anita Louise).\nThe celebrations are short-lived, as a rabid dog runs through the town and bites a man. As a woman attempts to cure him by witchcraft, Pasteur laments that doctors would have no more chance of success. Moving back to Paris, he makes rabies his next project. He spreads the disease from one animal to another by injection but cannot detect any microbe being transferred (viruses had not yet been discovered), and the method he used to create the anthrax vaccine fails.\nCharbonnet visits the lab to gloat over Pasteur's failure. He is so confident Pasteur is a quack that he injects himself with rabies\u2014and is triumphant, as he does not get the disease. Pasteur is puzzled until his wife Marie (Josephine Hutchinson) suggests the sample may have weakened with age. This sets him on the right path, giving dogs progressively stronger injections.\nBut before his experiments conclude, a frantic mother begs him to try his untested treatment on her son (Dickie Moore), who a rabid dog has bitten. Despite fearing imprisonment or even execution for practicing without a license to provide medical treatment, Pasteur decides he must try to save the child. During the attempt, Dr. Zaranoff (Akim Tamiroff) arrives from Russia with a group of peasants exposed to rabies. They have volunteered to receive Pasteur's treatment.\nAnnette goes into labor with Martel's child. The doctor to attend to her is unavailable, and the boy urgently needs Martel. Pasteur searches for another doctor, but he can only find Charbonnet. He begs Charbonnet to wash his hands and sterilize his instruments; Charbonnet finally agrees that if Charbonnet lives another month, Pasteur will retract and denounce all his work on rabies. Both men are honorable enough to respect the agreement. The birth goes well, but Pasteur suffers a mild stroke.\nDays later, word comes that Pasteur has permission to treat the still-alive Russians. He attends them in hospital for the first injections using a wheelchair and later a cane. The experiment is a success, and now even Charbonnet concedes he was wrong, tearing up Pasteur's retraction and asking for the shots himself.\nAfterwards, Pasteur hears that Lister will denounce him at the medical academy. He angrily attends, but it is actually a surprise. Lister praises him, Zaranoff presents him with a Russian medal, and the once-skeptical doctors honor him.\nReception and accolades.\nWriting for \"The Spectator\" in 1936, Graham Greene gave the film a good review, describing it as \"an honest, interesting and well-made picture\". Characterizing Paul Muni as \"the greatest living actor\" and as a \"Protean figure\", Greene asserts that Muni's depiction of Pasteur is accomplished \"with his whole body [to establish] not only the bourgeois, the elderly, the stubborn and bitter and noble little chemist, but his nationality and even his period.\"\nRadio adaptations.\nPaul Muni reprised his role in two radio play versions of the film: the November 23, 1936 episode of \"Lux Radio Theatre\" and the April 13, 1946 episode of \"Academy Award Theater\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61515", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61515", "title": "120 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 120 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Manilius and Carbo (or, less frequently, year 634 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Third Year of Yuanshou. The denomination 120 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nOsroene.\nBeginning of the kingdom Osroene. The end of the kingdom is in 244\u00a0AD.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61516", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61516", "title": "121 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 121 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Opimius and Allobrogicus (or, less frequently, year 633 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Second Year of Yuanshou. The denomination 121 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61517", "revid": "37290531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61517", "title": "Animus nocendi", "text": "State of mind of the perpetrator of a crime\nIn jurisprudence, (from la \" animus\"\u00a0'mind' and \" noceo\"\u00a0'to harm') is the subjective state of mind of the perpetrator of a crime, with reference to the exact knowledge of illegal content of their behaviour, and of its possible consequences.\nIn most modern legal systems, the is required as an essential condition to give a penal condemnation.\nThe is usually demonstrated by the verified presence of these elements:\nWhen the author of the crime had no , it is usually considered that the crime still exists, but the author is innocent, unless a responsibility for guilt can be found in the perpetrator's conduct: the typical case of a car accident in which a wrong or even hazardous manoeuvre causes personal injuries to another car driver, is then managed as a crime for the presence of injuries, yet the author will not be prosecuted as the author of the injuries (they did not want to hurt the other driver, thus had no ), but simply as the author of a dangerous conduct that indirectly caused said effects, and would be held responsible at a guilt title.\nThe is often absent in people with mental illness, and in front of such people, a psychiatric expertise is usually required to verify the eventual . Minors too are in many systems considered little capable of a correct knowledge about the meaning or the consequences of their actions, and this is the reason for the common reduction of the passive capability of punishment they usually can receive.\nA particular case of is the (from la \" voluntas\"\u00a0'will' and \" neco\"\u00a0'to kill'), describing the of a person who willfully kills another human being. Establishment of is necessary to prove murder or voluntary manslaughter as opposed to involuntary manslaughter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61519", "revid": "38315031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61519", "title": "A Tale of Two Cities (1935 film)", "text": "1935 film by Robert Zigler Leonard, Jack Conway\nA Tale of Two Cities is a 1935 film based upon Charles Dickens' 1859 historical novel, \"A Tale of Two Cities\", set in London and Paris.\nThe film stars Ronald Colman as Sydney Carton and Elizabeth Allan as Lucie Manette. The supporting players include Edna May Oliver, Reginald Owen, Basil Rathbone, Lucille La Verne, Blanche Yurka, Henry B. Walthall and Donald Woods. It was directed by Jack Conway from a screenplay by W. P. Lipscomb and S. N. Behrman. The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture and Best Film Editing.\nThe story is set in France and England and spans several years before and during the French Revolution. It deals with the evils that precipitated the Revolution and with an innocent family and their friends caught up in the horrors of the Terror. Charles Darnay, a French aristocrat who has rejected his rank and moved to England, and Sydney Carton, an alcoholic English advocate, both fall in love with Lucie Manette. Lucie has brought her father to England to recover from 18 years of unjust imprisonment in the Bastille. Lucie befriends Carton and later marries Darnay. In the end, Carton saves Darnay's life by taking his place at the guillotine. The film is generally regarded as the best cinematic version of Dickens' novel and one of the best performances of Colman's career.\nPlot.\nThe film opens with a portion of the famous introduction to the novel: \u201c It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us... In short, it was a period very like the present...\u201d Lucie Manette (Elizabeth Allan) and her servant and companion Miss Pross (Edna May Oliver) are informed by elderly banker Mr. Jarvis Lorry (Claude Gillingwater) that her father, Dr. Alexandre Mannette (Henry B. Walthall) is not dead, but has been a prisoner in the Bastille for eighteen years before finally being rescued. She travels with Mr. Lorry to Paris to take her father to her home in England. Dr. Manette has been cared for by a former servant, Ernest De Farge (Mitchell Lewis), and his wife (Blanche Yurka) who own a wine shop in Paris. The old man's mind has given way during his long ordeal, but Lucie's tender care begins to restore his sanity.\nOn the return trip across the English Channel, Lucie meets Charles Darnay (Donald Woods), a French aristocrat who, unlike his uncle, the Marquis St. Evremonde (Basil Rathbone), is sympathetic to the plight of the oppressed and impoverished French masses. He has denounced his uncle, relinquished his title, changed his name and is going to England to begin a new life. The marquis has Darnay framed for treason, but he is defended by barrister C.J. Stryver (Reginald Owen) and his highly proficient but cynical colleague Sydney Carton (Ronald Colman). Carton goes drinking with Barsad (Walter Catlett), the main prosecution witness and tricks him into admitting that he framed Darnay. When Barsad is called to testify, he is horrified to discover that Carton is a member of the defense. He recants his testimony to save himself, and Darnay is acquitted.\nFollowing the trial, Carton is thanked by Lucie. He quickly falls in love with her. Darnay confesses to Dr. Manette he is the nephew of the Marquis St. Evremonde; Manette forgives him, but reserves the right to tell Lucie himself. On their way to church, Lucie meets Carton and invites him to join them and he accepts. Afterwards, she invites him into their home to celebrate Christmas, but he declines because he has been drinking. Lucie and Carton eventually become close friends. Carton has hopes that Lucie will requite his love, but one day she tells him that she is engaged to Darnay.\nLucie and Darnay marry and have a daughter, also named Lucie, who is very fond of Carton. By this time, the French Revolution is beginning. Charles' uncle, the Marquis St. Evremond is one of its first victims, stabbed in his sleep by a man whose child had been fatally run down by his coach. The long-suffering peasants vent their fury on the aristocrats, condemning scores daily to Madame Guillotine. Darnay is tricked into returning to Paris and is arrested. Lucie and Dr. Manette travel to Paris to save Darnay. Manette pleads for mercy for his son-in-law, but Madame De Farge, seeking revenge against all the Evremondes, convinces the tribunal to sentence Darnay to death, using a letter Dr. Manette wrote while in prison, cursing and denouncing the entire Evremonde family.\nUpon learning of Darnay's imprisonment, Carton travels to Paris to comfort Lucie. Carton consults Mr. Lorry and tells him of his plan to rescue Darnay. Carton discovers Barsad is also in Paris and works as a spy in the prisons. Carton overcomes Barsad's reluctance to help him with his scheme to rescue Darnay by threatening to reveal that Barsad had been a spy for the Marquis St. Evremonde. Barsad takes Carton to visit Darnay in his cell; Carton renders Darnay unconscious with ether, switches clothes with him, and finishes the letter Darnay has been writing to Lucie and puts it in Darnay's pocket. Darnay is carried out of the cell without anyone noticing the switch.\nWhile Lucie prepares to return to England, Madame De Farge goes to provoke her into denouncing the Republic, but she is intercepted by Miss Pross inside the now-vacated apartment. Pross knows why Madame De Farge has come and is determined to stop her. The two women fight and De Farge pulls out a pistol, but in the ensuing struggle, Pross kills her. Darnay, Lucie, little Lucie, Lorry, and Pross all escape safely.\nWhile awaiting execution, a condemned, innocent seamstress (Isabel Jewell) who was sentenced at the same time as Darnay, notices Carton has assumed his identity. She draws comfort from his bravery and sacrifice as they ride together to the guillotine. As Carton stands at the foot of the guillotine, drums roll and then fade away as the camera rises up past the guillotine to the city and the sky above. His voice is heard saying, \"It's a far, far better thing I do than I have ever done. It's a far, far better rest I go to than I have ever known.\"\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nFilming ran from June 4, 1935, to August 19, 1935 The picture premiered in New York City on December 15, 1935.\nThe closing credits spell the name De Farge. Dickens spelled it Defarge in the novel.\nAccording to TCM's Genevieve McGillicuddy, \u201cSelznick had no trouble finding a lead actor... Ronald Colman had coveted the part since he began his career and knew the novel intimately. In an interview seven years before being cast as Sydney Carton, Colman reflected on Dickens' forte for characterization, stating that Carton 'has lived for me since the first instant I discovered him in the pages of the novel.' \"\nIn the book, Carton and Darnay are supposed to be as alike as twins. According to TCM, Selznick wanted Colman to play both roles, but Colman refused because of his experience with \"The Masquerader (1933)\". Selznick later commented, \"I am glad now that he held out for that, because I think a great deal of the illusion of the picture might have been lost had Colman rescued Colman and had Colman gone to the guillotine so that Colman could go away with Lucie.\" In 1937, Colman did play a dual role for Selznick in \"The Prisoner of Zenda\".\nJudith Anderson, May Robson, Emily Fitzroy and Lucille LaVerne all tested for Madame De Farge. LaVerne's portrayal in another role, as \"The Vengeance\", inspired the character of the Evil Queen in Disney's \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs:\" She provided the voices for both the Queen and the hag. Blanche Yurka, a noted Broadway actress at the time, made her film debut playing Madame De Farge.\nReception.\nAndre Sennwald wrote in \"The New York Times\" of December 26, 1935: \"Having given us 'David Copperfield', Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer now heaps up more Dickensian magic with a prodigally stirring production of 'A Tale of Two Cities' ... For more than two hours it crowds the screen with beauty and excitement, sparing nothing in its recital of the Englishmen who were caught up in the blood and terror of the French Revolution ... The drama achieves a crisis of extraordinary effectiveness at the guillotine, leaving the audience quivering under its emotional sledge-hammer blows ... Ronald Colman gives his ablest performance in years as Sydney Carton and a score of excellent players are at their best in it\u00a0... Only Donald Woods's Darnay is inferior, an unpleasant study in juvenile virtue. It struck me, too, that Blanche Yurka was guilty of tearing an emotion to tatters in the r\u00f4le of Madame De Farge\u00a0... you can be sure that 'A Tale of Two Cities' will cause a vast rearranging of ten-best lists.\"\nThe Marquis St. Evr\u00e9monde character from this production was nominated for the 2003 American Film Institute list AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp; Villains.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "61520", "revid": "1314634543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61520", "title": "Three Smart Girls", "text": "1936 film by Henry Koster\nThree Smart Girls is a 1936 American musical comedy film directed by Henry Koster and starring Barbara Read, Nan Grey, Deanna Durbin (her feature film debut), and Ray Milland. The film's screenplay was written by Adele Comandini and Austin Parker, and is about three sisters who travel to New York City to prevent their father from remarrying. The three plot to bring their divorced parents back together again.\nIt began an eight-year span of successful Deanna Durbin musicals and spawned two sequels, \"Three Smart Girls Grow Up\" and \"Hers to Hold\".\nPlot.\nThree sisters living in Switzerland hear their father is going to marry a younger woman in New York City so they travel there to prevent it.\nTheir plan involves getting a man to seduce her father's fianc\u00e9e. They accidentally hire a genuinely rich man who falls for one of the sisters.\nProduction.\nThe film was based on an original story. It was purchased for Universal by Adele Comandini. This film became a vehicle for 13 year old Jeanne Dante, who had been on Broadway in \"Call It a Day\". The film was produced by Harry John Brown who had recently joined Universal from Warners.\nJoe Pasternak wanted Judy Garland for Durbin's role, but Garland's home studio, MGM, wouldn't loan her out for the picture. However, Joe would produce four Garland films when he moved to MGM. Durbin was picked up from MGM after a short film, \"Every Sunday\" co-starring Garland. MGM dropped Durbin's contract freeing her to do \"Three Smart Girls\".\nIn July 1936, Deanna Durbin appeared alongside Dante, with Henry Koster to direct. By August Dante had dropped out and the three girls were to be played by Durbin, Nan Grey and Barbara Read. Binnie Barnes signed to play the vamp.\nRay Milland was a last-minute replacement for Louis Hayward, who was originally cast, but fell ill shortly of pleurisy four days into filming. The replacement was made in September.\nReception.\nThe film was a huge box office hit. Writing for \"The Spectator\" in 1937, Graham Greene gave the film a mixed review, complaining about the sentimentality of the first half of the film, and noting that it is only with the appearance of Precious, her mother, the Hungarian Count, and the English nobleman in the second half of the film that the picture is made. While criticizing Durbin's \"consciously girlish\" performance, Greene praised the acting of Auer and claimed that the second half of the film was where \"some welcome humour of an adult kind creep[s] tardily\" into the film.\nAwards.\n\"Three Smart Girls\" received Academy Award nominations for Best Picture, Best Sound (Homer G. Tasker), and Best Original Story.\nLegacy.\nThe film not only made Deanna Durbin a star, but it led to a number of imitations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61522", "revid": "42366806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61522", "title": "The Awful Truth", "text": "1937 film by Leo McCarey\nThe Awful Truth is a 1937 American screwball comedy film directed by Leo McCarey, and starring Irene Dunne and Cary Grant. Based on the 1922 play \"The Awful Truth\" by Arthur Richman, the film recounts a distrustful rich couple who begin divorce proceedings, only to interfere with one another's romances.\nThis was McCarey's first film for Columbia Pictures, with the dialogue and comic elements largely improvised by the director and actors. Irene Dunne's costumes were designed by Robert Kalloch. Although Grant tried to leave the production due to McCarey's directorial style, \"The Awful Truth\" saw his emergence as an A-list star and proponent of on-the-set improvisation.\nThe film was a huge box office success and was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actress (Dunne), and Best Supporting Actor (Ralph Bellamy), winning for Best Director (McCarey). The film was selected in 1996 for preservation in the Library of Congress' National Film Registry, having being deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". \"The Awful Truth\" was the first of three films co-starring Grant and Dunne, followed by \"My Favorite Wife\" (1940) and \"Penny Serenade\" (1941).\nPlot.\nJerry Warriner tells his wife he is going on vacation to Florida but instead disappears for two weeks without telling anyone where he is really going. He returns home, with a sunlamp tan, to find that his wife, Lucy, spent the night in the company of her handsome voice teacher, Armand Duvalle. Lucy claims his car broke down unexpectedly, but Jerry refuses to believe Lucy's assurances that nothing untrustworthy happened. Upon seeing the oranges in the basket Jerry brought home from Florida stamped \u201cCalifornia\u201d, however, Lucy discovers that Jerry did not actually go to Florida. Their mutual suspicion results in divorce proceedings, with custody of their dog, \u201cMr. Smith,\u201d in dispute. When the judge pronounces that he will grant custody to whomever Mr. Smith responds to when called, Lucy wins custody with concealed dog toy in her hand. The judge grants Jerry visiting rights to the dog and orders the divorce finalized in 90 days.\nLucy moves into an apartment with her Aunt Patsy. Her neighbor is amiable but rustic Oklahoma oilman Dan Leeson, whose mother does not approve of Lucy. On a visitation to Mr. Smith, Jerry subtly ridicules Dan in front of Lucy, which causes Lucy defiantly to cling closely to Dan. Jerry begins dating sweet-natured but simple singer Dixie Belle Lee, unaware that she performs a vulgar act at a local nightclub where a wind machine blows her skirt up. When Lucy and Dan turn up at the nightclub and see the act, Jerry is embarrassed, and Lucy makes witticisms as payback for Jerry's ridicule of Dan.\nConvinced that Lucy is still having an affair with Duvalle, Jerry bursts into Duvalle's apartment only to discover that Lucy is a legitimate vocal student of Duvalle and is giving her first recital in front of an audience. When Lucy announces her engagement to Dan, realizing he may still love Lucy, Jerry undermines Lucy's character with Mrs. Leeson, implying Lucy's infidelity as the cause of their divorce. On a subsequent visit to Mr. Smith, Jerry arrives as Duvalle is paying an unexpected visit to Lucy. Alarmed that Jerry will think Duvalle is there at her request, Lucy asks Duvalle to hide in her bedroom while Jerry plays with the dog. During a game of hide-and-seek, Mr. Smith reveals Duvalle's forgotten hat where Lucy hid it just before Jerry entered the salon. Meanwhile, Dan and his mother arrive; Jerry sarcastically states that he never had any doubt about Lucy's fidelity, while Dan and his mother apologize for assuming the worst about her. Jerry discovers Duvalle hiding in Lucy's bedroom and they end up in a fistfight. When Jerry chases Duvalle out the door, Mrs. Leeson assumes the worst is true, and Dan breaks off his engagement to Lucy; he and his mother return to Oklahoma.\nA few weeks later, Jerry begins dating high-profile heiress Barbara Vance, whose romance is covered in the society column. Realizing she still loves Jerry, Lucy crashes a party at the Vance mansion the night the divorce decree is to become final. Pretending to be Jerry's sister, she undermines Jerry's character, implying that \"their\" father was working class rather than wealthy. Acting like a showgirl, she recreates Dixie's risqu\u00e9 musical number. The snobbish Vances are appalled. Jerry attempts to explain away Lucy's behavior as drunkenness, and says he will drive Lucy home.\nLucy repeatedly sabotages the car on the ride to delay their parting. Pulled over by motorcycle police officers, who believe Jerry is drunk, Lucy manages to wreck the car. The police give the couple a lift to Aunt Patsy's nearby cabin. Although sleeping in different (but adjoining) bedrooms, Jerry and Lucy slowly overcome their pride and a series of comic mishaps in order to admit \"the awful truth\" that they still love one another. They reconcile at midnight, just before their divorce is to be finalized.\nCast.\nThe cast includes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Irene Dunne as Lucy Warriner\nPre-production.\nThe film is based on the stage play \"The Awful Truth\" by playwright Arthur Richman. In that play, created on September 18, 1922, at the Henry Miller's Theater of Broadway (current Stephen Sondheim Theatre), Norman Satterly divorces his wife, Lucy Warriner Satterly, after they accuse one another of infidelity. Lucy is about to remarry, but needs to clear her name before her fianc\u00e9 will agree to go forward with the marriage. As she tries to salvage her reputation, she falls in love again with her ex-husband and they remarry.\nThere were two previous film versions, a 1925 silent film \"The Awful Truth\" from Producers Distributing Corporation starring Warner Baxter and Agnes Ayres and a 1929 sound version from Path\u00e9 Exchange, \"The Awful Truth\", starring Ina Claire and Henry Daniell. Producer D.A. Doran had purchased the rights to the play for Path\u00e9. When Path\u00e9 closed, he joined Columbia Pictures. Columbia subsequently purchased all of Path\u00e9's scripts and screenplay rights for $35,000 ($ in 2024 dollars). Doran chose to remake the film in 1937, just as Columbia head Harry Cohn was hiring director Leo McCarey to direct comedies for the studio.\nCohn offered the film to director Tay Garnett. Garnett read Dwight Taylor's script, and felt it was \"about as funny as the seven-year-itch in an iron lung.\" He turned it down. According to Garnett, McCarey accepted the project simply because he needed work. \"Sure, the script was terrible, but I've seen worse. I worked it over for a few weeks, changed this and that. I finally decided I could make something of it.\"\nMcCarey did not like the narrative structure of the play, the previous film versions, or the unproduced Path\u00e9 script. Cohn had already assigned Everett Riskin to produce the film, and screenwriter Dwight Taylor had a draft script. Taylor changed Norman Satterly to Jerry Warriner, got rid of much of the play's moralistic tone, and added a good deal of screwball comedy. Jerry is violence-prone (he punches Lucy in the eye), and the couple fight over a necklace (not a dog). Much of the action in Taylor's script is set at Jerry's club. The mishaps in the script cause Jerry to crack up emotionally. When the couple visit their old home (which is being sold at auction), his love for his wife is rekindled.\nMcCarey didn't like Taylor's script. He believed, however, that \"The Awful Truth\" would do well at the box office. With the Great Depression in its seventh year, he felt audiences would enjoy seeing a picture about rich people having troubles. During face-to-face negotiations with Cohn, McCarey demanded $100,000 ($ in 2024 dollars) to direct. Cohn balked. McCarey wandered over to a piano and began to play show-tunes. Cohn, an avid fan of musicals, decided that anyone who liked that kind of music had to be talented\u2014and he agreed to pay McCarey's fee. He also agreed not to interfere in the production.\nMcCarey's hiring was not announced until April 6, 1937. Riskin withdrew from the film as McCarey insisted on producing.\nScript.\nMcCarey worked with screenwriter Vi\u00f1a Delmar and her regular collaborator, her husband, Eugene. The couple had written racy novels as well as the source material and screenplay for McCarey's \"Make Way for Tomorrow\". The Delmars refused to work anywhere but their home, visit the studio or the set, or to meet any of the actors when working on a script. In a letter to author Elizabeth Kendall, Vi\u00f1a Delmar said that McCarey worked with them on the script at their home, suggesting scenes. McCarey asked the Delmars to drop the major plot points of the play\u2014which focused on Dan Leeson's attempt to purchase mineral rights, a fire in Lucy Warriner's apartment building, and Lucy's midnight meeting with another man at a luxurious mountain resort\u2014and focus on the pride which Jerry and Lucy feel and which keeps them from reconciling.\nAccording to the Delmars, they completed a script which included musical numbers, making it resemble musical theatre more than screwball comedy. It also largely retained the play's narrative structure, with four acts: the break-up at the Warriner house, events at Jerry Warriner's sports club, arguments and misunderstandings at Lucy Warriner's apartment, and a finale at Dan Leeson's apartment. The sets were simple, and few actors were needed.\nAccording to other accounts, Mary C. McCall Jr., Dwight Taylor (again), and Dorothy Parker all worked on the script as well. None of their work was used by McCarey, and Taylor even asked that his name be taken off the script. Ralph Bellamy says that McCarey himself then wrote a script, completely reworking Delmar's effort. Harry Cohn was not happy with McCarey's decision to abandon Delmar's work, but McCarey convinced the studio boss that he could rework it. Film historians Iwan W. Morgan and Philip Davies say that McCarey retained only a single aspect of Delmar's work: The alleged infidelity of both man and wife.\nCasting.\nIrene Dunne had freelanced and had not been under contract to a studio since her arrival in Hollywood. She appeared in \"Theodora Goes Wild\" (1936) for Columbia, and despite her misgivings about doing comedy her performance had garnered her an Academy Award nomination as Best Actress. Dunne wanted to undertake a new project quickly after negative reaction to her performing in blackface in \"Show Boat\" (also 1936). Her agent, Charles K. Feldman, helped develop \"The Awful Truth\" for Dunne, and the film was rushed into production to accommodate her. McCarey wanted her for the film because he thought the \"incongruity\" of a \"genteel\" actress like Dunne in screwball comedy was funny, and she was asked to appear in it even though Delmar was still working on a script. Dunne was attached to the picture in mid-February 1937, although commitments to other stage and film projects meant production could not begin for several months. Dunne was paid $75,000 ($ in 2024 dollars) for her work. Dunne later said her decision to work on the film was \"just an accident\".\nCary Grant was cast three days after Dunne. Grant had also recently become a freelance actor without long-standing contractual obligations to any studio. By late 1936, he was negotiating a contract with Columbia. He ran into McCarey on the street, and told McCarey he was free. In February 1937, he signed a non-exclusive contract with Columbia Pictures in which he agreed to make four films over two years, provided each film was a prestige picture. He was paid $50,000 ($ in 2024 dollars) to appear in \"The Awful Truth\". Grant was eager to work with McCarey, McCarey wanted Grant, and Cohn assigned Grant to the picture.\nFor Ralph Bellamy, a contract player with Columbia, the film was just another assignment. Delmar's draft script, sent to Bellamy by his agent, originally described Dan Leeson as a conservative, prudish Englishman, a role written with Roland Young in mind. Per his agent's request, Bellamy ignored the script. Some time later, Bellamy got a call from his good friend, the writer Mary McCall, who asked him to work with her on redeveloping the role. McCall had been instructed to change the Leeson character into someone from the American West. They spent an afternoon together, and recrafting the character as well as writing a scene for his entrance in the film. After more time passed, Bellamy ran into writer Dwight Taylor at a cocktail party and learned that Taylor was rewriting his part. After a few weeks more, Dorothy Parker called Bellamy to tell him she was now working on the script and changing his role once more. The second week of June 1937, Bellamy's agent told him he'd been cast in \"The Awful Truth\" and was to report to the studio the next Monday. His casting was announced on June 23.\nJoyce Compton was cast on June 9, and Alexander D'Arcy was cast some time before July 11.\nFor the animal role of Mr. Smith, two dogs were cast but did not work out. Skippy, better known to the public as \"Asta\" in the \"Thin Man\" film series, was cast at the end of June. Skippy proved difficult to work with. For a critical scene in which Mr. Smith is to leap into Jerry Warriner's arms, a white rubber mouse (one of the dog's favorite toys) was placed in Cary Grant's breast pocket. But whenever Grant held his arms open, Skippy would dodge him at the last moment. It took several days to get the shot. The human cast of \"The Awful Truth\" was also forced to take several unscheduled days of vacation in late July 1937 because Skippy was booked on another film.\nPre-production activity.\n\"The Awful Truth\" was budgeted at $600,000 ($ in 2024 dollars). Pre-production on the film neared completion at the beginning of May 1937. Stephen Goosson was the supervising art director (his role today would be called production designer), and Lionel Banks the unit art director. Goosson was a 20-year veteran art director for Columbia Pictures, and \"The Awful Truth\" is considered among his most important films of the 1930s. Lionel Banks was primarily responsible for the production design of the film. He specialized in films set in the present day, and created restrained, well-crafted Art Deco sets for the picture. \"The Awful Truth\" is considered one of his more elegant designs.\nCostumes.\nColumbia Pictures' chief costume and fashion designer, Robert Kalloch, created Dunne's wardrobe. His work was personally approved by studio head Harry Cohn. The clothes were the most elegant and expensive yet worn by her on film, and costume design historian Jay Jorgensen has described them as \"magnificent\". In 2012, \"Vanity Fair\" ranked \"The Awful Truth\" as one of the 25 most fashionable films ever made in Hollywood.\nPrincipal photography.\nPrincipal photography began on June 21, 1937, without a completed script. This so concerned Ralph Bellamy that the Friday before filming started he contacted Harry Cohn to ask where the script was. Cohn declined to say anything about the film, and allowed Bellamy to talk to Leo McCarey. Bellamy went to McCarey's home to discuss the issue with him. McCarey was charming and witty, but evaded all of Bellamy's questions and concerns.\nInitial disruptiveness of McCarey's working style.\nThe first four or five days on the set were deeply upsetting to Dunne, Grant, and Bellamy due to the lack of a script and McCarey's working methods. McCarey had the cast sit around on the set the first few days and largely swap stories. The lack of rehearsal activity and script caused Dunne such emotional distress that she spontaneously burst into tears several times each day. Grant was so nervous that at times he became physically ill. When McCarey bowed to the cast's concerns and blocked a scene for Dunne and Grant, Grant refused to perform it.\nCary Grant in particular was unnerved by McCarey's behavior and lack of a script. Grant had spent most of his career at Paramount Studios, which had a factory-like approach to motion picture production; actors were expected to learn their lines and be ready every morning, and shooting schedules were strictly enforced. McCarey's improvisational style was deeply unsettling to Grant, and at the end of the first week Grant sent Cohn an eight-page memorandum titled \"What's Wrong With This Picture\". Grant asked Cohn to let him out of the film, offering to do one or more pictures for free and even saying he'd reimburse Cohn $5,000 if he were released. McCarey was so angry at Grant that he stopped speaking to him and told Cohn he'd kick in another $5,000 to get Grant off the film. Cohn ignored both the memo and the offers. Grant also sought to switch roles with Bellamy and asked Cohn to pressure McCarey into sticking to a more conventional style of filmmaking. Again, Cohn said no to Grant's requests. McCarey later said that Grant \"had no sound judgment\" when it came to determining what made for good comedy, and McCarey seemed to harbor a grudge against Grant for decades for trying to get out of the picture.\nCast support for improvisation.\nAccording to Bellamy, after the first five days, the three leads began to believe McCarey was a comedy genius. McCarey believed that improvisation was the key to great comedy. \"[A] lot of times we'd go into a scene [on \"The Awful Truth\"] with nothing at all\", he said. His working method was to ask his cast to improvise the scene, creating their dialogue and blocking their action before allowing cameras to roll. If a problem arose with a scene, McCarey would sit at a piano on the set and pick out tunes and sing until a solution came to him. McCarey supported his actors' comedy and other choices, which quickly alleviated the tension which had built up on the set. Ralph Bellamy was told to bring a selection of clothing from his extensive wardrobe. He worried that he had not been given costuming. McCarey told him that the clothes he'd brought from home fit the part perfectly, which made Bellamy feel comfortable in his acting and comedy choices. McCarey was also extremely patient with his cast, understanding of their concerns and sympathetic to their needs and problems. He also used his wit to keep his cast in good humor. Irene Dunne later recalled that the entire cast loved working on the picture because every day was full of laughter. Many actors didn't want each day's work to end, because they were having such a good time.\nCary Grant began trusting the director once he realized that McCarey recognized Grant's strengths and welcomed Grant's ideas about blocking, dialogue, and comic bits. McCarey also had the ability to get his performers to mimic his unique mannerisms. (It was something Irene Dunne thoroughly admired.) McCarey taught Grant a repertoire of comic vocalizations (like grunts) and movements and asked him to work with them. In turn, Grant imitated much of McCarey's own mannerisms and personality, becoming a \"clone\" of McCarey. Grant biographer Graham McCann says it would be an \"overstatement\" to say that McCarey gave Grant a screen personality. Grant had been working on this acting persona for some time; McCarey merely made Grant think more precisely about what he was trying to accomplish on camera. McCarey worked to give Grant comic dialogue and physical comedy (like pratfalls) as well as sophisticated dialogue and urbane moments, efforts which Grant also deeply appreciated. Grant came to feel liberated rather than inhibited by the lack of a script, and seized the chance to make sure that the film's humor reflected his. According to Ralph Bellamy, Grant enjoyed knowing that the audience was laughing at him, and worked to encourage it. Grant also used his early feelings of frustration to build his character's emotional and sexual frustration in the film.\nMost of \"The Awful Truth\" was improvised on the set. McCarey had two guides for directing the film. The first was that he believed the film was the \"story of my life\", because McCarey based many scenes and comic moments on misunderstandings he had had with his own wife (although they never accused one another of infidelity). The second guide was McCarey's lengthy experience of directing comedy. Jerry Warriner's need to find a lie to cover for his \"boys' night out away from the wives\" is a typical scenario McCarey used in many feature motion pictures and short films. It was also common in many of the Laurel and Hardy shorts which McCarey directed only for the man's alibi to break down. Subsequently, in \"The Awful Truth\", it is Jerry's alibi that crumbles. The bowler hat sequence in Lucy's apartment was based on a standard bit McCarey had frequently used in Laurel and Hardy films (as well as in the Marx Brothers' comedy \"Duck Soup\" (1933) that McCarey had also directed). Dunne's increasingly outrageous mishaps with the car radio in the scene after Jerry and Lucy leave the Vance mansion is similar to Harpo Marx's misadventures with a radio in \"Duck Soup\" and incorporates the straight man (Grant for Oliver Hardy) from Laurel and Hardy bits. McCarey also relied on his ability to craft a narrative from a series of unrelated sketches and he often staged portions of his films like musicals, inserting a song to tie elements together.\nImprovising the film.\nIrene Dunne had never met Cary Grant before, but she later recalled that they \"just worked from the first moment\" and called Grant a very generous actor. Cary Grant, in turn, said \"we just clicked\". Dunne so trusted his comedy judgment that she would often turn to him after a take and ask in a whisper, \"Funny?\"\nNearly every day during principal photography, Leo McCarey would arrive in the morning with ideas for the film written down on scraps of paper. On days when he had nothing in mind, McCarey would arrive on the set and play the piano until inspiration struck. He would then have the script girl write down his ideas or dialogue, and give the actors their instructions. Although he asked the cast to rehearse scenes, McCarey also encouraged his actors to improvise and build up the scene on their own. At times, McCarey himself acted out bits with the performers. McCarey continued to meet with screenwriter Vi\u00f1a Delmar every evening, sitting with her in a parked car on Hollywood Boulevard and improvising scenes for her to write down. McCarey also relied for dialogue on writer Sidney Buchman, who had joined Columbia in 1934 and who had written \"Theodora Goes Wild\" for Irene Dunne. Some of the best lines and comic moments in the film remained improvised, however. For example, McCarey himself came up with the idea of arguing over a dog rather than property. Another example occurs when Cary Grant appears at Lucy's apartment while she is meeting for the first time with Dan Leeson. The writers did not have a line of dialogue for Grant, who ad-libbed the line, \"The judge says this is my day to see the dog.\" Grant and Dunne also came up with the idea for Jerry to tickle Lucy with a pencil while Dan Leeson is at Lucy's door. Grant quickly became an accomplished improvisational actor during the shoot. He ad-libbed with such speed and composure that his co-stars often \"broke character\".\nThe nightclub scene was apparently also somewhat improvised on the set. In the Delmar script, Jerry's date is named Toots Biswanger and the scene is meant to parody the novel \"Gone with the Wind\" (two years before the film). She has a Southern American English accent, and Toots believes her song is a tribute to the novel. Jerry has a line in which he slyly criticizes Lucy's date by telling Dan \"It's a book.\" As Toots sings the song's critical line (\"my dreams are gone with the wind\"), the wind machine on the stage was to have blown off her hat, then her muff, then her cape. On the set, the singer's name is changed to Dixie Belle, much of the dialogue is improvised, and the wind machine joke changed to a more restrained blowing of the dress.\nAccording to Dunne, the action and dialogue for the scene in the Vance mansion was all written on the set. Dunne choreographed the dance and at least one line of dialogue, while the bit with the long handkerchief was a classic comic routine from silent films.\nColumbia Pictures head Harry Cohn was not happy with McCarey's directorial methods, either. On the first day of shooting, he walked onto the soundstage to see Bellamy singing \"Home on the Range\" off-key while Dunne tried to pick out the tune on a piano. He shook his head in disbelief and left. Later, Cohn became angry when he learned McCarey was apparently dawdling on the set by playing the piano and telling stories. He angrily confronted McCarey in front of the cast and crew, shouting, \"I hired you to make a great comedy so I could show up Frank Capra. The only one who's going to laugh at this picture is Capra!\" When Cohn caught McCarey playing the piano another time, McCarey dismissed his concerns by claiming to be writing a song for the film. Cohn also came on the set the day Harold Lloyd was visiting. Cohn was so incensed that McCarey seemed to be telling jokes that he ordered the set cleared. Lloyd departed, and so did McCarey. Cohn finally reached McCarey at home, and in a profanity-laced conversation demanded that McCarey return to work. McCarey demanded in turn that Cohn apologize personally to everyone on the set, and send his apology to Lloyd. Cohn, unwilling to abandon the picture, perfunctorily apologized. Nevertheless, Cohn did not rein in the director. Cohn decided instead to write the entire picture off as a loss, since he was obligated to pay Dunne's salary whether the film was made or not and he could not fire McCarey since only McCarey knew where the film was headed.\nImprovisation proved to be a problem for actor Alexander D'Arcy, who played the suave musician Armand Duvalle. Initially, D'Arcy portrayed Duvalle as French. Columbia Pictures' in-house censors vetoed his performance, saying it would offend overseas audiences. D'Arcy tried an Austrian, Italian, Spanish, and even vaguely South American persona. Each time, the censors disapproved of his work. Finally, after much experimentation, the actor's makeup was changed to fair from swarthy, he was told not to gesticulate too much, and he created a nondescript, vaguely European accent (which was nicknamed \"Spenchard\") for his role. The accent proved difficult to maintain. During long takes, D'Arcy would slip into his native French-inflected voice, forcing these scenes to be reshot multiple times.\nImprovisation could sometimes be a risky choice for the production in other ways as well. Delmar's script called for the film to be set in Connecticut. The critical plot element had the divorce court judge issue a 90-day interlocutory decree, and it is during this period in which most of the action in the film occurs. As filming commenced, it became clear that no one knew if Connecticut permitted interlocutory decrees. It turned out that the state did not, and Columbia Pictures' in-house lawyers could not determine which state did. By coincidence, David T. Wilentz, the New Jersey Attorney General, was visiting Los Angeles. McCarey called him on the telephone, and Wilentz confirmed that New Jersey divorce courts used them. The setting of the film was then changed to New Jersey. Improvisation also led to minor visual inconsistencies in the film, such as when Jerry Warriner appears to both stand and sit during the divorce proceedings.\nSongs and choreography.\nDuring pre-production, McCarey knew that he needed two songs for important scenes in the picture. Composer Ben Oakland and lyricist Milton Drake wrote two numbers for the film, \"I Don't Like Music\" and \"My Dreams Are Gone with the Wind\". Both were finished by the time principal photography began. Compton's original delivery of \"My Dreams Are Gone with the Wind\" and Dunne's reprise of it were filmed by July 25.\nOne critical scene in \"The Awful Truth\" occurs in a nightclub, during which both Dunne and Grant dance. In a second scene, Dunne's character dances in front of Jerry, his fianc\u00e9e, and her family. Usually, the production would hire a choreographer for these scenes, but McCarey declined to do so. Instead, he asked an African American youth working on the Columbia lot to teach Dunne and Grant how to dance. Their inept efforts to imitate him made their on-screen dances funnier. Ralph Bellamy was required to do the fictional \"Balboa Stomp\" in the nightclub scene while Irene Dunne feebly tries to imitate him. The dance proved so physically intimidating that Bellamy lost and his muscles and joints were sore for weeks afterward. Irene Dunne choreographed the burlesque dance which her character performs at the Vance mansion to embarrass Jerry. In rehearsal, Leo McCarey asked her to insert a \"stripper bump\" into her routine. Dunne replied, \"Never could do that.\" McCarey laughed so hard at her response that he asked her to include it in the performance.\nOne of the film's best remembered comedy moments is when Lucy Warriner accompanies an out of tune Dan Leeson on the piano while he sings \"Home on the Range\". This was filmed on June 21, the first day of filming. McCarey wanted the song in the film, but knew neither performer would agree if requested. Instead, McCarey tricked them into it by casually asking Dunne if she could play the piano. She said she could, a little. McCarey then asked Bellamy if he could sing. The actor said he knew the words to the song, but could not sing. McCarey asked them to do the song anyway, telling Bellamy to \"belt it out\" in an Oklahoman accent. McCarey had their performance filmed, and it turned out so well that he ordered the footage printed. Dunne was furious when she realized McCarey had intended to use the footage in the film all along.\nCinematography and editing.\nCinematographer Joseph Walker used mainly long takes when shooting \"The Awful Truth\". With McCarey providing only minimal direction, this helped to make scenes feel spontaneous and energetic. Generally, a scene would only be shot once unless there was a mistake, and shooting days were kept short (often ending at 3 PM). One particular scene, however, took nearly a full day to film. During the film's finale, shot about August 10, Delmar's script called for a cat to block the door connecting Jerry and Lucy's bedrooms, impeding Jerry's attempt at a marital reconciliation. An animal wrangler brought five cats in the morning, but none would stand still. Frustrated, McCarey called another animal wrangler, who soon arrived with three more cats. None would stay still. Three more animal wranglers were called during the day, but none of the cats would perform as required. Finally, McCarey was forced to issue an open call to the public for anyone with a cat who would perform the actions required. When a cat was found that would stay still, the animal refused to move when Cary Grant attempted to open the door.\n\"The Awful Truth\" was shot primarily on a soundstage at Columbia Pictures' Gower Street studios. Principal photography ended on August 17, 1937, the 37th day of shooting. At end of August, location shooting occurred at Columbia Ranch, the studio's lot located at the corner of Hollywood Way and Oak Street in Burbank, California. Reshoots on the film occurred during the first week of October.\nMcCarey did not permit Joseph Walker to shoot much coverage, preferring to \"edit in the camera\". This left editor Al Clark with few choices once the film began to be pieced together. One major cut made to the film was actor Claud Allister's performance as Lord Fabian in the Vance drawing room scene, which was completely excised. Film historian James Harvey says that the comic timing of Clark's editing in the nightclub scene\u2014cutting from Dixie Belle Lee's performance to Jerry, Lucy, and Dan at the table\u2014is \"exquisite...unmatched deadpan brilliance\".\nPreviews and release.\n\"The Awful Truth\" was shot in just six weeks, a record for a film of this genre (according to Ralph Bellamy). It was finished ahead of schedule and $200,000 ($ in 2024 dollars) under budget. The film contained several risqu\u00e9 moments which normally would have run afoul of the Motion Picture Production Code, including Jerry making double entendres about coal mines to an oblivious Dan, Dixie Belle Lee's exposed underwear, Lucy \"goosing\" pompous Mrs. Vance, and the final moment of the film when the cuckoo clock figures go into the same room together. Code administrator Joseph Breen permitted these gags because the picture and its cast were high-quality, which served to undercut the raciness of the moments.\nThe film was test screened, and the audience's reaction was good but not outstanding. Audiences were unused to seeing the three stars in a comedy, and were unsure whether they should laugh. McCarey realized the opening was too somber, and that viewers were not certain the picture was a comedy. He rewrote the opening scenes, adding one in which Lucy calls her attorney to discuss her impending divorce. A new bit in this scene helped establish the tone of the film more clearly. While on the phone, Lucy's lawyer tries to tell her that \"Marriage is a beautiful thing\". Each time, his wife (standing in the background of the shot) yells impatiently at him to remind him that dinner is ready. This happens three times. The attorney's response is harsher the second time. The third time, he shouts back \"Shut your big mouth!\" At a second preview, audiences roared with laughter.\n\"The Awful Truth\" was released in theaters in the United States on October 21, 1937.\nBox office and reception.\nGross box office receipts for \"The Awful Truth\" were more than $3\u00a0million ($ in 2024 dollars). The film made a profit of $500,000 ($ in 2024 dollars) in a year when Columbia Pictures' studio-wide profit was just $1.3\u00a0million ($ in 2024 dollars). By October 1990, the film had earned North American theatrical rentals of $1.53 million.\n\"The Film Daily\" named \"The Awful Truth\" as one of the ten best films of 1937.\nAlthough he was not nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor, the film was a triumph for Cary Grant. Overnight he was transformed into an A-list leading man. \"The Cary Grant Persona\" was fully established by this film, and Grant not only became an able improviser but often demanded improvisation in his films thereafter. Ralph Bellamy, however, was typecast for years in \"amiable dope\" roles after \"The Awful Truth\".\nAwards and honors.\nThe film was nominated for six Academy Awards (only winning Best Director for Leo McCarey).\nAfter winning the Oscar, McCarey said he had won it for the wrong picture, since he considered his direction of the 1937 melodrama \"Make Way for Tomorrow\" to be superior.\n\"The Awful Truth\" was selected in 1996 for preservation in the Library of Congress' National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nThe February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"The Awful Truth\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nThe film has since been recognized twice by American Film Institute:\nSubsequent versions.\nDunne, Grant, and Bellamy performed scenes from \"The Awful Truth\" on the \"Hollywood Hotel\" radio program on CBS on October 15, 1937.\n\"The Awful Truth\" was presented as a one-hour radio program on three occasions on \"Lux Radio Theatre\". On the September 11, 1939 broadcast Grant and Claudette Colbert starred in the adaptation. Bob Hope and Constance Bennett played the leads for the March 10, 1941 version. Dunne and Grant reprised their original lead roles on the January 18, 1955, broadcast.\nDunne reprised her Lucy Warriner role in a 30-minute version of \"The Awful Truth\" on \"The Goodyear Program\" on CBS on February 6, 1944. Walter Pidgeon played the role of Jerry Warriner.\nThe play inspired a film musical, \"Let's Do It Again\" (1953), starring Jane Wyman and Ray Milland.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61523", "revid": "24022231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61523", "title": "Absolut convergence", "text": ""}
{"id": "61524", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61524", "title": "Absolutely convergent", "text": ""}
{"id": "61525", "revid": "1316657655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61525", "title": "Dead End (1937 film)", "text": "Film by William Wyler\nDead End is a 1937 American crime drama film directed by William Wyler. It is an adaptation of the Sidney Kingsley 1935 Broadway play of the same name. It stars Sylvia Sidney, Joel McCrea, Humphrey Bogart, Wendy Barrie, and Claire Trevor. It was the first film appearance of the acting group known as the Dead End Kids.\nPlot.\nIn the slums of New York City, on the East River just below the Queensboro Bridge, wealthy people live in opulent and luxurious apartments because of the picturesque views of the river, while the destitute and poor live nearby in crowded, cockroach-infested tenements.\nAt the end of the street is a dock on the East River; to the left are the luxury apartments, and to the right are the slums. The Dead End Kids, led by Tommy Gordon, are a gang of street urchins who are already well on the path to a life of petty crime. Members of the gang besides Tommy include Dippy, Angel, Spit, T.B., and Milty, the new kid on the block in search of friends. Spit is a bit malicious with a cruel streak, and initially bullies the newcomer and takes his pocket change. However, Tommy eventually lets Milty join the gang, and he turns out to be both a loyal and generous friend.\nTommy's sister, Drina, dreams of marrying some dashing, rich stranger, who will save Tommy and her from this miserable life of poverty, and help prevent Tommy from growing up to be a mobster like Hugh \"Baby Face\" Martin, who has returned to the neighborhood with his partner Hunk to visit his mother and childhood girlfriend. Dave Connell, raised on the same street as Martin, recognizes him and warns him to stay away, but Martin contemptuously ignores him. Dave, a frustrated architect who currently works odd jobs, is Drina's childhood friend. He is having an affair with a rich man's mistress, Kay Burton. Although Dave and Kay love each other, they know they cannot be together because Dave cannot provide Kay with the kind of lifestyle she desires.\nMeanwhile, the kids lure Philip, a rich kid from the apartments, into a cellar, where they beat and rob him. When the boy's father, a judge, tries to intervene, Tommy winds up stabbing him in the arm. He escapes the police and goes into hiding.\nMartin is subsequently rejected by his mother, who denounces him as a murderer, and repulsed by his ex-girlfriend, Francey, who says she is tired and \"sick\". He realizes she is now a prostitute and dismisses her with a few twenties pulled from a wad of cash. Despondent over the failed visit, he decides to kidnap the rich child for ransom to make the trip back worthwhile. Dave sees Martin and his accomplices planning the kidnapping, and again warns him to leave. Martin knifes him, and Hunk pushes him into the river. Managing to pull himself out of the river, Dave pursues the hoodlums, knocking out Hunk and chasing Martin on the rooftops before cornering him on a fire escape. Amid a hail of bullets, he manages to mortally wound Martin, who falls onto the street below. While on the ground, Martin engages oncoming police officers in a firefight, shooting a couple before they open fire and kill him.\nAs the police and a crowd of people gather around Martin's body, the doorman recognizes Spit as being a member of the gang that attacked the rich kid's father, and identifies him to Officer Mulligan. Spit exonerates himself by informing the police that the man was cut by Tommy, who has returned to say goodbye to Drina before running away.\nMeanwhile, Kay approaches Dave, asking him to go away with her, using the reward money that he is owed for killing Martin. Dave refuses, and Kay returns to the man whom she does not love, but who can provide her with financial security.\nTommy hears of Spit's betrayal, and tries to give him the mark of the \"squealer\", which is a knife wound across the cheek. Before he can do so, Dave intervenes, and Drina and he convince Tommy to surrender to the police. Dave then offers to use his reward money to pay for Tommy's defense. As Drina, Dave, and Tommy leave with Mulligan, the rest of the Dead End Kids meander off into the night, singing \"If I had the wings of an angel, over these prison walls I would fly\".\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nGoldwyn wanted George Raft to play the gangster, but he turned it down, saying the part was too unsympathetic. \"Dead End\" was filmed from May 4 through mid-July 1937 on a single enormous set.\nRobert Osborne, film historian, stated that Joel McCrea had a tough time working with Humphrey Bogart, especially during the scene \"on the rooftop, guns ready, and standing very close to each other. During the filming of that scene, McCrea kept flinching, and the director William Wyler had to keep doing more takes. Finally, Wyler pulled McCrea aside, and he asked him what was wrong. McCrea, embarrassed to tell him, explained that Bogart kept spitting in his face when he was speaking, not exactly what Wyler was expecting to hear or to be the problem. Happens with actors more than you can imagine.\"\nCounterparts in actuality.\nThe stage directions to the play indicate that Rockefeller Center can be seen in the distance, which would place the location of the pier around 50th Street in Manhattan. In the movie, the location is made more definite as 53rd Street, adjoining a luxury building that is obviously the River House, which was and is at that location.\nThe actual Dead End was the corner of East 53rd Street and the East River. Sutton Place South runs north from East 53rd Street at that corner. The producers of the play and movie made a painstaking effort to recreate that very area in the stage scenery. The River House at the end of East 53rd Street closely resembles the Griswalds' house in the play and movie. One can find traces of some of the locales in Dead End in that area, however, the pier and tenements are gone and the Dead End is now part of Sutton Place Park and Exit 11 of FDR Drive.\nThe official name of the \"Dead End\" Kids is on the brick wall in chalk behind the boys as they play cards. This wall and the inscription are shown in several scenes throughout the film. The graffiti reads: E 54th Place Gang Member Only.\nWriting in \"The New York Times\", Carter B. Horsley said of the River House: \"Erected in 1931 when its area still teemed with tenements, it was mocked in the famous and popular 1936 movie, \"Dead End\" that was Lillian Hellman's adaptation of Sidney Kingsley's play.\"\nReception.\nWriting for \"Night and Day\" in 1937, Graham Greene gave the film a good review, characterizing it as \"one of the best pictures of the year\". While voicing mild complaints that the film \"gives too melodramatic a tone\", Greene lavished praise on the \"fine flexible direction\" and the acting of Humphrey Bogart for which Greene called \"the finest performance Bogart has ever given\".\nAwards and honors.\n\"Dead End\" was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture, Best Art Direction (Richard Day), Academy Award for Best Cinematography (Gregg Toland) and Best Supporting Actress (Claire Trevor).\nIn 2008, the American Film Institute nominated this film for its Top 10 Gangster Films list.\nLegacy.\nThe group of young actors from New York City who appeared in Sidney Kingsley's Broadway play \"Dead End\" in 1935 had been brought to Hollywood by producer Samuel Goldwyn to appear in this film version. They proved to be so popular as the \"\"Dead End\" Kids\" that they continued to make more than 60 movies under various monikers, including the Little Tough Guys, the East Side Kids, and the Bowery Boys, for 20 years until 1958.\nHome media.\nThe film was released on VHS and Beta in 1985 by Embassy Home Entertainment and on DVD on March 8, 2005 by MGM.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61526", "revid": "48984234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61526", "title": "North pole", "text": ""}
{"id": "61527", "revid": "1300983412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61527", "title": "In Old Chicago", "text": "1938 film by Henry King, Robert D. Webb\nIn Old Chicago is a 1938 American disaster musical drama film directed by Henry King. The screenplay by Sonya Levien and Lamar Trotti was based on the Niven Busch story, \"We the O'Learys\". The film is a fictionalized account about the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 and stars Alice Brady as Mrs. O'Leary, the owner of the cow which started the fire, and Tyrone Power and Don Ameche as her sons. It also stars Alice Faye and Andy Devine. At the time of its release, it was one of the most expensive movies ever made.\nPlot.\nThe O'Leary family are traveling to Chicago to start a new life when Patrick O'Leary tries to race a steam train in his wagon. He is killed when his wagon hits a bump and his horses break loose, dragging him. His wife Molly and their three boys are left to survive on their own. In town she agrees to prove her skills as a laundress when a woman's dress is accidentally spattered with mud. She quickly proves herself and builds a laundry business in an area known as \"the Patch\". Her sons are educated. One, Jack, becomes a reforming lawyer, but another, Dion, is involved in gambling. While washing a sheet, Mrs. O'Leary discovers a drawing, apparently created by Gil Warren, a devious local businessman. Her sons realize that it reveals that he has a plan to run a tramline along a street that he and his cronies intend to buy up cheaply.\nDion becomes enamored with a feisty saloon-bar singer, Belle, who works for Warren. After a stormy courtship they become lovers. Meanwhile, Bob, the youngest O'Leary son, who helps his mother, is in love with Gretchen, an innocent German girl. They meet in the barn watched by the O'Leary's cow Daisy and plan to marry. Mrs. O'Leary approves of the match, but expresses disdain for the loose-living Belle.\nDion and Belle bribe the local politicians to set up a saloon on the street where the tramline will pass. Dion makes a deal to support Warren's political career and carve up business in the town. However, Dion's dishonest practices lead to conflict with his brother Jack when one of Dion's cronies is arrested for multiple voting. Dion later decides to support his brother rather than Warren in the election, convinced he can cut out Warren altogether and reign-in Jack's reformist zeal. He is increasingly attracted by the daughter of the corrupt local senator, leading to conflicts with Belle. Bob and Gretchen marry and have a baby.\nAt a Warren election rally a fight breaks out, arranged by Dion. All Warren's election workers are arrested. Jack is elected mayor. He soon announces a campaign against corruption, targeting his brother's fiefdom in the Patch, which he intends to demolish. Belle and Dion separate when Jack asks her to support him. When he realizes Belle might testify against him, Dion asks her to marry him, making her testimony inadmissible. As mayor, Jack marries the couple, but knocks Dion out in a fist fight as soon he realizes he has been deceived.\nMrs. O'Leary is told about the fight while helping Daisy's calf to suckle. In her distress, she leaves a lamp in the barn, and Daisy knocks it over. A fire breaks out. Soon the whole of the Patch is on fire. Dion, Warren and their cronies are convinced that Jack has set the fire. Warren's men look for Jack, seeking revenge. Advised by Philip Sheridan, Jack plans to create a firebreak by dynamiting buildings to stop the fire reaching the gasworks, but Warren's gang try to stop him. When Dion learns from Bob how the fire really started, he rushes to Jack's aid. In the struggle, Jack and Dion fight off the gang and set off the dynamite, but Jack is shot by one of Warren's thugs and then killed by a falling building. Warren attempts to flee but is trampled to death by stampeding cattle from the stockyards.\nDion and Bob help to save Gretchen and the baby, while Belle rescues Mrs O'Leary. They all manage to escape to the river. Belle and Dion are reconciled, and Mrs. O'Leary predicts that the city will be rebuilt and flourish after her son's sacrifice for its future.\nProduction.\nDuring pre-production, MGM had announced that Jean Harlow, who was under contract to that studio, would be loaned to 20th Century Fox to star in the role Belle Fawcett. However, due to Harlow's untimely death, the part went to Alice Faye. Faye's popularity skyrocketed as a result of the picture, and she was reunited with Power and Ameche that same year for \"Alexander's Ragtime Band\", which proved to be even more successful.\nSome sources claim that MGM offered to loan both Harlow and Clark Gable to Fox for \"In Old Chicago\" if they reciprocated by loaning Shirley Temple to MGM for their upcoming production of \"The Wizard of Oz\". However, this is merely a rumor, as Harlow died in June 1937, several months before MGM had even purchased the rights to \"Oz\". The railroad scenes were filmed on the Sierra Railroad in Tuolumne County, California.\nAwards.\nThe film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. Alice Brady won the Oscar for Best Actress in a Supporting Role. She was the first person to win the Supporting Oscar after being nominated in the prior year. The film was also nominated in the categories of Music (Scoring), Sound Recording (E. H. Hansen), and Writing (Original Story), and won for Assistant Director (Robert D. Webb).\nHistorical accuracy.\nDespite crediting the Chicago Historical Society for assistance with historical research, much of the film is fictionalized. The area known as \"the Patch\" did exist as a predominantly Irish neighbourhood, and was associated with crime, as portrayed in the film. In the years before the film was made it had been supplanted by the Levee, an area renowned for its corrupt politicians, known as the Gray Wolves, whose deeds resemble those of the characters in the film.\nThe portrayal of the O'Leary family is largely fictitious down to the names of the characters. Mrs. O'Leary's name was Catherine, not Molly. The O'Learys had two children, one son and one daughter. In the movie there are three sons. Her only son was named James Patrick O'Leary. The daughter was named Anna. Their father Patrick O'Leary did not die in 1854 as a result of an accident involving his horses. He died in 1894. Mrs. O'Leary did not run her own \"French Laundry\" out of their house.\nThe Mayor of Chicago in 1871 was Roswell B. Mason, not an O'Leary son. However, Mason was elected on a reform ticket like the fictional Jack and took similar measures to deal with the fire. Mrs. O'Leary's son James Patrick did achieve success as a gambler and saloon owner comparable to that of Dion in the film.\nTrivia.\nScotty Mattraw and Eddie Collins both worked as voice actors in Walt Disney's first animated feature \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" the previous year, with Mattraw voicing Bashful and Collins voicing Dopey.\nHome media.\nThe film was released and restored to its full length on DVD in 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61528", "revid": "47079005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61528", "title": "Lost Horizon", "text": "1933 novel by the English writer James Hilton\nLost Horizon is a 1933 novel by the English writer James Hilton. The book was adapted into a film, also called \"Lost Horizon\", in 1937 by the director Frank Capra and a musical remake in 1973 by the producer Ross Hunter with music by Burt Bacharach. It is the origin of Shangri-La, a fictional utopian lamasery located high in the mountains of Tibet.\nThe novel has a frame story set in Berlin, where a neurologist obtains a manuscript which records the narrative of a British diplomat who had disappeared in China. The main narrative depicted in the manuscript starts in May 1931 within the British Raj. There is a revolution in the country and several people are evacuated. A number of them are transported in a Maharaja's airplane, but that plane is hijacked. After a crash landing, the four surviving passengers are guided to Shangri-La in the Kuen-Lun mountain range. \nPlot.\nThe prologue and epilogue are a frame story narrated by a neurologist. This neurologist and a novelist friend, Rutherford, are given dinner at Tempelhof, Berlin, by their old school-friend Wyland, a secretary at the British embassy. A chance remark by a passing airman brings up the topic of Hugh Conway, a British consul in Afghanistan, who disappeared under odd circumstances. Later in the evening, Rutherford reveals to the neurologist that, after the disappearance, he discovered Conway in a French mission hospital in Chung-Kiang (probably Chongqing), China, suffering from amnesia. Conway recovered his memory, told Rutherford his story (which Rutherford recorded in a manuscript), and then slipped away again.\nRutherford gives the neurologist his manuscript, which becomes the heart of the novel.\nIn May 1931, during the British Raj in India, the 80 White residents of Baskul are being evacuated to Peshawar due to revolution. In the aeroplane of the Maharajah of Chandrapur are: Conway, the British consul, aged 37; Charles Mallinson, his young vice-consul; an American, Henry D. Barnard; and a British missionary, Miss Roberta Brinklow. The plane is hijacked and flown instead over the mountains to Tibet. After a crash landing, the pilot dies, but not before telling the four (in Chinese, which only Conway speaks) to seek shelter at the nearby lamasery of Shangri-La. The location is unclear, but Conway believes the plane has \"progressed far beyond the western range of the Himalayas\" towards the lesser known heights of the Kuen-Lun mountain range.\nThe four are taken there by a party directed by Chang, a postulant at the lamasery who speaks English. The lamasery has modern conveniences, like central heating, bathtubs from Akron, Ohio, a large library, a grand piano, a harpsichord, and food from the fertile valley below. Towering above is Karakal, literally translated as \"Blue Moon,\" a mountain more than 28,000 feet high. Mallinson is keen to hire porters and leave, but Chang politely puts him off. The others eventually decide they are content to stay: Miss Brinklow because she wants to teach the people a sense of sin; Barnard because he is really Chalmers Bryant (wanted by the police for stock fraud) and because he is keen to develop the gold mines in the valley; and Conway because the contemplative scholarly life suits him.\nA seemingly young Manchu woman, Lo-Tsen, is another postulant at the lamasery. She does not speak English, but plays the harpsichord. Mallinson falls in love with her, as does Conway, though more languidly. Conway is given an audience with the High Lama, an unheard-of honor. He learns that the lamasery was constructed in its present form by a Catholic monk named Perrault from Luxembourg, in the early eighteenth century. The lamasery has since then been joined by others who have found their way into the valley. Once they have done so, their aging slows; if they then leave the valley, they age quickly and die. Conway guesses correctly that the High Lama is Perrault, now 250 years old.\nIn a later audience, the High Lama reveals that he is finally dying, and that he wants Conway to lead the lamasery. The High Lama then dies. Conway contemplates the events.\nHours after the High Lama dies, Conway is outside still pondering the events while in the moonlight. Mallinson then grabs him by the arm and tells Conway he has arranged to leave the valley with porters and Lo-Tsen. Barnard and Brinklow have decided to stay. The porters and Lo-Tsen are waiting for him five kilometers outside the valley, but he cannot traverse the dangerous route alone, so he convinces Conway to go along and assist him. Conway is caught, divided between the two worlds. Ultimately, because of his love for the boy, he decides to join Mallinson. This ends Rutherford's manuscript.\nThe last time Rutherford saw Conway, it appeared he was preparing to make his way back to Shangri-La. Rutherford completes his account by telling the neurologist that he attempted to track Conway and verify some of his claims of Shangri-La. He found the Chung-Kiang doctor who had treated Conway. The doctor said Conway had been brought in by a Chinese woman, who was ill and died soon after. She was old, the doctor had told Rutherford, \"Most old of anyone I have ever seen,\" implying that it was Lo-Tsen, aged drastically by her departure from Shangri-La. The narrator wonders whether Conway can find his way back to his lost paradise.\nReception and legacy.\nIn 2001, the city of Zhongdian in Yunnan, China was renamed Shangri-La City to promote tourism.\nThe book, published in 1933, caught the notice of the public only after Hilton's \"Goodbye, Mr. Chips\" was published in 1934. \"Lost Horizon\" became a huge popular success and in 1939 was published in paperback form, as Pocket Book #1, making it the first \"mass-market\" paperback.\nBy the 1960s, Pocket Books alone, over the course of more than 40 printings, had sold several million copies of \"Lost Horizon\", helping to make it one of the most popular novels of the 20th Century.\nUnited States President Franklin D. Roosevelt named the Presidential hideaway in Maryland, now called Camp David, after Shangri-La. In 1942, to ensure the safety of returning U.S. forces, Roosevelt answered a reporter's question about the origin of the Doolittle Raid by saying it had been launched from \"Shangri-La\". The true details of the raid were revealed to the public a year later. This inspired the naming of the USS \"Shangri-La\" (CV-38), commissioned in 1944.\n\"Lost Horizon\"'s concept of Shangri-La has gone on to influence other quasi-Asian mystical locations in fiction including Marvel Comics' K'un-L'un and DC Comics' Nanda Parbat.\nAdaptations.\nFilms.\nThe book has been adapted for film:\nMusical.\nThe book served as the basis for the unsuccessful 1956 Broadway musical \"Shangri-La\".\nPublications.\n\"Lost Horizon\" is currently available in paperback format and is now published by Summersdale Publishers Ltd http://, and Vintage http://, in the UK and by Harper Perennial, in the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61529", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61529", "title": "Lost Horizon (1937 film)", "text": "1937 film by Frank Capra\nLost Horizon (re-released in 1942 as The Lost Horizon of Shangri-La) is a 1937 American adventure drama fantasy film directed by Frank Capra. The screenplay by Robert Riskin is based on the 1933 novel of the same name by James Hilton.\nThe film exceeded its original budget by more than $776,000 and took five years to earn back its cost. The serious financial crisis it created for Columbia Pictures damaged the partnership between Capra and studio head Harry Cohn as well as the friendship between Capra and Riskin.\nIn 2016, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nOn March 10, 1935, a revolutionary uprising drives terrified Westerners to the airport in Baskul, China. The evacuation is organized by writer, soldier, and diplomat Robert Conway, before he is to return to the United Kingdom and become Foreign Secretary. He flies out with the last four evacuees: paleontologist Alexander Lovett; notorious swindler Henry Barnard; bitter, terminally ill Gloria Stone; and Conway's younger brother George. However, their pilot is forcibly replaced and their aircraft hijacked. It eventually runs out of fuel and crashes deep in the Himalayas, killing their abductor.\nThe group is rescued by Chang and his men and taken to Shangri-La, an idyllic valley sheltered from the bitter cold. The contented inhabitants are led by the mysterious High Lama. Initially anxious to return to civilization, most of the newcomers grow to love Shangri-La, including Gloria, who miraculously seems to be recovering from her illness. Conway is particularly enchanted, especially when he meets Sondra, a teacher who has grown up in Shangri-La. However, George and Maria, another young woman living there, are determined to leave.\nConway eventually has an audience with the High Lama, who he learns is a European Catholic priest, Father Perrault, who arrived in the area many years before. The founder of Shangri-La is said to be two hundred years old, preserved, like the other residents, by the magical properties of the paradise he has created, but is finally dying and needs someone wise in the ways of the modern world to keep it safe. Having read Conway's writings, Sondra believed he is the one; the Lama agreed with her and arranged for Conway's abduction. The old man names Conway his successor and then peacefully passes away.\nGeorge refuses to believe the Lama's fantastic story, and that Maria is much older than the 20 she claims to be. Chang says Maria was brought to Shangri-La in 1888 and was 20 at the time, which would make her 66 or 67. (Sondra claims to be 30.) Uncertain and torn between love and loyalty, Conway reluctantly agrees to accompany George and Maria with a group of porters returning to their homes. The porters gradually leave the trio behind, even shooting at them for their amusement. However, the shots trigger an avalanche that buries the porters.\nAfter grueling travel, Maria collapses in the snow. Conway picks her up and carries her to the shelter of a cave. There they see she has died, her withered face revealing her true age. George loses his sanity and jumps to his death. Conway continues on, finally collapsing. He is found and taken to a Chinese mission, where a search party sent from Britain meets him. The ordeal has caused him to lose his memory of Shangri-La.\nOn the long voyage back to the United Kingdom, he remembers everything; he tells his story and then jumps ship in Singapore. Searchers pursue him back to the Himalayas, but are unable to follow him any further. In the final scene, he reaches the pass leading to Shangri-La.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nFrank Capra had read the James Hilton novel while filming \"It Happened One Night\", and he intended to make \"Lost Horizon\" his next project. When Ronald Colman, his first and only choice for the role of Robert Conway, proved to be unavailable, Capra decided to wait and made \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" instead.\nHarry Cohn authorized a budget of $1.25 million for the film, the largest amount ever allocated to a project up to that time. According to a 1986 \"Variety\" interview with Frank Capra Jr., his father had wanted to shoot the film in color, but because the only suitable stock footage he intended to incorporate into the film, such as scenes from a documentary about the Himalayas, was in black and white, he was forced to change his plans. In 1985, Capra Sr. said the decision to film in black and white was made because three-strip Technicolor was new and fairly expensive, and the studio was unwilling to increase the film's budget so he could utilize it.\nAn often repeated story concerns casting the part of the High Lama. After a screen test of 56-year-old retired stage actor A.\u00a0E. Anson, Capra decided that he was just right for the part. He made a call to the actor's home, and the housekeeper who answered the phone was told to relay the message to Anson that the part was his. Not long after, the housekeeper called back telling Capra that when Anson heard the news, he had a heart attack and died. Subsequently, Capra offered the part to 58-year-old Henry B. Walthall. He died before shooting began. Finally, to play it safer age-wise, Capra cast Sam Jaffe, who was just 45. This is disputed, however, by camera logs dating back to the production that indicate Anson never tested for the part. Film historian Kendall Miller surmises that this story originated as an effort to add drama to Jaffe's casting.\nFrom the beginning, Capra ran into difficulties that resulted in serious cost overruns. Principal photography began on March 23, 1936, and by the time it was completed on July 17, the director had spent $1.6 million. Contributing to the added expenses was the filming of snow scenes and aircraft interiors at the Los Angeles Ice and Cold Storage Warehouse, where the low temperature affected the equipment and caused lengthy delays. The Streamline Moderne sets representing Shangri-La, designed by Stephen Goosson, had been constructed adjacent to Hollywood Way, a busy thoroughfare by day, which necessitated filming at night and heavily added to overtime expenses. Many exteriors were filmed on location in Palm Springs, Lucerne Valley, the Ojai Valley, the Mojave Desert, the Sierra Nevada Mountains, and in what is now Westlake Village, adding the cost of transporting cast, crew, and equipment to the swelling budget.\nCapra also used multiple cameras to cover every scene from several angles, and by the time shooting ended, he had used 1.1 million feet of film. For one scene lasting four minutes, he shot 6,000 feet, the equivalent of one hour of screen time. He spent six days filming Sam Jaffe performing the High Lama's monologues, then reshot the scenes twice, once with Walter Connolly, because it was felt Jaffe's makeup was unconvincing and he looked too young for the role. A total of 40 minutes of footage featuring the High Lama eventually was trimmed to the 12 that appeared in the final cut. Filming took one hundred days, 34 more than scheduled. The film's final cost, including prints and promotional advertising, was $2,626,620, and it did not make a profit until it was reissued in 1942.\nThe first cut of the film was six hours long. The studio considered releasing it in two parts, but eventually decided the idea was impractical. Working with editors Gene Havlick and Gene Milford, Capra managed to trim the running time to 3\u00bd hours for the first preview in Santa Barbara on November 22, 1936. Following a showing of the screwball comedy \"Theodora Goes Wild\", the audience was not receptive to a drama of epic length. Many walked out, and those who remained laughed at sequences intended to be serious. The feedback was mostly negative, and Capra was so distraught, he fled to Lake Arrowhead and remained in seclusion there for several days. He later claimed he burned the first two reels of the film, an account disputed by Milford, who noted setting the nitrate film on fire would have created a devastating explosion.\nFollowing the disastrous preview, Capra made extensive cuts, and on January 12, 1937, reshot scenes involving the High Lama written by Sidney Buchman, who declined screen credit for his work. The new footage placed more emphasis on the growing desperation of the world situation at the time. A world premiere was held at the Lincoln Theater in Miami Beach, Florida on February 18, 1937.\nStill unhappy with the film's length, Harry Cohn intervened and edited the film personally. When the edited version premiered in San Francisco on March 2, it was 132 minutes long. During the film's initial release in selected cities, it was a roadshow attraction, with only two presentations per day and tickets sold on a reserved-seat basis. Because the box-office returns were so low, the studio head cut an additional 14 minutes to slightly less than two hours (118 minutes) before the film went into general release on September 1. Due primarily to the cuts made without his approval, Capra later filed a lawsuit against Columbia, citing \"contractual disagreements\", among them, the studio's refusal to pay him a $100,000 semi-annual salary payment due him. A settlement was reached on November 27, 1937, with Capra collecting his money and being relieved of the obligation of making one of the five films required by his contract. In 1985, Capra claimed that Cohn, whom he described as the \"Jewish producer,\" trimmed the film simply so theaters could have more daily showings and increase the film's chance of turning a profit.\nReception.\nWhen the movie premiered at the Radio City Music Hall, Frank S. Nugent of \"The New York Times\" called it, \"a grand adventure film, magnificently staged, beautifully photographed, and capitally played.\" He continued,\n[T]here is no denying the opulence of the production, the impressiveness of the sets, the richness of the costuming, the satisfying attention to large and small detail which makes Hollywood at its best such a generous entertainer. We can deride the screen in its lesser moods, but when the West Coast impresarios decide to shoot the works the resulting pyrotechnics bathe us in a warm and cheerful glow. ... The penultimate scenes are as vivid, swift, and brilliantly achieved as the first. Only the conclusion itself is somehow disappointing. But perhaps that is inescapable, for there can be no truly satisfying end to any fantasy. ... Mr. Capra was guilty of a few directorial clich\u00e9s, but otherwise it was a perfect job. Unquestionably the picture has the best photography and sets of the year. By all means it is worth seeing.\nNugent later named it one of the 10 best films of the year.\n\"The Hollywood Reporter\" called it \"an artistic tour de force ... in all ways, a triumph for Frank Capra.\" \"Variety\" called it a \"sterling\" adaptation of Hilton's novel that \"can take its place with the best prestige pictures of the industry.\" \"The Film Daily\" declared it an \"Impressive and artistic drama\" and \"distinctly a worthwhile contribution to the industry.\"\nLess enthusiastic was Otis Ferguson, who in his review for \"National Board of Review Magazine\" observed, \"This film was made with obvious care and expense, but it will be notable in the future only as the first wrong step in a career that till now has been a denial of the very tendencies in pictures which this film represents.\" John Mosher of \"The New Yorker\" praised the \"beautiful flying scenes\" and the \"wild and terrifying bits of struggle on mountain peaks and crags\", but found the adaptation in general to be \"somewhat longish and wearisome on the screen. I thought the old lama would go on talking forever.\" Joseph McBride in a later biography notes that Capra's emphasis on theme rather than people was evident in the film; he also considered the film a financial \"debacle\".\nIn \"The Spectator\", Graham Greene agreed with the less enthusiastic American reviewers. Nothing reveals men's characters more than their Utopias\u00a0... this Utopia closely resembles a film star's luxurious estate on Beverly Hills: flirtatious pursuits through grape arbours, splashings and divings in blossomy pools under improbable waterfalls, and rich and enormous meals\u00a0... something incurably American: a kind of aerated idealism, ('We have one simple rule, Kindness') and of course, a girl (Miss Jane Wyatt, one of the dumber stars), who has read all the best books (this one included) and has the coy comradely manner of a not too advanced schoolmistress. For Greene, the film is \"very long\" and \"very dull ... as soon as the opening scenes are over\". He also regretted the film's missed opportunities: \"If the long, dull ethical sequences had been cut to the bone there would have been plenty of room for the real story: the shock of Western crudity and injustice on a man returned from a more gentle and beautiful way of life\".\n\"Lost Horizon\" earned theatrical rentals of $3.5 million in the U.S. and Canada.\nAwards and nominations.\nStephen Goosson's elaborate sets won him the Academy Award for Best Art Direction, and Gene Havlick and Gene Milford shared the Academy Award for Best Film Editing.\nThe film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture, but lost to \"The Life of Emile Zola\". H.B. Warner lost the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor to Joseph Schildkraut for the same film. Although Dimitri Tiomkin composed the music, the nomination for the Academy Award for Best Original Score went to Morris Stoloff, the head of the music department at Columbia Pictures. The Oscar went to Charles Previn of Universal Pictures for \"One Hundred Men and a Girl\". John P. Livadary was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Sound Recording, but lost to Thomas Moulton for \"The Hurricane\". Charles C. Coleman, nominated for the Academy Award for Best Assistant Director, lost to Robert Webb for \"In Old Chicago\". This was the last year an Oscar was awarded in this category.\nLater reissues and remakes.\nIn 1942, the film was re-released as \"The Lost Horizon of Shangri-La\". A lengthy drunken speech delivered by Robert Conway, in which he cynically mocks war and diplomacy, had already been deleted in the general release version. Capra felt the film made no sense without the scene, and in later years film critic Leslie Halliwell described the missing 12 minutes as \"vital\". They were restored years later.\nIn 1952, a 92-minute version of the film was released. It aimed to play down features of the utopia that suggested communist ideals, a sensitive point after a civil war in China resulted in the ascension of Mao Zedong's Communist Party in that country in 1949.\nIn 1973, the AFI initiated a restoration of the film. The project was undertaken by the UCLA Film and Television Archive (under the supervision of Robert Gitt) and Columbia Pictures and took 13 years to complete. Although all 132 minutes of the original soundtrack were recovered, only 125 minutes of film could be found, so the seven minutes of missing film footage were replaced with a combination of publicity photos of the actors in costume taken during filming and still frames depicting the missing scenes.\nAlso in 1973, Columbia Pictures produced a modernized musical remake directed by Charles Jarrott and starring Peter Finch and Liv Ullmann. The film featured a score by Burt Bacharach and Hal David. It was both a critical and financial disaster. It came at the end of an era of expensive musical films ushered in by the huge success, in turn, of \"Mary Poppins\", \"My Fair Lady\", and \"The Sound of Music\".\nAdaptations to other media.\n\"Lost Horizon\" was adapted as a radio play starring Ronald Colman and Donald Crisp for the September 15, 1941, broadcast of \"Lux Radio Theatre\". Colman reprised his role for the November 27, 1946, broadcast of \"Academy Award\" and the July 24, 1948, broadcast of \"Favorite Story\".\nIn 1946, Ronald Colman also made a three-record, 78 rpm album based on the film for American Decca Records. The score for the album was by Victor Young.\nAnother radio adaptation starring Herbert Marshall was broadcast on December 30, 1948, on \"Hallmark Playhouse\".\nA three-part radio dramatisation was made by the BBC and released in September 1981. It featured Derek Jacobi as Hugh Conway.\nA stage musical called \"Shangri-La\" was produced on Broadway in 1956, but closed after only 21 performances. It was staged for a 1960 \"Hallmark Hall of Fame\" television broadcast.\nRestoration and home media.\n\"Lost Horizon\" suffered various losses to its original running time over the years:\nAll three restorations have been released or licensed numerous times worldwide on home video by Sony and its predecessor, Columbia Pictures. The 1986 restoration was released on VHS and LaserDisc, while the 1998 restoration was issued on DVD. The 2016 restoration has been released on streaming; and on Blu-ray in various territories including Australia, the United States and much of Europe. In 2024, it was additionally released on Ultra HD Blu-ray in the US as part of the \"Frank Capra at Columbia\" box set.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61530", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61530", "title": "One Hundred Men and a Girl", "text": "1937 film by Henry Koster\nOne Hundred Men and a Girl (styled 100 Men and a Girl in advertising) is a 1937 American musical comedy film directed by Henry Koster and starring Deanna Durbin and the maestro Leopold Stokowski. Written by Charles Kenyon, Bruce Manning, and James Mulhauser from a story by Hanns Kr\u00e4ly, the film is about the daughter of a struggling musician who forms a symphony orchestra consisting of his unemployed friends. Through persistence, charm, and a few misunderstandings, they are able to get famed conductor Leopold Stokowski to lead them in a concert, which leads to a radio contract. \"One Hundred Men and a Girl\" was the first of two motion pictures featuring Leopold Stokowski, and is also one of the films for which Durbin is best remembered as an actress and a singer.\nPlot.\nJohn Cardwell, a trombone player, is only one of a large group of unemployed musicians. He tries unsuccessfully to gain an interview and audition with Leopold Stokowski, but not to disappoint his daughter, Patricia (Patsy), he tells her that he has managed to get the job with Stokowski's orchestra. Patsy soon learns the truth after sneaking into a rehearsal, and also learning that her father, desperate for rent money, has used some of the cash in a lady's evening bag he has found to pay his debts.\nThe irrepressible and wilful Patsy seeks an interview with Mrs. Frost, whose bag it was, and confesses her father's actions. Mrs. Frost, a society matron and wife of rich radio station owner John R. Frost, lightheartedly offers to sponsor an orchestra of unemployed musicians. Taking her at her word, Patsy and her father recruit 100 musicians, rent a garage space and start to rehearse. Realizing that Patsy took her seriously, Mrs. Frost flees to Europe.\nMr. Frost tells John and his friends that he will not sponsor them, as they had supposed, unless they can attract a well-recognized guest conductor to give them a 'name' and launch them on their opening night.\nPatsy, undaunted, sets out to recruit none other than Leopold Stokowski to be that conductor. Stokowski at first definitely refuses\u2014though when Patsy sings as the orchestra is rehearsing Mozart's \"Alleluia\" from \"Exsultate, jubilate\", he strongly suggests that she seek professional voice training and eventual representation.\nBy mistake, Patsy conveys the story to a newspaper music critic that Stokowski will conduct an orchestra of unemployed musicians, and that John R. Frost would broadcast the concert on the radio. When the story breaks, Frost protests his embarrassment to his friends, but they suggest valuable publicity would result. Frost immediately signs the one-hundred-man orchestra to a contract, though Patsy tries to tell them that Stokowski has not agreed.\nStokowski is astonished and offended at the news, but Patsy enters Stokowski's palatial house surreptitiously, along with the entire orchestra. She apologizes to him and insists that he listen to the players. The conductor is so moved by their performance of Liszt's \"Hungarian Rhapsody No. 2\" that he postpones a European tour and agrees to the engagement.\nThe concert is a rousing success for everyone, especially when Patsy, called upon to make a speech, instead agrees to sing the \"Brindisi\" (Drinking Song) from Verdi's opera \"La traviata\".\nProduction.\nBackground.\n\"Everybody said you can't top \"Three Smart Girls\"\", said Pasternak years later. \"I said you can top anything as long as you're honest, you don't fool yourself, you get the right subject and you create a public taste for it.\"\nThe film was originally called \"120 Men and One Girl\" and was announced in December 1936. It was based on an original story and screenplay by Hans Kraly.\nLeopold Stokowski was, at the time of the film's release, co-conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra with Eugene Ormandy. Political and artistic differences with the orchestra's board had already led Stokowski to allow Ormandy to assume a greater leadership role at the orchestra and eventually would lead Stokowski to break with the orchestra entirely. This might explain why the city in which the film is set, and by extension Stokowski's \"regular\" orchestra, is never positively identified in the film. The music was recorded in multi-channel stereophonic sound but released in monaural sound; three years later Stokowski and the Philadelphia Orchestra appeared in the first feature film to be presented in stereo, \"Fantasia\". Jane Barlow, ballerina and a student of Nijinska, was a body double for Deanna Durbin in this film.\nCasting Stokowski was reportedly Durbin's idea. Stokowski signed to make the film in February 1937. His fee was reportedly $80,000. Paramount objected saying they had signed a contract with the conductor but it turned out this was only verbal. Filming started in March.\nNetwork Radio \"Preview\".\nOn 27 August 1937, about a week before the film's Philadelphia premiere, Durbin and Stokowski appeared on the ABC radio network's \"Hollywood Hotel\" program, previewing their new movie and its music.\nReception.\nThe film opened to highly favorable critical reviews and is remembered as a hit. Of all the elements of the film, Deanna Durbin's ability to both sing \"and\" act drew the highest praise.\nThe Philadelphia Inquirer critic viewed the premiere and was pleased: \u201cWhat some previous pictures have done in getting operatic interludes onto the screen, \u2018100 Men and a Girl\u2019 does\u2014and does with surprising dignity and considerable resourcefulness\u2014for the gold mine of symphonic literature. However one may fret and fume, if one wants to, about the implausible aspects of this film fairy tale, the music it brings is a revelation of the fact that there is a meeting place in the move No Man's Land for two widely separated art forms...It is no secret that the Philadelphia Orchestra conductor's interest in film-making has brought criticism from various staid and prejudiced corners. \u2018Undignified\u2019 and \u2018cheap\u2019 are only two of the words that have been used. Unflattering as they are, we\u2019ve heard even stronger adjectives applied. Yet...when the picture's very first audience broke into spontaneous applause at its conclusion, we had the inescapable feeling that Stokowski would have felt himself completely justified and that he would willingly endure the criticism of the few for the grateful commendation of the many.\u201d\nAwards and honors.\nThe film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. In addition, Charles Previn, in his role as head of the music department for Universal Pictures, won the Academy Award for Original Music Score. (No specific composer credit was ever specified.) Previn's scoring consisted of using two original songs (by Sam Coslow and Friedrich Hollaender) and a carefully chosen selection of music from classical symphonic works and operas. The other three awards for which this film was nominated were Best Film Editing, Best Sound Mixing (Homer G. Tasker), and Best Original Story.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61531", "revid": "18240388", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61531", "title": "Stage Door", "text": "1937 film by Gregory La Cava\nStage Door is a 1937 American tragicomedy film directed by Gregory La Cava, and starring Katharine Hepburn, Ginger Rogers, Adolphe Menjou, Gail Patrick, Constance Collier, Andrea Leeds, Samuel S. Hinds, and Lucille Ball. Adapted from the 1936 play of the same name, it tells the story of several would-be actresses who live together in a boarding house at 158 West 58th Street in New York City. It was produced and distributed by RKO Pictures. Eve Arden and Ann Miller, who became notable in later films, play minor characters.\nThe film was adapted by Morrie Ryskind and Anthony Veiller from the play by Edna Ferber and George S. Kaufman, but the play's storyline and the characters' names were almost completely changed for the movie, so much so in fact that Kaufman joked the film should be called \"Screen Door\".\nPlot.\nTerry Randall moves into the Footlights Club, a theatrical boarding house in New York. Her polished manners and superior attitude make her no friends among the rest of the aspiring actresses living there, particularly her new roommate, flippant, cynical dancer Jean Maitland. From Terry's expensive clothing and her photograph of her elderly grandfather, Jean assumes she has obtained the former from her sugar daddy, just as fellow resident Linda Shaw has from her relationship with influential theatrical producer Anthony Powell. In truth, Terry comes from a wealthy Midwest family. Over the strong objections of her father, Henry Sims, she is determined to try to fulfill her dreams. In the boarding house, Terry's only supporter is aging actress Anne Luther, who appoints herself Terry's mentor and acting coach.\nWhen Powell sees Jean dancing, he decides to dump Linda. He arranges for Jean and her partner Annie to get hired for the floor show of a nightclub he partly owns. He then starts dating Jean, who starts falling for him.\nMeanwhile, well-liked Kay Hamilton had great success and rave reviews in a play the year before but has had no work since and is running out of money. She clings desperately to the hope of landing the leading role in Powell's new play, \"Enchanted April\". She finally gets an appointment to see Powell, only to have him cancel. She faints in the reception area, the result of malnutrition and disappointment. Seeing this, Terry barges into Powell's private office and berates him for his callousness. As a result, the other boarding house residents start to warm up to the newcomer.\nTerry's father secretly finances \"Enchanted April\" on the condition that Terry is given the starring role, hoping she will fail and return home. Powell invites Terry to his penthouse to break the news. When Jean shows up unannounced, Terry sees the opportunity to save her friend from the philandering Powell. She pretends that Powell is trying to seduce her. It works. However, it makes things uncomfortable around the boarding house. Terry's landing on the plum part breaks Kay's heart.\nThe inexperienced Terry is so woodenly bad during rehearsals that Powell tries to get out of his contract with Sims. On opening night, after she learns from Jean that Kay has committed suicide, Terry decides she cannot go on. Anne Luther tells her that she must, not just for herself and the tradition of the theatre, but also for Kay. She does and gives a heartfelt performance. She and the play are a hit, much to the chagrin of her father, who is in the audience. At her curtain call, Terry gives a speech in tribute to her dead friend, and Terry and Jean are reconciled. The play remains a success after months, but Terry continues to board at the Footlights Club. A newcomer shows up looking for a room.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Katharine Hepburn as Terry Randall\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nRKO Radio Pictures purchased film rights to the stage play of the same name for $130,000. The film only sparsely resembles the play, except in a few character names, such as Kay Hamilton, Jean Maitland, Terry Randall, Linda Shaw, and Judith Canfield. In the play, Terry Randall is from a rural family whose father is a country doctor, and Jean Maitland is actually a shallow girl who becomes a movie star. Kay Hamilton does commit suicide, but for completely different reasons and not on an opening night.\nCasting.\nKatharine Hepburn and Ginger Rogers were cast in lead roles, each for a respective salary of $75,000. Rogers, who was a close friend of Lucille Ball, suggested Ball for the role of Judy Canfield to producer Pandro S. Berman. Ann Miller, who was cast in the supporting part of Annie, was only fourteen years old when she appeared in the film.\nBurgess Meredith was considered for a role in the film, and Douglas Fairbanks Jr. was also considered for the part of Tony Powell, which ultimately went to Adolphe Menjou. Andrea Leeds, who was cast as Kay Hamilton, was borrowed by RKO from her contract with The Samuel Goldwyn Company.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography for \"Stage Door\" began on June 7, 1937, and was completed on July 31, 1937. Director Gregory La Cava also allowed the actresses to ad lib and improvise dialogue during filming, which earned him praise from stars Leeds and Rogers. Hepburn's famous lines during the play within the film, \"The calla lilies are in bloom again. Such a strange flower, suitable to any occasion. I carried them on my wedding day and now I place them here in memory of something that has died,\" are from \"The Lake\" (1934), the play for which Dorothy Parker panned Hepburn's performance as \"running the gamut of emotions from A to B.\"\nRelease.\nRKO Radio Pictures released \"Stage Door\" in the United States on October 8, 1937.\nHome media.\nAfter Kay commits suicide, there is a brief shot of her grave as part of the montage of the success of the play, which was once edited out on all television showings and is not present in some early home media releases. The shot was restored for DVD and subsequent TV broadcasts. As of 2025, \"Stage Door\" has been released on DVD in the US, UK, Italy, France and Spain on various labels including Warner Bros. and Sony.\nWarner Bros. first released the film on DVD on March 1, 2005. The Warner Archive Collection reissued the film on DVD on May 6, 2016.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Stage Door\" grossed $1,762,000 at the United States box office, for small profit of $81,000.\nCritical response.\nThe film received favorable reviews from critics, with \"Film Daily\" declaring it one of the ten best films of the year. Frank Nugent of \"The New York Times\" described it as a \"brilliant picture\" with \"amazingly good\" performances, and summarized the film as \"a magnificently devastating reply on Hollywood's behalf to all the catty little remarks that George Kaufman and Edna Ferber had made about it in their play.\"\nThe reviewer in \"The Times\" wrote of January 3, 1938, after the film's London premiere at the Regal on December 31, 1937:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Stories of life on the stage have always appealed to Hollywood: here success is sensational and meteoric, and failure equally sudden and dramatic. We know the formula by heart, and expect of our entertainment that it shall be rowdy, aggressive, and spectacular, culminating in the rise of the central character to fame in the bright lights of Broadway. \"Stage Door\" is rowdy and aggressive, and it does end in success for one of its characters and failure for another, but for all that it is a film of unusual insight and characterization. (...) The dialogue is brilliant, with typical American point and brevity, but nearly always spiteful and cruel, for these girls are the product of a hard environment. Three stand out from among the rest: Miss Katharine Hepburn (...) Miss Ginger Rogers (...) Miss Andrea Leeds.\u2014\u200a\nHepburn's four movies preceding \"Stage Door\" had been commercial failures. However, as a result of the positive response to this performance, RKO immediately cast her opposite Cary Grant in the screwball comedy \"Bringing Up Baby\" (1938).\nOther adaptations.\n\"Stage Door\" inspired the 1938 Golden Age Argentine film \"Women Who Work\" by Manuel Romero, which also takes place in an all-female boarding house.\nA 60-minute radio version of \"Stage Door\" was performed on \"Lux Radio Theatre\" on February 20, 1939, broadcast over the CBS Radio network. Ginger Rogers and Adolphe Menjou reprised their roles from the film, while Rosalind Russell replaced Katharine Hepburn as Terry Randall. Eve Arden, who played minor character Eve in the film, replaced Gail Patrick as Linda Shaw. The radio broadcast was included as a bonus feature on the 2005 Warner Bros. DVD release of the film.\n\"Stage Door\" was presented on CBS Radio again on December 5, 1941 on \"Philip Morris Playhouse\". The 30-minute adaptation by Charles Martin starred Geraldine Fitzgerald as Terry Randall.\nOn April 6, 1955, a 60-minute version of the play, adapted by Gore Vidal, aired on the CBS Television series \"The Best of Broadway\". It starred Rhonda Fleming, Elsa Lanchester, Diana Lynn, and Victor Moore.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61532", "revid": "1308904187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61532", "title": "Absolute convergence", "text": "Mode of convergence of an infinite series\nIn mathematics, an infinite series of numbers is said to converge absolutely (or to be absolutely convergent) if the sum of the absolute values of the summands is finite. More precisely, a real or complex series formula_1 is said to converge absolutely if formula_2 for some real number formula_3 Similarly, an improper integral of a function, formula_4 is said to converge absolutely if the integral of the absolute value of the integrand is finite\u2014that is, if formula_5 A convergent series that is not absolutely convergent is called conditionally convergent.\nAbsolute convergence is important for the study of infinite series, because its definition guarantees that a series will have some \"nice\" behaviors of finite sums that not all convergent series possess. For instance, rearrangements do not change the value of the sum, which is not necessarily true for conditionally convergent series.\nBackground.\nWhen adding a finite number of terms, addition is both associative and commutative, meaning that grouping and rearrangement do not alter the final sum. For instance, formula_6 is equal to both formula_7 and formula_8. However, associativity and commutativity do not necessarily hold for infinite sums. One example is the alternating harmonic series\nformula_9\nwhose terms are fractions that alternate in sign. This series is convergent and can be evaluated using the Maclaurin series for the function formula_10, which converges for all formula_11 satisfying formula_12:\nformula_13\nSubstituting formula_14 reveals that the original sum is equal to formula_15. The sum can also be rearranged as follows:\nformula_16\nIn this rearrangement, the reciprocal of each odd number is grouped with the reciprocal of twice its value, while the reciprocals of every multiple of 4 are evaluated separately. However, evaluating the terms inside the parentheses yields \nformula_17 \nor half the original series. The violation of the associativity and commutativity of addition reveals that the alternating harmonic series is conditionally convergent. Indeed, the sum of the absolute values of each term is formula_18, or the divergent harmonic series. According to the Riemann series theorem, any conditionally convergent series can be permuted so that its sum is any finite real number or so that it diverges. When an absolutely convergent series is rearranged, its sum is always preserved.\nDefinition for real and complex numbers.\nA sum of real numbers or complex numbers formula_19 is absolutely convergent if the sum of the absolute values of the terms formula_20 converges.\nSums of more general elements.\nThe same definition can be used for series formula_19 whose terms formula_22 are not numbers but rather elements of an arbitrary abelian topological group. In that case, instead of using the absolute value, the definition requires the group to have a norm, which is a positive real-valued function formula_23 on an abelian group formula_24 (written additively, with identity element 0) such that:\nIn this case, the function formula_34 induces the structure of a metric space (a type of topology) on formula_35 \nThen, a formula_24-valued series is absolutely convergent if formula_37\nIn particular, these statements apply using the norm formula_38 (absolute value) in the space of real numbers or complex numbers.\nIn topological vector spaces.\nIf formula_39 is a topological vector space (TVS) and formula_40 is a (possibly uncountable) family in formula_39 then this family is absolutely summable if \nIf formula_39 is a normable space and if formula_40 is an absolutely summable family in formula_46 then necessarily all but a countable collection of formula_58's are 0.\nAbsolutely summable families play an important role in the theory of nuclear spaces.\nRelation to convergence.\nIf formula_24 is complete with respect to the metric formula_60 then every absolutely convergent series is convergent. The proof is the same as for complex-valued series: use the completeness to derive the Cauchy criterion for convergence\u2014a series is convergent if and only if its tails can be made arbitrarily small in norm\u2014and apply the triangle inequality.\nIn particular, for series with values in any Banach space, absolute convergence implies convergence. The converse is also true: if absolute convergence implies convergence in a normed space, then the space is a Banach space.\nIf a series is convergent but not absolutely convergent, it is called conditionally convergent. An example of a conditionally convergent series is the alternating harmonic series. Many standard tests for divergence and convergence, most notably including the ratio test and the root test, demonstrate absolute convergence. This is because a power series is absolutely convergent on the interior of its disk of convergence.\nProof that any absolutely convergent series of complex numbers is convergent.\nSuppose that formula_61 is convergent. Then equivalently, formula_62 is convergent, which implies that formula_63 and formula_64 converge by termwise comparison of non-negative terms. It suffices to show that the convergence of these series implies the convergence of formula_65 and formula_66 for then, the convergence of formula_67 would follow, by the definition of the convergence of complex-valued series.\nThe preceding discussion shows that we need only prove that convergence of formula_68 implies the convergence of formula_69\nLet formula_68 be convergent. Since formula_71 we have\nformula_72\nSince formula_73 is convergent, formula_74 is a bounded monotonic sequence of partial sums, and formula_75 must also converge. Noting that formula_76 is the difference of convergent series, we conclude that it too is a convergent series, as desired.\nAlternative proof using the Cauchy criterion and triangle inequality.\nBy applying the Cauchy criterion for the convergence of a complex series, we can also prove this fact as a simple implication of the triangle inequality. By the Cauchy criterion, formula_77 converges if and only if for any formula_78 there exists formula_79 such that formula_80 for any formula_81 But the triangle inequality implies that formula_82 so that formula_83 for any formula_84 which is exactly the Cauchy criterion for formula_85\nProof that any absolutely convergent series in a Banach space is convergent.\nThe above result can be easily generalized to every Banach space formula_86 Let formula_87 be an absolutely convergent series in formula_88 As formula_89 is a Cauchy sequence of real numbers, for any formula_90 and large enough natural numbers formula_91 it holds:\nformula_92\nBy the triangle inequality for the norm \u01c1\u22c5\u01c1, one immediately gets:\nformula_93\nwhich means that formula_94 is a Cauchy sequence in formula_46 hence the series is convergent in formula_88\nRearrangements and unconditional convergence.\nReal and complex numbers.\nWhen a series of real or complex numbers is absolutely convergent, any rearrangement or reordering of that series' terms will still converge to the same value. This fact is one reason absolutely convergent series are useful: showing a series is absolutely convergent allows terms to be paired or rearranged in convenient ways without changing the sum's value.\nThe Riemann rearrangement theorem shows that the converse is also true: every real or complex-valued series whose terms cannot be reordered to give a different value is absolutely convergent. \nSeries with coefficients in more general space.\nThe term unconditional convergence is used to refer to a series where any rearrangement of its terms still converges to the same value. For any series with values in a normed abelian group formula_24, as long as formula_24 is complete, every series which converges absolutely also converges unconditionally.\nStated more formally:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014a_i\\\nFor series with more general coefficients, the converse is more complicated. As stated in the previous section, for real-valued and complex-valued series, unconditional convergence always implies absolute convergence. However, in the more general case of a series with values in any normed abelian group formula_24, the converse does not always hold: there can exist series which are not absolutely convergent, yet unconditionally convergent.\nFor example, in the Banach space \u2113\u221e, one series which is unconditionally convergent but not absolutely convergent is:\nformula_100\nwhere formula_101 is an orthonormal basis. A theorem of A.\u00a0Dvoretzky and C.\u00a0A.\u00a0Rogers asserts that every infinite-dimensional Banach space has an unconditionally convergent series that is not absolutely convergent.\nProof of the theorem.\nFor any formula_78 we can choose some formula_103 such that:\nformula_104\nLet\nformula_105\nwhere formula_106 so that formula_107 is the smallest natural number such that the list formula_108 includes all of the terms formula_109 (and possibly others).\nFinally for any integer formula_110 let\nformula_111\nso that \nformula_112\nand thus\nformula_113\nThis shows that\nformula_114\nthat is:\nformula_115\nQ.E.D.\nProducts of series.\nThe Cauchy product of two series converges to the product of the sums if at least one of the series converges absolutely. That is, suppose that\nformula_116\nThe Cauchy product is defined as the sum of terms formula_117 where:\nformula_118\nIf either the formula_22 or formula_120 sum converges absolutely then\nformula_121\nAbsolute convergence over sets.\nA generalization of the absolute convergence of a series, is the absolute convergence of a sum of a function over a set. We can first consider a countable set formula_39 and a function formula_123 We will give a definition below of the sum of formula_124 over formula_46 written as formula_126 \nFirst note that because no particular enumeration (or \"indexing\") of formula_39 has yet been specified, the series formula_128 cannot be understood by the more basic definition of a series. In fact, for certain examples of formula_39 and formula_130 the sum of formula_124 over formula_39 may not be defined at all, since some indexing may produce a conditionally convergent series. \nTherefore we define formula_133 only in the case where there exists some bijection formula_134 such that formula_135 is absolutely convergent. Note that here, \"absolutely convergent\" uses the more basic definition, applied to an indexed series. In this case, the value of the sum of formula_124 over formula_39 is defined by \nformula_138\nNote that because the series is absolutely convergent, then every rearrangement is identical to a different choice of bijection formula_139 Since all of these sums have the same value, then the sum of formula_124 over formula_39 is well-defined. \nEven more generally we may define the sum of formula_124 over formula_39 when formula_39 is uncountable. But first we define what it means for the sum to be convergent.\nLet formula_39 be any set, countable or uncountable, and formula_146 a function. We say that the sum of formula_124 over formula_39 converges absolutely if \nformula_149\nThere is a theorem which states that, if the sum of formula_124 over formula_39 is absolutely convergent, then formula_124 takes non-zero values on a set that is at most countable. Therefore, the following is a consistent definition of the sum of formula_124 over formula_39 when the sum is absolutely convergent. \nformula_155\nNote that the final series uses the definition of a series over a countable set.\nSome authors define an iterated sum formula_156 to be absolutely convergent if the iterated series formula_157 This is in fact equivalent to the absolute convergence of formula_158 That is to say, if the sum of formula_124 over formula_46 formula_161 converges absolutely, as defined above, then the iterated sum formula_156 converges absolutely, and vice versa.\nAbsolute convergence of integrals.\nThe integral formula_163 of a real or complex-valued function is said to converge absolutely if formula_164 One also says that formula_124 is absolutely integrable. The issue of absolute integrability is intricate and depends on whether the Riemann, Lebesgue, or Kurzweil-Henstock (gauge) integral is considered; for the Riemann integral, it also depends on whether we only consider integrability in its proper sense (formula_124 and formula_48 both bounded), or permit the more general case of improper integrals.\nAs a standard property of the Riemann integral, when formula_168 is a bounded interval, every continuous function is bounded and (Riemann) integrable, and since formula_124 continuous implies formula_170 continuous, every continuous function is absolutely integrable. In fact, since formula_171 is Riemann integrable on formula_172 if formula_124 is (properly) integrable and formula_174 is continuous, it follows that formula_175 is properly Riemann integrable if formula_124 is. However, this implication does not hold in the case of improper integrals. For instance, the function formula_177 is improperly Riemann integrable on its unbounded domain, but it is not absolutely integrable:\nformula_178\nIndeed, more generally, given any series formula_179 one can consider the associated step function formula_180 defined by formula_181 Then formula_182 converges absolutely, converges conditionally or diverges according to the corresponding behavior of formula_183\nThe situation is different for the Lebesgue integral, which does not handle bounded and unbounded domains of integration separately (\"see below\"). The fact that the integral of formula_170 is unbounded in the examples above implies that formula_124 is also not integrable in the Lebesgue sense. In fact, in the Lebesgue theory of integration, given that formula_124 is measurable, formula_124 is (Lebesgue) integrable if and only if formula_170 is (Lebesgue) integrable. However, the hypothesis that formula_124 is measurable is crucial; it is not generally true that absolutely integrable functions on formula_172 are integrable (simply because they may fail to be measurable): let formula_191 be a nonmeasurable subset and consider formula_192 where formula_193 is the characteristic function of formula_194 Then formula_124 is not Lebesgue measurable and thus not integrable, but formula_196 is a constant function and clearly integrable.\nOn the other hand, a function formula_124 may be Kurzweil-Henstock integrable (gauge integrable) while formula_170 is not. This includes the case of improperly Riemann integrable functions.\nIn a general sense, on any measure space formula_199 the Lebesgue integral of a real-valued function is defined in terms of its positive and negative parts, so the facts:\nare essentially built into the definition of the Lebesgue integral. In particular, applying the theory to the counting measure on a set formula_205 one recovers the notion of unordered summation of series developed by Moore\u2013Smith using (what are now called) nets. When formula_206 is the set of natural numbers, Lebesgue integrability, unordered summability and absolute convergence all coincide.\nFinally, all of the above holds for integrals with values in a Banach space. The definition of a Banach-valued Riemann integral is an evident modification of the usual one. For the Lebesgue integral one needs to circumvent the decomposition into positive and negative parts with Daniell's more functional analytic approach, obtaining the Bochner integral.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61533", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61533", "title": "A Star Is Born", "text": "A Star Is Born may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61534", "revid": "26391951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61534", "title": "Australopithecus", "text": "Genus of hominin ancestral to modern humans\nAustralopithecus (, ; or , , from la \" austr\u0101lis\"\u00a0'southern' and grc \" \"\u03c0\u03af\u03b8\u03b7\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2\" (p\u00edth\u0113kos)\"\u00a0'ape') is a genus of early hominins that existed in Africa during the Pliocene and Early Pleistocene. The genera \"Homo\" (which includes modern humans), \"Paranthropus\", and \"Kenyanthropus\" evolved from some \"Australopithecus\" species. \"Australopithecus\" is a member of the subtribe Australopithecina, which sometimes also includes \"Ardipithecus\", though the term \"australopithecine\" is sometimes used to refer only to members of \"Australopithecus\". Species include \"A. garhi\", \"A. africanus\", \"A. sediba\", \"A. afarensis\", \"A. anamensis\", \"A. bahrelghazali\", and \"A. deyiremeda\". Debate exists as to whether some \"Australopithecus\" species should be reclassified into new genera, or if \"Paranthropus\" and \"Kenyanthropus\" are synonymous with \"Australopithecus\", in part because of the taxonomic inconsistency.\nFurthermore, because e.g. \"A. africanus\" is more closely related to humans, or their ancestors at the time, than e.g. \"A. anamensis\" and many more \"Australopithecus\" branches, \"Australopithecus\" cannot be consolidated into a coherent grouping without also including the genus \"Homo\" and other genera.\nThe earliest known member of the genus, \"A. anamensis\", existed in eastern Africa around 4.2 million years ago. \"Australopithecus\" fossils become more widely dispersed throughout eastern and southern Africa (the Chadian \"A. bahrelghazali\" indicates that the genus was much more widespread than the fossil record suggests), before eventually becoming extinct 1.9 million years ago (or 1.2 to 0.6 million years ago if \"Paranthropus\" is included). While none of the groups normally directly assigned to this group survived, \"Australopithecus\" gave rise to living descendants, as the genus \"Homo\" emerged from an \"Australopithecus\" species at some time between 3 and 2 million years ago.\n\"Australopithecus\" possessed two of the three duplicated genes derived from \"SRGAP2\" roughly 3.4 and 2.4 million years ago (\"SRGAP2B\" and \"SRGAP2C\"), the second of which contributed to the increase in number and migration of neurons in the human brain. Significant changes to the hand first appear in the fossil record of later \"A. afarensis\" about 3 million years ago (fingers shortened relative to thumb and changes to the joints between the index finger and the trapezium and capitate).\nTaxonomy.\nResearch history.\nThe first \"Australopithecus\" specimen, the type specimen, was discovered in 1924 in a lime quarry by workers at Taung, South Africa. The specimen was studied by the Australian anatomist Raymond Dart, who was then working at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. The fossil skull was from a three-year-old bipedal primate (nicknamed Taung Child) that he named \"Australopithecus africanus\". The first report was published in \"Nature\" in February 1925. Dart realised that the fossil contained a number of humanoid features, and so he came to the conclusion that this was an early human ancestor. Later, Scottish paleontologist Robert Broom and Dart set out to search for more early hominin specimens, and several more \"A. africanus\" remains from various sites. Initially, anthropologists were largely hostile to the idea that these discoveries were anything but apes, though this changed during the late 1940s.\nIn 1950, evolutionary biologist Ernst Walter Mayr said that all bipedal apes should be classified into the genus \"Homo\", and considered renaming \"Australopithecus\" to \"Homo transvaalensis\". However, the contrary view taken by J.T. Robinson in 1954, excluding australopiths from \"Homo\", became the prevalent view. The first australopithecine fossil discovered in eastern Africa was an \"A. boisei\" skull excavated by Mary Leakey in 1959 in Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. Since then, the Leakey family has continued to excavate the gorge, uncovering further evidence for australopithecines, as well as for \"Homo habilis\" and \"Homo erectus\". The scientific community took 20 more years to widely accept \"Australopithecus\" as a member of the human family tree.\nIn 1997, an almost complete \"Australopithecus\" skeleton with skull was found in the Sterkfontein caves of Gauteng, South Africa. It is now called \"Little Foot\" and it is around 3.7 million years old. It was named \"Australopithecus prometheus\" which has since been placed within \"A. africanus\". Other fossil remains found in the same cave in 2008 were named \"Australopithecus sediba\", which lived 1.9 million years ago. \"A. africanus\" probably evolved into \"A. sediba\", which some scientists think may have evolved into \"H. erectus\", though this is heavily disputed.\nIn 2003, Spanish writer Camilo Jos\u00e9 Cela Conde and evolutionary biologist Francisco J. Ayala proposed resurrecting the genus \"Praeanthropus\" to house \"Orrorin\", \"A. afarensis\", \"A. anamensis\", \"A. bahrelghazali\", and \"A. garhi\", but this genus has been largely dismissed.\nClassification.\nWith the apparent emergence of the genera \"Homo, Kenyanthropus\", and \"Paranthropus\" in the genus \"Australopithecus,\" taxonomy runs into some difficulty, as the name of species incorporates their genus. According to cladistics, groups should not be left paraphyletic, where it is kept not consisting of a common ancestor and all of its descendants. Resolving this problem would cause major ramifications in the nomenclature of all descendent species. Possibilities suggested have been to rename \"Homo sapiens\" to \"Australopithecus sapiens\" (or even \"Pan sapiens\"), or to move some \"Australopithecus\" species into new genera. A study reported in 2025 reported preliminary success in extracting ancient proteins from an Australopithic tooth, suggesting that paleoproteomics has the potential to provide information about the genetic affinities of the species.\nIn 2002 and again in 2007, Camilo Jos\u00e9 Cela Conde \"et al.\" suggested that \"A. africanus\" be moved to \"Paranthropus\". On the basis of craniodental evidence, Strait and Grine (2004) suggest that \"A. anamensis\" and \"A. garhi\" should be assigned to new genera. It is debated whether or not \"A. bahrelghazali\" should be considered simply a western variant of \"A. afarensis\" instead of a separate species.\nEvolution.\n\"A. anamensis\" may have descended from or was closely related to \"Ardipithecus ramidus\". \"A. anamensis\" shows some similarities to both \"Ar. ramidus\" and \"Sahelanthropus\".\nAustralopiths shared several traits with modern apes and humans, and were widespread throughout Eastern and Northern Africa by 3.5 million years ago (mya). The earliest evidence of fundamentally bipedal hominins is a (3.6 mya) fossil trackway in Laetoli, Tanzania, which bears a remarkable similarity to those of modern humans. The footprints have generally been classified as australopith, as they are the only form of prehuman hominins known to have existed in that region at that time.\nAccording to the Chimpanzee Genome Project, the human\u2013chimpanzee last common ancestor existed about five to six million years ago, assuming a constant rate of mutation. However, hominin species dated to earlier than the date could call this into question. \"Sahelanthropus tchadensis\", commonly called \"Toumai\", is about seven million years old and \"Orrorin tugenensis\" lived at least six million years ago. Since little is known of them, they remain controversial among scientists since the molecular clock in humans has determined that humans and chimpanzees had a genetic split at least a million years later. One theory suggests that the human and chimpanzee lineages diverged somewhat at first, then some populations interbred around one million years after diverging.\nAnatomy.\nThe brains of most species of \"Australopithecus\" were roughly 35% of the size of a modern human brain with an endocranial volume average of . Although this is more than the average endocranial volume of chimpanzee brains at the earliest australopiths (\"A. anamensis\") appear to have been within the chimpanzee range, whereas some later australopith specimens have a larger endocranial volume than that of some early Homo fossils.\nMost species of \"Australopithecus\" were diminutive and gracile, usually standing tall. It is possible that they exhibited a considerable degree of sexual dimorphism, males being larger than females. In modern populations, males are on average a mere 15% larger than females, while in \"Australopithecus\", males could be up to 50% larger than females by some estimates. However, the degree of sexual dimorphism is debated due to the fragmentary nature of australopith remains. One paper finds that \"A. afarensis\" had a level of dimorphism close to modern humans.\nAccording to A. Zihlman, \"Australopithecus\" body proportions closely resemble those of bonobos (\"Pan paniscus\"), leading evolutionary biologist Jeremy Griffith to suggest that bonobos may be phenotypically similar to \"Australopithecus\". Furthermore, thermoregulatory models suggest that australopiths were fully hair covered, more like chimpanzees and bonobos, and unlike humans.\nThe fossil record seems to indicate that \"Australopithecus\" is ancestral to \"Homo\" and modern humans. It was once assumed that large brain size had been a precursor to bipedalism, but the discovery of \"Australopithecus\" with a small brain but developed bipedality upset this theory. Nonetheless, it remains a matter of controversy as to how bipedalism first emerged. The advantages of bipedalism were that it left the hands free to grasp objects (e.g., carry food and young), and allowed the eyes to look over tall grasses for possible food sources or predators, but it is also argued that these advantages were not significant enough to cause the emergence of bipedalism. Earlier fossils, such as \"Orrorin tugenensis\", indicate bipedalism around six million years ago, around the time of the split between humans and chimpanzees indicated by genetic studies. This suggests that erect, straight-legged walking originated as an adaptation to tree-dwelling. Major changes to the pelvis and feet had already taken place before \"Australopithecus\". It was once thought that humans descended from a knuckle-walking ancestor, but this is not well-supported.\nAustralopithecines have thirty-two teeth, like modern humans. Their molars were parallel, like those of great apes, and they had a slight pre-canine gap (diastema). Their canines were smaller, like modern humans, and with the teeth less interlocked than in previous hominins. In fact, in some australopithecines, the canines are shaped more like incisors. The molars of \"Australopithecus\" fit together in much the same way those of humans do, with low crowns and four low, rounded cusps used for crushing. They have cutting edges on the crests. However, australopiths generally evolved a larger postcanine dentition with thicker enamel. Australopiths in general had thick enamel, like \"Homo\", while other great apes have markedly thinner enamel. Robust australopiths wore their molar surfaces down flat, unlike the more gracile species, who kept their crests.\nDiet.\nIn 2025, a study published in \"Science\" measured nitrogen isotope ratios in fossilized teeth and determined that \"Australopithecus\" was almost entirely vegetarian.\n\"Australopithecus\" species are thought to have eaten mainly fruit, vegetables, and tubers, and perhaps easy-to-catch animals such as small lizards. Much research has focused on a comparison between the South African species \"A. africanus\" and \"Paranthropus robustus\". Early analyses of dental microwear in these two species showed, compared to \"P. robustus\", \"A. africanus\" had fewer microwear features and more scratches as opposed to pits on its molar wear facets. Microwear patterns on the cheek teeth of \"A. afarensis\" and \"A. anamensis\" indicate that \"A. afarensis\" predominantly ate fruits and leaves, whereas \"A. anamensis\" included grasses and seeds (in addition to fruits and leaves). The thickening of enamel in australopiths may have been a response to eating more ground-bound foods such as tubers, nuts, and cereal grains with gritty dirt and other small particulates which would wear away enamel. Gracile australopiths had larger incisors, which indicates tearing food was important, perhaps eating scavenged meat. Nonetheless, the wearing patterns on the teeth support a largely herbivorous diet.\nIn 1992, trace-element studies of the strontium/calcium ratios in robust australopith fossils suggested the possibility of animal consumption, as they did in 1994 using stable carbon isotopic analysis. In 2005, fossil animal bones with butchery marks dating to 2.6 million years old were found at the site of Gona, Ethiopia. This implies meat consumption by at least one of three species of hominins occurring around that time: \"A. africanus\", \"A. garhi\", and/or \"P. aethiopicus\". In 2010, fossils of butchered animal bones dated 3.4 million years old were found in Ethiopia, close to regions where australopith fossils were found. However, a 2025 study measuring nitrogen isotope ratios in fossilized teeth determined that \"Australopithecus\" was almost entirely vegetarian.\nRobust australopithecines (\"Paranthropus\") had larger cheek teeth than gracile australopiths, possibly because robust australopithecines had more tough, fibrous plant material in their diets, whereas gracile australopiths ate more hard and brittle foods. However, such divergence in chewing adaptations may instead have been a response to fallback food availability. In leaner times, robust and gracile australopithecines may have turned to different low-quality foods (fibrous plants for the former, and hard food for the latter), but in more bountiful times, they had more variable and overlapping diets. In a 1979 preliminary microwear study of \"Australopithecus\" fossil teeth, anthropologist Alan Walker theorized that robust australopiths ate predominantly fruit (frugivory).\nA study in 2018 found non-carious cervical lesions, caused by acid erosion, on the teeth of \"A. africanus\", probably caused by consumption of acidic fruit.\nTechnology.\nIt is debated if the \"Australopithecus\" hand was anatomically capable of producing stone tools. \"A. garhi\" was associated with large mammal bones bearing evidence of processing by stone tools, which may indicate australopithecine tool production. Stone tools dating to roughly the same time as \"A. garhi\" (about 2.6 mya) were later discovered at the nearby Gona and Ledi-Geraru sites, but the appearance of \"Homo\" at Ledi-Geraru (LD 350-1) casts doubt on australopithecine authorship.\nIn 2010, cut marks dating to 3.4 mya on a bovid leg were found at the Dikaka site, which were at first attributed to butchery by \"A. afarensis\", but because the fossil came from a sandstone unit (and were modified by abrasive sand and gravel particles during the fossilisation process), the attribution to butchery is dubious.\nIn 2015, the Lomekwi culture was discovered at Lake Turkana dating to 3.3 mya, possibly attributable to \"Kenyanthropus\" or \"A. deyiremeda\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61535", "revid": "433328", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61535", "title": "A Star Is Born (1937)", "text": ""}
{"id": "61536", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61536", "title": "Explorer 1", "text": "First satellite launched by the United States (1958)\nExplorer 1 was the first satellite launched by the United States in 1958 and was part of the U.S. participation in the International Geophysical Year (IGY). The mission followed the first two satellites, both launched by the Soviet Union during the previous year, Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2. This began a Space Race during the Cold War between the two nations.\nExplorer 1 was launched on 1 February 1958 at 03:47:56 GMT (or 31 January 1958 at 22:47:56 Eastern Time) atop the first Juno I booster from LC-26A at the Cape Canaveral Missile Test Center of the Atlantic Missile Range (AMR), in Florida. It was the first spacecraft to detect the Van Allen radiation belt, returning data until its batteries were exhausted after nearly four months. It remained in orbit until 1970.\nExplorer 1 was given Satellite Catalog Number 00004 and the Harvard designation 1958 Alpha 1, the forerunner to the modern International Designator.\nBackground.\nThe U.S. Earth satellite program began in 1954 as a joint U.S. Army and U.S. Navy proposal, called Project Orbiter, to put a scientific satellite into orbit during the International Geophysical Year. The proposal, using a military Redstone missile, was rejected in 1955 by the Eisenhower administration in favor of the Navy's Project Vanguard, using a booster advertised as more civilian in nature. Following the launch of the Soviet satellite Sputnik 1 on 4 October 1957, the initial Project Orbiter program was revived as the Explorer program to catch up with the Soviet Union.\nExplorer 1 was designed and built by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), while a Jupiter-C rocket was modified by the Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA) to accommodate a satellite payload; the resulting rocket known as the Juno I. The Jupiter-C design used for the launch had already been flight-tested in nose cone reentry tests for the Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile (IRBM) and was modified into Juno I. Working closely together, ABMA and JPL completed the job of modifying the Jupiter-C and building Explorer 1 in 84 days. However, before work was completed, the Soviet Union launched a second satellite, Sputnik 2, on 3 November 1957. The U.S. Navy attempted to put the first U.S. satellite into orbit but failed with the launch of the Vanguard TV-3 on 6 December 1957.\nSpacecraft.\nExplorer 1 was designed and built by California Institute of Technology's JPL under the direction of Dr. William Hayward Pickering. It was the second satellite to carry a mission payload (Sputnik 2 was the first).\nThe total mass of the satellite was , of which were instrumentation. In comparison, the mass of the first Soviet satellite Sputnik 1 was . The instrument section at the front end of the satellite and the empty scaled-down fourth-stage rocket casing orbited as a single unit, spinning around its long axis at 750 revolutions per minute.\nData from the scientific instruments was transmitted to the ground by two antennas. A 60 milliwatt transmitter fed a dipole antenna consisting of two fiberglasses slot antennas in the body of the satellite operating on 108.03 MHz, and four flexible whips forming a turnstile antenna were fed by a 10 milliwatt transmitter operating on 108.00 MHz.\nBecause of the limited space available and the requirements for low weight, the payload instrumentation was designed and built with simplicity and high reliability in mind, using germanium and silicon transistors in its electronics. A total of 20 transistors were used in Explorer 1, plus additional ones in the Army's micrometeorite amplifier. Electrical power was provided by mercury chemical batteries that made up approximately 40% of the payload weight.\nThe external skin of the instrument section was sandblasted stainless steel with white stripes. Several other color schemes had been tested, resulting in backup articles, models, and photographs showing different configurations, including alternate white and green striping and blue stripes alternating with copper. The final color scheme was determined by studies of shadow\u2013sunlight intervals based on firing time, trajectory, orbit and inclination.\nScience payload.\nThe Explorer 1 payload consisted of the Iowa Cosmic Ray Instrument without a tape data recorder which was not modified in time to make it onto the spacecraft. The real-time data received on the ground was therefore very sparse and puzzling showing normal counting rates and no counts at all. The later Explorer 3 mission, which included a tape data recorder in the payload, provided the additional data for confirmation of the earlier Explorer 1 data.\nThe scientific instrumentation of Explorer 1 was designed and built under the direction of Dr. James Van Allen of the University of Iowa containing:\nFlight.\nAfter a jet stream-related delay on 28 January 1958, at 03:47:56 GMT on 1 February 1958 the Juno I rocket was launched, putting Explorer 1 into orbit with a perigee of and an apogee of having a period of 114.80 minutes, and an inclination of 33.24\u00b0. Goldstone Tracking Station could not report after 90 minutes as planned whether the launch had succeeded because the orbit was larger than expected. At about 06:30 GMT, after confirming that Explorer 1 was indeed in orbit, a news conference was held in the Great Hall at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C. to announce it to the world.\nThe original expected lifetime of the satellite before orbital decay was three years. Mercury batteries powered the high-power transmitter for 31 days and the low-power transmitter for 105 days. Explorer 1 stopped transmission of data on 23 May 1958, when its batteries died, but remained in orbit for more than 12 years. It reentered the atmosphere over the Pacific Ocean on 31 March 1970 after more than 58,400 orbits.\nResults.\nExplorer 1 changed rotation axis after launch. The elongated body of the spacecraft had been designed to spin about its long (least-inertia) axis but refused to do so, and instead started precessing due to energy dissipation from flexible structural elements. Later it was understood that on general grounds, the body ends up in the spin state that minimizes the kinetic rotational energy for a fixed angular momentum (this being the maximal-inertia axis). This motivated the first further development of the Eulerian theory of rigid body dynamics after nearly 200 years \u2013 to address this kind of momentum-preserving energy dissipation.\nSometimes the instrumentation reported the expected cosmic ray count (approximately 30 counts per second) but other times it would show a peculiar zero counts per second. The University of Iowa (under James Van Allen) observed that all of the zero counts per second reports were from an altitude of more than over South America, while passes at would show the expected level of cosmic rays. Later, after Explorer 3, it was concluded that the original Geiger counter had been overwhelmed (\"saturated\") by strong radiation coming from a belt of charged particles trapped in space by the Earth's magnetic field. This belt of charged particles is now known as the Van Allen radiation belt. The discovery was considered to be one of the outstanding discoveries of the International Geophysical Year.\nThe acoustic micrometeorite detector detected 145 impacts of cosmic dust in 78,750 seconds. This calculates to an average impact rate of 8.0\u22123 impacts per second per square meter, or 29 impacts per hour per square meter, over the twelve-day period.\nLegacy.\nExplorer 1 was the first of the long-running Explorers program. Four follow-up satellites of the Explorer series were launched by the Juno I launch vehicle in 1958. Of these, Explorer 3 and 4 were successful, while Explorer 2 and 5 failed to reach orbit. The final flight of the Juno I booster, the satellite Beacon-1, also failed. The Juno I vehicle was replaced by the Juno II launch vehicle in 1959.\nA follow-up to the first mission, Explorer-1 Prime Unit 2, was successfully launched aboard a Delta II launch vehicle in late October 2011. The Prime was built using modern satellite construction techniques. The orbiting satellite was a backup, because the initial Explorer-1 Prime, launched on 4 March 2011, did not reach orbit due to a launch vehicle failure.\nAn identically constructed flight backup of Explorer 1 is on display in the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum, Milestones of Flight Gallery in Washington, D.C., LC-26A was deactivated in 1963 and was designated for use as a museum in 1964, the Air Force Space and Missile Museum. Here too, a full-scale Explorer 1 is on display, but this one is a mock-up.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61537", "revid": "292035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61537", "title": "Satellite 1958 Alpha", "text": ""}
{"id": "61538", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61538", "title": "Van Allen Belt", "text": ""}
{"id": "61540", "revid": "50900134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61540", "title": "Nestorius", "text": "Archbishop of Constantinople from c. 428 to 431\nNestorius of Constantinople (; ; c.\u2009386\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009451) was an early Christian prelate who served as Archbishop of Constantinople from 10 April 428 to 11 July 431. He was a Christian theologian from the Catechetical School of Antioch, and several of his teachings in the fields of Christology and Mariology were seen as controversial and heretical, causing major disputes. \nIn 431, he was condemned and deposed from his see by the Council of Ephesus, presided over by his archrival Cyril of Alexandria, but the counter-council led by John I of Antioch vindicated him and deposed Cyril in return. Nestorius refrained from attending both of these councils and instead sought retirement from the Byzantine Emperor. \nNestorius himself used the title \"Theotokos\" and did not advocate for its ban. His teachings included cautious usage of \"Theotokos\" (\"God-Bearer\"), used for Mary, mother of Jesus, in order that Christ's human and divine natures not be confused, as he believed Christ was born according to his humanity and not his divinity, which indicated his preference for the concept of the prosopic union of two natures (divine and human) of Christ, over the concept of a hypostatic union. He proposed instead the title of \"Christotokos\" (\"Christ-bearer\"). This brought him into conflict with Cyril of Alexandria and other prominent diophysite and miaphysite churchmen of the time, who accused him of heresy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the babe and the Lord of the babe are one and the same person, the suspected phrase \"inhabitant of the babe\" must be simply intended as a safeguard against identification of the Word with the flesh. So Mary is Theotokos \u2013 because the Word was united to the temple ... which is in nature consubstantial with the holy Virgin ... It is in virtue of this union that the holy Virgin is called Theotokos\u2014\u200a\nNestorius sought to defend himself at the Council of Ephesus in 431, but instead found himself formally condemned for heresy by a majority of the bishops and was subsequently removed from his see. On his own request, he retired to his former monastery, in or near Antioch. In 435, Theodosius II sent him into exile in Upper Egypt, where he lived on until about 451, strenuously defending his views. His last major defender within the Roman Empire, Theodoret of Cyrrhus, finally agreed to anathematize him in 451 during the Council of Chalcedon. \nFrom then on, he had no defenders within the empire, but the Church of the East in the Persian Empire never accepted his condemnation. That led later Western Christians to give the name \"Nestorian Church\" to the Church of the East where his teachings were deemed orthodox and in line with its own teachings. Nestorius is revered as among three \"Greek Teachers\" (in addition to Diodorus of Tarsus and Theodore of Mopsuestia) of the Church of the East. The East Syriac Eucharistic Service, which is known to be among the oldest in the world, incorporates prayers attributed to Nestorius himself. \nThe discovery, translation and publication of his \"Bazaar of Heracleides\" at the beginning of the 20th century have led to a reassessment of his theology in Western scholarship. It is now argued by some scholars and clergy that his ideas are compatible with later Chalcedonian theology and/or his condemnation at Ephesus was misplaced, but the orthodoxy of his formulation of the doctrine of Christ is still controversial.\nLife.\nSources place the birth of Nestorius around 386 in the city of Germanicia in the Province of Syria, Roman Empire (now Kahramanmara\u015f in Turkey). A Syriac source mentioned that Nestorius was of Persian origin, while others have stated he was of Hellenised Antiochian or Syrian origin.\nHe received his clerical training as a pupil of Theodore of Mopsuestia in Antioch. He was living as a priest and monk in the monastery of Euprepius near the walls, and he gained a reputation for his sermons that led to his enthronement by Theodosius II, as Patriarch of Constantinople, following the 428 death of Sisinnius I of Constantinople.\nNestorian controversy.\nShortly after his arrival in Constantinople, Nestorius became involved in the disputes of two theological factions, which differed in their Christology. Nestorius tried to find a middle ground between those that emphasized the fact that in Christ, God had been born as a man and insisted on calling the Virgin Mary \"Theotokos\" (, \"God-bearer\") and those that rejected that title because God, as an eternal being, could not have been born. He never divided Christ into two sons (Son of God and Son of Mary), but rather, he refused to attribute to the divine nature the human acts and sufferings of the man Jesus Christ. Nestorius suggested the title \"Christotokos\" (\"\u03a7\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c4\u03cc\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2\", \"Christ-bearer\"), but he did not find acceptance on either side.\n\"Nestorianism\" refers to the doctrine that there are two distinct hypostases in the Incarnate Christ, the one Divine and the other human. The teaching of all churches that accept the Council of Ephesus is that in the Incarnate Christ is a single hypostasis, God and man at once. That doctrine is known as the hypostatic union. Nestorius, on the other hand, affirmed that the two hypostases are not united as a single hypostasis, but that there exists a \"connection\" (Greek: \u03c3\u03c5\u03bd\u03b1\u03c6\u03b5\u03af\u03b1 \"synapheia\") between them, and repeatedly stated that they are united in the one person (Prosopon, \u201c\u03c0\u03c1\u03cc\u03c3\u03c9\u03c0\u03bf\u03bd\u201d) of Christ in a prosopic union. Caution must be taken in understanding the usage of prosopon, as it was used in different contexts to mean either \"person\" or \"properties\". Thus, in the second usage, Nestorius stated that the \"prosopae\" (singular Prosopon \"\u03c0\u03c1\u03cc\u03c3\u03c9\u03c0\u03bf\u03bd\", lit. \"face\"), and therefore the two hypostases (not \"persons\"), are united in the prosopic union, thought not in a manner of mixture or dissolution.\nNestorius's opponents charged him with detaching Christ's divinity and humanity into two persons existing in one body, thereby denying the reality of the Incarnation. It is not clear whether Nestorius actually taught that, though the Church of the East, and modern scholars, believe he taught one person.\nEusebius of Dorylaeum, a layman who later became the bishop of the neighbouring Dorylaeum, was the first to accuse Nestorius of heresy, but the most forceful opponent of Nestorius was Patriarch Cyril of Alexandria. This naturally caused great excitement at Constantinople, especially among the clergy, who were clearly not well disposed to Nestorius, the stranger from Antioch.\nCyril appealed to Pope Celestine I of Rome to make a decision, and Celestine delegated to Cyril the job of excommunicating Nestorius if he did not change his teachings within 10 days.\nNestorius had arranged with the emperor in the summer of 430 for the assembling of a council. He now hastened it, and the summons had been issued to patriarchs and metropolitans on 19 November, before the pope's sentence, delivered through Cyril of Alexandria, was served on Nestorius.\nEmperor Theodosius II convoked a general church council, at Ephesus, itself a special seat for the veneration of Mary, where the \"Theotokos\" formula was popular. The Emperor and his wife supported Nestorius, but Pope Celestine I supported Cyril.\nCyril of Alexandria took charge of the Council of Ephesus in 431, opening debate before the long-overdue contingent of Eastern bishops from Antioch arrived. The council deposed Nestorius and declared him a heretic.\nIn Nestorius' own words:\nWhen the followers of Cyril of Alexandria saw the vehemence of the emperor... they roused up a disturbance and discord among the people with an outcry, as though the emperor were opposed to God; they rose up against the nobles and the chiefs who acquiesced not in what had been done by them and they were running hither and thither. And... they took with them those who had been separated and removed from the monasteries by reason of their lives and their strange manners and had for this reason been expelled, and all who were of heretical sects and were possessed with fanaticism and with hatred against me. And one passion was in them all, Jews and pagans and all the sects, and they were busying themselves that they should accept without examination the things which were done without examination against me; and at the same time all of them, even those that had participated with me at table and in prayer and in thought, were agreed... against me and vowing vows one with another against me... In nothing were they divided.\nWhile the council was in progress, John I of Antioch and the eastern bishops arrived and were furious to hear that Nestorius had already been condemned. They convened their own synod, at which Cyril of Alexandria was deposed. Both sides then appealed to the emperor.\nInitially, the imperial government ordered both Nestorius and Cyril of Alexandria to be deposed and exiled. Nestorius was made to return to his monastery at Antioch, and Maximianus of Constantinople was consecrated Archbishop of Constantinople in his place. Cyril was eventually allowed to return after bribing various courtiers.\nLater events.\nIn the following months, 17 bishops who supported Nestorius's doctrine were removed from their sees. Eventually, John I of Antioch was obliged to abandon Nestorius, in March 433. On 3 August 435, Theodosius II issued an imperial edict that exiled Nestorius from the monastery in Antioch in which he had been staying to a monastery in the Great Oasis of Hibis (al-Khargah), in Egypt, securely within the diocese of Cyril of Alexandria. The monastery suffered attacks by desert bandits, and Nestorius was injured in one such raid. Nestorius seems to have survived there until at least 450 (given the evidence of \"The Book of Heraclides\"). Nestorius died shortly after the Council of Chalcedon in 451, in Thebaid, Egypt.\nWritings.\nVery few of Nestorius' writings survive, many being destroyed by his opponents. There are several letters preserved in the records of the Council of Ephesus and fragments of a few others. About 30 sermons are extant, mostly in fragmentary form. The only complete treatise is the lengthy defence of his theological position, \"The Bazaar of Heraclides\", written in exile at the Oasis, which survives in Syriac translation. It must have been written no earlier than 450, as he knows of the death of the Emperor Theodosius II (29 July 450). There is an English translation of this work, but it was criticised as inaccurate, as well as the older French translation. Further scholarly analyses have shown that several early interpolations have been made in the text, sometime in the second half of the 5th century.\n\"Bazaar of Heracleides\".\nIn 1895, a 16th-century book manuscript containing a copy of a text written by Nestorius was discovered by American missionaries in the library of the Nestorian patriarch in the mountains at Qudshanis, Hakkari. This book had suffered damage during Muslim conquests but was substantially intact, and copies were taken secretly. The Syriac translation had the title of the \"Bazaar of Heracleides\". The original 16th-century manuscript was destroyed in 1915 during the Turkish and Kurdish genocide of Assyrian Christians. Edition of this work is primarily to be attributed to the German scholar, Friedrich Loofs, of Halle University.\nIn the \"Bazaar\", written about 450, Nestorius denies the heresy for which he was condemned and instead affirms of Christ \"the same one is twofold\" \u2014 an expression that some consider similar to the formulation of the Council of Chalcedon. Nestorius' earlier surviving writings, however, including his letter written in response to Cyril of Alexandria's charges against him, contain material that has been interpreted by some to imply that at that time he held that Christ had two persons. Others view this material as merely emphasising the distinction between how the pre-incarnate Logos is the Son of God and how the incarnate Emmanuel, including his physical body, is truly called the Son of God.\nLegacy.\nThough Nestorius had been condemned by the Imperial church, there was a faction loyal to him and his teachings. Following the Nestorian schism, many Nestorian Christians were forced to relocate to the communities within the Persian Empire; thus, the church took on names such as \"Nestorian Church\" and \"Church of Persia\".\nIn modern times, the Assyrian Church of the East, the descendant of the historical Church of the East, reveres Nestorius as a saint, but the modern church does not subscribe to the entirety of the Nestorian doctrine as it has traditionally been understood in the West to mean \"two persons\", believing that the West misunderstood and misrepresented his theology, and rejects that Nestorius taught any heresy. Patriarch Dinkha IV repudiated the exonym \"Nestorian\" on the occasion of his accession in 1976.\nAfter the Council of Ephesus, within the Byzantine Empire, the doctrine of Monophysitism developed in reaction to Nestorianism by Eutyches, who asserted that Christ had a \"monos\" (sole) nature, the human nature being fully absorbed into the divine, in contrast to Miaphysitism, which affirms a \"mia\" (one) composite nature from both, fully divine and fully human, \"without change, commingling, division, or separation\". Despite being condemned at the Third Council of Ephesus by the Oriental Orthodox Churches, Monophysitism is sometimes attributed to them, either intentionally or out of ignorance.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61542", "revid": "16989132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61542", "title": "Juneteenth", "text": "US holiday commemorating the end of slavery in the United States\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Subinfobox bodystyle/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJuneteenth, officially Juneteenth National Independence Day, is a federal holiday in the United States. It is celebrated annually on June 19 to commemorate the end of slavery in the United States. The holiday's name, first used in the 1890s, is a portmanteau of \"June\" and \"nineteenth\", referring to June 19, 1865, the day when Major General Gordon Granger ordered the final enforcement of the Emancipation Proclamation in Texas at the end of the American Civil War.\nIn the Civil War period, slavery came to an end in various areas of the United States at different times. Many enslaved Southerners escaped, demanded wages, stopped work, or took up arms against the Confederacy of slave states. In January 1865, Congress proposed the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution for the national abolition of slavery. By June 1865, almost all of the enslaved population had been freed by the victorious Union Army or by state abolition laws. When the national abolition amendment was ratified in December, the remaining enslaved people in Delaware and in Kentucky were freed.\nEarly Juneteenth celebrations date back to 1866, at first involving church-centered community gatherings in Texas. They spread across the South among newly freed African-Americans and their descendants and became more commercialized in the 1920s and 1930s, often centering on a food festival. Participants in the Great Migration brought these celebrations to the rest of the country. During the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s, Juneteenth celebrations were eclipsed by the nonviolent determination to achieve civil rights, but they grew in popularity again in the 1970s, with a focus on African-American freedom and African-American arts. Beginning with Texas by proclamation in 1938, and by legislation in 1979, every U.S. state and the District of Columbia has formally recognized the holiday in some way. \nThe day was recognized as a federal holiday in 2021, when the 117th U.S. Congress enacted and President Joe Biden signed the Juneteenth National Independence Day Act into law. Juneteenth became the first new federal holiday since Martin Luther King Jr. Day was adopted in 1983. Juneteenth is also celebrated by the Mascogos, descendants of Black Seminoles who escaped from slavery in 1852 and settled in Coahuila, Mexico.\nCelebrations and traditions.\nThe holiday is considered the \"longest-running African-American holiday\" and has been called \"America's second Independence Day\". Juneteenth falls on June\u00a019 and has often been celebrated on the third Saturday in June. Historian Mitch Kachun notes that celebrations of the end of slavery have three goals: \"to celebrate, to educate, and to agitate.\"\nEarly celebrations consisted of baseball, fishing, and rodeos. African Americans were often prohibited from using public facilities for their celebrations, so instead they were typically held at churches or outdoors near bodies of water. Celebrations were characterized by elaborate large meals and people wearing their best clothing. It was common for formerly enslaved people and their descendants to make a pilgrimage to Galveston, Texas, where the announcement of emancipation had originally taken place. News coverage of early festivals, Janice Hume and Noah Arceneaux state, \"served to assimilate African-American memories within the dominant 'American story'\".\nModern observance is primarily in local celebrations. In many places, Juneteenth has become a multicultural holiday. Traditions include public readings of the Emancipation Proclamation which promised freedom, singing traditional songs such as \"Swing Low, Sweet Chariot\" and \"Lift Every Voice and Sing\", and reading of works by noted African-American writers, such as Ralph Ellison and Maya Angelou. Celebrations include picnics, rodeos, street fairs, cookouts, family reunions, park parties, historical reenactments, blues festivals, and Miss Juneteenth contests. Red food and drinks are traditionally served during the celebrations, including red velvet cake and strawberry soda, with red meant to represent resilience and joy.\nJuneteenth celebrations often include lectures and exhibitions on African-American culture. The modern holiday places much emphasis on teaching about African-American heritage. Karen M. Thomas writes in \"Emerge\" that \"community leaders have latched on to [Juneteenth] to help instill a sense of heritage and pride in black youth.\" Celebrations are commonly accompanied by voter registration efforts, the performing of plays, and retelling stories. The holiday is also a celebration of soul food and other cuisine with African-American influences. In \"Tourism Review International\", Anne Donovan and Karen DeBres write that \"Barbecue is the centerpiece of most Juneteenth celebrations.\" Major news networks host specials and marathons on national outlets featuring prominent Black voices.\nThe Black Seminoles of Nacimiento in Mexico hold a festival and reunion known as el D\u00eda de los Negros on June 19. \nMany former British colonies celebrate Emancipation Day on August 1, commemorating the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. \nSince 2021, the United Nations has designated August 31 as the International Day for People of African Descent.\nHistory.\nOn September 22, 1862, President Abraham Lincoln announced that the Emancipation Proclamation would go into effect on January 1, 1863, promising freedom to enslaved people in all of the rebellious parts of Southern states of the Confederacy including Texas. Enforcement of the Proclamation generally relied upon the advance of Union troops. Texas, as the most remote state of the former Confederacy, had seen an expansion of slavery because the presence of Union troops was low as the American Civil War ended; thus, the enforcement of the Emancipation Proclamation had been slow and inconsistent there prior to Granger's order. In all June 19, 1865, was 900 days after the Emancipation Proclamation went into effect, 71 days after Robert E. Lee surrendered to the Union on April 9, 1865, and 24 days after the disbanding of the Confederate military department covering Texas on May 26, 1865.\nEarly history.\nThe Civil War and celebrations of emancipation.\nDuring the American Civil War (1861\u20131865), emancipation came at different times in different parts of the Southern United States. Large celebrations of emancipation, often called Jubilees (recalling the biblical Jubilee, in which enslaved people were freed), took place on September\u00a022, January\u00a01, July\u00a04, August\u00a01, April\u00a06, and November\u00a01, among other dates. When emancipation finally came to Texas, on June 19, 1865, as the southern rebellion collapsed, celebration was widespread. While that date did not actually mark the unequivocal end of slavery, even in Texas, June 19 came to be a day of shared commemoration across the United States\u00a0\u2013 created, preserved, and spread by ordinary African Americans\u00a0\u2013 of slavery's wartime demise.\nEnd of slavery in Texas.\nLincoln issued the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation in the midst of the Civil War on September 22, 1862, declaring that if the rebels did not end the fighting and rejoin the Union, all enslaved people in the Confederacy would be freed on the first day of the year. On January 1, 1863, Lincoln issued the final Emancipation Proclamation, declaring that all enslaved people in the Confederate States of America in rebellion and not in Union hands were freed.\nPlanters and other slaveholders from eastern states had migrated into Texas to escape the fighting, and many brought enslaved people with them, increasing by the thousands the enslaved population in the state at the end of the Civil War. Although most lived in rural areas, more than 1,000 resided in Galveston or Houston by 1860, with several hundred in other large towns. By 1865, there were an estimated 250,000 enslaved people in Texas.\nDespite the surrender of Confederate General-in-Chief Robert E. Lee at Appomattox Court House on April\u00a09, 1865, the western Confederate Army of the Trans-Mississippi did not formally surrender until June 2. On the morning of June\u00a019, 1865, Union Major General Gordon Granger arrived on the island of Galveston to take command of the more than 2,000 federal troops recently landed in the department of Texas to enforce the emancipation of its enslaved population and oversee Reconstruction, nullifying all laws passed within Texas during the war by Confederate lawmakers. The order informed all Texans that, in accordance with a Proclamation from the Executive of the United States, all enslaved people were free:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLongstanding urban legend places a historic reading of General Order No.\u00a03 at Ashton Villa; but no historical evidence supports this claim. There is no evidence that Granger or any of his troops \"proclaimed\" the Ordinance by reading it aloud. All indications are that copies of the Ordinance were posted in public places, including the Negro Church on Broadway, since renamed Reedy Chapel A.M.E. Church.\nOn June\u00a021, 2014, the Galveston Historical Foundation and Texas Historical Commission erected a Juneteenth plaque where the Osterman Building once stood signifying the location of Major General Granger's Union Headquarters believed to be where he issued his general orders.\nAlthough this event commemorates the end of slavery, emancipation for the remaining enslaved population in two Union border states, Delaware and Kentucky, would not come until December\u00a06, 1865, when the Thirteenth Amendment was ratified. The federal amendment also put a definitive end to chattel slavery\u00a0and\u00a0indentured servitude\u00a0in New Jersey, freeing approximately 16 elderly individuals. Furthermore, thousands of black slaves were not freed until after the Reconstruction Treaties of late 1866, when the Cherokee, Creek, Chickasaw, Choctaw, and Seminole\u00a0tribes were forced to sign new treaties that required them to free their slaves.\nThe freedom of formerly enslaved people in Texas was given state law status in a series of Texas Supreme Court decisions between 1868 and 1874.\nEarly Juneteenth celebrations.\nFormerly enslaved people in Galveston rejoiced after General Order No. 3. One year later, on June\u00a019, 1866, freedmen in Texas organized the first of what became annual commemorations of \"Jubilee Day\". Early celebrations were used as political rallies to give voting instructions to newly freed African Americans. Other independence observances occurred on January\u00a01 or\u00a04.\nIn some cities, Black people were barred from using public parks because of state-sponsored segregation of facilities. Across parts of Texas, freed people pooled their funds to purchase land to hold their celebrations. The day was first celebrated in Austin in 1867 under the auspices of the Freedmen's Bureau, and it had been listed on a \"calendar of public events\" by 1872. That year, Black leaders in Texas raised $1,000 for the purchase of of land, today known as Houston's Emancipation Park, to celebrate Juneteenth.\nThe observation was soon drawing thousands of attendees across Texas. In Limestone County, an estimated 30,000 Black people celebrated at Booker T. Washington Park, established in 1898 for Juneteenth celebrations. The Black community began using the word \"Juneteenth\" for Jubilee Day early in the 1890s. The word \"Juneteenth\" appeared in print in the \"Brenham Weekly Banner\", a white newspaper from Brenham, Texas, as early as 1891. Mentions of Juneteenth celebrations outside of Texas appeared as early as 1909 in Shreveport, Louisiana.\nDecline of celebrations during the Jim Crow era.\nIn the early 20th century, economic and political forces led to a decline in Juneteenth celebrations. From 1890 to 1908, Texas and all former Confederate states passed new constitutions or amendments that effectively disenfranchised Black people, excluding them from the political process. White-dominated state legislatures passed Jim Crow laws imposing second-class status. Gladys L. Knight writes the decline in celebration was in part because \"upwardly mobile blacks ... were ashamed of their slave past and aspired to assimilate into mainstream culture. Younger generations of blacks, becoming further removed from slavery were occupied with school ... and other pursuits.\" Others who migrated to the Northern United States could not take time off or simply dropped the celebration.\nThe Great Depression forced many Black people off farms and into the cities to find work, where they had difficulty taking the day off to celebrate. From 1936 to 1951, the Texas State Fair served as a destination for celebrating the holiday, contributing to its revival. In 1936, an estimated 150,000 to 200,000 people joined the holiday's celebration in Dallas. In 1938, Governor of Texas James Allred issued a proclamation stating in part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whereas, the Negroes in the State of Texas observe June\u00a019 as the official day for the celebration of Emancipation from slavery; and\nWhereas, June\u00a019, 1865, was the date when General [Gordon] Granger, who had command of the Military District of Texas, issued a proclamation notifying the Negroes of Texas that they were free; and\nWhereas, since that time, Texas Negroes have observed this day with suitable holiday ceremony, except during such years when the day comes on a Sunday; when the Governor of the State is asked to proclaim the following day as the holiday for State observance by Negroes; and\nWhereas, June\u00a019, 1938, this year falls on Sunday;\nNOW, THEREFORE, I, JAMES V. ALLRED, Governor of the State of Texas, do set aside and proclaim the day of June\u00a020, 1938, as the date for observance of\nEMANCIPATION DAY\nin Texas, and do urge all members of the Negro race in Texas to observe the day in a manner appropriate to its importance to them.\nSeventy thousand people attended a \"Juneteenth Jamboree\" in 1951. From 1940 through 1970, in the second wave of the Great Migration, more than five million Black people left Texas, Louisiana and other parts of the South for the North and the West Coast. As historian Isabel Wilkerson writes, \"The people from Texas took Juneteenth Day to Los Angeles, Oakland, Seattle, and other places they went.\" In 1945, Juneteenth was introduced in San Francisco by a migrant from Texas, Wesley Johnson.\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s, the Civil Rights Movement focused the attention of African Americans on expanding freedom and integrating. As a result, observations of the holiday declined again, though it was still celebrated in Texas.\nRevival of celebrations.\n1960s\u20131980s.\nJuneteenth soon saw a revival as Black people began tying their struggle to that of ending slavery. In Atlanta, some campaigners for equality wore Juneteenth buttons. During the 1968 Poor People's Campaign to Washington, DC, called by Rev. Ralph Abernathy, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference made June 19 the \"Solidarity Day of the Poor People's Campaign\". In the subsequent revival, large celebrations in Minneapolis and Milwaukee emerged, as well as across the Eastern United States.\nIn 1974, Houston began holding large-scale celebrations again, and Fort Worth, Texas, followed the next year. Around 30,000 people attended festivities at Sycamore Park in Fort Worth the following year. The 1978 Milwaukee celebration was described as drawing more than 100,000 attendees. In 1979, the Texas Legislature made the occasion a state holiday. In the late 1980s, there were major celebrations of Juneteenth in California, Wisconsin, Illinois, Georgia, and Washington, D.C.\nPrayer breakfast and commemorative celebrations.\nIn 1979, Democratic State Representative Al Edwards of Houston successfully sponsored legislation to make Juneteenth a paid Texas state holiday. The same year, he hosted the inaugural Al Edwards prayer breakfast and commemorative celebration on the grounds of the 1859 home, Ashton Villa. As one of the few existing buildings from the Civil War era and popular in local myth and legend as the location of Major General Granger's order, Edwards's annual celebration includes a local historian dressed as the Union general reading General Order No.\u00a03 from the second-story balcony of the home. The Emancipation Proclamation is also read and speeches are made. Representative Al Edwards died of natural causes April\u00a029, 2020, at the age of 83, but the annual prayer breakfast and commemorative celebration continued at Ashton Villa, with the late legislator's son Jason Edwards speaking in his father's place.\nOfficial statewide recognitions.\nIn the late 1970s, when the Texas Legislature declared Juneteenth a \"holiday of significance ... particularly to the blacks of Texas\", it became the first state to establish Juneteenth as a state holiday. The bill passed through the Texas Legislature in 1979 and was officially made a state holiday on January\u00a01, 1980. During the 1980s and 1990s, the holiday became more widely celebrated among African-American communities across the country and received increasing mainstream attention. Before 2000, three more U.S. states officially observed the day, and over the next two decades it was recognized as an official observance in all states, except South Dakota, until becoming a federal holiday.\nJuneteenth in pop culture and the mass media.\nRalph Ellison's 1965 short story \"Juneteenth\" in the \"Quarterly Review of Literature\", an excerpt from his novel in progress of the same name, brought the holiday to more widespread attention. In 1991, there was an exhibition by the Anacostia Community Museum (part of the Smithsonian Institution) called \"Juneteenth '91, Freedom Revisited\". In 1994, a group of community leaders gathered at Christian Unity Baptist Church in New Orleans to work for greater national celebration of Juneteenth. International awareness arose as expatriates and U.S. military bases overseas celebrated Juneteenth in cities abroad, such as Paris. In 1999, Ralph Ellison's novel \"Juneteenth\" was posthumously published, increasing recognition of the holiday. By 2006, at least 200 cities across the United States celebrated the day.\nThe holiday gained mainstream awareness outside African-American communities through depictions in media, such as episodes of TV series \"Atlanta\" (2016) and \"Black-ish\" (2017), the latter of which featured musical numbers about the holiday by Aloe Blacc, The Roots, and Fonzworth Bentley.\nIn 2018, Apple added Juneteenth to its calendars in iOS under official U.S. holidays. Private companies began to adopt Juneteenth as a paid day off for employees, while others officially marked the day in ceremonial ways, such as holding a moment of silence. In 2020, additional American corporations and educational institutions, including Twitter, the National Football League, Nike, began treating Juneteenth as a company holiday, providing a paid day off to their workers, and Google Calendar added Juneteenth to its U.S. Holidays calendar. Also in 2020, a number of major universities formally recognized Juneteenth, either as a \"day of reflection\" or as a university holiday with paid time off for faculty and staff.\nThe 2020 mother-daughter film on the holiday's pageant culture, \"Miss Juneteenth\", featured African-American women \"determined to stand on their own\" while confronting sexist tendencies within their community.\nBecoming a federal holiday.\nIn 1996, the first federal legislation to recognize \"Juneteenth Independence Day\" was introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives, H.J.\u00a0Res.\u00a0195, sponsored by Barbara-Rose Collins (D-MI). In 1997, Congress recognized the day through Senate Joint Resolution\u00a011 and House Joint Resolution\u00a056. In 2013, the U.S. Senate passed Senate Resolution\u00a0175, acknowledging Lula Briggs Galloway (late president of the National Association of Juneteenth Lineage), who \"successfully worked to bring national recognition to Juneteenth Independence Day\", and the continued leadership of the National Juneteenth Observance Foundation.\nIn the 2000s and 2010s, activists continued a long process to push Congress towards official recognition of Juneteenth. Organizations such as the National Juneteenth Observance Foundation sought a Congressional designation of Juneteenth as a national day of observance. By 2016, 45 states were recognizing the occasion. Activist Opal Lee, often referred to as the \"grandmother of Juneteenth\", campaigned for decades to make Juneteenth a federal holiday, leading walks in many states to promote the idea. In 2016\u201317 at the age of 89, she led a symbolic walk from Fort Worth, Texas to Washington D.C. to advocate for the federal holiday. When it was officially made a federal holiday on June 17, 2021, she was standing beside President Joe Biden as he signed the bill.\nJuneteenth became one of five date-specific federal holidays along with New Year's Day (January\u00a01), Independence Day (July\u00a04), Veterans Day (November\u00a011), and Christmas Day (December\u00a025). Juneteenth is the first new federal holiday since Martin Luther King Jr. Day was declared a holiday in 1986. Juneteenth also falls within the statutory Honor America Days period, which lasts for 21 days from Flag Day (June 14) to Independence Day (July 4).\nThe Juneteenth Flag.\nIn 1997, activist Ben Haith created the Juneteenth flag, which was further refined by illustrator Lisa Jeanne Graf. In 2000, the flag was first hoisted at the Roxbury Heritage State Park in Boston by Haith. The star at the center represents Texas and the extension of freedom for all African Americans throughout the whole nation. The burst around the star represents a nova and the red curve represents a horizon, standing for a new era for African Americans. The red, white, and blue colors represent the American flag, which shows that African Americans and their enslaved ancestors are Americans, and the national belief in liberty and justice for all citizens.\nLegal observance.\nState and local holiday.\nTexas was the first state to recognize the date by enacted law, in 1980. By 2002, eight states officially recognized Juneteenth and four years later 15 states recognized the holiday. By 2008, just over half of the states recognized Juneteenth in some way. By 2019, 47 states and the District of Columbia recognized Juneteenth, although as of 2020 only Texas had adopted the holiday as a paid holiday for state employees.\nIn June 2019, Governor of Pennsylvania Tom Wolf recognized Juneteenth as a holiday in the state. In the yearlong aftermath of the murder of George Floyd that occurred on May 25, 2020, nine states designated Juneteenth a paid holiday, including New York, Washington, and Virginia. In 2020, Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker issued a proclamation that the day would be marked as \"Juneteenth Independence Day\". This followed the filing of bills by both the House and Senate to make Juneteenth a state holiday. Baker did not comment on these bills specifically but promised to grant the observance of Juneteenth greater importance. On June 16, 2021, Illinois adopted a law changing its ceremonial holiday to a paid state holiday.\nSome cities and counties have also recognized Juneteenth through proclamation. In 2020, Juneteenth was formally recognized by New York City (as an annual official city holiday and public school holiday, starting in 2021). Cook County, Illinois, adopted an ordinance to make Juneteenth a paid county holiday. The City and County of Honolulu recognizes it as an \"annual day of honor and reflection\", and Portland, Oregon (as a day of remembrance and action and a paid holiday for city employees).\nNorth Dakota approved recognition of Juneteenth as a state-recognized annual holiday on April 13, 2021, with Hawaii becoming the 49th state to recognize the holiday on June 16, 2021. On June 16, 2020, South Dakota Governor Kristi Noem proclaimed that the following June 19, 2020, was to be Juneteenth Day for that year only, spurning calls for it to be recognized annually, rather than just for 2020. In February 2022, South Dakota became the last state to recognize Juneteenth as an annual state holiday or observance. Its law provided for following the federal law even before it was official. On May 2, 2022, Colorado Governor Jared Polis signed a bill changing the state's ceremonial observance to a state holiday and it is now the 11th state holiday in Colorado.\nAs of 2024, 27 states and the District of Columbia have made Juneteenth an annualized paid holiday for state employees, with the remainder maintaining at least a ceremonial observance (New Mexico's personnel board declared it a paid worker holiday, although it is not a statutory holiday in New Mexico). Additional states may observe it as a paid holiday for state workers but rely on a decision, often of the governor, in each year, instead of perpetual by statute, which may or may not occur again the next year. Local governments including counties and municipalities also may close their offices and pay their workers time-off. The table below only includes the states with perpetual, annual, paid holiday laws identified by the Congressional Research Service in 2023 or subsequent sources:\nFederal holiday.\nJuneteenth is a federal holiday in the United States. For decades, activists and congress members (led by many African Americans) proposed legislation, advocated for, and built support for state and national observances. During his campaign for president in June 2020, Joe Biden publicly celebrated the holiday. President Donald Trump, during his 2020 campaign for reelection, added making the day a national holiday part of his \"Platinum Plan for Black America\". Spurred on by Opal Lee, the racial justice movement and the Congressional Black Caucus, on June\u00a015, 2021, the Senate unanimously passed the Juneteenth National Independence Day Act, establishing Juneteenth as a federal holiday. It passed through the House of Representatives by a 415\u201314 vote on June\u00a016.\nPresident Joe Biden signed the bill (Pub. L.\u00a0) on June\u00a017, 2021, making Juneteenth the eleventh American federal holiday and the first to obtain legal observance as a federal holiday since Martin Luther King Jr. Day was designated in 1983. According to the bill, federal government employees will now get to take the day off every year on June 19, or should the date fall on a Saturday or Sunday, they will get the Friday or Monday closest to the Saturday or Sunday on which the date falls. Juneteenth is observed with the closure of post offices, banks, the NYSE and Nasdaq stock exchanges and other financial markets, most government offices, and many schools, universities, and private businesses.\nIn January 2025, President Donald Trump issued an executive order banning diversity, equity, and inclusion programs in federal agencies that has been interpreted by various agencies as eliminating in-agency observance planning for a number of cultural remembrance events, including Juneteenth, Black History Month, and several others. Nonetheless, for February 2025, Trump issued the traditional presidential proclamation calling on officials to commemorate Black History Month.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61544", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61544", "title": "Tree Fern", "text": ""}
{"id": "61545", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61545", "title": "Rafael Sabatini", "text": "Italian-British writer (1875\u20131950)\nRafael Sabatini (29 April 1875 \u2013 13 February 1950) was an Italian-born British writer of romance and adventure novels.\nHe is best known for his worldwide bestsellers: \"The Sea Hawk\" (1915), \"Scaramouche\" (1921), \"Captain Blood\" (a.k.a. \"Captain Blood: His Odyssey\") (1922), and \"Bellarion the Fortunate\" (1926). Several of his novels have been made into films, both silent and sound.\nIn all, Sabatini produced 34 novels, eight short story collections, six non-fiction books, numerous uncollected short stories, and several plays.\nLife as an author.\nAfter a brief stint in the business world, Sabatini went to work as a writer. His first published short story, \"The Red Mask,\" was printed in 1898, and his first novel came out in 1902. It took Sabatini roughly a quarter of a century of hard work before he attained success in 1921 with \"Scaramouche\". The novel, an historical romance set during the French Revolution, became an international bestseller. It was followed the next year by the equally successful \"Captain Blood\". All of his earlier books were then rushed into reprints, the most popular of which was \"The Sea Hawk\" (originally published in 1915).\nSabatini was a prolific writer, producing a new book approximately every year. With his high output and well-crafted stories he was able to maintain his popularity with the reading public through the decades that followed.\nIn the early 1940s illness from stomach cancer forced Sabatini to slow his prolific writing. He only published three more books before his death in 1950: \"King in Prussia\" (also known as The Birth of Mischief, 1944), \"Turbulent Tales\" (a collection of short stories, 1946), and \"The Gamester\" (1949).\nPersonal life.\nRafael Sabatini was born in Jesi, Italy, to an English mother, Anna Trafford, and Italian father, Vincenzo Sabatini. His parents were opera singers who then became teachers.\nAt a young age Sabatini was exposed to many languages living with his grandfather in Britain. He attended school in Portugal, and as a teenager in Switzerland. By the time he was 17, when he returned to Britain to live permanently, he had become proficient in five languages. He quickly added a sixth language \u2013 English \u2013 to his linguistic collection. He consciously chose to write in his adopted language, because, he said, \"all the best stories are written in English\".\nIn 1905, he married Ruth Goad Dixon, the daughter of a Liverpool merchant. They had a son, Sabatini's only son, Rafael-Angelo (nicknamed Binkie). He was killed in a car crash on 1 April 1927. In 1931, Sabatini and his wife Ruth divorced. Later that year he moved from London to Clifford, Herefordshire, near Hay-on-Wye.\nIn 1935, he married the sculptor Christine Dixon (n\u00e9e Wood), his former sister-in-law - she had been married previously to Ruth's brother, Hugh Wainwright Dixon. They suffered further tragedy when Christine and Hugh's son, Lancelot Steele Dixon, was killed aged 23 in a flying accident on the day he received his RAF wings, on 9 April 1940; he flew his aeroplane over his family's house, but the plane went out of control and crashed in flames right before the observers' eyes.\nSabatini died in Switzerland 13 February 1950. He was buried in Adelboden, Switzerland. On his headstone his wife had written, \"He was born with a gift of laughter and a sense that the world was mad\", the first line of \"Scaramouche\".\nFilm adaptations.\nSound films.\nSeveral of his novels were made into notable films in the sound era: \nThe 1940 film \"The Sea Hawk\", with Errol Flynn, is not an adaptation but a wholly new story which just used his novel\u2019s title.\nSilent films.\nHis novel \"Bardelys the Magnificent\" was made into a famous 1926 \"lost\" film of the same title, directed by King Vidor, starring John Gilbert, and long viewable only in a fragment excerpted in Vidor's silent comedy \"Show People\" (1928). All but one of the reels of \"Bardelys\" were rediscovered in France in 2006, and a restoration (with production stills standing in for the missing reel) was completed in 2008.\nA silent version of \"The Tavern Knight\" (1920) was made in England.\nA silent version of \"Captain Blood\" (1924), directed by David Smith and starring J. Warren Kerrigan, which was one of the last productions of the Vitagraph Company of America, survives in the Library of Congress, and two other silent adaptations of Sabatini novels which survive in other archives are Rex Ingram's \"Scaramouche\" (1923) starring Ram\u00f3n Novarro at the George Eastman Museum, and Frank Lloyd's \"The Sea Hawk\" starring Milton Sills at the UCLA Film and Television Archive.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61550", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61550", "title": "Black swan", "text": "Species of bird\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe black swan (Cygnus atratus) is a large waterbird, a species of swan which breeds mainly in the southeast and southwest regions of Australia. Within Australia, the black swan is nomadic, with erratic migration patterns dependent on climatic conditions. It is a large bird with black plumage and a red bill. It is a monogamous breeder, with both partners sharing incubation and cygnet-rearing duties.\nThe black swan was introduced to various countries as an ornamental bird in the 1800s, but has managed to escape and form stable populations. Described scientifically by English naturalist John Latham in 1790, the black swan was formerly placed into a monotypic genus, \"Chenopis\". Black swans can be found singly, or in loose companies numbering into the hundreds or even thousands. It is a popular bird in zoological gardens and bird collections, and escapees are sometimes seen outside their natural range.\nThis bird is a regional symbol of both Western Australia, where it is native, and the English town of Dawlish, where it is an introduced species.\nDescription.\nBlack swans are black-feathered birds, with white flight feathers. The bill is bright red, with a pale bar and tip; and legs and feet are greyish-black. Cobs (males) are slightly larger than pens (females), with a longer and straighter bill. Cygnets (immature birds) are a greyish-brown with pale-edged feathers.\nMature black swans measure between in length and weigh . Their wing span is between . The neck is long (relatively the longest neck among the swans) and curved in an \"S\"-shape.\nThe black swan utters a musical and far reaching bugle-like sound, called either on the water or in flight, as well as a range of softer crooning notes. It can also whistle, especially when disturbed while breeding and nesting.\nWhen swimming, black swans hold their necks arched or erect and often carry their feathers or wings raised in an aggressive display. In flight, a wedge of black swans will form as a line or a V, with the individual birds flying strongly with undulating long necks, making whistling sounds with their wings and baying, bugling or trumpeting calls.\nThe black swan is unlike any other Australian bird, although in poor light and at long range it may be confused with a magpie goose in flight. However, the black swan can be distinguished by its much longer neck and slower wing beat.\nOne captive population of black swans in Lakeland, Florida has produced a few individuals which are a light mottled grey colour instead of black. White black swans are also known to exist; these individuals, which are leucistic, are believed to occur rarely in the wild.\nDistribution.\nThe black swan is common in the wetlands of southwestern and eastern Australia and adjacent coastal islands. In the south west its range encompasses an area between North West Cape, Cape Leeuwin and Eucla; while in the east it covers a large region bounded by the Atherton Tableland, the Eyre Peninsula and Tasmania, with the Murray Darling Basin supporting very large populations of black swans. It is uncommon in central and northern Australia.\nThe black swan's preferred habitat extends across fresh, brackish and salt water lakes, swamps and rivers with underwater and emergent vegetation for food and nesting materials. It also favors permanent wetlands, including ornamental lakes, but can also be found in flooded pastures and tidal mudflats, and occasionally on the open sea near islands or the shore.\nThe black swan was once thought to be sedentary, but is now known to be highly nomadic. There is no set migratory pattern, but rather opportunistic responses to either rainfall or drought. In high rainfall years, emigration occurs from the south west and south east into the interior, with a reverse migration from these heartlands in drier years. When rain does fall in the arid central regions, black swans will migrate to these areas to nest and raise their young. However, should dry conditions return before the young have been raised, the adult birds will abandon the nests and their eggs or cygnets and return to wetter areas.\nThe black swan, like many other water fowl, loses all its flight feathers at once when it moults after breeding and is unable to fly for about a month. During this time it will usually settle on large, open waters for safety.\nThe species has a large range, with figures between 1 and 10 million km2 given as the extent of occurrence. The current global population is estimated to be up to 500,000 individuals. No threat of extinction or significant decline in population has been identified with this numerous and widespread bird.\nBlack swans were first seen by Europeans in 1697, when Willem de Vlamingh's expedition explored the Swan River, Western Australia.\nIntroduced populations.\nNew Zealand.\nBefore the arrival of the M\u0101ori in New Zealand, a related species of swan known as the New Zealand swan had developed there, but was apparently hunted to extinction. In 1864, the Australian black swan was introduced to New Zealand as an ornamental waterfowl and populations are now common on larger coastal or inland lakes, especially Rotorua Lakes, Lake Wairarapa, Lake Ellesmere / Te Waihora, and the Chatham Islands. Black swans have also naturally flown to New Zealand, leading scientists to consider them a native rather than exotic species, although the present population appears to be largely descended from deliberate introductions.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe black swan is also very popular as an ornamental waterbird in western Europe, especially Britain, and escapees are commonly reported. As yet, the population in Britain is not considered to be self-sustaining and so the species is not afforded admission to the official British List, but the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust have recorded a maximum of nine breeding pairs in the UK in 2001, with an estimate of 43 feral birds in 2003\u20132004.\nA small population of black swans exists on the River Thames at Marlow, on the brook running through the small town of Dawlish in Devon, near the River Itchen, Hampshire, and the River Tees near Stockton on Tees. The Dawlish population is so well associated with the town that the bird has been the town's emblem for forty years.\nJapan.\nThere are also wild populations in Japan, having originally been imported during 1950\u20131960.\nUnited States.\nBlack swans have been reported in Florida, but there is no evidence that they are breeding; persistent sightings may be due to continual releases or escapes. Orange County, California reported black swans in Lake Forest, Irvine and Newport Beach on October 5, 2020, and Santa Ana in December 2021 in the \"Versailles on the Lake\" apartment community. The \"Lake Forest Keys\" community bought the original swans about eight to ten years ago and since then there have been many births and gaggles from the original couple\" according to a report in the \"Orange County Register\". Black swans formerly resided in the vicinity of Lake Junaluska, a large lake in Waynesville, North Carolina.\nMainland China.\nBlack swans can also be found in mainland China. In 2018, one group of swans was introduced to the Shenzhen University campus on an artificial lake in Guangdong Province.\nBehaviour.\nDiet and feeding.\nThe black swan is almost exclusively herbivorous, and while there is some regional and seasonal variation, the diet is generally dominated by aquatic and marshland plants. In New South Wales the leaf of reedmace (genus \"Typha\") is the most important food of birds in wetlands, followed by submerged algae and aquatic plants such as \"Vallisneria\". In Queensland, aquatic plants such as \"Potamogeton\", stoneworts, and algae are the dominant foods. The exact composition varies with water level; in flood situations where normal foods are out of reach black swans will feed on pasture plants on shore. The black swan feeds in a similar manner to other swans. When feeding in shallow water it will dip its head and neck under the water and it is able to keep its head flat against the bottom while keeping its body horizontal. In deeper water the swan up-ends to reach lower. Black swans are also able to filter feed at the water's surface.\nNesting and reproduction.\nLike other swans, the black swan is largely monogamous, pairing for life (about 6% divorce rate). Recent studies have shown that around a third of all broods exhibit extra-pair paternity. An estimated one-quarter of all pairings are homosexual, mostly between males. They steal nests, or form temporary threesomes with females to obtain eggs, driving away the female after she lays the eggs.\nGenerally, black swans in the Southern hemisphere nest in the wetter winter months (February to September), occasionally in large colonies. A black swan nest is essentially a large heap or mound of reeds, grasses and weeds between 1 and 1.5 metres (3\u2013&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442 feet) in diameter and up to 1 metre high, in shallow water or on islands. A nest is reused every year, restored or rebuilt as needed. Both parents share the care of the nest. A typical clutch contains four to eight greenish-white eggs that are incubated for about 35\u201340 days. Incubation begins after the laying of the last egg, to synchronise the hatching of the chicks. Prior to the commencement of incubation the parent will sit over the eggs without actually warming them. Both sexes incubate the eggs, with the female incubating at night. The change over between incubation periods is marked by ritualised displays by both sexes. If eggs accidentally roll out of the nest both sexes will retrieve the egg using the neck (in other swan species only the female performs this feat). Like all swans, black swans will aggressively defend their nests with their wings and beaks. After hatching, the cygnets are tended by the parents for about nine months until fledging. Cygnets may ride on their parent's back for longer trips into deeper water, but black swans undertake this behaviour less frequently than mute and black-necked swans.\nRelationship with humans.\nConservation.\nThe black swan is protected in New South Wales, Australia under the \"National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974\" (s.5). The Black Swan is fully protected in all states and territories of Australia and must not be shot. It is evaluated as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.\nAustralian culture.\nThe black swan was a literary or artistic image among Europeans even before their arrival in Australia. Cultural reference has been based on symbolic contrast and as a distinctive motif.\nThe black swan's role in Australian heraldry and culture extends to the first founding of the colonies in the eighteenth century. It has often been equated with antipodean identity, the contrast to the white swan of the northern hemisphere indicating 'Australianness'. The black swan is featured on the flag, and is both the state bird and state emblem of Western Australia; it also appears in the coat of arms and other iconography of the state's institutions. The Black Swan was the sole postage stamp design of Western Australia from 1854 to 1902.\nIndigenous Australia.\nThe Noongar People of the South-West of Australia call the black swan \"Kooldjak\" along the West and South-West coast, \"Gooldjak\" in the South East and it is sometimes referred to as \"maali\" in language schools.\nThe Teen Toomele Menennye people of Tasmania call the black swan \"Pickerdar\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61551", "revid": "15415726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61551", "title": "Jupiter-C", "text": "Part of the Redstone rocket family\nThe Jupiter-C was an American research and development vehicle developed from the Jupiter-A. Jupiter-C was used for three uncrewed sub-orbital spaceflights in 1956 and 1957 to test re-entry nosecones that were later to be deployed on the more advanced PGM-19 Jupiter mobile missile. The recovered nosecone was displayed in the Oval Office as part of President Dwight D. Eisenhower's televised speech on November 7, 1957.\nA member of the Redstone rocket family, Jupiter-C was designed by the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA), under the direction of Wernher von Braun. Three Jupiter-C flights were made. These were followed by satellite launches with the vehicle designated as Juno I (see Juno I below or the Juno I article). All were launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida.\nDescription.\nEach vehicle consisted of a modified Redstone ballistic missile with two solid-propellant upper stages. The tanks of the Redstone were lengthened by 8\u00a0ft (2.4 m) to provide additional propellant. The instrument compartment was also smaller and lighter than the Redstone's. The second and third stages were clustered in a \"tub\" atop the vehicle.\nThe second stage was an outer ring of eleven scaled-down Sergeant rocket engines; the third stage was a cluster of three scaled-down Sergeant rockets grouped within. These were held in position by bulkheads and rings and surrounded by a cylindrical outer shell. The webbed base plate of the shell rested on a ball bearing shaft mounted on the first-stage instrument section. Two electric motors spun in the tub at a rate varying from 450 to 750 rpm to compensate for thrust imbalance when the clustered motors fired. The rate of spin was varied by a programmer so that it did not couple with the changing resonance frequency of the first stage during flight.\nThe upper-stage tub was visibly spun-up before launch. During first-stage flight, the vehicle was guided by a gyro-controlled autopilot controlling both air-vanes and jet vanes on the first stage by means of servos. Following a vertical launch from a simple steel table, the vehicle was programmed so that it was traveling at an angle of 40 degrees from the horizontal at burnout of the first stage, which occurred 157 seconds after launch.\nAt first-stage burnout, explosive bolts fired and springs separated the instrument section from the first-stage tankage. The instrument section and the spinning tub were slowly tipped to a horizontal position by means of four air jets located at the base of the instrument section. When the apex of the vertical flight occurred after a coasting flight of about 247 seconds, a radio signal from the ground ignited the eleven-rocket cluster of the second stage, separating the tub from the instrument section. The third stage then fired to raise the apogee. Through this system, designed by Wernher von Braun in 1956 for his proposed Project Orbiter, the Jupiter-C obviated the need for a guidance system in the upper stages.\nJuno I.\nThe Juno I was a satellite launch vehicle based on the Jupiter-C, but with the addition of a fourth stage, atop the \"tub\" of the third stage and the use of Hydyne as fuel. The Juno name derived from Von Braun wishing to make the satellite launch appear as peaceable as the Vanguard rocket, which was not a weapon, but was developed from a weather study rocket, the Viking. Since the Juno I was the same height as the Jupiter-C (21.2 meters), with the added fourth stage being hidden inside the shell, this vehicle which successfully launched the first orbital satellite of the United States is often incorrectly referred to as a Jupiter-C.\nEncrypted serial number.\nThe Jupiter-C was part of the IRBM project, and the sequence of manufacture of the rockets (which are not necessarily launched in order, and may be uprated as solutions to technical problems are worked out in tests) was considered a military secret. So the designation painted on the sides of the rocket was not a serial number in clear text, but employed a simple transformation cypher that the staff would be sure not to forget. The key was taken from the name of the design and test base: Huntsville, Alabama, giving HUNTSVILE, with duplicated letters dropped: H was used for 1, U for 2, ..., E for 9 and X for 0. For example, the Jupiter-C / Juno I modified to launch Explorer 1 had \"UE\" painted on the side, indicating it was S/N 29 (U\u21922, E\u21929).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61552", "revid": "15415726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61552", "title": "Juno I", "text": "Four-stage American expendable launch vehicle (1958\u201359)\nThe Juno I was a four-stage American space launch vehicle, used to launch lightweight payloads into low Earth orbit. The launch vehicle was used between January 1958 to December 1959. The launch vehicle is a member of the Redstone launch vehicle family, and was derived from the Jupiter-C sounding rocket. It is commonly confused with the Juno II launch vehicle, which was derived from the PGM-19 Jupiter medium-range ballistic missile. In 1958, a Juno I launch vehicle was used to launch America's first satellite, Explorer 1.\nHistory.\nDeveloped as a part of the Explorer Project, the original goal for the launch vehicle was to place an artificial satellite into orbit. Following the Soviet Union's launch of Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957 (and the resulting \"Sputnik crisis\") and the failure of the Vanguard 1 launch attempt, the program received funding to match the Soviet space achievements. The launch vehicle family name was suggested in November 1957 by Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Dr. William Pickering, who proposed the name Juno, after the Roman goddess and queen of the gods, as well as for its position as the satellite-launching version of the Jupiter-C. The fourth stage for the Juno I launch vehicle was derived following the September 1956 test launch of a Jupiter-C for the Army Ballistic Missile Agency, which could have been the world's first satellite launch, had a fourth stage been loaded and fueled. A fourth stage would have allowed the nose cone to overshoot the target and enter orbit.\nThe first launch of a Juno I launch vehicle was in early 1958, with the successful launch of Explorer 1 satellite on February 1, 1958, at 03:47:56 GMT, after the Soviet Union's Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957. The launch had been scheduled for January 29, 1958, but was scrubbed twice. Explorer 1 was the first U.S. satellite, and it confirmed the existence of the Van Allen radiation belt. Following the first successful launch, five more Juno I launch attempts occurred with two successes and three failures. The final launch attempt was on October 23, 1958, from Cape Canaveral Launch Pad 5, which ended in failure.\nLaunch vehicle.\nThe Juno I consisted of a Jupiter-C first stage, based on the Redstone missile; with three additional solid fuel stages based on the Sergeant missile to provide the added impulse to achieve orbit. The fourth stage was mounted on top of the \"tub\" of the third stage, and fired after third-stage burnout to boost the payload and fourth stage to an orbital velocity of , with an acceleration of 25\u201351 g. The tub along with the fourth stage were set spinning while the launch vehicle was on the launch pad to provide gyroscopic force in lieu of a guidance system that would have required thrust vectoring, vernier thrusters, or a reaction control system. The booster guidance package (with the tub attached) separated from the first stage after burnout to provide attitude control until second stage ignition. This multi-stage system, designed by Wernher von Braun in 1956 for his proposed Project Orbiter, obviated the need for a guidance system in the upper stages. It was the simplest method for putting a payload into orbit but having no upper-stage guidance, the payload could not achieve a precise orbit. Both the four-stage Juno I and three-stage Jupiter-C launch vehicles were the same height (), with the added fourth-stage booster of the Juno I being enclosed inside the nose cone of the third stage.\nLaunch history.\nJuno I was launched six times by ABMA in 1958, intending to place satellites in LEO.\nFollowing the successful launch of Explorer 1 on February 1, 1958, the first U.S. satellite, Juno I made five more launches before being retired in favor of Juno II. Although Juno I's launch of the Explorer 1 satellite was a huge success for the U.S. space program, only two of its remaining five flights were successful, Explorer 3 and Explorer 4, giving the Juno I vehicle a mission total success ratio of 50%. The Juno I vehicle was replaced by the Juno II in 1959.\nThe designation painted on the sides of the rocket was inherited from Jupiter-C, where the sequence of manufacture of the rockets (which are not necessarily launched in order, and may be uprated as solutions to technical problems are worked out in tests) was considered a military secret. So the designation employed a simple transformation cypher based on the name of the design and test base: Huntsville, Alabama, giving HUNTSVILE, with duplicated letters dropped. This way H was used for 1, U for 2, ..., E for 9 and X for 0. Thus the \"UE\" painted on the side of the Juno I that launched Explorer 1 indicates it was S/N 29 (U\u21922, E\u21929).\nThe American public was happy and relieved that America had finally managed to launch a satellite after the launch failures in the Vanguard and Viking series. With the relative success of the Juno I program, von Braun developed the Juno II, using a PGM-19 Jupiter first stage, rather than a Redstone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61553", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61553", "title": "Tree fern", "text": "Ferns that grow with a trunk elevating the fronds above ground level\nTree ferns are arborescent (tree-like) ferns that grow with a trunk elevating the fronds above ground level, making them trees. Many extant tree ferns are members of the order Cyatheales, to which belong the families Cyatheaceae (scaly tree ferns), Dicksoniaceae, Metaxyaceae, and Cibotiaceae. It is estimated that Cyatheales originated in the early Jurassic, and is the third group of ferns known to have given rise to tree-like forms. The others are the extinct \"Tempskya\" of uncertain position, and Osmundales where the extinct Guaireaceae and some members of Osmundaceae also grew into trees. In addition there were the Psaroniaceae including \"Tietea\" in the Marattiales, which is the sister group to all the leptosporangiate ferns.\nOther tree ferns include \"Leptopteris\" and \"Todea\" in the family Osmundaceae, which can achieve short trunks under a metre tall. Osmunda regalis is sometimes considered a tree fern. Fern species with short trunks in the genera \"Blechnum\", \"Cystodium\" and \"Sadleria\" from the order Polypodiales and smaller members of Cyatheales like \"Calochlaena\", \"Cnemedaria\", \"Culcita\", \"Lophosoria\" and \"Thyrsopteris\" are also considered tree ferns. The species Ctenitis sloanei (Florida tree fern) from Florida, Mexico, Bermuda and the Caribbean is sometimes called a tree fern. Like all ferns, tree ferns reproduce by means of spores formed on the undersides of the fronds.\nRange.\nTree ferns are found growing in tropical and subtropical areas worldwide, as well as cool to temperate rainforests in Australia, New Zealand and neighbouring regions (e.g. Lord Howe Island, Norfolk Island, Nuie etc.). They are also found in New Caledonia. In the Americas, they are widespread in Colombia, Ecuador, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Bolivia, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Peru, Brazil, Mexico, Costa Rica, Panama, Guatemala, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and other Caribbean islands as well as many of the islands near South America. A single tree fern is known to exist in the mainland United States and the Bahamas. Tree ferns are common place in most Pacific islands like the Clipperton Islands, Cocos Islands, Revillagigedo Islands, Hawaiian Islands, Johnston Atoll, Wake Island, Marcus Island (Minami-Tori-shima), Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, Palau, Federated States of Micronesia (Yap, Chuuk, Pohnpei, Kosrae), Marshall Islands (Bikini, Enewetak, Majuro, Kwajalein), Nauru, Kiribati (Gilbert Islands, Phoenix Islands, Line Islands), Tuvalu, Tokelau, Wallis and Futuna, American Samoa, Samoa, Tonga, Cook Islands, French Polynesia (Marquesas, Tuamotu, Gambier, Society, Austral Islands), Pitcairn Islands, Easter Island (Rapa Nui). Tree ferns are known from Indonesia, Timor, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Thailand, Myanmar, Vietnam, Cambodia, The Philippines, Japan, China, Laos, India, Bangladesh and some nearby islands such as the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. In Africa, they can be found in places such as Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, South Africa, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi, Comoros, Seychelles and Madagascar. In Europe they are mainly known from Iberia in places such as Spain, Portugal and the Canary Islands.\nDescription.\nThe fronds of tree ferns are usually very large and multiple-pinnate. Their trunk is actually a vertical and modified rhizome, and woody tissue is absent. To add strength, there are deposits of lignin in the cell walls and the lower part of the stem is reinforced with thick, interlocking mats of tiny roots. If the crown of \"Dicksonia antarctica\" (the most common species in gardens) is damaged, it will inevitably die because that is where all the new growth occurs. But other clump-forming tree fern species, such as \"D. squarrosa\" and \"D. youngiae\", can regenerate from basal offsets or from \"pups\" emerging along the surviving trunk length. Tree ferns often fall over in the wild, yet manage to re-root from this new prostrate position and begin new vertical growth.\nUses.\nTree-ferns have been cultivated for their beauty alone; a few, however, were of some economic application, chiefly as sources of starch. These include the \"Sphaeropteris excelsa\" of Norfolk Island that was threatened with extinction for the sake of its sago-like pith, which was eaten by pigs. It is now widely cultivated as an ornamental tree, although there is only one small wild population on Norfolk Island.\"Sphaeropteris medullaris\" (mamaku, black tree fern) also furnished a kind of sago to people living in New Zealand, Queensland and the Pacific islands. A Javanese species of \"Dicksonia\" (\"D. chrysotricha\") furnishes silky hairs, which were once imported as a styptic, and the long silky or wooly hairs, abundant on the stem and frond-leaves in the various species of \"Cibotium\" have not only been put to a similar use, but in the Hawaiian Islands furnished wool for stuffing mattresses and cushions, which was formerly an article of export.\nSpecies.\nIt is not certain the exact number of species of tree ferns there are, but it may be close to 600\u2013700\u00a0species. Many species have become extinct in the last century as forest habitats have come under pressure from human intervention.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61554", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61554", "title": "Tony Williams (drummer)", "text": "American jazz drummer (1945\u20131997)\nAnthony Tillmon Williams (December 12, 1945\u00a0\u2013 February 23, 1997) was an American jazz drummer.\nWilliams first gained fame as a member of Miles Davis' \"Second Great Quintet\", and later pioneered jazz fusion with Davis' group and his own combo, the Tony Williams Lifetime. In 1970, music critic Robert Christgau described him as \"probably the best drummer in the world.\" Williams was inducted into the \"Modern Drummer\" Hall of Fame in 1986 and the Percussive Arts Society Hall of Fame in 1997.\nLife and career.\nWilliams was born in Chicago, Illinois, and grew up in Boston, Massachusetts. He was of African, Portuguese, and Chinese descent. He studied with drummer Alan Dawson at the age of 11, and began playing professionally at the age of 13 with saxophonist Sam Rivers. Saxophonist Jackie McLean hired Williams when he was 16. As a young drummer, he was influenced by Max Roach, Art Blakey, Philly Joe Jones, Roy Haynes, Louis Hayes, and Jimmy Cobb.\nAt 17, Williams joined Miles Davis in what was later dubbed Davis's Second Great Quintet--with saxophonist Wayne Shorter, pianist Herbie Hancock, and bassist Ron Carter. Davis had been in something of a creative lull, and critics noted the young Tony Williams's playing spurred the others on. Williams was a vital element of the group, called by Davis in his autobiography \"the center that the group's sound revolved around.\" His playing helped redefine the role of the jazz rhythm section through the use of polyrhythms and metric modulation. Meanwhile, he recorded his first two albums as a leader for the Blue Note label, \"Life Time\" (1964) and \"Spring\" (1965). He also recorded as a sideman for the label including the classics \"Out to Lunch!\" with Eric Dolphy and \"Point of Departure\" with Andrew Hill, both in 1964.\nIn 1969 Williams formed the Tony Williams Lifetime, with John McLaughlin on guitar and Larry Young on organ. Lifetime was a pioneering band of the fusion movement.\nTheir first album was \"Emergency!\". For the \"Turn It Over\" album, the trio were joined by bass guitarist and vocalist Jack Bruce. After several more releases and touring, Lifetime disbanded. In 1975, Williams formed \"The New Tony Williams Lifetime\", featuring bassist Tony Newton, keyboardist Alan Pasqua and guitarist Allan Holdsworth, who recorded two albums for Columbia Records, \"Believe It\" and \"Million Dollar Legs\".\nIn 1976, Williams reunited with his colleagues from the Miles Davis Quintet. (Davis himself was in the midst of a six-year hiatus and was \"replaced\" by trumpeter Freddie Hubbard.) A record of their concert was later released as \"V.S.O.P\" (\"Very Special One-time Performance\"), the name under which the group toured and recorded for several years.\nIn 1979, Williams, McLaughlin and bassist Jaco Pastorius united for a performance at the Havana Jazz Festival. This trio came to be known as the Trio of Doom, and a recording of their performance (along with some studio tracks recorded in New York shortly thereafter) was released in 2007. Williams and Pastorius also played together on \"Good Question\" from the 1978 Herbie Hancock album \"Sunlight\". Williams appears with the group Fuse One on their 1980 album.\nIn 1985, he returned to Blue Note with the \"Foreign Intrigue\" album. Eventually Williams formed his own acoustic quintet with trumpeter Wallace Roney, saxophonist Bill Pierce, pianist Mulgrew Miller and bassist Ira Coleman. The quintet played Williams's compositions almost exclusively, recording and touring extensively from 1986 to 1992, culminating in \"The Story of Neptune\" album.\nWilliams guested with the band Public Image Limited, fronted by John Lydon, on their release \"Album\" (1986). \nOn February 20, 1997, Williams checked into Seton Medical Center in Daly City, California, suffering from stomach pain. Three days later, while recuperating from gall bladder surgery, he died of a heart attack. He was 51 years old.\nPersonal life.\nWilliams lived and taught in the San Francisco Bay Area until his death in 1997. One of his final recordings was \"The Last Wave\" by the trio known as Arcana, a release organized by Bill Laswell.\nDiscography.\nAs leader/co-leader.\nCompilation\nAs a member.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs sideman.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61558", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61558", "title": "Patriarch Stephanus I", "text": ""}
{"id": "61559", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61559", "title": "Archimedean spiral", "text": "Spiral with constant distance from itself\nThe Archimedean spiral (also known as Archimedes' spiral, the arithmetic spiral) is a spiral named after the 3rd-century BC Greek mathematician Archimedes. The term \"Archimedean spiral\" is sometimes used to refer to the more general class of spirals of this type (see below), in contrast to \"Archimedes' spiral\" (the specific arithmetic spiral of Archimedes). It is the locus corresponding to the locations over time of a point moving away from a fixed point with a constant speed along a line that rotates with constant angular velocity. Equivalently, in polar coordinates (\"r\", \"\u03b8\") it can be described by the equation\nformula_1\nwith real number b. Changing the parameter b controls the distance between loops.\nFrom the above equation, it can thus be stated: position of the particle from point of start is proportional to angle \u03b8 as time elapses.\nArchimedes described such a spiral in his book \"On Spirals\". Conon of Samos was a friend of his and Pappus states that this spiral was discovered by Conon.\nDerivation of general equation of spiral.\nA physical approach is used below to understand the notion of Archimedean spirals.\nSuppose a point object moves in the Cartesian system with a constant velocity v directed parallel to the x-axis, with respect to the xy-plane. Let at time \"t\" \n 0, the object was at an arbitrary point (\"c\", 0, 0). If the xy plane rotates with a constant angular velocity \u03c9 about the z-axis, then the velocity of the point with respect to z-axis may be written as:\nformula_2\nAs shown in the figure alongside, we have \"vt\" + \"c\" representing the modulus of the position vector of the particle at any time t, with vx and vy as the velocity components along the x and y axes, respectively.\nformula_3\nThe above equations can be integrated by applying integration by parts, leading to the following parametric equations:\nformula_4\nSquaring the two equations and then adding (and some small alterations) results in the Cartesian equation\nformula_5\n(using the fact that \"\u03c9t\" \n \"\u03b8\" and \"\u03b8\" \n arctan ) or\nformula_6\nIts polar form is\nformula_7\nArc length and curvature.\nGiven the parametrization in cartesian coordinates\nformula_8\nthe arc length from \"\u03b8\"1 to \"\u03b8\"2 is\nformula_9\nor, equivalently:\nformula_10\nThe total length from \"\u03b8\"1 \n 0 to \"\u03b8\"2 \n \"\u03b8\" is therefore\nformula_11\nThe curvature is given by \nformula_12\nCharacteristics.\nThe Archimedean spiral has the property that any ray from the origin intersects successive turnings of the spiral in points with a constant separation distance (equal to 2\"\u03c0b\" if \u03b8 is measured in radians), hence the name \"arithmetic spiral\". In contrast to this, in a logarithmic spiral these distances, as well as the distances of the intersection points measured from the origin, form a geometric progression.\nThe Archimedean spiral has two arms, one for \"\u03b8\" &gt; 0 and one for \"\u03b8\" &lt; 0. The two arms are smoothly connected at the origin. Only one arm is shown on the accompanying graph. Taking the mirror image of this arm across the y-axis will yield the other arm.\nFor large \u03b8 a point moves with well-approximated uniform acceleration along the Archimedean spiral while the spiral corresponds to the locations over time of a point moving away from a fixed point with a constant speed along a line which rotates with constant angular velocity (see contribution from Mikhail Gaichenkov).\nAs the Archimedean spiral grows, its evolute asymptotically approaches a circle with radius .\nGeneral Archimedean spiral.\nSometimes the term \"Archimedean spiral\" is used for the more general group of spirals\nformula_13\nThe normal Archimedean spiral occurs when \"c\" \n 1. Other spirals falling into this group include the hyperbolic spiral (\"c\" \n \u22121), Fermat's spiral (\"c\" \n 2), and the lituus (\"c\" \n \u22122).\nApplications.\nOne method of squaring the circle, due to Archimedes, makes use of an Archimedean spiral. Archimedes also showed how the spiral can be used to trisect an angle. Both approaches relax the traditional limitations on the use of straightedge and compass in ancient Greek geometric proofs.\nThe Archimedean spiral has a variety of real-world applications. Scroll compressors, used for compressing gases, have rotors that can be made from two interleaved Archimedean spirals, involutes of a circle of the same size that almost resemble Archimedean spirals, or hybrid curves.\nArchimedean spirals can be found in spiral antenna, which can be operated over a wide range of frequencies.\nThe coils of watch balance springs and the grooves of very early gramophone records form Archimedean spirals, making the grooves evenly spaced (although variable track spacing was later introduced to maximize the amount of music that could be cut onto a record).\nAsking for a patient to draw an Archimedean spiral is a way of quantifying human tremor; this information helps in diagnosing neurological diseases.\nArchimedean spirals are also used in digital light processing (DLP) projection systems to minimize the \"rainbow effect\", making it look as if multiple colors are displayed at the same time, when in reality red, green, and blue are being cycled extremely quickly. Additionally, Archimedean spirals are used in food microbiology to quantify bacterial concentration through a spiral platter.\nThey are also used to model the pattern that occurs in a roll of paper or tape of constant thickness wrapped around a cylinder.\nMany dynamic spirals (such as the Parker spiral of the solar wind, or the pattern made by a Catherine's wheel) are Archimedean. For instance, the star LL Pegasi shows an approximate Archimedean spiral in the dust clouds surrounding it, thought to be ejected matter from the star that has been shepherded into a spiral by another companion star as part of a double star system.\nConstruction methods.\nThe Archimedean Spiral cannot be constructed precisely by traditional compass and straightedge methods, since the arithmetic spiral requires the radius of the curve to be incremented constantly as the angle at the origin is incremented. But an arithmetic spiral can be constructed approximately, to varying degrees of precision, by various manual drawing methods. One such method uses compass and straightedge; another method uses a modified string compass. \nThe common traditional construction uses compass and straightedge to approximate the arithmetic spiral. First, a large circle is constructed and its circumference is subdivided by 12 diameters into 12 arcs (of 30 degrees each; see regular dodecagon). Next, the radius of this circle is itself subdivided into 12 unit segments (radial units), and a series of concentric circles is constructed, each with radius incremented by one radial unit. Starting with the horizontal diameter and the innermost concentric circle, the point is marked where its radius intersects its circumference; one then moves to the next concentric circle and to the next diameter (moving up to construct a counterclockwise spiral, or down for clockwise) to mark the next point. After all points have been marked, successive points are connected by a line approximating the arithmetic spiral (or by a smooth curve of some sort; see French Curve). Depending on the desired degree of precision, this method can be improved by increasing the size of the large outer circle, making more subdivisions of both its circumference and radius, increasing the number of concentric circles (see Polygonal Spiral). Approximating the Archimedean Spiral by this method is of course reminiscent of Archimedes\u2019 famous method of approximating \u03c0 by doubling the sides of successive polygons (see Polygon approximation of \u03c0).\nCompass and straightedge construction of the Spiral of Theodorus is another simple method to approximate the Archimedean Spiral.\nA mechanical method for constructing the arithmetic spiral uses a modified string compass, where the string wraps and winds (or unwraps/unwinds) about a fixed central pin (that does not pivot), thereby incrementing (or decrementing) the length of the radius (string) as the angle changes (the string winds around the fixed pin which does not pivot). Such a method is a simple way to create an arithmetic spiral, arising naturally from use of a string compass with winding pin (not the loose pivot of a common string compass). The string compass drawing tool has various modifications and designs, and this construction method is reminiscent of string-based methods for creating ellipses (with two fixed pins).\nYet another mechanical method is a variant of the previous string compass method, providing greater precision and more flexibility. Instead of the central pin and string of the string compass, this device uses a non-rotating shaft (column) with helical threads (screw; see Archimedes\u2019 screw) to which are attached two slotted arms: one horizontal arm is affixed to (travels up) the screw threads of the vertical shaft at one end, and holds a drawing tool at the other end; another sloped arm is affixed at one end to the top of the screw shaft, and is joined by a pin loosely fitted in its slot to the slot of the horizontal arm. The two arms rotate together and work in consort to produce the arithmetic spiral: as the horizontal arm gradually climbs the screw, that arm\u2019s slotted attachment to the sloped arm gradually shortens the drawing radius. The angle of the sloped arm remains constant throughout (traces a cone), and setting a different angle varies the pitch of the spiral. This device provides a high degree of precision, depending on the precision with which the device is machined (machining a precise helical screw thread is a related challenge). And of course the use of a screw shaft in this mechanism is reminiscent of Archimedes\u2019 screw.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61562", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61562", "title": "Hilberts basis theorem", "text": ""}
{"id": "61563", "revid": "11487052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61563", "title": "Spiral", "text": "Curve that winds around a central point\nIn mathematics, a spiral is a curve which emanates from a point, moving further away as it revolves around the point. It is a subtype of whorled patterns, a broad group that also includes concentric objects.\nTwo-dimensional.\nA two-dimensional, or plane, spiral may be easily described using polar coordinates, where the radius formula_1 is a monotonic continuous function of angle formula_2:\nThe circle would be regarded as a degenerate case (the function not being strictly monotonic, but rather constant).\nIn \"formula_4-formula_5-coordinates\" the curve has the parametric representation:\nExamples.\nSome of the most important sorts of two-dimensional spirals include:\nAn \"Archimedean spiral\" is, for example, generated while coiling a carpet.\nA \"hyperbolic spiral\" appears as image of a helix with a special central projection (see diagram). A hyperbolic spiral is some times called \"reciproke\" spiral, because it is the image of an Archimedean spiral with a circle-inversion (see below).\nThe name \"logarithmic spiral\" is due to the equation formula_12. Approximations of this are found in nature.\nSpirals which do not fit into this scheme of the first 5 examples:\nA \"Cornu spiral\" has two asymptotic points.&lt;br&gt;\nThe \"spiral of Theodorus\" is a polygon.&lt;br&gt;\nThe \"Fibonacci Spiral\" consists of a sequence of circle arcs.&lt;br&gt;\nThe \"involute of a circle\" looks like an Archimedean, but is not: see Involute#Examples.\nGeometric properties.\nThe following considerations are dealing with spirals, which can be described by a polar equation formula_13, especially for the cases formula_14 (Archimedean, hyperbolic, Fermat's, lituus spirals) and the logarithmic spiral formula_11.\nThe angle formula_16 between the spiral tangent and the corresponding polar circle (see diagram) is called \"angle of the polar slope\" and formula_17 the \"polar slope\".\nFrom vector calculus in polar coordinates one gets the formula\nformula_18\nHence the slope of the spiral formula_19 is\nIn case of an \"Archimedean spiral\" (formula_21) the polar slope is formula_22\nIn a \"logarithmic spiral\", formula_23 is constant.\nThe curvature formula_24 of a curve with polar equation formula_13 is\nformula_26\nFor a spiral with formula_27 one gets\nIn case of formula_21 \"(Archimedean spiral)\"\nformula_30.&lt;br&gt; \nOnly for formula_31 the spiral has an \"inflection point\".\nThe curvature of a \"logarithmic spiral\" formula_32 is formula_33\nThe area of a sector of a curve (see diagram) with polar equation formula_13 is\nformula_35\nFor a spiral with equation formula_36 one gets\nformula_38\nThe formula for a \"logarithmic spiral\" formula_32 is\nformula_40\nThe length of an arc of a curve with polar equation formula_13 is\nformula_42\nFor the spiral formula_36 the length is\nNot all these integrals can be solved by a suitable table. In case of a Fermat's spiral, the integral can be expressed by elliptic integrals only.\nThe arc length of a \"logarithmic spiral\" formula_32 is formula_46\nThe inversion at the unit circle has in polar coordinates the simple description: formula_47.\nA logarithmic spiral formula_32 is mapped onto the logarithmic spiral formula_51\nBounded spirals.\nThe function formula_52 of a spiral is usually strictly monotonic, continuous\nand unbounded. For the standard spirals formula_52 is either a power function or an exponential function. If one chooses for formula_52 a \"bounded\" function, the spiral is bounded, too. A suitable bounded function is the arctan function:\nSetting formula_55 and the choice formula_56 gives a spiral, that starts at the origin (like an Archimedean spiral) and approaches the circle with radius formula_57 (diagram, left).\nFor formula_58 and formula_59 one gets a spiral, that approaches the origin (like a hyperbolic spiral) and approaches the circle with radius formula_60 (diagram, right).\nThree-dimensional.\nHelices.\nTwo major definitions of \"spiral\" in the American Heritage Dictionary are:\nThe first definition describes a planar curve, that extends in both of the perpendicular directions within its plane; the groove on one side of a gramophone record closely approximates a plane spiral (and it is by the finite width and depth of the groove, but \"not\" by the wider spacing between than within tracks, that it falls short of being a perfect example); note that successive loops \"differ\" in diameter. In another example, the \"center lines\" of the arms of a spiral galaxy trace logarithmic spirals.\nThe second definition includes two kinds of 3-dimensional relatives of spirals:\nIn the side picture, the black curve at the bottom is an Archimedean spiral, while the green curve is a helix. The curve shown in red is a conical spiral.\nTwo well-known spiral space curves are \"conical spirals\" and \"spherical spirals\", defined below.\nAnother instance of space spirals is the \"toroidal spiral\". A spiral wound around a helix, also known as \"double-twisted helix\", represents objects such as coiled coil filaments.\nConical spirals.\nIf in the formula_4-formula_5-plane a spiral with parametric representation \nformula_63 \nis given, then there can be added a third coordinate formula_64, such that the now space curve lies on the cone with equation formula_65:\nSpirals based on this procedure are called conical spirals.\nStarting with an \"archimedean spiral\" formula_67 one gets the conical spiral (see diagram)\nformula_68\nSpherical spirals.\nAny cylindrical map projection can be used as the basis for a spherical spiral: draw a straight line on the map and find its inverse projection on the sphere, a kind of spherical curve.\nOne of the most basic families of spherical spirals is the Clelia curves, which project to straight lines on an equirectangular projection. These are curves for which longitude and colatitude are in a linear relationship, analogous to Archimedean spirals in the plane; under the azimuthal equidistant projection a Clelia curve projects to a planar Archimedean spiral.\nIf one represents a unit sphere by spherical coordinates\n formula_69\nthen setting the linear dependency formula_70 for the angle coordinates gives a parametric curve in terms of parameter &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nformula_71\nAnother family of spherical spirals is the rhumb lines or loxodromes, that project to straight lines on the Mercator projection. These are the trajectories traced by a ship traveling with constant bearing. Any loxodrome (except for the meridians and parallels) spirals infinitely around either pole, closer and closer each time, unlike a Clelia curve which maintains uniform spacing in colatitude. Under stereographic projection, a loxodrome projects to a logarithmic spiral in the plane.\nIn nature.\nThe study of spirals in nature has a long history. Christopher Wren observed that many shells form a logarithmic spiral; Jan Swammerdam observed the common mathematical characteristics of a wide range of shells from \"Helix\" to \"Spirula\"; and Henry Nottidge Moseley described the mathematics of univalve shells. D\u2019Arcy Wentworth Thompson's \"On Growth and Form\" gives extensive treatment to these spirals. He describes how shells are formed by rotating a closed curve around a fixed axis: the shape of the curve remains fixed, but its size grows in a geometric progression. In some shells, such as \"Nautilus\" and ammonites, the generating curve revolves in a plane perpendicular to the axis and the shell will form a planar discoid shape. In others it follows a skew path forming a helico-spiral pattern. Thompson also studied spirals occurring in horns, teeth, claws and plants.\nA model for the pattern of florets in the head of a sunflower was proposed by H. Vogel. This has the form\nformula_72\nwhere \"n\" is the index number of the floret and \"c\" is a constant scaling factor, and is a form of Fermat's spiral. The angle 137.5\u00b0 is the golden angle which is related to the golden ratio and gives a close packing of florets.\nSpirals in plants and animals are frequently described as whorls. This is also the name given to spiral shaped fingerprints.\nAs a symbol.\nThe Celtic triple-spiral is in fact a pre-Celtic symbol. It is carved into the rock of a stone lozenge near the main entrance of the prehistoric Newgrange monument in County Meath, Ireland. Newgrange was built around 3200 BCE, predating the Celts; triple spirals were carved at least 2,500 years before the Celts reached Ireland, but have long since become part of Celtic culture. The triskelion symbol, consisting of three interlocked spirals or three bent human legs, appears in many early cultures: examples include Mycenaean vessels, coinage from Lycia, staters of Pamphylia (at Aspendos, 370\u2013333 BC) and Pisidia, as well as the heraldic emblem on warriors' shields depicted on Greek pottery.\nSpirals occur commonly in pre-Columbian art in Latin and Central America. The more than 1,400 petroglyphs (rock engravings) in Las Plazuelas, Guanajuato Mexico, dating 750-1200 AD, predominantly depict spirals, dot figures and scale models. In Colombia, monkeys, frog and lizard-like figures depicted in petroglyphs or as gold offering-figures frequently include spirals, for example on the palms of hands. In Lower Central America, spirals along with circles, wavy lines, crosses and points are universal petroglyph characters. Spirals also appear among the Nazca Lines in the coastal desert of Peru, dating from 200 BC to 500 AD. The geoglyphs number in the thousands and depict animals, plants and geometric motifs, including spirals.\nSpirals are also a symbol of hypnosis, stemming from the clich\u00e9 of people and cartoon characters being hypnotized by staring into a spinning spiral (one example being Kaa in Disney's \"The Jungle Book\"). They are also used as a symbol of dizziness, where the eyes of a cartoon character, especially in anime and manga, will turn into spirals to suggest that they are dizzy or dazed. The spiral is also found in structures as small as the double helix of DNA and as large as a galaxy. Due to this frequent natural occurrence, the spiral is the official symbol of the World Pantheist Movement. The spiral is also a symbol of the dialectic process and of Dialectical monism.\nThe spiral is a frequent symbol for spiritual purification, both within Christianity and beyond (one thinks of the spiral as the neo-Platonist symbol for prayer and contemplation, circling around a subject and ascending at the same time, and as a Buddhist symbol for the gradual process on the Path to Enlightenment). [...] while a helix is repetitive, a spiral expands and thus epitomizes growth \u2013 conceptually \"ad infinitum\".\nIn art.\nThe spiral has inspired artists throughout the ages. Among the most famous of spiral-inspired art is Robert Smithson's earthwork, \"Spiral Jetty\", at the Great Salt Lake in Utah. The spiral theme is also present in David Wood's Spiral Resonance Field at the Balloon Museum in Albuquerque, as well as in the critically acclaimed Nine Inch Nails 1994 concept album \"The Downward Spiral\". The Spiral is also a prominent theme in the anime \"Gurren Lagann\", where it represents a philosophy and way of life. It also central in Mario Merz and Andy Goldsworthy's work. The spiral is the central theme of the horror manga \"Uzumaki\" by Junji Ito, where a small coastal town is afflicted by a curse involving spirals.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
