{"id": "60089", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60089", "title": "Terry Bradshaw", "text": "American football player and sports analyst (born 1948)\nTerry Paxton Bradshaw (born September 2, 1948) is an American former professional football quarterback who played in the National Football League (NFL) for 14 seasons with the Pittsburgh Steelers. Since 1994, he has been a television sports analyst and co-host of \"Fox NFL Sunday\". Bradshaw is also an actor and recording artist, having participated in several television shows (mainly as himself) and films, most notably co-starring in the movie \"Failure to Launch\", and releasing several country music albums.\nNicknamed the Blonde Bomber, he won four Super Bowls in a six-year period (1974, 1975, 1978, and 1979), becoming the first quarterback to win three and four Super Bowls, and led the Steelers to eight AFC Central championships. He was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1989, his first year of eligibility, and the College Football Hall of Fame in 1996.\nBradshaw was known for being a tough competitor and having one of the most powerful arms in NFL history. His physical skills and on-the-field leadership played a major role in the Steelers' dynasty throughout the 1970s. During his career, he passed for more than 300 yards in a game seven times, but three of those performances came in the postseason (two of which were in Super Bowls). In four career Super Bowl appearances, he passed for 932 yards and nine touchdowns, both Super Bowl records at the time of his retirement. In 19 career postseason games, he completed 261 passes for 3,833 yards.\nEarly life.\nBradshaw was born in Shreveport, Louisiana, on September 2, 1948. His father, William Marvin \"Bill\" Bradshaw (1927\u20132014), a native of Sparta, Tennessee, was a veteran of the United States Navy, a former vice president of manufacturing of the Riley Beaird Company in Shreveport, and a Southern Baptist layman. His mother, Novis (n\u00e9e Gay; 1929\u20132023), was one of five children of Clifford and Lula Gay of Red River Parish, Louisiana. He has an older brother, Gary, and a younger brother, Craig.\nIn his early childhood, the family lived in Camanche, Iowa, where he set forth the goal to play professional football. When he was a teenager, Bradshaw returned with his family to Shreveport. There, he attended Woodlawn High School, played under assistant coach A. L. Williams, and led the Knights to the AAA state championship game in 1965, but lost 12\u20139 to the Sulphur Golden Tornadoes. While at Woodlawn, he set a national record for throwing the javelin at ; his exploits earned him a spot in the \"Sports Illustrated\" feature \"Faces in the Crowd\". Bradshaw's successor as Woodlawn's starting quarterback was another future NFL standout, Joe Ferguson of the Buffalo Bills. Bradshaw's Steelers defeated Ferguson's Bills in a 1974 divisional playoff game.\nCollege career.\nBradshaw decided to attend Louisiana Tech University in Ruston, recruited in part by future Hall of Fame coach Jimmy Johnson. He has much affinity for his alma mater, and is a member of the Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity. Initially, he was second on the depth chart at quarterback behind Phil Robertson, who later became famous as the inventor of the Duck Commander duck call and television personality on the A&amp;E program \"Duck Dynasty\".\nWhen he arrived at Tech in 1966, Bradshaw caused a media frenzy because of his reputation as a football sensation from nearby Shreveport. Robertson was a year ahead of Bradshaw, and was the starter for two seasons in 1966 and 1967, and chose not to play in 1968. As Robertson put it: \"I'm going for the ducks, you [Terry] can go for the bucks.\"\nIn 1969, Bradshaw was considered by most professional scouts to be the most outstanding college football player in the nation. As a junior during the 1968 season, he amassed 2,890 total yards, ranking number one in the NCAA, and led his team to a 9\u20132 record and a 33\u201313 win over Akron in the Rice Bowl. In his senior season, he gained 2,314 yards, ranking third in the NCAA, and led his team to an 8\u20132 record. His decrease in production was mainly because his team played only 10 games that year, and he was taken out of several games in the second half because his team had built up huge leads.\nBradshaw graduated owning virtually all Louisiana Tech passing records at the time. In 1970, Bradshaw received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. In 1984, he was inducted into the inaugural class of the Louisiana Tech sports hall of fame. Four years later, he was inducted into the state of Louisiana's sports hall of fame.\nNFL career.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nIn the 1970 NFL draft, Bradshaw was selected as the first overall pick by the Pittsburgh Steelers, who got the first pick in the draft after winning a coin flip tiebreaker with the Chicago Bears since the teams had identical 1\u201313 records in 1969. Bradshaw was hailed at the time as the consensus number-one pick.\nBradshaw became a starter in his second season after splitting time with Terry Hanratty in his rookie campaign. During his first few seasons, the 6'3\", 215-pound quarterback was erratic and threw many interceptions (he threw 210 interceptions over the course of his career), and was mocked by the media for his rural roots and perceived lack of intelligence.\nBradshaw took several seasons to adjust to the NFL, but he eventually led the Steelers to eight AFC Central championships and four Super Bowl titles. The Pittsburgh Steelers featured the \"Steel Curtain\" defense and a powerful running attack led by Franco Harris and Rocky Bleier, but Bradshaw's strong arm gave them the threat of the deep pass, helping to loosen opposing defenses. In 1972, he threw the \"Immaculate Reception\" pass to Franco Harris, among the most famous plays in NFL history, to beat the Raiders in the AFC Divisional playoffs.\nBradshaw temporarily lost the starting job to Joe Gilliam in 1974, but he took over again during the regular season. In the 1974 AFC Championship Game against the Oakland Raiders, his fourth-quarter touchdown pass to Lynn Swann proved to be the winning score in a 24\u201313 victory. In the Steelers' 16\u20136 Super Bowl IX victory over the Minnesota Vikings that followed, Bradshaw completed 9 of 14 passes and his fourth-quarter touchdown pass put the game out of reach and helped take the Steelers to their first Super Bowl victory.\nIn Super Bowl X following the 1975 season, Bradshaw threw for 209 yards, most of them to Swann, as the Steelers beat the Dallas Cowboys, 21\u201317. His late-fourth-quarter, 64-yard touchdown pass to Swann, released a split-second before defensive tackle Larry Cole flattened him, was selected by NFL Films as the \"Greatest Throw of All Time\".\nNeck and wrist injuries in 1976 forced Bradshaw to miss four games. He was sharp in a 40\u201314 victory over the Baltimore Colts, completing 14 of 18 passes for 264 yards and three touchdowns and achieving the highest-possible passer rating of 158.3. As of 2022, it is the only playoff game where the visiting quarterback achieved this effort. With this outstanding game, he was not only instrumental in Pittsburgh's blowout win but also potentially\u2014and inadvertently\u2014helped save the lives of scores of people from the impact of a plane crash which took place soon after the game ended as result of the butterfly effect. This is because the Colts were beaten so badly that their fans left much earlier than they would have, with their supporter zone being completely vacated by time of the impact. There were no serious injuries, and the pilot was arrested for violating air safety regulations. Donald Kroner was the 33-year-old pilot charged with reckless flying, littering, and making a bomb threat against former Baltimore Colts linebacker Bill Pellington. Pellington owned a bar and restaurant from which Kroner was once ejected for using foul language. The crash is the subject of the 2022 documentary \"Section 1\" by Secret Base's Jon Bois and Alex Rubenstein.\nHowever, the Steelers' hopes of a three-peat ended when both of their 1,000-yard rushers (Harris and Bleier) were injured in the win over the Colts, and the Steelers subsequently lost to the Oakland Raiders in the AFC Championship game, 24\u20137. Jack Lambert asserted that the 1976 Steelers team was the best team that he ever played on, including the four Super Bowl teams of which he was a part.\nBradshaw had his best season in 1978 when he was named the NFL's Most Valuable Player (MVP) by the Associated Press after a season in which he completed 207 of 368 passes for 2,915 yards and a league-leading 28 touchdown passes. He was also named All-Pro and All-AFC that year, despite throwing 20 interceptions.\nBefore Super Bowl XIII, a Steelers-Cowboys rematch, Cowboys linebacker Thomas \"Hollywood\" Henderson famously ridiculed Bradshaw by saying, \"He couldn't spell 'cat' if you spotted him the 'c' and the 'a'.\" Bradshaw got his revenge by winning the Super Bowl MVP award, completing 17 of 30 passes for a then-record 318 yards and four touchdowns in a 35\u201331 win. Bradshaw has in later years made light of the ridicule with quips such as \"it's football, not rocket science.\"\nBradshaw won his second straight Super Bowl MVP award in 1979 in Super Bowl XIV. He passed for 309 yards and two touchdowns in a 31\u201319 win over the Los Angeles Rams. Early in the fourth quarter, with Pittsburgh down 19\u201317, Bradshaw again turned to the long pass to help engineer a victory: a 73-yard touchdown to John Stallworth. Bradshaw shared \"Sports Illustrated\"'s Sportsman of the Year award that season with fellow Pittsburgh star Willie Stargell, whose Pirates won the 1979 World Series.\nAfter two seasons of missing the playoffs, Bradshaw played through pain\u2014he needed a cortisone shot before every game because of an elbow injury sustained during training camp\u2014in a strike-shortened 1982 NFL season. He still managed to tie for the most touchdown passes in the league with 17. In a 31\u201328 Wild Card Round loss to the San Diego Chargers, Bradshaw's last postseason game, he completed 28 of 39 passes for 325 yards, two touchdowns, and two interceptions.\nAfter undergoing off-season elbow surgery (using the alias \"Thomas Brady\", with the actual Brady being six years old at the time), Bradshaw was idle for the first 14 games of the 1983 NFL season. Then on December 10, 1983, against the New York Jets, he felt a pop in his elbow while throwing his final pass, a 10-yard touchdown to Calvin Sweeney in the second quarter of the Steelers' 34\u20137 win. Bradshaw later left the game and never played again. The two touchdowns Bradshaw threw in what was the final NFL game played at Shea Stadium (and the last NFL game played in New York City proper to date) allowed him to finish his career with two more touchdowns (212) than interceptions (210).\nBradshaw's retirement came as a surprise to some, and in hindsight unplanned on the Steelers' part. Before Bradshaw's elbow problems happened, the team chose to pass on Pitt quarterback Dan Marino in the 1983 NFL draft as an heir successor to Bradshaw due in part to head coach Chuck Noll wanting to rebuild on defense, and according to Bill Hillgrove, the Rooney family not wanting Marino to face a lot of pressure in his hometown and needing to experience life outside of Oakland, where Marino grew up and Pitt is located. The player the Steelers drafted instead (Gabriel Rivera) played only six games before becoming a quadriplegic following a drunk-driving crash, and Marino's subsequent success with the Miami Dolphins prompted Art Rooney to remind his sons daily until his death that the team \"should've drafted Marino.\" The decision also set the franchise back at quarterback; while the team eventually returned to being a Super Bowl contender after their rebuilding period during the mid-1980s, they did not have a consistent quarterback until Ben Roethlisberger arrived in 2004.\nAlthough the Steelers have not officially retired Bradshaw's number 12, they have not reissued it since his retirement.\nAfter football.\nBradshaw was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1989. \nIn July 1997, Bradshaw served as the presenter when Mike Webster, his center on the Steelers' Super Bowl XIII and XIV title teams, was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nIn 2006, despite the Steelers being one of the teams playing in the game, Bradshaw did not attend a pregame celebration for past Super Bowl MVPs during Super Bowl XL in Detroit, Michigan. According to reports, Bradshaw (along with three-time MVP and close friend Joe Montana) requested a US$100,000 guarantee for his appearance in the Super Bowl MVP Parade, and associated appearances. The NFL could not guarantee that they would make that much, so refused. A representative for Bradshaw has since denied this report. After an appearance on \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\" (February 6, 2006), Bradshaw stated that the reason why he did not attend the MVP parade was that he was spending time with family, that he hates the crowds and the Super Bowl media circus, and also that the only way he would attend a Super Bowl is when Fox is broadcasting the game (ABC broadcast Super Bowl XL, which is that network's last such game to date), though Bradshaw attended several press conferences in Detroit days earlier. Bradshaw also stated that money was not an issue.\nIn April 2006, Bradshaw donated his four Super Bowl rings, College Football Hall of Fame ring, Pro Football Hall of Fame ring, Hall of Fame bust, four miniature replica Super Bowl trophies, a helmet, and jersey from one of his Super Bowl victories to his alma mater, Louisiana Tech.\nOn November 5, 2007, during a nationally televised \"Monday Night Football\" game, Bradshaw joined former teammates including Franco Harris and Joe Greene to accept their position on the Steelers' 75th Anniversary All-Time Team.\nBroadcasting career.\nBradshaw retired from football on July 24, 1984, and quickly signed a television contract with CBS to become an NFL game analyst in 1984, where he and play-by-play announcer Verne Lundquist had the top-rated programs. Prior to his full-time work for them, he served as a guest commentator for CBS Sports' NFC postseason broadcasts from 1980\u201382.\nBradshaw was promoted into television studio analyst for \"The NFL Today\" in 1990 (which he hosted with Greg Gumbel through the 1993 season). In 1994, with the Fox network establishing its sports division with their purchase of NFL TV rights, Bradshaw joined \"Fox NFL Sunday\", where he normally acts as a comic foil to his co-hosts. On \"Fox NFL Sunday\", he hosts two semiregular features, \"Ten Yards with TB\", where he fires random questions at an NFL professional, and \"The Terry Awards\", an annual comedic award show about the NFL season. As a cross-promotional stunt, he also hosted two consecutive \"Digi-Bowl\" specials in 2001 and 2002 on Fox Kids, providing commentary from the \"NFL on Fox\" studio in-between episodes of \"\"; the 2002 special was the final one as the Fox Kids block ended the same year. He appeared on the first broadcast of \"NASCAR on FOX\", where he took a ride with Dale Earnhardt at Daytona International Speedway the night before Earnhardt was killed in a last-lap crash in the Daytona 500. Bradshaw also waved the green flag at the start of the ill-fated race.\nBradshaw has the reputation of being the \"ol' redneck\", but in former co-host and NFL coach Jimmy Johnson's words, the act is a \"schtick\". According to Johnson, Bradshaw deflects such criticism by stating that \"he's so dumb that he has to have somebody else fly his private plane.\"\nBradshaw has also garnered the reputation for criticizing players and teams. Following Super Bowl XLVI he was confronted by Ann Mara, wife of the late Wellington Mara, and \"heckled\" for not picking the Giants to win on \"Fox NFL Sunday\".\nFor his work in broadcasting, Bradshaw has won three Sports Emmy Awards as a studio analyst.\nBusiness career.\nDuring the early part of his career with the Steelers, Bradshaw was a used-car salesman during the off season to supplement his income, as this was still during the days when most NFL players did not make enough money to focus solely on football.\nIn the late 1970s and early 1980s, Bradshaw sold peanut butter with his name and image on the label. Commercials were run on television in the Shreveport market.\nBradshaw has also written or co-written five books and recorded six albums of country/western and gospel music. His cover of \"I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry\" hit the top 20 on \"Billboard's\" country chart (and number 91 on the Hot 100) in 1976; two other tunes (\"The Last Word In Lonesome Is Me\" and \"Until You\") also made the country charts.\nIn 2001, Bradshaw entered the world of NASCAR by joining with HighLine Performance Group racing team to form FitzBradshaw Racing. He also is the spokesman for Jani-King international, Inc. Bradshaw ended his ownership in 2006.\nAmong U.S. consumers, Bradshaw remains one of pro football's most popular retired players. As of September 2007, Bradshaw was the top-ranked former pro football player in the Davie-Brown Index, which surveys consumers to determine a celebrity's appeal and trust levels.\nIn early 2020, Bradshaw launched Terry Bradshaw Kentucky Straight Bourbon Whiskey, a collaboration with Silver Screen Bottling Company. The bourbon boasts 51.9 percent ABV (103.8 proof) which is Bradshaw's passing percentage. The bourbon is produced by Green River Distilling Company in Owensboro, Kentucky.\nPersonal life.\nBradshaw has been married four times. He was first married to Melissa Babish (Miss Teenage America, 1969) from 1972 to 1973; ice skater JoJo Starbuck from 1976 to 1983; and family attorney Charla Hopkins from 1983 to 1999, with whom he had two daughters, Erin and Rachel. Erin Bradshaw shows champion Paint and American Quarter Horses and is an honors graduate of the University of North Texas in Denton, Texas. Rachel Bradshaw is a graduate of Belmont University in Nashville, Tennessee, and appeared in \"Nashville\" (2007), a reality television series about young musicians trying to make it in Nashville, and is the widow of former Tennessee Titans kicker Rob Bironas. The first three of Bradshaw's marriages have all ended in divorce, a subject he jokes about frequently on his NFL pregame show. Bradshaw was married for the fourth time, on July 8, 2014, to Tammy, his girlfriend of 15 years.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAfter his NFL career ended, Bradshaw disclosed that he had frequently experienced anxiety attacks after games. The problem worsened in the late 1990s after his third divorce, when he said he \"could not bounce back\" as he had after the previous divorces or after a bad game. In addition to anxiety attacks, his symptoms included weight loss, frequent crying, and sleeplessness. He was diagnosed with clinical depression. Since then, he has taken Paxil regularly. He chose to speak out about his depression to overcome the stigma associated with it and to urge others to seek help.\nBradshaw's anxieties about appearing in public, away from the controlled environment of a television studio, led to an unintentional estrangement from the Steelers. When team founder and owner Art Rooney died in 1988, Bradshaw did not attend his funeral. A year later, during his Hall of Fame induction speech, Bradshaw made a point of saluting his late boss and friend, pointing to the sky and saying, \"Art Rooney\u00a0...\u00a0boy, I tell you, I loved that man.\"\nStill, Bradshaw never returned to Three Rivers Stadium for a Steelers game. When the last regular-season game was played there on December 16, 2000, against the Washington Redskins, Bradshaw was with the \"Fox NFL Sunday\" crew, doing their pregame show aboard the aircraft carrier , while Fox covered the game live. Bradshaw expressed regret that he could not be there, but later said privately that he did not feel he could face the crowds. Not until September 2002, when fellow Hall of Fame teammate and longtime friend Mike Webster died, did Bradshaw finally return to Pittsburgh to attend his friend's funeral.\nIn October 2002, Bradshaw returned to the Steelers sideline for the first time in 20 years for a Monday night . In 2003, when the Steelers played the 1,000th game in franchise history, Fox covered the game at Heinz Field, and Bradshaw returned to cover the game. In addition to appearing to take his position on the Steelers All-Time Team in 2007 as part of the team's 75th-anniversary festivities, he also was on the sideline alongside a number of his teammates such as Mean Joe Greene and Franco Harris for the game against the Baltimore Ravens on November 5. Despite those appearances, Bradshaw's appearances at Steelers functions have remained relatively rare compared to his Hall of Fame teammates from his playing days.\nPolitically, Bradshaw is a long-time supporter of the Republican Party. In 2012, he went on record on \"Fox News\" as supporting the candidacy of Newt Gingrich for the Republican presidential nomination. In the same interview, he also labeled linebacker Terrell Suggs \"an idiot\" for making comments critical of Denver Broncos quarterback Tim Tebow's public remarks about his Christian faith, saying Suggs \"better be careful; if I were him I'd be on my hands and knees tonight asking for forgiveness because that's totally unacceptable.\"\nBradshaw has made statements critical of President of the United States Donald Trump. During a 2017 episode of \"FOX NFL Sunday\", Bradshaw, while not condoning NFL players kneeling during the national anthem, stated, \"if our country stands for anything, folks, it's freedom. People died for that freedom. I'm not sure if our President understands those rights. That every American has the right to speak out also to protest. Believe me, these athletes do love our [this] great country of ours. Personally, I think our President should concentrate on North Korea and healthcare rather than ripping into athletes and the NFL.\" After the Super Bowl LII Champion Philadelphia Eagles White House visit was cancelled due to Trump's anti-anthem protest sentiment, Bradshaw voiced his support for the Philadelphia Eagles, stating that \"Trump just needs to go somewhere and enjoy the money he's got.\" In 2019, Bradshaw appeared on \"Fox &amp; Friends\" and commented on Donald Trump's planned attendance of a regular-season game between the University of Alabama and Louisiana State University, stating that he respects Donald Trump \"having the guts to go in there.\"\nHealth.\nIn September 2022, after viewers expressed concern during his appearance on \"Fox NFL Sunday\", Bradshaw revealed he had been treated for bladder cancer and neck cancer between 2021 and 2022.\nRelationship with Chuck Noll.\nWhile Bradshaw never had any problems with the Rooney family, he had a complicated relationship with Steelers head coach Chuck Noll. Noll and Bradshaw had an uneasy relationship during his playing days, with Bradshaw stating that he felt that Noll was too hard on him and never liked him, though the two made peace (at least publicly) before Noll's death in 2014.\nIn an interview with NFL Films in 2016 for an episode of \"A Football Life\" about Noll, Bradshaw felt that they had too much of a culture clash with their personalities. Bradshaw also stated that Noll belittled him constantly and that Bradshaw wanted positive reinforcement instead of \"being grabbed at\". In the same episode, however, former Steelers public relations director Joe Gordon characterized the animosity as \"a one-way street,\" with former teammate Jack Ham adding that Noll \"insulated\" Bradshaw from certain issues while taking a \"rest of us be damned\" approach with the other players.\nIn an archival interview, Noll described his relationship with Bradshaw as \"professional\" and \"business-like\" and that his personality needed to conform with the team, adding, \"it worked, even if Bradshaw didn't like it.\" Nonetheless, Bradshaw chose not to attend Noll's funeral despite being in Pittsburgh at the time.\nTelevision and film career.\nBradshaw has appeared in numerous television commercials. The most recent was the series of live ads for Tide detergent along with his Fox Sports co-host Curt Menefee, where Bradshaw shows up with a shirt stain on what appeared to be live TV from the Fox broadcast booth at Super Bowl LI and then washes it with Tide at the house of Jeffrey Tambor. The teasers leading up to the Super Bowl showed Tambor initially taking his shirts to Rob Gronkowski's dry cleaners, only to see the sleeves get ripped out. Near the end of the Super Bowl, Menefee spills coffee on his shirt, but Tambor, who is watching on TV, refuses to help out.\nBradshaw has had cameo appearances in many shows as himself, including \"Brotherly Love\", \"Everybody Loves Raymond\", \"Married... with Children\", \"Modern Family\", \"The Larry Sanders Show\", and \"The League\". He also appeared on \"Malcolm in the Middle\" with Howie Long as the trashy coach of a women's ice hockey team. He hosted a short-lived television series in 1997 called \"Home Team with Terry Bradshaw\".\nIn addition to his television work, Bradshaw has appeared in several movies, including a part in the 1978 film \"Hooper\", which starred Burt Reynolds, Jan-Michael Vincent, and Sally Field, and made an appearance in the 1981 film \"The Cannonball Run\". In 1980, he had a cameo in \"Smokey and the Bandit II\", which starred Burt Reynolds, Jerry Reed, and Sally Field. He made a guest appearance in \"The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.\" in 1994, playing Colonel Forrest March, a rogue U.S. Army officer who gave orders to his squad (played by NFL players Ken Norton Jr., Carl Banks, and Jim Harbaugh) in a huddle using football diagrams.\nBradshaw appeared on Jeff Foxworthy's short-lived sitcom \"The Jeff Foxworthy Show\" as a motivational speaker for people needing to change their lives. Bill Engvall's character is affected by Bradshaw's rantings about witchcraft and voodoo in his pregame warm-ups.\nOn October 11, 2001, Bradshaw received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, the first NFL player to do so.\nIn 2006, Bradshaw returned to the silver screen in the motion picture \"Failure to Launch\". He and Kathy Bates played the parents of Matthew McConaughey's character. In one notable scene, he appeared nude, which his own daughters (who were teenagers at the time) did not even know about until they saw the movie's premiere with their grandmother and were half-heartedly warned by Bradshaw just moments before the scene.\nHe is also a devout Christian and wrote the book \"Terry Bradshaw: Man of Steel\" with broadcaster Dave Diles. Since 2010, Bradshaw has been hosting television shows produced by United States Media Television.\nIn 2017, Bradshaw appeared as himself in the comedy film \"Father Figures\".\nIn 2016 and 2018, Bradshaw had a leading role in the NBC reality-travel series \"Better Late Than Never\", where he travels around the world with William Shatner, Henry Winkler, George Foreman, and Jeff Dye. In 2017, he had a supporting role as a fictionalized version of himself in the comedy film \"Father Figures\".\nOn January 16, 2019, Bradshaw competed in season one of \"The Masked Singer\" as \"Deer\".\nOn October 12, 2019, Bradshaw and his family competed in \"Celebrity Family Feud\" against Adam Rippon's team. They went on to go to the final round but failed to get to 200 points.\nOn January 2, 2020, he was on the season-eight premiere of \"Last Man Standing\".\nOn September 17, 2020, Bradshaw and his family premiered their new E! reality show \"The Bradshaw Bunch\".\nAwards and honors.\nNFL\nNCAA\nMedia\nSports Emmy Awards\nHalls of Fame\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60090", "revid": "50918973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60090", "title": "Enzo Ferrari", "text": "Italian racing driver, engineer and entrepreneur (1898\u20131988)\nEnzo Anselmo Giuseppe Maria Ferrari (; ; 18 February 1898 \u2013 14 August 1988) was an Italian racing driver and entrepreneur, the founder of Scuderia Ferrari in Grand Prix motor racing, and subsequently of the Ferrari automobile marque. Under his leadership in Formula One, Ferrari won nine World Drivers' Championships and eight World Constructors' Championships during his lifetime. \nHe was widely known as il Commendatore or il Drake, a nickname given by British opponents in reference to the English privateer Francis Drake, due to Ferrari's demonstrated ability and determination in achieving significant sports results with his small company. In his final years, he was often referred to as l'Ingegnere (\"the Engineer\"), il Grande Vecchio (\"the Grand Old Man\"), il Cavaliere (\"the Knight\"), il Mago (\"the Wizard\"), and il Patriarca (\"the Patriarch\").\nEarly life.\nEnzo Anselmo Giuseppe Maria Ferrari was born on 18 February 1898 in Modena, Italy, while his birth certificate states 20 February. His parents were Alfredo Ferrari and Adalgisa Bisbini; he had an older brother Alfredo Junior (Dino). The family lived in via Paolo Ferrari n\u00b085, next to the mechanical workshop founded by Alfredo, who worked for the nearby railways. This site is now the Enzo Ferrari Museum.\nAlfredo Senior was the son of a grocer from Carpi, and began a workshop fabricating metal parts at the family home. \nEnzo grew up with little formal education. Unlike his brother, he preferred working in his father's workshop and participated in the construction of the canopy at the Giulianova station in 1914. He had ambitions of becoming an operetta tenor, sports journalist, or racing driver. When he was 10 he witnessed Felice Nazzaro's win at the 1908 Circuito di Bologna, an event which inspired him to become a racing driver. During World War I, he served in the 3rd Mountain Artillery Regiment of the Italian Army. His father Alfredo, and his older brother, Alfredo Jr., died in 1916 as a result of a widespread Italian flu outbreak. Ferrari became seriously sick himself during the 1918 flu pandemic and was consequently discharged from the Italian service.\nRacing career.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Second place is the first loser\".&lt;br&gt;(Original: \"Il secondo \u00e8 il primo dei perdenti\".)\nAfter the collapse of his family's carpentry business, Ferrari searched for a job in the car industry. He unsuccessfully volunteered his services to Fiat in Turin, eventually settling for a job as test-driver for CMN (Costruzioni Meccaniche Nazionali), a car manufacturer in Milan which rebuilt used truck bodies into small passenger cars. He was later promoted to race car driver and made his competitive debut in the 1919 Parma-Poggio di Berceto hillclimb race, where he finished fourth in the three-litre category at the wheel of a 2.3-litre 4-cylinder C.M.N. 15/20. On 23 November of the same year, he took part in the Targa Florio but had to retire after his car's fuel tank developed a leak. Due to the large number of retirements, he finished 9th. \nIn 1920, Ferrari joined the racing department of Alfa Romeo as a driver. Ferrari won his first Grand Prix in 1923 in Ravenna on the Savio Circuit. 1924 was his best season, with three wins, including Ravenna, Polesine and the Coppa Acerbo in Pescara. Deeply shocked by the death of Ugo Sivocci in 1923 and Antonio Ascari in 1925, Ferrari, by his admission, continued to race half-heartedly. At the same time, he developed a taste for the organisational aspects of Grand Prix racing. Following the birth of his son Alfredo (Dino) in 1932, Ferrari decided to retire and form a team of superstar drivers, including Giuseppe Campari and Tazio Nuvolari. This team was called Scuderia Ferrari (founded by Enzo in 1929) and acted as a racing division for Alfa Romeo. The team was very successful, thanks to excellent cars like the Alfa Romeo P3 and to the talented drivers, like Nuvolari. Ferrari retired from competitive driving having participated in 41 Grands Prix with a record of 11 wins.\nDuring this period, the prancing horse emblem appeared on his team's cars. The emblem had been created and sported by Italian fighter plane pilot Francesco Baracca. During World War I, Baracca's mother gave her son a necklace with the prancing horse on it before takeoff. Baracca was shot down and killed by an Austrian aeroplane in 1918. In memory of his death, Ferrari used the prancing horse to create the emblem that would become the world-famous Ferrari shield. Initially displayed on Ferrari's Alfa Romeo racing car, the shield was first seen on a factory Ferrari in 1947.\nBuilding Ferrari.\nAlfa Romeo agreed to partner with Ferrari's racing team until 1933, when financial constraints forced them to withdraw their support \u2013 a decision subsequently retracted thanks to the intervention of Pirelli. Despite the quality of the Scuderia drivers, the team struggled to compete with Auto Union and Mercedes. Although the German manufacturers dominated the era, Ferrari's team achieved a notable victory in 1935 when Tazio Nuvolari beat Rudolf Caracciola and Bernd Rosemeyer on their home turf at the German Grand Prix.\nIn 1937 Scuderia Ferrari was dissolved and Ferrari returned to Alfa's racing team, named \"Alfa Corse\". Alfa Romeo decided to regain full control of its racing division, retaining Ferrari as Sporting Director. After a disagreement with Alfa's managing director Ugo Gobbato, Ferrari left in 1939 and founded Auto-Avio Costruzioni, a company supplying parts to other racing teams. Although a contract clause restricted him from racing or designing cars for four years, Ferrari managed to manufacture two cars for the 1940 Mille Miglia, which were driven by Alberto Ascari and Lotario Rangoni. With the outbreak of World War II, Ferrari's factory was forced to undertake war production for Mussolini's fascist government. Following Allied bombing of the factory, Ferrari relocated from Modena to Maranello. At the end of the war, Ferrari decided to start making cars bearing his name, and founded Ferrari S.p.A. in 1947.\nEnzo decided to battle the dominating Alfa Romeos and race with his own team. The team's open-wheel debut took place in Turin in 1948 and the first win came later in the year in Lago di Garda. The first major victory came at the 1949 24 Hours of Le Mans, with a Ferrari 166 MM driven by Luigi Chinetti and (Baron Selsdon of Scotland) Peter Mitchell-Thomson. In 1950 Ferrari enrolled in the newly born Drivers World Championship and is the only team to remain continuously present since its introduction. Ferrari won his first world championship Grand Prix with Jos\u00e9 Froil\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez at Silverstone in 1951. Apocryphally, Enzo cried like a baby when his team finally defeated the mighty Alfetta 159. The first championship came in 1952, with Alberto Ascari, a task that was repeated one year later. In 1953 Ferrari made his only attempt at the Indianapolis 500, but the car driven by Ascari crashed on lap 41 of the race. \nIn order to finance his racing endeavors in Formula One as well as in other events such as the Mille Miglia and Le Mans, the company started selling sports cars.\nFerrari's decision to continue racing in the \"Mille Miglia\" brought the company new victories and greatly increased public recognition. However, increasing speeds, poor roads, and nonexistent crowd protection eventually spelled disaster for both the race and Ferrari. During the 1957 Mille Miglia, near the town of Guidizzolo, a 4.0-litre Ferrari 335 S driven by Alfonso de Portago was traveling at when it blew a tyre and crashed into the roadside crowd, killing de Portago, his co-driver and nine spectators, five of whom were children. In response, Enzo Ferrari and Englebert, the tyre manufacturer, were charged with manslaughter in a lengthy criminal prosecution that was finally dismissed in 1961.\nDeeply unsatisfied with the way motorsports were covered in the Italian press, in 1961 Ferrari supported Bologna-based publisher Luciano Conti's decision to start a new publication, \"Autosprint\". Ferrari himself regularly contributed to the magazine for a few years.\nMany of Ferrari's greatest victories came at Le Mans (nine victories, including six in a row in 1960\u20131965) and in Formula One during the 1950s and 1960s, with the successes of Juan Manuel Fangio (1956), Mike Hawthorn (1958), and Phil Hill (1961).\nThe Great Walkout.\nEnzo Ferrari's strong personality and controversial management style became notorious in 1962. Following a rather weak title defence of Phil Hill's 1961 world title, sales manager Girolamo Gardini, together with manager Romolo Tavoni, chief engineer Carlo Chiti, sports car development chief Giotto Bizzarrini and other key figures in the company left Ferrari to found the rival car manufacturer and racing team Automobili Turismo e Sport (ATS). Based in Bologna, and financially supported by Count Giovanni Volpi, ATS managed to lure away Phil Hill and Giancarlo Baghetti from Ferrari, who responded by promoting junior engineers like Mauro Forghieri, Sergio Scaglietti and Giampaolo Dallara, and hiring Ludovico Scarfiotti, Lorenzo Bandini, Willy Mairesse and John Surtees to drive his Formula One cars.\nThe \"great walkout\" came at an especially difficult time for Ferrari. At the urging of Chiti, the company was developing a new 250-based model. Even if the car would be finished, it was unclear if it could be raced successfully. Ferrari's shakeup proved to be successful. The mid-engined Dino racers laid the foundation for Forghieri's dominant 250-powered 250 P. Driver John Surtees won the world title in 1964 following a tense battle with Jim Clark and Graham Hill. The Dino road cars sold well, and other models like the 275 and Daytona were on the way. Conversely, ATS, following a troubled Formula One 1963 campaign, with both cars retiring four times in five races, folded at the end of the year.\nIn 1998, Tavoni declared in an interview that he and the remainder of Ferrari's senior figures did not leave on their initiative, but were ousted following a disagreement with Ferrari over the role of his wife in the company. He said: \"Our mistake was to go to a lawyer and write him a letter, instead of openly discussing the issue with him. We knew that his wife wasn't well. We should have been able to deal with it in a different way. When he called the meeting to fire us, he had already nominated our successors.\"\nMerging with Fiat.\nBy the end of the 1960s, increasing financial difficulties and the problem of racing in many categories and having to meet new safety and clean air emissions requirement for road car production and development, caused Ferrari to start looking for a business partner. In 1969 Ferrari sold 50% of his company to Fiat S.p.A., with the caveat that he would remain 100% in control of the racing activities and that Fiat would pay a sizable subsidy until his death for use of his Maranello and Modena production plants. Ferrari had previously offered Ford the opportunity to buy the firm in 1963 for US$18 million ($ in 2024 dollars ) but, late in negotiations, Ferrari withdrew once he realized that Ford would not agree to grant him independent control of the company racing department. Ferrari became a joint-stock company, and Fiat took a small share in 1965. In 1969, Fiat increased their holding to 50% of the company. In 1988 Fiat's holding rose to 90%.\nFollowing the agreement with Fiat, Ferrari stepped down as managing director of the road car division in 1971. In 1974, Ferrari appointed Luca Cordero di Montezemolo as Sporting Director/Formula One Team manager. Montezemolo eventually assumed the presidency of Ferrari in 1992, a post he held until September 2014. Clay Regazzoni was runner-up in 1974, while Niki Lauda won the championship in 1975 and 1977. In 1977, Ferrari was criticized in the press for replacing World Champion Lauda with newcomer Gilles Villeneuve. Ferrari claimed that Villeneuve's aggressive driving style reminded him of Tazio Nuvolari. These feelings were reinforced after the 1979 French Grand Prix when Villeneuve finished second after an intense battle with Ren\u00e9 Arnoux. According to technical director Mauro Forghieri, \"When we returned to Maranello, Ferrari was ecstatic. I have never seen him so happy for a second place.\"\nThe Modena Aerautodrome.\nIn the early 1970s, Ferrari, aided by fellow Modena constructors Maserati and Automobili Stanguellini, demanded that the Modena Town Council and Automobile Club d'Italia upgrade the Aerautodromo di Modena, the reasoning being that the race track was obsolete and inadequate to test modern racing cars. The proposal was initially discussed with interest, but eventually stalled due to lack of political will. Ferrari then proceeded to buy the land adjacent to his factory and build the Fiorano Circuit, a 3\u00a0km track still in use to test Ferrari racing and road cars.\nFinal years.\nAfter Jody Scheckter won the title in 1979, the team experienced a disastrous 1980 campaign. In 1981 Ferrari attempted to revive his team's fortunes by switching to turbo engines. In 1982, the second turbo-powered Ferrari, the 126C2, showed great promise. However, driver Gilles Villeneuve was killed in an accident during qualifying for the Belgian Grand Prix in Zolder, in May. In August, at Hockenheim, teammate Didier Pironi had his career cut short in a violent end over end flip on the misty back straight after hitting the Renault F1 driven by Alain Prost. Pironi was leading the driver's championship at the time; he would lose the lead and the championship by five points as he sat out the remaining five races. The Scuderia went on to win the Constructors Championship at the end of the season and in 1983, with driver Ren\u00e9 Arnoux in contention for the championship until the very last race. Michele Alboreto finished second in 1985, but the team would not see championship glory again before Ferrari's death in 1988. The final race win Ferrari saw before his death was when Gerhard Berger and Alboreto scored a 1\u20132 finish at the final round of the 1987 season in Australia.\nAuto racing and management controversies.\nFerrari's management style was autocratic and he was known to pit drivers against each other in the hope of improving their performance. Some critics believe that Ferrari deliberately increased psychological pressure on his drivers, encouraging intra-team rivalries and fostering an atmosphere of intense competition for the position of number one driver. \"He thought that psychological pressure would produce better results for the drivers\", said Ferrari team driver Tony Brooks. \"He would expect a driver to go beyond reasonable limits... You can drive to the maximum of your ability, but once you start psyching yourself up to do things that you don't feel are within your ability it gets stupid. There was enough danger at that time without going over the limit.\" According to Mario Andretti, \"[Ferrari] just demanded results. But he was a guy that also understood when the cars had shortcomings. He was one that could always appreciate the effort that a driver made, when you were just busting your butt, flat out, flinging the car, and all that. He knew and saw that. He was all-in. Had no other interest in life outside of motor racing and all of the intricacies of it. Somewhat misunderstood in many ways because he was so demanding, so tough on everyone, but at the end of the day he was correct. Always correct. And that's why you had the respect that you had for him.\"\nBetween 1955 and 1971 eight Ferrari drivers were killed driving Ferrari racing cars: Alberto Ascari, Eugenio Castellotti, Alfonso de Portago, Luigi Musso, Peter Collins, Wolfgang von Trips, Lorenzo Bandini and Ignazio Giunti. Although such a high death toll was not unusual in motor racing in those days, the Vatican newspaper \"L'Osservatore Romano\" described Ferrari as being like the god Saturn, who consumed his own sons. In Ferrari's defence, contemporary F1 race car driver Stirling Moss commented: \"I can't think of a single occasion where a (Ferrari) driver's life was taken because of mechanical failure.\"\nIn public Ferrari was careful to acknowledge the drivers who risked their life for his team, insisting that praise should be shared equally between car and driver for any race won. However, his longtime friend and company accountant, Carlo Benzi, related that privately Ferrari would say that \"the car was the reason for any success\".\nFollowing the deaths of Giuseppe Campari in 1933 and Alberto Ascari in 1955, both of whom he had a strong personal relationship with, he chose not to get too close to his drivers, out of fear of emotionally hurting himself. Later in life, he relented his position and grew very close to Clay Regazzoni and especially Gilles Villeneuve.\nPersonal life.\nEnzo Ferrari lived a reserved life and rarely granted interviews. He seldom left Modena and Maranello and never went to any Grands Prix outside of Italy after the 1950s (because his passport was confiscated while he was on trial following the Guidizzolo tragedy). He was usually seen at the Grands Prix at Monza, near Milan, and Imola, not far from the Ferrari factory, where the circuit was named after the late Dino. His last known trip abroad was in 1982, when he went to Paris to broker a compromise between the warring FISA and FOCA parties. He never flew in an aeroplane (always using a car or train for their travels) and never set foot in a lift (always preferred using stairs, although he himself said it was more tiring).\nFerrari met his future wife, Laura Dominica Garello (c.\u20091900\u20131978) in Turin. They lived together for two years, and married on 28 April 1923. According to Brock Yates' 1991 book \"Enzo Ferrari: The Man and the Machine\", Ferrari married to keep up appearances for the sake of his career, as divorce was frowned upon in the predominantly Catholic Italy, and sought sexual conquests not so much for pleasure but for the gratification of his ego. According to Yates, Ferrari once remarked to racing manager Romolo Tavoni that \"a man should always have two wives\", and at one point in 1961, when he was dating three women simultaneously, he wrote, \"I am convinced that when a man tells a woman he loves her, he only means that he desires her and that the only perfect love in this world is that of a father for his son\", a comment that came several years after the death of his first son.\nFerrari and Laura's one son, Alfredo \"Dino\", who was born in 1932 and groomed as Enzo's successor, suffered from ill-health and died from muscular dystrophy in 1956. According to \"Time\" magazine, Ferrari and Laura's love for their son is what kept them together. Although Dino never raced competitively, his father provided him with a fleet of cars that he raced for pleasure. He also designed engine parts while bedridden. Ferrari and Laura remained married until her death in 1978. John Nikas, writer and expert on the history of cars who founded the British Sports Car Hall of Fame, said of Ferrari, \"His real loves in life were racing and Dino.\"\nEnzo had a second son, Piero, with his mistress Lina Lardi in 1945. As divorce was illegal in Italy until 1970, Piero could only be recognized as Enzo's son after Laura's death in 1978. Piero Lardi's existence was kept a secret known only to a few of his father's confidantes. According to Yates, \"There is no question that at some point in the late 1950s, Laura Ferrari discovered her husband's second life\", and openly derided him as a \"bastard\" when she saw him in a factory. After Laura's death, Ferrari adopted Piero, who took the name Piero Lardi Ferrari. As of 2023, he is vice chairman of the company, and owns a 10% share of it. Piero told the \"Los Angeles Times\" that Michael Mann's 2023 biographical film \"Ferrari\" was accurate, in particular in its depiction of his father's drive, saying, \"My father was a person who was always looking ahead, moving forward, never going back.\"\nFerrari was made a Cavaliere del Lavoro in 1952, to add to his honours of Cavaliere and Commendatore in the 1920s. He also received several honorary degrees, including the Hammarskj\u00f6ld Prize in 1962, the Columbus Prize in 1965, and the De Gasperi Award in 1987. He was posthumously inducted into the International Motorsports Hall of Fame (1994) and the Automotive Hall of Fame (2000).\nDeath.\nFerrari died on 14 August 1988 in Maranello at the age of 90, of leukemia. Because he was a private person, and because he feared possible popular protests due to the fact that Ferrari's team had been beaten by McLaren in every race of the 1988 season so far, Enzo expressed the wish for his death to be reported in the media only on 16 August, the day after his burial (witnessed only by his family) on 15 August. \nHe witnessed the launch of the Ferrari F40 shortly before his death, which was dedicated as a symbol of his achievements in 40 years. In 2002 Ferrari began production of the Ferrari Enzo, named after its founder.\nThe Italian Grand Prix was held just weeks after Ferrari's death, and the result was a 1\u20132 finish for Ferrari, with the Austrian Gerhard Berger leading home Italian and Milan native Michele Alboreto; it was the only race that McLaren did not win that season. Since Ferrari's death, the Scuderia Ferrari team has remained successful. \nThe team won the Constructors' Championship every year from to , and in both and . Michael Schumacher won the World Drivers' Championship with Scuderia Ferrari every year from to , and Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen won the title with the team in .\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60091", "revid": "15954147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60091", "title": "Juan-Manuel Fangio", "text": ""}
{"id": "60092", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60092", "title": "Che Guevarra", "text": ""}
{"id": "60093", "revid": "33343951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60093", "title": "Ernesto Guevara", "text": ""}
{"id": "60094", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60094", "title": "Promiscuity", "text": "Practice of having casual sex frequently with different partners\nPromiscuity is the practice of engaging in sexual activity frequently with different partners or being indiscriminate in the choice of sexual partners. The term can carry a moral judgment. A common example of behavior viewed as promiscuous by many cultures is the one-night stand, and its frequency is used by researchers as a marker for promiscuity.\nWhat sexual behavior is considered promiscuous varies between cultures, as does the prevalence of promiscuity. Different standards are often applied to different genders and civil statutes. Feminists have traditionally argued a significant double standard exists between how men and women are judged for promiscuity. Historically, stereotypes of the promiscuous woman have tended to be pejorative, such as \"the slut\" or \"the harlot\", while male stereotypes have been more varied, some expressing approval, such as \"the stud\" or \"the player\", while others imply societal deviance, such as \"the womanizer\" or \"the philanderer\". A scientific study published in 2005 found that promiscuous men and women are both prone to derogatory judgment. \nPromiscuity is common in many animal species. Some species have promiscuous mating systems, ranging from polyandry and polygyny to mating systems with no stable relationships where mating between two individuals is a one-time event. Many species form stable pair bonds, but still mate with other individuals outside the pair. In biology, incidents of promiscuity in species that form pair bonds are usually called extra-pair copulations.\nMotivations.\nAccurately assessing people's sexual behavior is difficult, since strong social and personal motivations occur, depending on social sanctions and taboos, for either minimizing or exaggerating reported sexual activity.\nAmerican experiments in 1978 and 1982 found the great majority of men were willing to have sex with women they did not know, of average attractiveness, who propositioned them. No woman, by contrast, agreed to such propositions from men of average attractiveness. While men were in general comfortable with the requests, regardless of their willingness, women responded with shock and disgust.\nThe number of sexual partners people have had in their lifetimes varies widely within a population. We see a higher number of people who are more comfortable with their sexuality in the modern world. A 2007 nationwide survey in the United States found the median number of female sexual partners reported by men was seven and the median number of male partners reported by women was four. The men possibly exaggerated their reported number of partners, women reported a number lower than the actual number, or a minority of women had a sufficiently larger number than most other women to create a mean significantly higher than the median, or all of the above. About 29% of men and 9% of women reported to have had more than 15 sexual partners in their lifetimes. Studies of the spread of sexually transmitted infections consistently demonstrate a small percentage of the studied population has more partners than the average man or woman, and a smaller number of people have fewer than the statistical average. An important question in the epidemiology of sexually transmitted infections is whether or not these groups copulate mostly at random with sexual partners from throughout a population or within their social groups.\nA 2006 systematic review analyzing data from 59 countries worldwide found no association between regional sexual behavior tendencies, such as number of sexual partners, and sexual-health status. Much more predictive of sexual-health status are socioeconomic factors like poverty and mobility. Other studies have suggested that people with multiple casual sex partners are more likely to be diagnosed with sexually transmitted infections.\nSevere and impulsive promiscuity, along with a compulsive urge to engage in illicit sex with attached individuals is a common symptom of borderline personality disorder, histrionic personality disorder, narcissistic personality disorder, and antisocial personality disorder but most promiscuous individuals do not have these disorders.\nCross-cultural studies.\nIn 2008, a U.S. university study of international promiscuity found that Finns have had the largest number of sex partners in the industrialized world, and British people have the largest number among big western industrial nations. The study measured one-night stands, attitudes to casual sex, and number of sexual partners. A 2014 nationwide survey in the United Kingdom named Liverpool the country's most promiscuous city.\nBritain's position on the international index \"may be linked to increasing social acceptance of promiscuity among women as well as men\". Britain's ranking was \"ascribed to factors such as the decline of religious scruples about extramarital sex, the growth of equal pay and equal rights for women, and a highly sexualized popular culture\". \nThe top-10-ranking OECD nations with a population over 10\u00a0million on the study's promiscuity index, in descending order, were the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands, Czechia, Australia, the United States, France, Turkey, Mexico, and Canada.\nA 2017 survey by Superdrug found that the United Kingdom was the country with the most sex partners with an average of 7, while Austria had around 6.5. The 2012 Trojan Sex Life Survey found that African American men reported an average of 38 sex partners in their lifetime. A study funded by condom-maker Durex, conducted in 2006 and published in 2009, measured promiscuity by a total number of sexual partners. The survey found Austrian men had the highest number of sex partners globally, with 29.3 sexual partners on average. New Zealand women had the highest number of sex partners for females in the world with an average of 20.4 sexual partners. In all of the countries surveyed, except New Zealand, men reported more sexual partners than women.\nOne review found the people from developed Western countries had more sex partners than people from developing countries in general, while the rate of STIs was higher in developing countries.\nAccording to the 2005 Global Sex Survey by Durex, people have had on average nine sexual partners, the most in Turkey (14.5) and Australia (13.3), and the fewest in India (3) and China (3.1).\nAccording to the 2012 General Social Survey in the United States by the National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago, Protestants on average had more sex partners than Catholics. Similarly, a 2019 study by the Institute for Family Studies in the US found that of never married young people, Protestants have more sexual partners than Catholics.\nFemale promiscuity.\nIn 1994, a study in the United States found almost all married heterosexual women reported having sexual contact only with their husbands, and unmarried women almost always reported having no more than one sexual partner in the past three months. Lesbians who had long-term partners reported having fewer outside partners than heterosexual women. More recent research, however, contradicts the assertion that heterosexual women are largely monogamous. A 2002 study estimated that 45% to 55% of married heterosexual women engage in sexual relationships outside of their marriage, while the estimate for heterosexual men engaging in the same conduct was 50\u201360% in the same study.\nOne possible explanation for hypersexuality is child sexual abuse (CSA) trauma. Many studies have examined the correlation between CSA and risky sexual behavior. Rodriguez-Srednicki and Ofelia examined the correlation of CSA experienced by women and their self-destructive behavior as adults using a questionnaire. The diversity and ages of the women varied. Slightly fewer than half the women reported CSA while the remainder reported no childhood trauma. The results of the study determined that self-destructive behaviors, including hypersexuality, correlates with CSA in women. CSA can create sexual schemas that result in risky sexual behavior. This can play out in their sexual interactions as girls get older. The sexual behaviors of women that experienced CSA differed from those of women without exposure to CSA. Studies show CSA survivors tend to have more sexual partners and engage in higher risk sexual behaviors. \nSince at least 1450, the word 'slut' has been used, often pejoratively, to describe a sexually promiscuous woman. In and before the Elizabethan and Jacobean eras, terms like \"strumpet\" and \"whore\" were used to describe women deemed promiscuous, as seen, for example, in John Webster's 1612 play \"The White Devil\".\nThornhill and Gangestad found that women are much more likely to sexually fantasize about and be attracted to extra-pair men during the fertile phase of the menstrual cycle than the luteal phase, whereas attraction to the primary partner does not change depending on the menstrual cycle. A 2004 study by Pillsworth, Hasselton and Buss contradicted this, finding greater in-pair sexual attraction during this phase and no increase in attraction to extra-pair men.\nIn Norwegian students, Kennair et al. (2023) found no signs of a sexual double standard in short-term or long-term mating contexts, nor in choosing a friend, except that women's self-stimulation was more acceptable than men's.\nMale promiscuity.\nHeterosexual/straight men.\nA 1994 study in the United States, which looked at the number of sexual partners in a lifetime, found 20% of heterosexual men had one partner, 55% had two to 20 partners, and 25% had more than 20 sexual partners. More recent studies have reported similar numbers.\nIn the United Kingdom, a nationally representative study in 2013 found that 33.9% of heterosexual men had 10 or more lifetime sexual partners. Among men between 45 and 54 years old, 43.1% reported 10 or more sexual partners.\nA 2003 representative study in Australia found that heterosexual men had a median of 8 female sexual partners in their lifetime. For lifetime sexual partners: 5.8% had 0 partners, 10.3% had 1 partner, 6.1% had 2 partners, 33% had between 3 and 9 partners, 38.3% had between 10 and 49 partners and 6.6% had more than 50 female sexual partners.\nA 2014 representative study in Australia found that heterosexual men had a median of 7.8 female sexual partners in their lifetime. For lifetime sexual partners: 3.7% had 0 partners, 12.6% had 1 partner, 6.8% had 2 partners, 32.3% had between 3 and 9 partners, 36.9% had between 10 and 49 partners and 7.8% had more than 50 female sexual partners.\nGay men and MSM.\nResearch by J. Michael Bailey has found that homosexual and heterosexual men share a similar level of interest in casual sex. However, compared to gay men, straight men are limited in their ability to have sex with multiple females. According to Bailey, \"These facts suggest that women are responsible for the pace of sex. Gay and straight men both want casual sex, but only straight men have the brake of women's sexually cautious nature to slow them.\"\nThe 2013 British NATSAL study found that gay men had a median of 19 lifetime sexual partners. In the previous year, 45.8% of gay men reported having 1 sexual partner, 21.3% reported having between 2 and 4, 7.3% reported having between 5 and 9, and 19.6% reported having 10 or more sexual partners. 6% of gay men had 0 sexual partners. 71.1% of gay men had more than 10 sexual lifetime sexual partners.\nA 2014 study in Australia found gay men had a median of 22 lifetime sexual partners (\"sexual partner\" was defined as kissing, touching or intercourse). 37.8% of gay men had more than 50 sexual partners. In the past year, 50.1% of gay men reported having either 0 or 1 partner, while 25.6% reported 10 or more partners.\nConvenience sample research on gay sexual behavior may overrepresent promiscuous respondents. This is because gay men are a small portion of the male population, and thus many surveys rely on convenience sampling. Examples of this type of sampling includes surveying men on dating apps such as Grindr, or finding volunteers at gay bars, clubs and saunas. Convenience samples often exclude gay men who are in relationships, men who do not use dating apps or men who do not attend gay venues. For example, the British and European convenience surveys included approximately five times as many gay men who reported \"5 or more sexual partners\" than the nationally representative NATSAL study did. Probability sample surveys are more useful in this regard, because they seek to accurately reflect the characteristics of the gay male population. Examples include the NATSAL in the United Kingdom and the General Social Survey in the United States.\nAccording to John Corvino, opponents of gay rights often cite convenience sample research on promiscuity. Psychologist J. Michael Bailey has stated that social conservatives use promiscuity among gay men as evidence of a \"decadent\" nature of gay men, but says \"I think they're wrong. Promiscuous gay men are expressing an essentially masculine trait. They are doing what most heterosexual men would do if they could. They are in this way just like heterosexual men, except that they don't have women to constrain them.\"\nRegarding sexually transmitted infections (STIs), some researchers have said that the number of sexual partners had by gay men cannot fully explain rates of HIV infection in this population. According to an article published in the BMJ, unprotected receptive anal sex, which carries a higher risk of HIV transmission, is a more important factor.\nA 1989 study found having over 100 partners to be present though rare among homosexual males. A 1994 study found that difference in the mean number of sexual partners between gay and straight men \"did not appear very large\".\nA 2007 study reported that two large population surveys found \"the majority of gay men had similar numbers of unprotected sexual partners annually as straight men and women.\"\nEvolution.\nEvolutionary psychologists propose that a conditional human tendency for promiscuity is inherited from hunter-gatherer ancestors. Promiscuity increases the likelihood of having children, thus \"evolutionary\" fitness. According to them, female promiscuity is advantageous in that it allows females to choose fathers for their children who have better genes than their mates, to ensure better care for their offspring, have more children, and as a form of fertility insurance. Male promiscuity was likely advantageous because it allowed males to father more children.\nPrimitive promiscuity.\nPrimitive promiscuity or original promiscuity was the 19th-century hypothesis that humans originally lived in a state of promiscuity or \"hetaerism\" before the advent of society as we understand it. Hetaerism is a theoretical early state of human society, as postulated by 19th-century anthropologists, which was characterized by the absence of the institution of marriage in any form and in which women were the common property of their tribe and in which children never knew who their fathers were.\nThe reconstruction of the original state of primitive society or humanity was based on the idea of progress, according to which all cultures have degrees of improvement and becoming more complicated. It seemed logical to assume that never before the types of families developed did they simply exist, and in primitive society, sexual relations were without any boundaries and taboos. This view is represented, inter alia, by anthropologist Lewis H. Morgan in \"Ancient Society\" and Friedrich Engels' work \"The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State\".\nIn the first half of the 20th century, this notion was rejected by a number of authors, e.g. Edvard Westermarck, a Finnish philosopher, social anthropologist and sociologist with in-depth knowledge of the history of marriage, who provided strong evidence that, at least in the first stages of cultural development, monogamy has been a perfectly normal and natural form of man-woman coexistence.\nModern cultural anthropology has not confirmed the existence of a complete promiscuity in any known society or culture. The evidence of history is reduced to some texts of Herodotus, Strabo, and Solinus, which have been hard to interpret.\nReligious, social, and cultural views.\nChristianity, Judaism, and Islam condemn promiscuity and instead advocate lifelong monogamous marriage (although Islam allows polygamy for men). The perspectives on promiscuity vary significantly depending on the region. Every country has different values and morals pertaining to sexual life.\nPromiscuity has been practiced in hippie communities and other alternative subcultures since the 1960s cultural revolution.\nSex and Culture is a book by J. D. Unwin concerning the correlation between a society's level of 'cultural achievement' and its level of sexual restraint. Published in 1934, the book concluded with the theory that as societies develop, they become more sexually liberal, accelerating the social entropy of the society, and thereby diminishing its \"creative\" and \"expansive\" energy.\nOther animals.\nSome researchers have suggested that the practice of referring to animals as promiscuous in reference to their mating system is often inaccurate and potentially biased. More precise terms such as polyandry, polygyny, and polygynandry are increasingly preferred.\nMany animal species, such as spotted hyenas, pigs, bonobos and chimpanzees, are promiscuous as a rule, and do not form pair bonds. Although social monogamy occurs in about 90% of avian species and about 3% of mammalian species, an estimated 90% of socially monogamous species exhibit individual promiscuity in the form of copulation outside the pair bond.\nIn the animal world, some species, including birds such as swans and fish such as \"Neolamprologus pulcher\", once believed monogamous, are now known to engage in extra-pair copulations. One example of extra-pair fertilization (EPF) in birds is the black-throated blue warblers. Though it is a socially monogamous species, both males and females engage in EPF.\nThe Darwin-Bateman paradigm, which states that males are typically eager to copulate while females are more choosy about whom to mate with, has been confirmed by a meta-analysis. There is, however, continued debate about the utility and pitfalls of the Bateman perspective.\nRisks.\nPromiscuity may increase the risk of acquiring sexually transmitted infections.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60096", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60096", "title": "Testalying", "text": ""}
{"id": "60097", "revid": "26536202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60097", "title": "Topological ring", "text": "In mathematics, a topological ring is a ring formula_1 that is also a topological space such that both the addition and the multiplication are continuous as maps formula_2 where formula_3 carries the product topology. This means formula_1 is an additive topological group and a multiplicative topological semigroup.\nTopological rings are fundamentally related to topological fields and arise naturally while studying them, since for example the completion of a topological field may be a topological ring which is not a field.\nGeneral comments.\nThe group of units formula_5 of a topological ring formula_1 is a topological group when endowed with the topology coming from the embedding of formula_5 into the product formula_3 as formula_9 However, if the unit group is endowed with the subspace topology as a subspace of formula_10 it may not be a topological group, because inversion on formula_5 need not be continuous with respect to the subspace topology. An example of this situation is the adele ring of a global field; its unit group, called the idele group, is not a topological group in the subspace topology. If inversion on formula_5 is continuous in the subspace topology of formula_1 then these two topologies on formula_5 are the same.\nIf one does not require a ring to have a unit, then one has to add the requirement of continuity of the additive inverse, or equivalently, to define the topological ring as a ring that is a topological group (with respect to addition) in which multiplication is continuous, too.\nExamples.\nTopological rings occur in mathematical analysis, for example as rings of continuous real-valued functions on some topological space (where the topology is given by pointwise convergence), or as rings of continuous linear operators on some normed vector space; all Banach algebras are topological rings. The rational, real, complex and formula_15-adic numbers are also topological rings (even topological fields, see below) with their standard topologies. In the plane, split-complex numbers and dual numbers form alternative topological rings. See hypercomplex numbers for other low-dimensional examples.\nIn commutative algebra, the following construction is common: given an ideal formula_16 in a commutative ring formula_10 the I-adic topology on formula_1 is defined as follows: a subset formula_19 of formula_1 is open if and only if for every formula_21 there exists a natural number formula_22 such that formula_23 This turns formula_1 into a topological ring. The formula_16-adic topology is Hausdorff if and only if the intersection of all powers of formula_16 is the zero ideal formula_27 \nThe formula_15-adic topology on the integers is an example of an formula_16-adic topology (with formula_30).\nCompletion.\nEvery topological ring is a topological group (with respect to addition) and hence a uniform space in a natural manner. One can thus ask whether a given topological ring formula_1 is complete. If it is not, then it can be \"completed\": one can find an essentially unique complete topological ring formula_32 that contains formula_1 as a dense subring such that the given topology on formula_1 equals the subspace topology arising from formula_35\nIf the starting ring formula_1 is metric, the ring formula_32 can be constructed as a set of equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences in formula_10 this equivalence relation makes the ring formula_32 Hausdorff and using constant sequences (which are Cauchy) one realizes a (uniformly) continuous morphism (CM in the sequel) formula_40 such that, for all CM formula_41 where formula_42 is Hausdorff and complete, there exists a unique CM formula_43 such that \nformula_44 If formula_1 is not metric (as, for instance, the ring of all real-variable rational valued functions, that is, all functions formula_46 endowed with the topology of pointwise convergence) the standard construction uses minimal Cauchy filters and satisfies the same universal property as above (see Bourbaki, General Topology, III.6.5).\nThe rings of formal power series and the formula_15-adic integers are most naturally defined as completions of certain topological rings carrying formula_16-adic topologies.\nTopological fields.\nSome of the most important examples are topological fields. A topological field is a topological ring that is also a field, and such that inversion of non zero elements is a continuous function. The most common examples are the complex numbers and all its subfields, and the valued fields, which include the formula_15-adic fields.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60098", "revid": "330520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60098", "title": "Attack on Pearl Harbor", "text": "1941 Japanese surprise attack on the United States\nThe attack on Pearl Harbor was a surprise military strike by the Empire of Japan on the United States Pacific Fleet at its naval base at Pearl Harbor on Oahu, Hawaii, on December 7, 1941. At the time, the U.S. was a neutral country in World War II. The air raid on Pearl Harbor, which was launched from aircraft carriers, resulted in the U.S. declaring war on Japan the next day. The Japanese military leadership referred to the attack as the Hawaii Operation and Operation AI, and as Operation Z during its planning.\nThe attack on Pearl Harbor was preceded by months of negotiations between the U.S. and Japan over the future of the Pacific. Japanese demands included that the U.S. end its sanctions against Japan, cease aiding China in the Second Sino-Japanese War, and allow Japan to access the resources of the Dutch East Indies. Japan sent out its naval attack group on November 26, 1941, just prior to receiving the Hull note, which stated the U.S. desire that Japan withdraw from China and French Indochina. Isoroku Yamamoto, commander of the Japanese Combined Fleet, planned the attack as a pre-emptive strike on the Pacific Fleet, based at Pearl Harbor since 1940 in order to prevent it from interfering with Japan's planned actions in Southeast Asia. Yamamoto hoped that the strike would enable Japan to make quick territorial gains and negotiate peace. In addition to Pearl Harbor, over seven hours Japan launched coordinated attacks on the U.S.-held Philippines, Guam, and Wake Island; and on the British Empire in Malaya, Singapore, and Hong Kong.\nThe attack force, commanded by Ch\u016bichi Nagumo, began its attacks at 7:48a.m. Hawaiian time (6:18p.m. GMT) on December 7, 1941. The base was attacked by 353 fighters, level and dive bombers, and torpedo bombers in two waves launched from six aircraft carriers. Of the eight U.S. battleships present, all were damaged and four were sunk. All but were later raised, and six were returned to service during the war. The Japanese also sank or damaged three cruisers, three destroyers, an anti-aircraft training ship, and a minelayer. More than 180 U.S. aircraft were destroyed. A total of 2,403 Americans were killed and 1,178 others were wounded, while the Japanese lost a total of 29 aircraft, five midget submarines, and 130 men. The three U.S. carriers stationed at Pearl Harbor were at sea at the time, and important base installations, including its oil storage and naval repair facilities, were not attacked.\nJapan declared war on the U.S. and the British Empire later that day (December 8 in Tokyo), but the declarations were not delivered until the next day. On December 8, both the United Kingdom and U.S. declared war on Japan. On December 11, though they had no formal obligation to do so under the Tripartite Pact with Japan, Germany and Italy each declared war on the United States, which responded with a declaration of war against Germany and Italy. While there were historical precedents for unannounced military action by Japan, the lack of a formal warning and perception that the attack had been unprovoked led U.S. president Franklin D. Roosevelt to famously label December 7, 1941, \"a date which will live in infamy\". The attack was the deadliest event ever in Hawaii, and the deadliest foreign attack on the U.S. until the September 11 attacks of 2001.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nDiplomacy.\nWar between the Empire of Japan and the United States was seen as a possibility since the 1920s. Japan had been wary of American territorial and military expansion in the Pacific and Asia since the late 1890s, followed by the annexation of islands, such as Hawaii and the Philippines, which were close to or within Japan's perceived sphere of influence.\nAt the same time, Japanese strategic thinkers believed that Japan needed economic self-sufficiency in order to wage modern war. The experiences of World War I had taught the Japanese that modern wars would be protracted, require total mobilization, and create vulnerabilities for trade embargoes and encirclement. As a consequence, Japan needed access to strategically important resources (e.g., iron, oil) that could not be extracted at sufficient levels in the home islands.\nAlthough Japan had begun to take a hostile stance against the United States after the rejection of the Racial Equality Proposal, their relationship was cordial enough to remain trading partners. Tensions did not seriously grow until Japan's invasion of Manchuria in 1931. Over the next decade, Japan expanded into China, leading to the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937. Japan spent considerable effort trying to isolate China and endeavored to secure enough independent resources to attain victory on the mainland. The \"Southern Operation\" was designed to assist these efforts. Nevertheless, Japan would still rely heavily on U.S. oil imports, including to Japanese forces in Japan-occupied Manchuria. In a memorandum dated October 24, 1934, Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs Stanley K. Hornbeck discussed his meeting with Standard Oil New Jersey head Walter C. Teagle to U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt. The memo described that Teagle was uncooperative with U.S. recommendations and how Standard Oil was given special treatment by the Japanese government, which made the company less subject to Japan's national business regulation policies than other companies. Hornbeck noted in the memorandum that as a result of Teagle's business dealings with Japan, \"the major portion of the petroleum and petroleum products now imported into Japan is of American origin.\"\nStarting in December 1937, events such as the Japanese attack on USS \"Panay\", the Allison incident, and the Nanking Massacre swung Western public opinion sharply against Japan. The United States unsuccessfully proposed a joint action with the United Kingdom to blockade Japan. In 1938, following an appeal by President Roosevelt, American companies stopped providing Japan with implements of war.\nIn 1940, Japan invaded French Indochina, attempting to stymie the flow of supplies reaching China. The United States halted shipments of airplanes, parts, machine tools, and aviation gasoline to Japan, which the latter perceived as an unfriendly act. The United States did not stop oil exports, however, partly because of the prevailing sentiment in Washington that given Japanese dependence on American oil, such an action was likely to be considered an extreme provocation.\nIn mid-1940, President Franklin D. Roosevelt moved the Pacific Fleet from San Diego to Hawaii. He also ordered a military buildup in the Philippines, taking both actions in the hope of discouraging Japanese aggression in the Far East. Because the Japanese high command was mistakenly certain any attack on the United Kingdom's Southeast Asian colonies, including Singapore, would bring the United States into the war, a devastating preventive strike appeared to be the only way to prevent American naval interference. An invasion of the Philippines was also considered necessary by Japanese war planners. The American War Plan Orange had envisioned defending the Philippines with an elite force of 40,000 men; this option was never implemented due to opposition from Douglas MacArthur, who felt he would need a force ten times that size. By 1941, American planners expected to have to abandon the Philippines at the outbreak of war. Late that year, Admiral Thomas C. Hart, commander of the United States Asiatic Fleet, was given orders to that effect.\nThe United States finally ceased oil exports to Japan in July 1941, following the seizure of French Indochina after the Fall of France, in part because of new American restrictions on domestic oil consumption. Because of this decision, Japan proceeded with plans to take the oil-rich Dutch East Indies. On August 17, Roosevelt warned Japan that America was prepared to take opposing steps if \"neighboring countries\" were attacked.\nJapan and the United States engaged in negotiations during 1941, attempting to improve relations. In the course of these negotiations, Japan offered to withdraw from most of China and Indochina after making peace with the Nationalist government. It also proposed to adopt an independent interpretation of the Tripartite Pact and to refrain from trade discrimination, provided all other nations reciprocated. Washington rejected these proposals. Japanese Prime Minister Konoe then offered to meet with Roosevelt, but Roosevelt insisted on reaching an agreement before any meeting. The American ambassador to Japan repeatedly urged Roosevelt to accept the meeting, warning that it was the only way to preserve the conciliatory Konoe government and peace in the Pacific. However, his recommendation was not acted upon. The Konoe government collapsed the following month when the Japanese military rejected a withdrawal of all troops from China.\nJapan's final proposal, delivered on November 20, offered to withdraw from southern Indochina and to refrain from attacks in Southeast Asia, so long as the United States, United Kingdom, and Netherlands supplied of aviation fuel, lifted their sanctions against Japan, and ceased aid to China. The American counter-proposal of November 26 (November 27 in Japan), the Hull note, required Japan to completely evacuate China without conditions and conclude non-aggression pacts with Pacific powers. On November 26 in Japan, the day before the note's delivery, the Japanese task force left port for Pearl Harbor.\nThe Japanese intended the attack as a preventive action to keep the United States Pacific Fleet from interfering with their planned military actions in Southeast Asia against overseas territories of the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and the United States. Over the course of seven hours, there were coordinated Japanese attacks on the American-held Philippines, Guam, and Wake Island and on the British Empire in Malaya, Singapore, and Hong Kong. From the Japanese point of view, it was seen as a preemptive strike \"before the oil gauge ran empty.\"\nMilitary planning.\nPreliminary planning for an attack on Pearl Harbor to protect the move into the \"Southern Resource Area\", the Japanese term for the Dutch East Indies and Southeast Asia generally, began early in 1941 under the auspices of Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, then commanding Japan's Combined Fleet. He won assent to formal planning and training for an attack from the Imperial Japanese Navy General Staff only after much contention with Naval Headquarters, including a threat to resign his command. Full-scale planning was underway by early spring 1941, primarily by Rear Admiral Ry\u016bnosuke Kusaka, with assistance from Commander Minoru Genda and Yamamoto's Deputy Chief of Staff, Captain Kameto Kuroshima. The planners studied the 1940 British air attack on the Italian fleet at Taranto intensively.\nOver the next several months, pilots were trained, equipment was adapted, and intelligence was collected. Despite these preparations, Emperor Hirohito did not approve the attack plan until November 5, after the third of four Imperial Conferences called to consider the matter. At first, he hesitated to engage in war but eventually authorized the Pearl Harbor strike despite dissent from certain advisors. Final authorization was not given by the emperor until December 1, after a majority of Japanese leaders advised him the Hull note would \"destroy the fruits of the China incident, endanger Manchukuo and undermine Japanese control of Korea\". Before the attack, he became more involved in military matters, even joining the Conference of Military Councillors, which was considered unusual for him. Additionally, he actively sought more information about the war plans. According to an aide, he openly displayed happiness upon hearing about the success of the surprise attacks. \nBy late 1941, many observers believed that hostilities between the United States and Japan were imminent. A Gallup poll just before the attack on Pearl Harbor found that 52% of Americans expected war with Japan, 27% did not, and 21% had no opinion. While American Pacific bases and facilities had been placed on alert on many occasions, officials doubted Pearl Harbor would be the first target; instead, they expected the Philippines to be attacked first. This presumption was due to the threat that the air bases throughout the country and the naval base at Manila posed to sea lanes, as well as to the shipment of supplies to Japan from territory to the south. They also incorrectly believed that Japan was not capable of mounting more than one major naval operation at a time.\nObjectives.\nThe Japanese attack had several major aims. First, it intended to destroy important American fleet units, thereby preventing the Pacific Fleet from interfering with the Japanese conquest of the Dutch East Indies and Malaya and enabling Japan to conquer Southeast Asia without interference. The leaders of the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) subscribed to Alfred Thayer Mahan's \"decisive battle\" doctrine, especially that of destroying the maximum number of battleships. Second, it was hoped to buy time for Japan to consolidate its position and increase its naval strength before shipbuilding authorized by the 1940 Vinson-Walsh Act erased any chance of victory. Third, to deliver a blow to America's ability to mobilize its forces in the Pacific, battleships were chosen as the main targets, since they were the prestige ships of navies at the time. Finally, it was hoped that the attack would undermine American morale to such an extent that the American government would drop its demands contrary to Japanese interests and seek a peace compromise.\nStriking the Pacific Fleet at anchor in Pearl Harbor had two distinct disadvantages: the targeted ships would be in very shallow water, so it would be relatively easy to salvage and possibly repair them, and most of the crews would survive the attack since many would be on shore leave or would be rescued from the harbor. A further important disadvantage was the absence of all three Pacific Fleet aircraft carriers (, , and ). Despite these concerns, Yamamoto decided to press ahead.\nJapanese confidence in their ability to win a short war meant that other targets in the harbor, especially the navy yard, oil tank farms and submarine base, were left unscathed, since by their thinking the war would be over before the influence of these facilities would be felt.\nApproach and attack.\nOn November 26, 1941, a Japanese task force (the Striking Force) of six aircraft carriers\u00a0\u2013 , , , , , and \u00a0\u2013 departed Hittokapu Bay on Etorofu (now Iterup) Island in the Kuril Islands, \"en route\" to a position northwest of Hawaii, intending to launch its 408 aircraft to attack Pearl Harbor: 360 for the two attack waves and 48 on defensive combat air patrol (CAP), including nine fighters from the first wave.\nThe first wave was to be the primary attack, while the second wave was to attack carriers as its first objective and cruisers as its second, with battleships as the third target. The first wave carried most of the weapons designed to attack capital ships, mainly specially adapted Type 91 aerial torpedoes which were designed with an anti-roll mechanism and a rudder extension that let them operate in shallow water. The aircrews were ordered to select the highest-value targets (battleships and aircraft carriers) or, if these were not present, any other high-value ships (cruisers and destroyers). First-wave dive bombers were to attack ground targets. Fighters were ordered to strafe and destroy as many parked aircraft as possible to ensure they did not intercept the bombers, especially in the first wave. When the fighters' fuel got low, they were to refuel aboard the aircraft carriers and return to combat. Fighters were to assume CAP duties where needed, especially over American airfields.\nBefore the attack commenced, the Imperial Japanese Navy launched reconnaissance floatplanes from heavy cruisers and , to scout Oahu and Lahaina Roads, Maui, respectively, with orders to report on American fleet composition and location. Reconnaissance aircraft flights risked alerting the Americans, and were not necessary. Fleet composition and preparedness information in Pearl Harbor were already known from the reports of the Japanese spy Takeo Yoshikawa. A report of the absence of the American fleet at Lahaina anchorage off Maui was received from the \"Tone\"'s floatplane and the fleet submarine . Another four scout planes patrolled the area between the Japanese carrier force (the Kid\u014d Butai) and Niihau, to detect any counterattack.\nSubmarines.\nFleet submarines , , , , and each embarked a Type A midget submarine for transport to the waters off Oahu. The five I-boats left Kure Naval District on November 25, 1941. On December 6, they came to within of the mouth of Pearl Harbor and launched their midget subs at about 01:00 local time on December 7. At 03:42 Hawaiian time, the minesweeper spotted a midget submarine periscope southwest of the Pearl Harbor entrance buoy and alerted the destroyer . The midget may have entered Pearl Harbor. However, \"Ward\" sank another midget submarine at 06:37 in the first American shots in the Pacific Theater. A midget submarine on the north side of Ford Island missed the seaplane tender with her first torpedo and missed the attacking destroyer with her other one before being sunk by \"Monaghan\" at 08:43.\nA third midget submarine, \"Ha-19\", grounded twice, once outside the harbor entrance and again on the east side of Oahu, where it was captured on December 8. Ensign Kazuo Sakamaki swam ashore and was captured by Hawaii National Guard Corporal David Akui, becoming the first Japanese prisoner of war. A fourth had been damaged by a depth charge attack and was abandoned by its crew before it could fire its torpedoes. It was found outside the harbor in 1960. Japanese forces received a radio message from a midget submarine at 00:41 on December 8 claiming to have damaged one or more large warships inside Pearl Harbor.\nIn 1992, 2000, and 2001, Hawaii Undersea Research Laboratory's submersibles found the wreck of the fifth midget submarine lying in three parts outside Pearl Harbor. The wreck was in the debris field where much surplus American equipment had been dumped after the war, including vehicles and landing craft. Both of its torpedoes were missing. This correlates with reports of two torpedoes fired at the light cruiser at 10:04 at the entrance of Pearl Harbor, and a possible torpedo fired at destroyer at 08:21. There is dispute over this official chain of events though. The \"torpedo\" that \"St. Louis\" saw was also reportedly a porpoising minesweeping float being towed by the destroyer . Some historians and naval architects theorize that a photo of Battleship Row, taken by a Japanese naval aviator during the attack on Pearl Harbor, which was declassified in the 1990s and publicized in the 2000s, shows the fifth midget submarine firing a torpedo at \"West Virginia\" and another at \"Oklahoma\". These torpedoes were twice the size of the aerial torpedoes so it was possible that both torpedoes heavily contributed to the sinkings of both ships and especially helped to capsize \"Oklahoma\" as \"Oklahoma\" was the only battleship that day to suffer catastrophic damage to her belt armor at the waterline from a torpedo. Admiral Chester Nimitz, in a report to Congress, confirmed that one midget submarine's torpedo (possibly from the other midget submarine that fired torpedoes but failed to hit a target) which was fired but did not explode was recovered in Pearl Harbor and was much larger than the aerial torpedoes.\n Others dispute this theory.\nJapanese declaration of war.\nThe attack took place before any formal declaration of war was made by Japan, but this was not Admiral Yamamoto's intention. He originally stipulated that the attack should not commence until thirty minutes after Japan had informed the United States that peace negotiations were at an end. However, the attack began before the notice could be delivered. Tokyo transmitted the 5000-word notification (commonly called the \"14-Part Message\") in two blocks to the Japanese Embassy in Washington. Transcribing the message took too long for the Japanese ambassador to deliver it at 1:00p.m. Washington time, as ordered, and consequently the message was not presented until more than one hour after the attack had begun\u200a\u2014\u200a but American code breakers had already deciphered and translated most of the message hours before it was scheduled to be delivered. The final part of the message is sometimes described as a declaration of war. While it was viewed by a number of senior American government and military officials as a very strong indicator negotiations were likely to be terminated and that war might break out at any moment, it neither declared war nor severed diplomatic relations. A declaration of war was printed on the front page of Japan's newspapers in the evening edition of December 8 (late December 7 in the United States), but not delivered to the American government until the day after the attack.\nFor decades, conventional wisdom held that Japan attacked without first formally breaking diplomatic relations only because of accidents and bumbling that delayed the delivery of a document hinting at war to Washington. In 1999, however, Takeo Iguchi, a professor of law and international relations at International Christian University in Tokyo, discovered documents that pointed to a vigorous debate inside the government over how, and indeed whether, to notify Washington of Japan's intention to break off negotiations and start a war, including a December 7 entry in the war diary saying, \"[O]ur deceptive diplomacy is steadily proceeding toward success.\" Of this, Iguchi said, \"The diary shows that the army and navy did not want to give any proper declaration of war, or indeed prior notice even of the termination of negotiations... and they clearly prevailed.\"\nIn any event, even if the Japanese had decoded and delivered the 14-Part Message before the beginning of the attack, it would not have constituted either a formal break of diplomatic relations or a declaration of war. The final two paragraphs of the message read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus the earnest hope of the Japanese Government to adjust Japanese-American relations and to preserve and promote the peace of the Pacific through cooperation with the American Government has finally been lost.The Japanese Government regrets to have to notify hereby the American Government that in view of the attitude of the American Government it cannot but consider that it is impossible to reach an agreement through further negotiations.\nUnited States naval intelligence officers were alarmed by the unusual timing for delivering the message\u200a\u2014\u200a1:00p.m. on a Sunday, which was 7:30a.m. in Hawaii\u200a\u2014\u200aand attempted to alert Pearl Harbor. But due to communication problems the warning was not delivered before the attack.\nFirst wave composition.\nThe first attack wave of 183 airplanes, led by Commander Mitsuo Fuchida, was launched north of Oahu. Six airplanes failed to launch due to technical difficulties. The first wave included three groups of airplanes:\nAs the first wave approached Oahu, it was detected by United States Army SCR-270 radar positioned at Opana Point near the island's northern tip. This post had been in training mode for months, but was not yet operational. The operators, Privates George Elliot Jr. and Joseph Lockard, reported a target to Private Joseph P. McDonald, who was stationed at Fort Shafter's Intercept Center near Pearl Harbor. Lieutenant Kermit A. Tyler, a newly assigned officer at the thinly manned Intercept Center, presumed it was the scheduled arrival of six B-17 bombers from California. The Japanese planes were approaching from a direction very close (only a few degrees difference) to the bombers, and while the operators had never seen a formation as large on radar, they neglected to tell Tyler of its size. Tyler, for security reasons, could not tell the operators of the six B-17s that were due (even though it was widely known).\nAs the first wave approached Oahu, they encountered and shot down several American aircraft. At least one of these radioed a somewhat incoherent warning. Other warnings from ships off the harbor entrance were still being processed or awaiting confirmation when the Japanese air assault began at 7:48a.m. Hawaiian time (3:18a.m. December 8 Japanese Standard Time, as kept by ships of the \"Kido Butai\"), with the attack on Kaneohe. A total of 353 Japanese planes reached Oahu in two waves. Slow, vulnerable torpedo bombers led the first wave, exploiting the first moments of surprise to attack the most important ships present (the battleships), while dive bombers attacked American air bases across Oahu, starting with Hickam Field, the largest, and Wheeler Field, the main United States Army Air Forces fighter base. The 171 planes in the second wave attacked the Army Air Forces' Bellows Field, near Kaneohe on the windward side of the island, and Ford Island. The only aerial opposition came from a handful of P-36 Hawks, P-40 Warhawks and some SBD Dauntless dive bombers from the carrier .\nIn the first-wave attack, about eight of the forty-nine 800\u2011kg (1760lb) armor-piercing bombs dropped hit their intended battleship targets. At least two of those bombs broke up on impact, another detonated before penetrating an unarmored deck, and one was a dud. Thirteen of the forty torpedoes hit battleships, while four hit other ships. Men aboard the ships awoke to the sounds of alarms, bombs exploding, and gunfire, prompting them to dress as they ran to General Quarters stations. (The famous message \"Air raid Pearl Harbor. This is not drill.\" was sent from the headquarters of Patrol Wing Two, the first senior Hawaiian command to respond.) American servicemen were caught unprepared by the attack. Ammunition lockers were locked, aircraft parked wingtip to wingtip in the open to prevent sabotage, guns unmanned (none of the Navy's 5\"/38s, only a quarter of its machine guns, and only four of 31 Army batteries got in action). Despite this low alert status, many American military personnel responded effectively during the attack. Ensign Joseph Taussig Jr., aboard , commanded the ship's antiaircraft guns and was severely wounded but remained at his post. Lieutenant Commander F. J. Thomas commanded \"Nevada\" in the captain's absence and got her underway until the ship was grounded at 9:10a.m. One of the destroyers, , got underway with only four officers aboard, all ensigns, none with more than a year's sea duty; she operated at sea for 36 hours before her commanding officer managed to get back aboard. Captain Mervyn Bennion, commanding , led his men until he was cut down by fragments from a bomb which hit , moored alongside.\nSecond wave composition.\nThe second planned wave consisted of 171 planes: 54 B5Ns, 81 D3As, and 36 A6Ms, commanded by Lieutenant-Commander Shigekazu Shimazaki. Four planes failed to launch because of technical difficulties. This wave and its targets also comprised three groups of planes:\nThe second wave was divided into three groups. One was tasked to attack K\u0101ne\u02bbohe, the rest Pearl Harbor proper. The separate sections arrived at the attack point almost simultaneously from several directions.\nAmerican casualties and damage.\nNinety minutes after it began, the attack was over. 2,008 sailors were killed and 710 others wounded; 218 soldiers and airmen (who were part of the Army prior to the independent United States Air Force in 1947) were killed and 364 wounded; 109 Marines were killed and 69 wounded; and 68 civilians were killed and 35 wounded. In total, 2,403 Americans were killed, and 1,178 were wounded. Eighteen ships were sunk or run aground, including five battleships. All of the Americans killed or wounded during the attack were legally non-combatants, given that there was no state of war when the attack occurred.\nOf the American fatalities, nearly half were due to the explosion of 's forward magazine after she was hit by a modified shell. Author Craig Nelson wrote that the vast majority of the U.S. sailors killed at Pearl Harbor were junior enlisted personnel. \"The officers of the Navy all lived in houses and the junior people were the ones on the boats, so pretty much all of the people who died in the direct line of the attack were very junior people\", Nelson said. \"So everyone is about 17 or 18 whose story is told there.\"\nAmong the notable civilian casualties were nine Honolulu Fire Department firefighters who responded to Hickam Field during the bombing in Honolulu, becoming the only fire department members on American soil to be attacked by a foreign power in history. Fireman Harry Tuck Lee Pang of Engine6 was killed near the hangars by machine-gun fire from a Japanese plane. Captains Thomas Macy and John Carreira of Engine4 and Engine1, respectively, died while battling flames inside the hangar after a Japanese bomb crashed through the roof. An additional six firefighters were wounded by Japanese shrapnel. The wounded later received Purple Hearts (originally reserved for service members wounded by enemy action while partaking in armed conflicts) for their peacetime actions that day on June 13, 1944; the three firefighters killed did not receive theirs until December 7, 1984, on the 43rd anniversary of the attack. This made the nine men the only non-military firefighters to receive such an award in American history.\nAlready damaged by a torpedo and on fire amidships, \"Nevada\" attempted to exit the harbor. She was targeted by many Japanese bombers as she got underway and sustained more hits from bombs, which started further fires. She was deliberately beached to avoid risking blocking the harbor entrance if she sank there. was hit by two bombs and two torpedoes. The crew might have kept her afloat, but were ordered to abandon ship just as they were raising power for the pumps. Burning oil from \"Arizona\" and was drifted down toward her and probably made the situation look worse than it was. The disarmed target ship was holed twice by torpedoes. \"West Virginia\" was hit by seven torpedoes, the seventh tearing away her rudder. was hit by four torpedoes, the last two above her belt armor, which caused her to capsize. was hit by two of the converted 16\" shells, but neither caused serious damage.\nAlthough the Japanese concentrated on battleships (the largest vessels present), they did not ignore other targets. The light cruiser was torpedoed, and the concussion from the blast capsized the neighboring minelayer . Two destroyers in dry dock, and , were destroyed when bombs penetrated their fuel bunkers. The leaking fuel caught fire; flooding the dry dock in an effort to fight fire made the burning oil rise, and both were burned out. \"Cassin\" slipped from her keel blocks and rolled against \"Downes\". The light cruiser was holed by a torpedo. The light cruiser was damaged but remained in service. The repair vessel , moored alongside \"Arizona\", was heavily damaged and beached. The seaplane tender \"Curtiss\" was also damaged. The destroyer was badly damaged when two bombs penetrated her forward magazine.\nOf the 402 American aircraft in Hawaii, 188 were destroyed and 159 damaged, 155 of them on the ground. Almost none were actually ready to take off to defend the base. Eight Army Air Forces pilots managed to get airborne during the attack, and six were credited with downing at least one Japanese aircraft during the attack: 1st Lieutenant Lewis M. Sanders and 2nd Lieutenants Philip M. Rasmussen, Kenneth M. Taylor, George S. Welch, Harry W. Brown, and Gordon H. Sterling Jr. Of 33 Consolidated PBY Catalinas in Hawaii, 30 were destroyed, while three on patrol at the time of the attack returned undamaged. Friendly fire brought down some American planes on top of that, including four from an inbound flight from .\nAt the time of the attack, nine civilian aircraft were flying in the vicinity of Pearl Harbor. Of these, three were shot down.\nJapanese losses.\nFifty-five Japanese airmen and nine submariners were killed in the attack, and one, Kazuo Sakamaki, was captured. Of Japan's 414 available planes, 350 took part in the raid. Twenty-nine were lost, nine in the first wave (three fighters, one dive bomber, and five torpedo bombers) and twenty in the second (six fighters and fourteen dive bombers), with another 74 damaged by anti-aircraft fire from the ground.\nPossible third wave.\nAccording to some accounts, several Japanese junior officers, including Fuchida and Genda, urged Nagumo to carry out a third strike in order to sink more of Pearl Harbor's remaining warships, and damage the base's maintenance shops, drydock facilities and oil tank yards. Most notably, Fuchida gave a firsthand account of this meeting several times after the war. However, some historians have cast doubt on this and many other of Fuchida's later claims, which sometimes conflict with documented historic records. Genda, who opined during the planning for the attack that without an invasion three strikes were necessary to fully disable the Pacific Fleet, denied requesting an additional attack. Regardless, it is undisputed that the captains of the other five carriers in the task force reported they were willing and ready to carry out a third strike soon after the second returned, but Nagumo decided to withdraw for several reasons:\nAlthough a hypothetical third strike would have likely focused on the base's remaining warships, military historians have suggested any potential damage to the shore facilities would have hampered the Pacific Fleet far more seriously. If they had been wiped out, \"serious [American] operations in the Pacific would have been postponed for more than a year\"; according to Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, later Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet, \"it would have prolonged the war another two years\".\nAt a conference aboard his flagship the following morning, Yamamoto supported Nagumo's withdrawal without launching a third wave. In retrospect, sparing the vital dockyards, maintenance shops, and the oil tank farm meant the United States could respond relatively quickly in the Pacific. Yamamoto later regretted Nagumo's decision to withdraw and categorically stated it had been a great mistake not to order a third strike.\nShips lost or damaged.\nTwenty-one American ships were damaged or lost in the attack, of which all but three were repaired and returned to service.\nSalvage.\nAfter a systematic search for survivors, Captain Homer N. Wallin was ordered to lead a formal salvage operation.\nAround Pearl Harbor, divers from the Navy (shore and tenders), the Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard, and civilian contractors (Pacific Bridge Company and others) began work on the ships that could be refloated. They patched holes, cleared debris, and pumped water out of ships. Melvin Storer and other Navy divers worked inside the damaged ships. Within six months, five battleships and two cruisers were patched or refloated so they could be sent to shipyards in Pearl Harbor and on the mainland for extensive repair.\nIntensive salvage operations continued for another year, a total of some 20,000 man-hours under water. \"Arizona\" and the target ship \"Utah\" were too heavily damaged for salvage and remain where they were sunk, with \"Arizona\" becoming a war memorial. \"Oklahoma\", while successfully raised, was never repaired and capsized while under tow to the mainland in 1947. The \"Nevada\" proved particularly difficult to raise and repair; two men involved in the operation died after inhaling poisonous gases that had accumulated in the ship's interior. When feasible, armament and equipment were removed from vessels too damaged to repair and put to use to improve the anti-aircraft defense of the harbor or installed aboard other craft.\nNews coverage.\nCoverage in the United States.\nThe initial announcement of the attack on Pearl Harbor was made by the White House Press Secretary, Stephen Early, at 2:22p.m. Eastern time (8:52a.m. Hawaiian time): \"The Japanese have attacked Pearl Harbor from the air and all naval and military activities on the island of Oahu, principal American base in the Hawaiian islands.\" As information developed, Early made a number of additional announcements to approximately 150 White House reporters over the course of the afternoon.\nInitial reports of the attack moved on news wires at approximately 2:25p.m. Eastern time. The first radio coverage (which, at the time, represented the earliest opportunity for ordinary people to learn of the attack) was on the CBS radio network's scheduled news program, \"World News Today\", at 2:30p.m. Eastern time. John Charles Daly read the initial report, then switched to London, where Robert Trout ad-libbed on the possible London reaction. The first report on NBC cut into a play, a dramatization of \"The Inspector-General\", at 2:33p.m. Eastern time and lasted only 21 seconds. Unlike the later practice with major news stories, there were only brief interruptions of scheduled commercial programming. \nThe attacks were covered on television but the extent of it was limited; as commercial television had started just six months earlier, \"a few thousand TV sets existed\" in the United States, with most being in the Greater New York City area, and only a handful of stations existed which were all in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles and Philadelphia. WNBT from New York was the only TV station that was regularly airing that day in the country, with the comedy movie \"Millionaire Playboy\", which was scheduled for 3:30-4:30 PM, being interrupted with the news of the attack. The other station known to cover the attacks was WCBW, also out of New York, where a special report on the attack was broadcast that evening. There are no recordings of either station's coverage, either visual or audio.\nAt the time of the attack, the last three regular season National Football League games were happening. The Chicago Bears were playing the Chicago Cardinals at Comiskey Park; the Brooklyn Dodgers were playing the New York Giants at the Polo Grounds;, and the Philadelphia Eagles were playing the Washington Redskins at Washington's Griffith Stadium. All three games were in progress as the attacks began, and no official announcements were made at any of the games concerning the attacks, with many fans finding out from phone calls placed at the stadium or from newsboys outside the stadium. However, throughout the Redskins game, happening in Washington, many military, government and diplomatic personnel were asked to call their offices or return to them. At the Giants game, OSS head, Col. William J. Donovan, was paged to call his office immediately, and all military personnel were asked to return to their stations at the conclusion of the game. The Washington game, thanks to the announcements and general curiosity of the happenings, ended in a near-empty stadium. When asked why an announcement wasn't made at his game, Redskins owner George Preston Marshall simply stated, \"I didn't want to divert the fans' attention from the game.\"\nA contemporaneous newspaper report compared the attack to the Battle of Port Arthur in which the Imperial Japanese Navy attacked the Imperial Russian Navy, triggering the Russo-Japanese War, 37 years prior. Modern writers have continued to note parallels between the attacks, albeit more dispassionately.\nCoverage in Japan.\nNews of the attack was first broadcast at 11:30 AM (Japanese Standard Time), however it had already been announced \"shortly after\" 7 AM (Japanese Standard Time) that Japan had \"entered into a situation of war with the United States and Britain in the Western Pacific before dawn\". There was no further elaboration or explanation, and the attacks were already finished by that time. The attack on Pearl Harbor was eventually covered in the Japanese press, but press in wartime Japan was heavily censored. One Japanese newspaper, \"The\" \"Asahi Shimbun\" did report on the attack the day it occurred, and from that point onward their editorials began to back governmental decisions regardless of what they were. The \"Asahi Shimbun\" also reported the declaration of war on the United States after the attacks, framing it as an Imperial Order, with most Japanese people taking it that way. In contrast, coverage in the \"New York Times\" focused on \"the danger to democracy and to the nation\" brought on by the Japanese attack. NHK broadcast twelve special news reports along with its six regularly scheduled ones that day. NHK covered the news of Pearl Harbor and other attacks positively throughout the rest of the month.\nCoverage elsewhere.\nThe United Kingdom's BBC broadcast news of the attack and that Manila was also under attack.\nAftermath.\nThe day after the attack, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt delivered his famous Day of Infamy speech to a Joint Session of Congress, calling for a formal declaration of war on the Empire of Japan. Congress obliged his request less than an hour later. On December 11, Germany and Italy declared war on the United States, even though the Tripartite Pact did not require it. Congress issued a declaration of war against Germany and Italy later that same day.\nThe United Kingdom had already been at war with Germany since September 1939 and with Italy since June 1940, and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill had promised to declare war \"within the hour\" of a Japanese attack on the United States. Upon learning of the Japanese attacks on Malaya, Singapore, and Hong Kong, Churchill promptly determined there was no need to either wait or further consult the US government and immediately summoned the Japanese ambassador. As a result, the United Kingdom declared war on Japan nine hours before the United States did.\nThe attack was an initial shock to all the Allies in the Pacific Theater. Further losses compounded the alarming setback. Japan attacked the Philippines hours later (because of the time difference, it was December 8 in the Philippines). Only three days after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the battleship \"Prince of Wales\" and battlecruiser \"Repulse\" were sunk off the coast of Malaya, causing Churchill later to recollect \"In all the war I never received a more direct shock. As I turned and twisted in bed the full horror of the news sank in upon me. There were no British or American capital ships in the Indian Ocean or the Pacific except the American survivors of Pearl Harbor who were hastening back to California. Over this vast expanse of waters, Japan was supreme and we everywhere were weak and naked.\"\nThroughout the war, Pearl Harbor was frequently used in American propaganda.\nOne further consequence of the attack on Pearl Harbor and its aftermath (notably the Niihau incident) was that Japanese-American residents and citizens were relocated to nearby Japanese-American internment camps. Within hours of the attack, hundreds of Japanese-American leaders were rounded up and taken to high-security camps such as Sand Island at the mouth of Honolulu harbor and Kilauea Military Camp on the island of Hawaii. Eventually, more than 110,000 Japanese Americans, nearly all who lived on the West Coast, were forced into interior camps, but in Hawaii, where the 150,000-plus Japanese Americans composed over one-third of the population, only 1,200 to 1,800 were interned.\nThe attack also had international consequences. The Canadian province of British Columbia, bordering the Pacific Ocean, had long had a large population of Japanese immigrants and their Japanese-Canadian descendants. Pre-war tensions were exacerbated by the Pearl Harbor attack, leading to a reaction from the government of Canada. On February 24, 1942, Order-in-Council P.C. no. 1486 was passed under the War Measures Act, allowing for the forced removal of any and all Canadians of Japanese descent from British Columbia, as well as prohibiting them from returning to the province. On March 4, regulations under the act were adopted to evacuate Japanese Canadians. As a result, 12,000 were interned in interior camps, 2,000 were sent to road camps, and another 2,000 were forced to work in the prairies on sugar beet farms.\nIn the wake of the attack, fifteen Medals of Honor, fifty-one Navy Crosses, fifty-three Silver Stars, four Navy and Marine Corps Medals, one Distinguished Flying Cross, four Distinguished Service Crosses, one Distinguished Service Medal, and three Bronze Star Medals were awarded to the American servicemen who distinguished themselves in combat at Pearl Harbor. Additionally, a special military award, the Pearl Harbor Commemorative Medal, was later authorized for all military veterans of the attack.\nNiihau Incident.\nJapanese planners of the Pearl Harbor attack had determined that some means were required for rescuing fliers whose aircraft were damaged too badly to return to the carriers. The island of Niihau, only thirty minutes by air from Pearl Harbor, was designated as the rescue point.\nDuring the second wave, a Zero fighter flown by Petty Officer Shigenori Nishikaichi of \"Hiryu\" was damaged in the attack on Wheeler, so he flew to the rescue point. The aircraft was further damaged on his crash landing. Nishikaichi was helped from the wreckage by one of the Native Hawaiians, who, aware of the tension between the United States and Japan, took the pilot's pistol, maps, codes and other documents. The island's residents had no telephones or radios and were completely unaware of the attack on Pearl Harbor. Nishikaichi enlisted the support of three Japanese-American residents in an attempt to recover the documents. During the ensuing struggles, Nishikaichi was killed, and a Hawaiian civilian was wounded; one collaborator committed suicide, and his wife and the third collaborator were sent to prison.\nThe ease with which the local ethnic Japanese residents had apparently gone to Nishikaichi's assistance was a source of concern for many and tended to support those who believed that local Japanese could not be trusted.\nStrategic implications.\nRear Admiral Ch\u016bichi Hara summed up the Japanese result by saying, \"We won a great tactical victory at Pearl Harbor and thereby lost the war.\"\nWhile the attack accomplished its intended objective, it turned out to be largely unnecessary. Unknown to Yamamoto, who conceived the original plan, the United States Navy had decided as far back as 1935 to abandon \"charging\" across the Pacific towards the Philippines in response to an outbreak of war (in keeping with the evolution of Plan Orange). The United States instead adopted \"Plan Dog\" in 1940, which emphasized keeping the IJN out of the eastern Pacific and away from the shipping lanes to Australia, while the United States concentrated on defeating Nazi Germany.\nFortunately for the United States, the American aircraft carriers were untouched; otherwise, the Pacific Fleet's ability to conduct offensive operations would have been crippled for a year or more (given no diversions from the Atlantic Fleet). As it was, the Navy was left with no choice but to rely on carriers and submarines. While six of the eight battleships were repaired and returned to service, their relatively low speed and high fuel consumption limited their deployment, and they served mainly in shore bombardment roles (their only major action being the Battle of Surigao Strait in October 1944). A major flaw in Japanese strategic thinking was their reliance on \"Kantai Kessen\", a belief that the ultimate Pacific battle would be fought by battleships, in keeping with the doctrine of Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan. As a result, Yamamoto (and his successors) hoarded battleships for a \"decisive battle\" that never happened.\nThe Japanese confidence in their ability to win a quick victory meant that they neglected Pearl Harbor's navy repair yards, oil tank farms, submarine base, and old headquarters building. All of these targets were omitted from Genda's list, yet they proved more important than any battleship to the American war effort in the Pacific. The survival of the repair shops and fuel depots allowed Pearl Harbor to maintain logistical support of the Navy, such as the Doolittle Raid and the Battles of the Coral Sea and Midway. It was submarines that immobilized the Imperial Japanese Navy's heavy ships and brought Japan's economy to a virtual standstill by crippling the importation of oil and raw materials: By the end of 1942, the amount of imported raw materials was cut in half \"to a disastrous ten million tons\", while oil \"was almost completely stopped\". Lastly, the basement of the Old Administration Building was the home of the cryptanalytic unit that contributed significantly to the Midway ambush and the submarine force's success.\nDebate on the failure of American intelligence.\nThere has been debate as to how and why the United States had been caught unawares, and how much and when American officials knew of Japanese plans and related topics. As early as 1924, Chief of United States Air Service Mason Patrick showed concern for military vulnerabilities in the Pacific, having sent General Billy Mitchell on a survey of the Pacific and the East. Patrick called Mitchell's subsequent report, which identified vulnerabilities in Hawaii, a \"theoretical treatise on employment of airpower in the Pacific, which, in all probability undoubtedly will be of extreme value some 10 or 15 years hence\".\nAt least two naval war games, one in 1932 and another in 1936, proved that Pearl was vulnerable to such an attack. Admiral James Richardson was removed from command shortly after protesting President Roosevelt's decision to move the bulk of the Pacific fleet to Pearl Harbor. The decisions of military and political leadership to ignore these warnings have contributed to conspiracy theories. Several writers, including decorated World WarII veteran and journalist Robert Stinnett, author of \"Day of Deceit\", and former United States Rear Admiral Robert Alfred Theobald, author of \"The Final Secret of Pearl Harbor: The Washington Background of the Pearl Harbor Attack\", have argued that various parties high in the American and British governments knew of the attack in advance and may even have let it happen or encouraged it in order to force the United States into the war via the so-called \"back door\". However, this conspiracy theory is rejected by mainstream historians.\nThe theory that the Americans were warned in advance, however, is supported by statements made by Dick Ellis, a British-Australian intelligence officer for MI6 who helped William J. Donovan set up the Office of Strategic Services. Ellis was deputy to William Stephenson at British Security Co-ordination. In Jesse Fink's 2023 biography of Ellis, \"The Eagle in the Mirror\", Ellis is quoted as saying: \"[Stephenson] was convinced from the information that was reaching him that this attack was imminent, and through Jimmy Roosevelt, President Roosevelt's son, he passed this information to the President. Now whether the President at that time had other information which corroborated this... it's impossible to say.\"\nThe US Navy's \"Washington chief\" during the Pearl Harbor attack was Admiral Harold R. Stark, who was the Chief of Naval Operations. While Admiral Kimmel commanded the Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor, Admiral Stark was his superior in Washington and was found to be responsible for failing to adequately advise Kimmel of the critical situation prior to the attack.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUS government documents.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMagazine articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n116 moving images, 13 photographs and 9 textual records are available online"}
{"id": "60099", "revid": "12070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60099", "title": "K19 Widowmaker", "text": ""}
{"id": "60101", "revid": "15954157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60101", "title": "Nerve gas", "text": ""}
{"id": "60102", "revid": "20313678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60102", "title": "Not invented here", "text": "Management attitude for innovation or development\nNot invented here (NIH) is the tendency to avoid using or buying products, research, standards, or knowledge from external origins. It is usually adopted by social, corporate, or institutional cultures. Research illustrates a strong bias against ideas from the outside.\nThe reasons for not wanting to use the work of others are varied, but can include a desire to support a local economy instead of paying royalties to a foreign license-holder, fear of patent infringement, lack of understanding of the foreign work, an unwillingness to acknowledge or value the work of others, jealousy, belief perseverance, or forming part of a wider turf war. As a social phenomenon, this tendency can manifest itself as an unwillingness to adopt an idea or product because it originates from another culture, a form of tribalism and/or an inadequate effort in choosing the right approach for the business.\nThe term is typically used in a pejorative sense. The opposite predisposition is sometimes called \"invented here\", \"not invented there\",&lt;ref name=\"10.2307/24131312\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \"proudly found elsewhere\" (PFE) or \"invented elsewhere\".\nScientific study.\nA 1982 study by Ralph Katz and Thomas J. Allen provides empirical evidence for the \"not invented here\" syndrome, showing that the performance of R&amp;D project groups declines after about five years, which they attribute to the groups becoming increasingly insular and communicating less with key information sources outside the group.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60106", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60106", "title": "Evans and Sutherland", "text": ""}
{"id": "60107", "revid": "31519789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60107", "title": "Dot matrix", "text": "Two-dimensional patterned array\nA dot matrix is a 2-dimensional patterned array, used to represent characters, symbols and images. Most types of modern technology use dot matrices for display of information, including mobile phones, televisions, and printers. The system is also used in textiles with sewing, knitting and weaving.\nAn alternate form of information display using lines and curves is known as a vector display, was used with early computing devices such as air traffic control radar displays and pen-based plotters but is no longer used. Electronic vector displays were typically monochrome only, and either leave the interiors of closed vector shapes unfilled, or perform slow, time-consuming and often non-uniform shape-filling, as on pen-based plotters.\nIn printers, the dots are usually the darkened areas of the paper. In displays, the dots may light up, as in an LED, CRT, or plasma display, or darken, as in an LCD.\nUse in computers.\nAlthough the output of modern computers is generally all in the form of dot matrices (technically speaking), computers may internally store data as either a dot matrix or as a vector pattern of lines and curves. Vector data encoding requires less memory and less data storage, in situations where the shapes may need to be resized, as with font typefaces. For maximum image quality using only dot matrix fonts, it would be necessary to store a separate dot matrix pattern for the many different potential point sizes that might be used. Instead, a single group of vector shapes is used to render all the specific dot matrix patterns needed for the current display or printing task.\nAll points addressable.\nAll points addressable (APA), or pixel addressable, in the context of a dot matrix on a computer monitor or any display device consisting of a pixel array, refers to an arrangement whereby bits or cells can be individually manipulated, as opposed to rewriting the whole array, or regions such as characters, every time a change is needed.\nGenerally, text modes are not all-points-addressable, whereas graphics modes are. With the advent of more powerful computer graphics hardware, the use and importance of text-only display modes has declined, and with graphics modes it is generally taken for granted that they are all-points-addressable.\nUse in printers.\nThe process of doing dot matrix printing can involve dot matrix printers, both for impact and non-impact printers.\nAlmost all modern computer printers (both impact and non-impact) create their output as matrices of dots, and they may use \nExcept for impact dot matrix printers, it is not customary to call the others by that term.\nPrinters that are not but what \"The New York Times\" calls a \"dot-matrix impact printer\" are not called dot matrix printers. Impact printers survive where multi-part forms are needed, as the pins can impress dots through multiple layers of paper to make a carbonless copy, for security purposes.\nAs an impact printer, the term mainly refers to low-resolution impact printers, with a column of 8, 9 or 24 \"pins\" hitting an ink-impregnated fabric ribbon, like a typewriter ribbon, onto the paper. It was originally contrasted with both daisy wheel printers and line printers that used fixed-shape embossed metal or plastic stamps to mark paper.\nAll types of electronic printers typically generate image data as a two-step process. First the information to be printed is converted into a dot matrix using a raster image processor, and the output is a dot matrix referred to as a raster image, which is a complete full-page rendering of the information to be printed. Raster image processing may occur in either the printer itself using a page description language such as Adobe Postscript, or may be performed by printer driver software installed on the user's computer.\nEarly 1980s impact printers used a simple form of internal raster image processing, using low-resolution built-in bitmap fonts to render raw character data sent from the computer, and only capable of storing enough dot matrix data for one printed line at a time. External raster image processing was possible such as to print a graphical image, but was commonly extremely slow and data was sent one line at a time to the impact printer.\nDepending on the printer technology the dot size or grid shape may not be uniform. Some printers are capable of producing smaller dots and will intermesh the small dots within the corners of larger ones for antialiasing. Some printers have a fixed resolution across the printhead but with much smaller micro-stepping for the mechanical paper feed, resulting in non-uniform dot-overlapping printing resolutions like 600\u00d71200 dpi.\nA dot matrix is useful for marking materials other than paper. In manufacturing industry, many product marking applications use dot matrix inkjet or impact methods. This can also be used to print 2D matrix codes, e.g. Datamatrix.\nLED matrix.\nAn LED matrix or LED display is a large, low-resolution form of dot-matrix display, useful both for industrial and commercial information displays as well as for hobbyist human\u2013machine interfaces. It consists of a 2-D diode matrix with their cathodes joined in rows and their anodes joined in columns (or vice versa). By controlling the flow of electricity through each row and column pair it is possible to control each LED individually. By multiplexing, scanning across rows, quickly flashing the LEDs on and off, it is possible to create characters or pictures to display information to the user.\nBy varying the pulse rate per LED, the display can approximate levels of brightness. Multi-colored LEDs or RGB-colored LEDs permit use as a full-color image display. The refresh rate is typically fast enough to prevent the human eye from detecting the flicker.\nThe primary difference between a common LED matrix and an OLED display is the large, low resolution dots. The OLED monitor functionally works the same, except there are many times more dots, and they are all much smaller, allowing for greater detail in the displayed patterns.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60108", "revid": "31322263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60108", "title": "Rasterisation", "text": "Conversion of a vector-graphics image to a raster image\nIn computer graphics, rasterisation (British English) or rasterization (American English) is the task of taking an image described in a vector graphics format (shapes) and converting it into a raster image (a series of pixels, dots or lines, which, when displayed together, create the image which was represented via shapes). The rasterized image may then be displayed on a computer display, video display or printer, or stored in a bitmap file format. Rasterization may refer to the technique of drawing 3D models, or to the conversion of 2D rendering primitives, such as polygons and line segments, into a rasterized format.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"rasterisation\" comes from de \" Raster\"\u00a0'grid, pattern, schema' and la \" r\u0101strum\"\u00a0'scraper, rake'.\n2D images.\nLine primitives.\nBresenham's line algorithm is an example of an algorithm used to rasterize lines.\nCircle primitives.\nAlgorithms such as the midpoint circle algorithm are used to render circles onto a pixelated canvas.\n3D images.\nRasterization is one of the typical techniques of rendering 3D models. Compared with other rendering techniques such as ray tracing, rasterization is extremely fast and therefore used in most realtime 3D engines. However, rasterization is simply the process of computing the mapping from scene geometry to pixels and does not prescribe a particular way to compute the color of those pixels. The specific color of each pixel is assigned by a pixel shader (which in modern GPUs is completely programmable). Shading may take into account physical effects such as light position, their approximations or purely artistic intent.\nThe process of rasterizing 3D models onto a 2D plane for display on a computer screen (\"screen space\") is often carried out by fixed function (non-programmable) hardware within the graphics pipeline. This is because there is no motivation for modifying the techniques for rasterization used at render time and a special-purpose system allows for high efficiency.\nTriangle rasterization.\nPolygons are a common representation of digital 3D models. Before rasterization, individual polygons are typically broken down into triangles; therefore, a typical problem to solve in 3D rasterization is rasterization of a triangle. Properties that are usually required from triangle rasterization algorithms are that rasterizing two adjacent triangles (i.e. those that share an edge)\nThis leads to establishing rasterization rules to guarantee the above conditions. One set of such rules is called a top-left rule, which states that a pixel is rasterized if and only if\nA \"top\" edge is an edge that is exactly horizontal and lies above other edges, and a \"left\" edge is a non-horizontal edge that is on the left side of the triangle.\nThis rule is implemented e.g. by Direct3D and many OpenGL implementations (even though the specification doesn't define it and only requires a consistent rule).\nQuality.\nThe quality of rasterization can be improved by antialiasing, which creates \"smooth\" edges. Sub-pixel precision is a method which takes into account positions on a finer scale than the pixel grid and can produce different results even if the endpoints of a primitive fall into same pixel coordinates, producing smoother movement animations. Simple or older hardware, such as PlayStation 1, lacked sub-pixel precision in 3D rasterization.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60109", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60109", "title": "Inkjet", "text": ""}
{"id": "60110", "revid": "410440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60110", "title": "Printer control language", "text": ""}
{"id": "60111", "revid": "42342156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60111", "title": "HP-GL", "text": "HP-GL, short for Hewlett-Packard Graphics Language and often written as HPGL, is a printer control language created by Hewlett-Packard (HP). HP-GL was the primary printer control language used by HP plotters. It was introduced with the plotter http:// in 1977 and became a standard for almost all plotters. Hewlett-Packard's printers also usually support HP-GL/2 in addition to PCL.\nDesign.\nThe language is formed from a series of two letter codes (mnemonics), followed by optional parameters. For instance an arc can be drawn on a page by sending the string:\ncodice_1\nThis means \"Arc Absolute\", and the parameters place the center of the arc at absolute coordinates 100,100 on the page, with a starting angle of 50 degrees measured counter-clockwise. A fourth optional parameter (not used here) specifies how far the arc continues, and defaults to 5 degrees.\nWhen first introduced, HP-GL contained the following commands:\nFormats:\nExamples.\nTypical HP-GL files start with a few setup commands, followed by a long string of graphics commands. The file was in ASCII (text file) format, for instance:\nThe coordinate system was based on the smallest units one of the HP plotters could support, and was set to 25\u00a0\u03bcm (i.e. 40 units per millimeter, 1016 per inch).\nThe coordinate space was positive or negative floating point numbers, specifically \u00b1230.\nHP-GL/2.\nThe original HP-GL language did not support definition of line width, as this parameter was determined by the pens loaded into the plotter. With the advent of the first inkjet plotters, line width for the \"pens\" specified within the HP-GL files had to be set at the printer so it would know what line width to print for each pen, a cumbersome and error-prone process. With Hewlett-Packard Graphics Language/2 aka HP-GL/2, definition of line width was introduced into the language and allowed for elimination of this step. Also, among other improvements a binary file format was defined that allowed for smaller files and shorter file transfer times, and the minimal resolution was reduced.\nAGL.\nHP-GL is related to AGL (A Graphics Language), an extension of the BASIC programming language. AGL was implemented on Hewlett-Packard minicomputers to simplify controlling a plotter. AGL commands describe the desired graphics plotting function, which the computer relays as several HP-GL instructions to the plotter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60112", "revid": "51064909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60112", "title": "Battle of Midway", "text": "1942 major naval battle in World War II\nThe Battle of Midway was a major naval battle in the Pacific Theater of World War II that took place on 4\u20137 June 1942, six months after Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor and one month after the Battle of the Coral Sea. The Japanese Combined Fleet under the command of Isoroku Yamamoto suffered a decisive defeat by the U.S. Pacific Fleet near Midway Atoll, about northwest of Oahu. Yamamoto had intended to capture Midway and lure out and destroy the U.S. Pacific Fleet, especially the aircraft carriers which had escaped damage at Pearl Harbor.\nBefore the battle, Japan desired to extend its Pacific defense perimeter, especially after the Doolittle air raid of Tokyo in April 1942, and to clear the seas for attacks on Midway, Fiji, Samoa, and Hawaii. A related Japanese attack on the Aleutian Islands began one day earlier, on 3 June. The Japanese strike force at Midway, known as the \"Kid\u014d Butai,\" was commanded by Chuichi Nagumo. Yamamoto's plan for the operation, which depended on precise timing and coordination, was undermined by its wide dispersal of forces, which left the rest of the fleet unable to support the \"Kid\u014d Butai\" effectively.\nOn 4 June, the Japanese began bombing Midway and prepared to wait for the Pacific Fleet to arrive from Pearl Harbor to defend the island. Unknown to Yamamoto, U.S. code breakers had determined the date and location of his planned attack, enabling the Americans to prepare their own ambush; Chester Nimitz, commander of the Pacific Fleet, had sent a large force under Frank Jack Fletcher to the Midway area before the Japanese had arrived. Land-based planes from Midway and carrier-based planes from the U.S. fleet surprised and attacked Nagumo's force. All four Japanese fleet carriers\u2014, , , and \u2014present at the battle were sunk, as was the heavy cruiser . Japan also lost 3,000 men, including many well-trained and difficult-to-replace pilots. The U.S. lost the carrier and the destroyer , while the carriers and (under the command of Raymond Spruance during the battle) survived the fighting without damage.\nThe Battle of Midway, along with the Guadalcanal campaign, is widely considered a turning point in the Pacific War. After Midway and the attrition of the Solomon Islands campaign, Japan's ability to replace its losses in materiel and trained men became rapidly insufficient, while the U.S.'s massive industrial and training capabilities increased over time. Historian John Keegan called the battle \"the most stunning and decisive blow in the history of naval warfare\", while historian Craig Symonds called it \"one of the most consequential naval engagements in world history, ranking alongside Salamis, Trafalgar, and Tsushima Strait, as both tactically decisive and strategically influential.\"\nBackground.\nAfter expanding the war in the Pacific to include western colonies, the Japanese Empire quickly attained its initial strategic goals of British Hong Kong, the Philippines, British Malaya, Singapore, and the Dutch East Indies, the latter of whose oil resources were particularly important to Japan. Because of this, preliminary planning for the second phase of operations commenced as early as January 1942.\nBecause of strategic disagreements between the Imperial Army (IJA) and Imperial Navy (IJN), and infighting between the Navy's Imperial General Headquarters and Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto's Combined Fleet, a follow-up strategy was not formed until April 1942. Yamamoto finally won the bureaucratic struggle with a thinly veiled threat to resign, after which his plan was adopted. Yamamoto's primary strategic goal was the elimination of America's carrier forces, which he regarded as the principal threat to the overall Pacific campaign. This concern was acutely heightened by the Doolittle Raid on 18 April 1942, in which 16 United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) B-25 Mitchell bombers launched from bombed targets in Tokyo and several other Japanese cities. The raid, while militarily insignificant, was a shock to the Japanese and highlighted a gap in the defenses around the Japanese home islands as well as the vulnerability of Japanese territory to American bombers.\nThis, and other successful hit-and-run raids by American carriers in the South Pacific, showed that they were still a threat, although seemingly reluctant to be drawn into all-out battle. Yamamoto reasoned that another air attack on Naval Station Pearl Harbor would induce all of the American fleet to sail out to fight, including the carriers. However, considering the increased strength of American land-based airpower on the Hawaiian Islands since the 7 December 1941 attack, he judged that it was too risky to attack Pearl Harbor directly.\nInstead, Yamamoto selected Midway, a tiny atoll at the extreme northwest end of the Hawaiian Island chain, approximately from Oahu. Midway was outside the effective range of almost all the American aircraft stationed on the main Hawaiian Islands. It was not especially important in the larger scheme of Japan's intentions, but the Japanese felt the Americans would consider Midway a vital outpost of Pearl Harbor and would be compelled to defend it vigorously. The U.S. \"did\" indeed consider Midway vital: following the battle, the establishment of a U.S. submarine base on Naval Air Facility Midway Island allowed submarines operating from Pearl Harbor to refuel and re-provision, extending their radius of operations by . In addition to serving as a seaplane base, Midway's airstrips were a forward staging point for bomber attacks on Wake Island.\nYamamoto's plan.\nTypical of Japanese naval planning during World War II, Yamamoto's battle plan for taking Midway (named Operation MI) was exceedingly complex. It required the careful coordination of multiple battle groups over hundreds of miles of open sea. His design was also predicated on optimistic intelligence suggesting that and USS \"Hornet\", forming Task Force 16, were the only carriers available to the Pacific Fleet. During the Battle of the Coral Sea one month earlier, had been sunk and suffered so much damage that the Japanese believed she too had been lost. However, following hasty repairs at Pearl Harbor, \"Yorktown\" sortied and ultimately played a critical role in the discovery and eventual destruction of the Japanese fleet carriers at Midway. Finally, much of Yamamoto's planning, coinciding with the general feeling among the Japanese leadership at the time, was based on a gross misjudgement of American morale which was believed to be debilitated from the string of Japanese victories in the preceding months.\nYamamoto felt deception would be required to lure the U.S. fleet into a fatally compromised situation. To this end, he dispersed his forces so that their full extent (particularly his battleships) would be concealed from the Americans prior to battle. Critically, Yamamoto's supporting battleships and cruisers trailed Vice Admiral Ch\u016bichi Nagumo's carrier force by several hundred miles. They were intended to come up and destroy whatever elements of the American fleet might come to Midway's defense once Nagumo's carriers had weakened them sufficiently for a daylight gun battle. This tactic was doctrine in most major navies of the time.\nUnknown to Yamamoto, the U.S. had broken parts of the main Japanese naval code (dubbed JN-25 by the Americans), divulging many details of his plan. His emphasis on dispersal also meant none of his formations were in a position to support the others. For instance, although Nagumo's carriers were expected to carry out strikes against Midway and bear the brunt of American counterattacks, the only warships in his fleet larger than the screening force of twelve destroyers were two fast battleships, two heavy cruisers, and one light cruiser. By contrast, Yamamoto and Kondo had between them two light carriers, five battleships, four heavy cruisers, and two light cruisers, none of which saw action at Midway.\nThe light carriers of the trailing forces and Yamamoto's three battleships were unable to keep pace with the carriers of the \"Kid\u014d Butai\" (\u6a5f\u52d5\u90e8\u968a, \"Mobile Strike Force\") and so could not sail in company with them. The \"Kid\u014d Butai\" would sail into range at best speed so as to increase the chance of surprise and would not have ships spread out across the ocean guiding the USN toward it. If the other parts of the invasion force needed more defense, the \"Kid\u014d Butai\" would make best speed to defend them. Hence the slower ships could not be with the \"Kid\u014d Butai\". The distance between Yamamoto and Kondo's forces and Nagumo's carriers had grave implications during the battle. The invaluable reconnaissance capability of the scout planes carried by the cruisers and carriers, and the additional anti-aircraft capability of the cruisers and the other two battleships of the \"Kong\u014d\"-class in the trailing forces, were unavailable to help Nagumo.\nAleutian invasion.\nTo obtain support from the IJA for the Midway operation, the IJN agreed to support their invasion of the United States through the Aleutian Islands of Attu and Kiska, part of the Alaska Territory. The IJA occupied these islands to place the Japanese home islands out of range of U.S. land-based bombers in Alaska. Most Americans feared that the occupied islands would be used as bases for Japanese bombers to attack strategic targets and population centers along the U.S. West Coast.\nThe Japanese operations in the Aleutians (Operation AL) removed yet more ships that could otherwise have augmented the force striking Midway. Whereas many earlier historical accounts considered the Aleutians operation as a feint to draw American forces away, according to the original Japanese battle plan, AL was intended to be launched simultaneously with the attack on Midway. A one-day delay in the sailing of Nagumo's task force resulted in Operation AL beginning a day before the Midway attack.\nPrelude.\nAmerican reinforcements.\nTo do battle with the IJN, expected to muster four or five carriers, Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, Commander in Chief, Pacific Ocean Areas, needed every available flight deck. He already had Vice Admiral William Halsey's two-carrier (\"Enterprise\" and \"Hornet\") task force at hand, though Halsey was stricken with shingles and had to be replaced by Rear Admiral Raymond A. Spruance, Halsey's escort commander. Nimitz also hurriedly recalled Rear Admiral Frank Jack Fletcher's task force, including the carrier \"Yorktown\", from the South West Pacific Area.\nDespite estimates that \"Yorktown\", damaged in the Battle of the Coral Sea, would require several months of repairs at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, her elevators were intact and her flight deck largely so. The Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard worked around the clock, and in 72 hours she was restored to a battle-ready state, judged good enough for two or three weeks of operations, as Nimitz required. Her flight deck was patched, and whole sections of internal frames were cut out and replaced. Repairs continued even as she sortied, with work crews from the repair ship , herself damaged in the attack on Pearl Harbor six months earlier, still aboard.\n\"Yorktown\"'s partially depleted air group was rebuilt using whatever planes and pilots could be found. Scouting Five (VS-5) was replaced with Bombing Three (VB-3) from . Torpedo Five (VT-5) was replaced by Torpedo Three (VT-3). Fighting Three (VF-3) was reconstituted to replace VF-42 with sixteen pilots from VF-42 and eleven pilots from VF-3, with Lieutenant Commander John Thach in command. Some of the aircrew were inexperienced, which may have contributed to an accident in which Thach's executive officer Lieutenant Commander Donald Lovelace was killed. Despite efforts to get \"Saratoga\" (which had been undergoing repairs on the American West Coast) ready, the need to resupply and assemble sufficient escorts meant she was unable to reach Midway until after the battle.\nOn Midway, the U.S. Navy had by 4 June stationed four squadrons of PBYs\u201431 aircraft in total\u2014for long-range reconnaissance duties, and six brand-new Grumman TBF Avengers from \"Hornet\"'s VT-8. The Marine Corps stationed 19 Douglas SBD Dauntless, seven F4F-3 Wildcats, 17 Vought SB2U Vindicators, and 21 Brewster F2A Buffalos. The USAAF contributed a squadron of 17 B-17 Flying Fortresses and four Martin B-26 Marauders equipped with torpedoes: in total 122 aircraft. Although the F2As and SB2Us were already obsolete, they were the only aircraft available to the Marine Corps at the time.\nJapanese shortcomings.\nDuring the Battle of the Coral Sea one month earlier, the Japanese light carrier had been sunk and the fleet carrier had been severely damaged and was in drydock for repair. Although the fleet carrier escaped the battle undamaged, she had lost almost half her air group and was in port at the Kure Naval District in Hiroshima, awaiting replacement aircraft and pilots. That there were none immediately available can be attributed to the growing inability of the IJN to properly train pilots faster than they were killed in action. In desperation, instructors from the Yokosuka Air Corps were relieved of their duties to plug the gap.\nThus, Carrier Division 5, consisting of the two most advanced aircraft carriers of the \"Kido Butai\", was not available which meant that Vice-Admiral Nagumo had only two-thirds of the fleet carriers at his disposal: and forming Carrier Division 1 and and making up Carrier Division 2. This was partly due to fatigue; Japanese carriers had been constantly on operations since 7 December 1941 including raids on Darwin and Colombo. Nonetheless, the First Carrier Strike Force sailed with 248 available aircraft on the four carriers (60 on \"Akagi\", 74 on \"Kaga\" (B5N2 squadron oversized), 57 on \"Hiry\u016b\" and 57 on \"S\u014dry\u016b\").\nThe main Japanese carrier-borne strike aircraft were the Aichi D3A1 \"Val\" dive bomber and the Nakajima B5N2 \"Kate\", which was used either as a torpedo bomber or as a level bomber. The main carrier fighter was the fast and highly maneuverable Mitsubishi A6M Zero. For a variety of reasons, production of the \"Val\" had been drastically reduced, while that of the \"Kate\" had been stopped completely and, as a consequence, there were none available to replace losses. In addition, many of the aircraft being used during the June 1942 operations had been operational since late November 1941 and, although they were well-maintained, many were almost worn out and had become increasingly unreliable. These factors meant all carriers of the \"Kid\u014d Butai\" had fewer aircraft than their normal complement, with few spare aircraft or parts in the carriers' hangars.\nIn addition, Nagumo's carrier force suffered from several defensive deficiencies: \"it could throw a punch but couldn't take one.\" Japanese carrier anti-aircraft guns and associated fire control systems had several design and configuration change deficiencies which limited their effectiveness. The IJN's fleet combat air patrol (CAP) had too few fighter aircraft and was hampered by an inadequate early warning system, including a lack of radar. Poor radio communications with the fighter aircraft inhibited effective command and control. The carriers' escorting warships were deployed as visual scouts in a ring at long range, not as close anti-aircraft escorts, as they lacked training, doctrine, and sufficient anti-aircraft guns.\nJapanese strategic scouting arrangements prior to the battle were also in disarray. A picket line of Japanese submarines was late getting into position (partly because of Yamamoto's haste), which let the American carriers reach their assembly point northeast of Midway (known as \"Point Luck\") without being detected. A second attempt at reconnaissance, using four-engine H8K \"Emily\" flying boats to scout Pearl Harbor prior to the battle and detect whether the American carriers were present, part of Operation K, was thwarted when Japanese submarines assigned to refuel the search aircraft discovered that the intended refueling point\u2014a hitherto deserted bay off French Frigate Shoals\u2014was occupied by American warships because the Japanese had carried out an identical mission in March. Thus, Japan was deprived of any knowledge concerning the movements of the American carriers immediately before the battle.\nJapanese radio intercepts did notice an increase in American submarine activity and message traffic. This information was in Yamamoto's hands prior to the battle. Japanese plans were not changed; Yamamoto, at sea in , assumed Nagumo had received the same signal from Tokyo and did not communicate with him by radio, so as not to reveal his position. These messages were, contrary to earlier historical accounts, also received by Nagumo before the battle began. For reasons that remain unclear, Nagumo did not alter his plans or take additional precautions.\nU.S. code-breaking.\nNimitz had one critical advantage: U.S. cryptanalysts had partially broken the Japanese Navy's JN-25b code. Since early 1942, the U.S. had been decoding messages stating that there would soon be an operation at objective \"AF.\" It was initially not known where \"AF\" was, but Commander Joseph Rochefort and his team at Station HYPO were able to confirm that it was Midway: Captain Wilfred Holmes devised the ruse of telling the base at Midway (by secure undersea communications cable) to broadcast an uncoded radio message stating that Midway's water purification system had broken down. Within 24 hours, the code breakers picked up a Japanese message that \"AF was short on water.\" The Japanese seemed unconcerned that the Americans were broadcasting uncoded that a major naval installation close to the Japanese was having a water shortage, which Japanese intelligence might have suspected as deception. HYPO was also able to determine the date of the attack as either 4 or 5 June, and to provide Nimitz with a complete IJN order of battle.\nJapan had a new codebook, but its introduction had been delayed, enabling HYPO to read messages for several crucial days; the new code, which took several days to be cracked, came into use on 24 May, but the important breaks had already been made. As a result, the Americans entered the battle with a good picture of where, when, and in what strength the Japanese would appear. Nimitz knew that the Japanese had negated their numerical advantage by dividing their ships into four separate task groups, so widely separated that they were essentially unable to support each other. This dispersal resulted in few fast ships being available to escort the Carrier Striking Force, thus reducing the number of anti-aircraft guns protecting the carriers. Nimitz calculated that the aircraft on his three carriers, plus those on Midway Island, gave the U.S. rough parity with Yamamoto's four carriers, mainly because American carrier air groups were larger than Japanese ones. The Japanese, by contrast, remained largely unaware of their opponent's true strength and dispositions even after the battle began.\nBattle.\nInitial air attacks.\nAt about 09:00 on 3 June, Ensign Jack Reid, piloting a PBY from U.S. Navy patrol squadron VP-44, spotted the Japanese Occupation Force to the west-southwest of Midway. He mistakenly reported this group as the Main Force. Nine B-17s took off from Midway at 12:30 for the first air attack. Three hours later, they found Tanaka's transport group to the west.\nHarassed by heavy anti-aircraft fire, they dropped their bombs. Although their crews reported hitting four ships, none were actually hit and no significant damage was inflicted. Early the following morning, the Japanese oil tanker \"Akebono Maru\" sustained the first hit when a torpedo from an attacking PBY struck her around 01:00. This was the only successful air-launched torpedo attack by the U.S. during the battle.\nAt 04:30 on 4 June, Nagumo launched his initial attack on Midway, consisting of 36 D3As and 36 B5Ns, escorted by 36 Zero fighters. At the same time, he launched his seven search aircraft (2 B5Ns from \"Akagi\" and \"Kaga;\" 4 Aichi E13A \"Jakes\" from the heavy cruiser \"\" and \"Chikuma;\" and 1 short-range Nakajima E8N \"Dave\" from the battleship \"Haruna\"; an eighth aircraft from launched 30 minutes late). Japanese reconnaissance arrangements were flimsy, with too few aircraft to adequately cover the assigned search areas, laboring under poor weather conditions to the northeast and east of the task force. As Nagumo's bombers and fighters were taking off, 11 PBYs were leaving Midway to run their search patterns. At 05:34, a PBY reported sighting two Japanese carriers; another spotted the inbound airstrike 10 minutes later.\nMidway's radar picked up the Japanese at 05:53, at a distance of 93 nautical miles, and interceptors were scrambled. Unescorted bombers headed off to attack the Japanese carriers, their fighter escorts remaining behind to defend Midway. Having taken off at 06:00 Midway-based Marine fighters led by Major Floyd B. Parks, which included six F4Fs and twenty F2As, intercepted the Japanese at 06:20 and suffered heavy losses, though they destroyed four B5Ns and one Zero. Within the first few minutes, two F4Fs and thirteen F2As were destroyed, while most of the surviving U.S. planes were damaged, with only two remaining airworthy. Starting At 06:34, Japanese carrier aircraft bombed and heavily damaged the U.S. base. American anti-aircraft fire was intense and accurate, destroying three Japanese aircraft and damaging many more.\nOf the 108 Japanese aircraft that participated in this attack, 11 were destroyed (including 3 that ditched), 14 were heavily damaged, and 29 were damaged to some degree. 140 more were available to the Japanese, but never launched, and were destroyed when their carriers sank. The initial Japanese attack did not succeed in neutralizing Midway: American bombers could still use the airbase to refuel and attack the Japanese, and most of Midway's land-based defenses remained intact. Japanese pilots reported to Nagumo that a second aerial attack on Midway's defenses would be necessary if troops were to go ashore by 7 June.\nHaving taken off prior to the Japanese attack, American bombers based on Midway made several attacks on the Japanese carrier force. These included six Grumman Avengers, detached to Midway from \"Hornet\"'s VT-8 (Midway was the combat debut of both VT-8 and the Avenger); Marine Scout-Bombing Squadron 241 (VMSB-241), consisting of 11 SB2U-3s and 16 SBDs, plus four USAAF B-26s of the 18th Reconnaissance and 69th Bomb Squadrons armed with torpedoes, and 15 B-17s of the 31st, 72nd, and 431st Bomb Squadrons. The Japanese repelled these attacks, losing only three Zero fighters while destroying five Avengers, two SB2Us, eight SBDs, and two B-26s. Among the dead was Major Lofton R. Henderson of VMSB-241, killed while leading his inexperienced SBD squadron into action. The main airfield at Guadalcanal was named after him in August 1942.\nOne B-26, piloted by Lieutenant James Muri, after dropping his torpedo and searching for an escape route, flew directly down the length of \"Akagi\" while being fired upon by fighters and anti-aircraft fire, which had to hold their fire to avoid hitting their own flagship; the B-26 strafed \"Akagi\", killing two men. Another B-26, piloted by Lieutenant Herbert Mayes, did not pull out of its run after being seriously damaged by anti-aircraft fire, and instead flew directly at \"Akagi\"'s bridge. Either attempting a suicide ramming or out of control, the plane narrowly missed striking the bridge, which could have killed Nagumo and his staff, crashing into the ocean. This experience may well have contributed to Nagumo's determination to launch another attack on Midway in direct violation of Yamamoto's order to keep the reserve strike force armed for anti-ship operations.\nWhile the air strikes from Midway were happening, American submarine , commanded by Lieutenant Commander William Brockman, approached the Japanese fleet, attracting attention from the escorts. Around 08:20, she made an unsuccessful torpedo attack on a battleship and then dived to evade escorts. At 09:10, she launched a torpedo at a cruiser and again dived to evade escorts, with destroyer \"Arashi\" spending considerable time chasing \"Nautilus\".\nNagumo's dilemma.\nIn accordance with Yamamoto's orders for Operation MI, Nagumo had kept half of his aircraft in reserve, comprising two squadrons each of dive bombers and torpedo bombers. The dive bombers were as yet unarmed (this was doctrinal: dive bombers were to be armed on the flight deck). The torpedo bombers were armed with torpedoes should any American warships be located.\nAt 07:15, Nagumo ordered his reserve planes to be re-armed with contact-fused general-purpose bombs for use against land targets. This was a result of the attacks from Midway, as well as the morning flight leader's recommendation of a second strike. Re-arming had been underway for about 30 minutes when, at 07:40, the delayed scout plane from \"Tone\" signaled that it had sighted a sizable American naval force to the east, but neglected to specify its composition. Later evidence suggests Nagumo did not receive the sighting report until 08:00.\nNagumo quickly reversed his order to re-arm the bombers and demanded that the scout plane ascertain the composition of the American force. Another 20\u201340 minutes elapsed before \"Tone\"'s scout finally radioed the presence of a single carrier in the American force. This was one of the carriers from Task Force 16. The other carrier was not sighted.\nNagumo was now in a quandary. Rear Admiral Tamon Yamaguchi, leading Carrier Division 2 (\"Hiry\u016b\" and \"S\u014dry\u016b\"), recommended that Nagumo strike immediately with the forces at hand: 16 D3A1 dive bombers on \"S\u014dry\u016b\" and 18 on \"Hiry\u016b\", and half the ready cover patrol aircraft. Nagumo's opportunity to hit the American ships was now limited by the imminent return of his Midway strike force. The returning strike force needed to land promptly or it would have to ditch into the sea. Because of the constant flight deck activity associated with combat air patrol operations during the preceding hour, the Japanese never had an opportunity to position (\"spot\") their reserve planes on the flight deck for launch.\nThe few aircraft on the Japanese flight decks at the time of the attack were either defensive fighters or, in the case of \"S\u014dry\u016b\", fighters being spotted to augment the combat air patrol. Spotting his flight decks and launching aircraft would have required at least 30 minutes. Furthermore, by spotting and launching immediately, Nagumo would be committing some of his reserves to battle without proper anti-ship armament, and likely without fighter escort; he had just witnessed how easily the unescorted American bombers had been shot down.\nJapanese naval doctrine preferred the launching of fully constituted strikes rather than piecemeal attacks. Without confirmation of whether the American force included carriers (not received until 08:20), Nagumo's reaction was doctrinaire. The arrival of another land-based American air strike at 07:53 gave weight to the need to attack the island again. Nagumo decided to wait for his first strike force to land, and then launch the reserve, which would by then be properly armed with torpedoes.\nHad Nagumo instead launched the available aircraft around 07:45 and risked the ditching of Tomonaga's aircraft, they would have formed a powerful and well-balanced force with the potential to sink two American carriers. Furthermore, fueled and armed aircraft inside the ships presented a significant additional hazard for damage to the carriers in an event of attack, and keeping them on the decks was much more dangerous than getting them airborne. Whatever the case, at that point there was no way to stop the American strike against him, since Fletcher's carriers had launched their planes beginning at 07:00 (with \"Enterprise\" and \"Hornet\" having completed launching by 07:55, but \"Yorktown\" not until 09:08), so the aircraft that would deliver the crushing blow were already on their way. Even if Nagumo had not strictly followed carrier doctrine, he could not have prevented the launch of the American attack.\nAttacks on the Japanese fleet.\nThe Americans had already launched their carrier aircraft against the Japanese. Fletcher, in overall command aboard \"Yorktown\", and benefiting from PBY sighting reports from the early morning, ordered Spruance to launch against the Japanese as soon as was practical, while initially holding \"Yorktown\" in reserve in case any other Japanese carriers were found.\nSpruance judged that, though the range was extreme, a strike could succeed and gave the order to launch the attack. He left Halsey's Chief of Staff, Captain Miles Browning, to work out the details and oversee the launch. The carriers had to launch into the wind, so the light southeasterly breeze would require them to steam away from the Japanese at high speed. Browning, therefore, suggested a launch time of 07:00, giving the carriers an hour to close on the Japanese at . This would place them at about from the Japanese fleet, assuming it did not change course. The first plane took off from Spruance's carriers \"Enterprise\" and \"Hornet\" a few minutes after 07:00. Fletcher, upon completing his own scouting flights, followed suit at 08:00 from \"Yorktown\".\nFletcher, along with \"Yorktown\"'s commanding officer, Captain Elliott Buckmaster, and their staffs, had acquired the first-hand experience needed in organizing and launching a full strike against an enemy force in the Coral Sea, but there was no time to pass these lessons on to \"Enterprise\", commanded by Captain George Murray, and \"Hornet\", commanded by Captain Marc Mitscher, which were tasked with launching the first strike. Spruance ordered the striking aircraft to proceed to target immediately rather than waiting for the strike force to assemble, since neutralizing the Japanese carriers was the key to the survival of his own task force.\nWhile the Japanese were able to launch 108 aircraft in just seven minutes, it took \"Enterprise\" and \"Hornet\" over an hour to launch 117. Spruance judged that the need to throw something at the Japanese as soon as possible was greater than the need to coordinate the attack by aircraft of different types and speeds (fighters, bombers, and torpedo bombers). Accordingly, American squadrons were launched piecemeal and proceeded to the target in several different groups. It was accepted that the lack of coordination would diminish the impact of the American attacks and increase their casualties, but Spruance calculated that this was worthwhile, since keeping the Japanese under aerial attack impaired their ability to launch a counter strike (Japanese tactics preferred fully constituted attacks), and he gambled that he would find Nagumo with his flight decks at their most vulnerable.\nAmerican carrier aircraft had difficulty locating the target, despite the positions they had been given. The strike from \"Hornet\", led by Commander Stanhope C. Ring, followed an incorrect heading of 265 degrees rather than the 240 degrees indicated by the contact report. As a result, Air Group Eight's dive bombers missed the Japanese carriers: the 10 F4Fs from \"Hornet\" ran out of fuel and had to ditch. This became known as the Flight to Nowhere. Torpedo Squadron 8 (VT-8, from \"Hornet\"), led by Lieutenant Commander John C. Waldron, broke formation from Ring and followed the correct heading.\nWaldron's squadron sighted the Japanese carriers and began attacking at 09:20, followed at 09:40 by VF-6 from \"Enterprise\", whose Wildcat fighter escorts lost contact, ran low on fuel, and had to turn back. Without fighter escort, all 15 TBD Devastators of VT-8 were shot down without being able to inflict any damage. Ensign George H. Gay, Jr. was the only survivor of the 30 aircrew of VT-8. He launched his torpedo on \"S\u014dry\u016b\" before he was shot down, but \"S\u014dry\u016b\" evaded it. VT-6, led by Lieutenant Commander Eugene E. Lindsey lost 9 of its 14 Devastators (one ditched later), and 10 of 12 Devastators from \"Yorktown\"'s VT-3 (who attacked at 10:10) were shot down with no hits to show for their effort, thanks in part to the abysmal performance of their unimproved Mark 13 torpedoes. The TBD Devastator had shown itself to be unsuitable for modern warfare and it was to be replaced by the TBF Avenger.\nThe Japanese combat air patrol, flying Zeros, made short work of the unescorted, slow, under-armed TBDs. A few TBDs managed to get within a few ship-lengths range of their targets before dropping their torpedoes\u2014close enough to be able to strafe the Japanese ships and force their carriers to make sharp evasive maneuvers\u2014but all of their torpedoes either missed or failed to explode. The performance of American torpedoes early in the war was extremely poor, as shot after shot missed by running directly under the target (deeper than intended), prematurely exploded, or failed to explode at all. Remarkably, senior Navy and Bureau of Ordnance officers never questioned why half a dozen torpedoes, released so close to the Japanese carriers, produced no results.\nDespite their failure to score any hits, the American torpedo attacks achieved three important results. First, they kept the Japanese carriers off balance and unable to prepare and launch their own counter strike. Second, the poor control of the Japanese CAP meant they were out of position for subsequent attacks. Third, many of the Zeros ran low on ammunition and fuel. The appearance of a third torpedo plane attack from the southeast by VT-3 from \"Yorktown\", led by Lieutenant Commander Lance Edward Massey at 10:00 quickly drew the majority of the Japanese CAP to the southeast quadrant of the fleet. Better discipline and the employment of a greater number of Zeros for the CAP might have enabled Nagumo to prevent (or at least mitigate) the damage caused by the coming American attacks.\nBy chance, at the same time VT-3 was sighted by the Japanese, three squadrons of SBDs from \"Enterprise\" and \"Yorktown\" were approaching from the southwest and northeast. The \"Yorktown\" squadron (VB-3) had flown just behind VT-3 but elected to attack from a different course. The two squadrons from \"Enterprise\" (VB-6 and VS-6) were running low on fuel because of the time spent looking for the Japanese ships. Air Group Commander C. Wade McClusky, Jr. decided to continue the search and by good fortune spotted the wake of the Japanese destroyer , steaming at full speed to rejoin Nagumo's carriers after having unsuccessfully depth-charged U.S. submarine , which had unsuccessfully attacked the battleship . Some bombers were lost from fuel exhaustion before the attack commenced.\nMcClusky's decision to continue the search and his judgment, in the opinion of Admiral Chester Nimitz, \"decided the fate of our carrier task force and our forces at Midway\u00a0...\" All three American dive-bomber squadrons (VB-6, VS-6, and VB-3) arrived almost simultaneously at the perfect time, locations and altitudes to attack. Most of the Japanese CAP was directing its attention to the torpedo planes of VT-3 and was out of position; meanwhile, armed Japanese strike aircraft filled the hangar decks, fuel hoses snaked across the decks as refueling operations were hastily being completed, and the repeated change of ordnance meant that bombs and torpedoes were stacked around the hangars, rather than stowed safely in the magazines, making the Japanese carriers extraordinarily vulnerable.\nDestruction of \"Kaga\", \"S\u014dry\u016b\" and \"Akagi\".\nBeginning at 10:22, the two squadrons of \"Enterprise\"'s air group split up with the intention of sending one squadron each to attack \"Kaga\" and \"Akagi\". A miscommunication caused both of the squadrons to dive at \"Kaga\". Recognizing the error, Lieutenant Richard Halsey Best and his two wingmen were able to pull out of their dives and, after judging that \"Kaga\" was doomed, headed north to attack \"Akagi\". Coming under an onslaught of bombs from almost two full squadrons, \"Kaga\" sustained three to five direct hits, which caused heavy damage and started multiple fires. One of the bombs landed on or right in front of the bridge, killing Captain Jisaku Okada and most of the ship's senior officers. Lieutenant Clarence E. Dickinson, part of McClusky's group, recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We were coming down in all directions on the port side of the carrier\u00a0... I recognized her as the \"Kaga\"; and she was enormous\u00a0... The target was utterly satisfying\u00a0... I saw a bomb hit just behind where I was aiming\u00a0... I saw the deck rippling and curling back in all directions exposing a great section of the hangar below\u00a0... I saw [my] bomb hit right abreast of the [carrier's] island. The two bombs struck in the forward area of the parked planes\u00a0...\nSeveral minutes later, Best and his two wingmen dived on \"Akagi\". Mitsuo Fuchida, the Japanese aviator who had led the attack on Pearl Harbor, was on \"Akagi\" when it was hit, and described the attack:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A look-out screamed: \"Hell-Divers!\" I looked up to see three black enemy planes plummeting towards our ship. Some of our machineguns managed to fire a few frantic bursts at them, but it was too late. The plump silhouettes of the American Dauntless dive-bombers quickly grew larger, and then a number of black objects suddenly floated eerily from their wings.\nAlthough \"Akagi\" sustained only one direct hit (almost certainly dropped by Lieutenant Best), it proved to be a fatal blow: the bomb struck the edge of the mid-ship deck elevator and penetrated to the upper hangar deck, where it exploded among the armed and fueled aircraft in the vicinity. Nagumo's chief of staff, Ry\u016bnosuke Kusaka, recorded \"a terrific fire\u00a0... bodies all over the place\u00a0... Planes stood tail up, belching livid flames and jet-black smoke, making it impossible to bring the fires under control.\" Another bomb exploded underwater very close astern; the resulting geyser bent the flight deck upward \"in grotesque configurations\" and caused crucial rudder damage.\nSimultaneously, \"Yorktown\"'s VB-3, commanded by Lieutenant Max Leslie, went for \"S\u014dry\u016b\", scoring at least three hits and causing extensive damage. Gasoline ignited, creating an inferno, while stacked bombs and ammunition detonated. VT-3 targeted \"Hiry\u016b\", which was hemmed in by \"S\u014dry\u016b\", \"Kaga\", and \"Akagi\", but achieved no hits.\nWithin six minutes, \"S\u014dry\u016b\" and \"Kaga\" were ablaze from stem to stern. \"Akagi\", having been struck by only one bomb, took longer to burn, but the resulting fires quickly expanded and proved impossible to extinguish; she too was eventually consumed by flames and had to be abandoned. Although Nagumo was reluctant to leave \"Akagi\", Kusaka was able to persuade him. At 10:46, Nagumo transferred his flag to the light cruiser . All three carriers remained temporarily afloat, as none had suffered damage below the waterline, other than the rudder damage to \"Akagi\" caused by the near miss close astern. Despite initial hopes that \"Akagi\" could be saved or at least towed back to Japan, all three carriers were eventually abandoned and scuttled. While \"Kaga\" was burning, \"Nautilus\" showed up again and launched three torpedoes at her, scoring one dud hit. \"Kaga\" was later sunk by the Japanese destroyer \"Hagikaze\".\nJapanese counterattacks.\n\"Hiry\u016b\", the sole surviving Japanese aircraft carrier, wasted little time in counterattacking. \"Hiry\u016b\"'s first attack wave, consisting of 18 D3As and 6 Zeros, followed the retreating American aircraft and attacked the first carrier they encountered, \"Yorktown\", hitting her with three bombs, which blew a hole in the deck, snuffed out all but one of her boilers, and destroyed one anti-aircraft mount. The damage forced Fletcher to move his command staff to the heavy cruiser . Damage control parties were able to temporarily patch the flight deck and restore power to several boilers within an hour, giving her a speed of and enabling her to resume air operations. \"Yorktown\" hoisted a flag signal to indicate a speed of 5 knots. Captain Buckmaster had his signalmen hoist a new 10-by-15-foot American flag from the foremast. Thirteen D3As and three Zeros were lost in this attack (two Zeros turned back early after they were damaged attacking some of \"Enterprise\"'s SBDs returning from their attack on the Japanese carriers).\nApproximately one hour later, \"Hiry\u016b\"'s second attack wave, consisting of ten B5Ns and six escorting Zeros, arrived over \"Yorktown\"; the repair efforts had been so effective that the Japanese pilots assumed that \"Yorktown\" must be a different, undamaged carrier. They attacked, crippling \"Yorktown\" with two torpedoes; she lost all power and developed a 23-degree list to port. Five B5Ns and two Zeros were shot down in this attack.\nNews of the two strikes, with the mistaken reports that each had sunk an American carrier, greatly improved Japanese morale. The few surviving aircraft were all recovered aboard \"Hiry\u016b\". Despite the heavy losses, the Japanese believed that they could scrape together enough aircraft for one more strike against what they believed to be the only remaining American carrier.\nAmerican counterattack.\nLate in the afternoon, a \"Yorktown\" scout aircraft located \"Hiry\u016b\", prompting \"Enterprise\" to launch a final strike of 24 dive bombers (six SBDs from VS-6, four SBDs from VB-6, and 14 SBDs from \"Yorktown\"'s VB-3). Despite \"Hiry\u016b\" being defended by more than a dozen Zero fighters, the attack by \"Enterprise\" and orphaned \"Yorktown\" aircraft launched from \"Enterprise\" was successful: four bombs (possibly five) hit \"Hiry\u016b\", leaving her ablaze and unable to operate aircraft. \"Hornet\"'s strike, launched late because of a communications error, concentrated on the remaining escort ships but failed to score any hits. A bomb from the \"Enterprise\" dive bomber piloted by Dusty Kleiss struck \"Hiry\u016b\" on the bow, essentially crippling her.\nAfter futile attempts at controlling the blaze, most of the crew on \"Hiry\u016b\" were evacuated, and the remainder of the fleet continued sailing northeast in an attempt to intercept the American carriers. Despite a scuttling attempt by a Japanese destroyer that hit her with a torpedo and then departed quickly, \"Hiry\u016b\" stayed afloat for several more hours. She was discovered early the next morning by an aircraft from the escort carrier , prompting hopes she could be saved or towed back to Japan. Soon after being spotted, \"Hiry\u016b\" sank. Yamaguchi, along with ship's captain, Tomeo Kaku, chose to go down with the ship, costing Japan perhaps its best carrier officer. One young sailor reportedly tried to stay with the officers but was denied.\nAs darkness fell, both sides made tentative plans for continuing the action. Fletcher, obliged to abandon the derelict \"Yorktown\" and feeling he could not adequately command from a cruiser, ceded operational command to Spruance. Spruance knew the U.S. had won a great victory, but he was unsure of what Japanese forces remained and was determined to safeguard both Midway and his carriers. To aid his aviators, who had launched at extreme range, he had continued to close with Nagumo during the day and persisted as night fell.\nFinally, fearing a possible night encounter with Japanese surface forces and believing Yamamoto still intended to invade (based in part on a misleading contact report from the submarine ) Spruance changed course and withdrew to the east, turning back west towards the Japanese at midnight. For his part, Yamamoto initially decided to continue the engagement and sent his remaining surface forces searching eastward for the American carriers. Simultaneously, he detached a cruiser raiding force to bombard the island. The Japanese surface forces failed to make contact with the Americans because Spruance had briefly withdrawn eastward, and Yamamoto ordered a general withdrawal to the west. It was fortunate for the U.S. that Spruance did not pursue: had he come in contact with Yamamoto's heavy ships, including , in the dark, considering the Japanese Navy's superiority in night-attack tactics at the time, there is a very high probability his cruisers would have been overwhelmed and his carriers sunk.\nSpruance failed to reestablish contact with Yamamoto's forces on 5 June, despite extensive searches. Towards the end of the day, he launched a search-and-destroy mission to seek out any remnants of Nagumo's carrier force. This late afternoon strike narrowly missed detecting Yamamoto's main body and failed to score hits on a straggling Japanese destroyer. The strike planes returned to the carriers after nightfall, prompting Spruance to order \"Enterprise\" and \"Hornet\" to turn on their lights to aid the landings.\nAt 02:15 on 5 June Commander John Murphy's \"Tambor\", lying west of Midway, made the second of the submarine force's two major contributions to the battle's outcome, although its impact was heavily blunted by Murphy. Sighting several ships, neither Murphy nor his executive officer, Edward Spruance (son of Admiral Spruance), could identify them. Uncertain of whether they were friendly and unwilling to approach any closer to verify their heading or type, Murphy decided to send a vague report of \"four large ships\" to Admiral Robert English, Commander, Submarine Force, Pacific Fleet. This report was passed on by English to Nimitz, who then sent it to Spruance. Spruance, a former submarine commander, was \"understandably furious\" at the vagueness of Murphy's report, as it provided him with little more than suspicion and no concrete information on which to make his preparations. Unaware of the exact location of Yamamoto's \"Main Body\" (a persistent problem since the time PBYs had first sighted the Japanese), Spruance was forced to assume the \"four large ships\" reported by \"Tambor\" represented the main invasion force and so he moved to block it, while staying northeast of Midway.\nIn reality, the ships sighted by \"Tambor\" were the detachment of four cruisers and two destroyers Yamamoto had sent to bombard Midway. At 02:55 these ships received Yamamoto's order to retire and changed course to comply. At about the same time as this change of course, \"Tambor\" was sighted and during maneuvers designed to avoid a submarine attack, the heavy cruisers and collided, inflicting serious damage on \"Mogami\"'s bow. The less severely damaged \"Mikuma\" slowed to to keep pace. Only at 04:12 did the sky brighten enough for Murphy to be certain the ships were Japanese, by which time staying surfaced was hazardous and he dived to approach for an attack. The attack was unsuccessful, and around 06:00 he finally reported two westbound s before diving again and playing no further role in the battle. Limping along on a straight course at 12\u00a0knots\u2014roughly one-third their top speed\u2014\"Mogami\" and \"Mikuma\" had been almost perfect targets for a submarine attack. As soon as \"Tambor\" returned to port, Spruance had Murphy relieved of duty and reassigned to a shore station, citing his confusing contact report, poor torpedo shooting during his attack run, and general lack of aggression, especially as compared to \"Nautilus\", the oldest of the 12 boats at Midway and the only one which had successfully placed a torpedo on target (albeit a dud).\nOver the next two days, several strikes were launched against the stragglers, first from Midway, then from Spruance's carriers. \"Mikuma\" was eventually sunk by Dauntlesses, while \"Mogami\" survived further severe damage to return home for repairs. The destroyers and were also bombed and strafed during the last of these attacks. Captain Richard E. Fleming, a U.S. Marine Corps aviator, was killed while executing a glide bomb run on \"Mikuma\" and was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor.\nMeanwhile, salvage efforts on \"Yorktown\" were encouraging, and she was taken in tow by fleet tug . In the late afternoon of 6 June the , which had managed to slip through the cordon of destroyers (possibly because of the large amount of debris in the water), fired a salvo of torpedoes, two of which struck \"Yorktown\". There were few casualties aboard since most of the crew had already been evacuated, but a third torpedo from this salvo struck the destroyer , which had been providing auxiliary power to \"Yorktown\". \"Hammann\" broke in two and sank with the loss of 80 lives, mostly because her own depth charges exploded. With further salvage efforts deemed hopeless, the remaining repair crews were evacuated from \"Yorktown\". Throughout the night of 6 June and into the morning of 7 June, \"Yorktown\" remained afloat, but by 05:30 on 7 June, her list rapidly increased to port. Shortly afterward, the ship turned onto her port side. At 07:01, \"Yorktown\" capsized and sank.\nJapanese and U.S. casualties.\nSBD pilot Norman \"Dusty\" Kleiss, who scored three hits on Japanese ships during the Battle of Midway (aircraft carriers \"Kaga\" and \"Hiry\u016b\" and heavy cruiser \"Mikuma\"), wrote: \"From the experience in the Marshalls, at Wake and at Marcus, I thought our fleet learned its lessons. We could not send TBDs into action unless they had adequate smoke protection and torpedoes that exploded more than 10 percent of the time.\"\nBy the time the battle ended, 3,057 Japanese had died. Casualties aboard the four carriers were: \"Akagi\": 267; \"Kaga\": 811; \"Hiry\u016b\": 392 (including Yamaguchi who chose to go down with his ship); \"Sory\u016b\": 711 (including Captain Yanagimoto, who chose to remain on board); a total of 2,181. The heavy cruisers \"Mikuma\" (sunk; 700 casualties) and \"Mogami\" (badly damaged; 92) accounted for another 792 deaths.\nIn addition, the destroyers \"Arashio\" (bombed; 35) and \"Asashio\" (strafed by aircraft; 21) were both damaged during the air attacks which sank \"Mikuma\" and caused further damage to \"Mogami\". Floatplanes were lost from the cruisers \"Chikuma\" (3) and \"Tone\" (2). Dead aboard the destroyers \"Tanikaze\" (11), \"Arashi\" (1), \"Kazagumo\" (1) and the fleet oiler \"Akebono Maru\" (10) made up the remaining 23 casualties.\nAt the end of the battle, the U.S. lost the carrier \"Yorktown\" and the destroyer \"Hammann\". 307 Americans had been killed, including Major General Clarence L. Tinker, Commander, 7th Air Force, who personally led a bomber strike from Hawaii against the retreating Japanese forces on 7 June. He was killed when his aircraft crashed near Midway Island.\nAftermath.\nAfter winning a clear victory, and as pursuit became too hazardous near Wake Island, American forces retired. Spruance again withdrew to the east to refuel his destroyers and rendezvous with the carrier \"Saratoga\", which was ferrying much-needed replacement aircraft. Fletcher transferred his flag to \"Saratoga\" on the afternoon of 8 June and resumed command of the carrier force. For the remainder of that day and the next, Fletcher continued to launch search missions from the three carriers to ensure the Japanese were no longer advancing on Midway. Late on 10 June a decision was made to leave the area, and the American carriers returned to Pearl Harbor.\nHistorian Samuel E. Morison noted in 1949 that Spruance was criticized for not pursuing the retreating Japanese, allowing their surface fleet to escape. Clay Blair argued in 1975 that had Spruance pressed on, he would have been unable to launch his aircraft after nightfall, and his cruisers would have been overwhelmed by Yamamoto's powerful surface units, including \"Yamato\". Furthermore, the American air groups had suffered considerable losses, including most of their torpedo bombers. This made it unlikely that they would be effective in an airstrike against the Japanese battleships, even if they had managed to catch them during the daytime. Also, Spruance's destroyers were critically low on fuel.\nOn 10 June the Imperial Japanese Navy conveyed to the military liaison conference an incomplete picture of the results of the battle. Nagumo's detailed battle report was submitted to the high command on 15 June. It was intended only for the highest echelons in the Japanese Navy and government and was guarded closely throughout the war. In it, one of the more striking revelations is the comment on Mobile Force Commander Nagumo's estimates: \"The enemy is not aware of our plans (we were not discovered until early in the morning of the 5th at the earliest).\" In reality, the whole operation had been compromised from the beginning by American code-breaking efforts.\nThe Japanese public and much of the military command structure were kept in the dark about the extent of the defeat: Japanese news announced a great victory. Only Emperor Hirohito and the highest Navy command staff were accurately informed of the carrier and personnel losses. Consequently, even the Imperial Japanese Army continued to believe, for at least a short time, that the fleet was in good condition.\nOn the return of the Japanese fleet to Hashirajima on 14 June the wounded were immediately transferred to naval hospitals; most were classified as \"secret patients\", placed in isolation wards and quarantined from other patients and their own families to keep this major defeat secret. The remaining officers and men were quickly dispersed to other units of the fleet and, without being allowed to see family or friends, were shipped to units in the South Pacific, where the majority died in battle. None of the flag officers or staff of the Combined Fleet were penalized, and Nagumo was later placed in command of the rebuilt carrier force. A possible reason Nagumo was not relieved of command was that he reported two American carriers had been sunk; not one actually sunk.\nAs a result of the defeat, new procedures were adopted whereby more Japanese aircraft were refueled and re-armed on the flight deck rather than in the hangars, and the practice of draining all unused fuel lines was adopted. The new carriers being built were redesigned to incorporate only two flight deck elevators and new firefighting equipment. More carrier crew members were trained in damage-control and firefighting techniques, although the losses of the \"Sh\u014dkaku\", ', and especially ' later in the war suggest that there were still problems in this area.\nJapanese replacement pilots were pushed through an abbreviated training regimen to meet the short-term needs of the fleet, leading to a sharp decline in the quality of the aviators produced. These inexperienced pilots were fed into front-line units, while the veterans who remained after Midway and the Solomons campaign were forced to share an increased workload as conditions grew more desperate, with few being given a chance to rest in rear areas or in the home islands. As a result, Japanese naval air groups as a whole progressively deteriorated during the war while their American adversaries continued to improve.\nAmerican prisoners.\nThree U.S. aviators were captured during the battle: Ensign Wesley Osmus, a pilot from \"Yorktown\"; Ensign Frank O'Flaherty, a pilot from \"Enterprise\"; and Aviation Machinist's Mate Bruno Peter Gaido, O'Flaherty's gunner. Osmus was held on \"Arashi\"; O'Flaherty and Gaido on the cruiser \"Nagara\" (or destroyer \"Makigumo\", sources vary); O'Flaherty and Gaido were interrogated and then tied to water-filled kerosene cans and thrown overboard to drown. Osmus was murdered on the \"Arashi\". The report filed by Nagumo tersely states that Osmus, \"died on 6 June and was buried at sea\"; O'Flaherty and Gaido's fates were not mentioned. The execution of Osmus was apparently ordered by \"Arashi\"'s captain, Watanabe Yasumasa. Yasumasa died when the destroyer sank in December 1943; had he survived the war he would have likely been tried as a war criminal.\nJapanese prisoners.\nTwo enlisted men from \"Mikuma\" were rescued from a life raft on 9 June by and taken to Pearl Harbor. After receiving medical care, at least one of these sailors cooperated during interrogation and provided intelligence. Another 35 crewmen from \"Hiry\u016b\" were taken from a lifeboat by on 19 June after being spotted by an American search plane. They were taken to Midway and then transferred to Pearl Harbor on .\nImpact.\nThe Battle of Midway has often been called \"the turning point of the Pacific\". It was the Allies' first major naval victory against the Japanese. Had Japan won the battle as thoroughly as the U.S. did, it might have been able to capture Midway Island. \"Saratoga\" would have been the only American carrier in the Pacific, as no new ones were completed before the end of 1942. While the U.S. would probably not have sought peace with Japan as Yamamoto hoped, his country might have revived Operation FS to invade and occupy Fiji and Samoa; attacked Australia, Alaska, and Ceylon; or even attempted to occupy Hawaii.\nAlthough the Japanese continued to try to secure more territory, and the U.S. did not move from a state of naval parity to one of supremacy until after several more months of hard combat, Midway allowed the Allies to switch to the strategic initiative, paving the way for the landings on Guadalcanal and the prolonged attrition of the Solomon Islands campaign. Midway allowed this to occur before the first of the new fleet carriers became available at the end of 1942. The Guadalcanal campaign is regarded by some as a turning point in the Pacific War.\nSome authors have stated that heavy losses in carriers and veteran aircrews at Midway permanently weakened the Imperial Japanese Navy. Parshall and Tully have stated that the heavy losses in veteran aircrew (110, just under 25% of the aircrew embarked on the four carriers) were not crippling to the Japanese naval air corps as a whole; the Japanese navy had 2,000 carrier-qualified aircrews at the start of the Pacific War. The loss of four large fleet carriers and over 40% of the carriers' highly trained aircraft mechanics and technicians, plus the essential flight-deck crews and armorers, and the loss of organizational knowledge embodied in such highly trained crews, were still heavy blows to the Japanese carrier fleet. A few months after Midway, the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service sustained similar casualty rates in the Battle of the Eastern Solomons and Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands, and it was these battles, combined with the constant attrition of veterans during the Solomons campaign, which were the catalyst for the sharp downward spiral in operational capability.\nAfter the battle, \"Sh\u014dkaku\" and \"Zuikaku\" were the only large carriers of the original Pearl Harbor strike force still afloat. Of Japan's other carriers, \"Taih\u014d\", which was not commissioned until early 1944, would be the only fleet carrier worth teaming with \"Sh\u014dkaku\" and \"Zuikaku\"; and were light carriers, while and , although technically classified as fleet carriers, were second-rate ships of comparatively limited effectiveness. In the time it took Japan to build three carriers, the U.S. Navy commissioned more than two dozen fleet and light fleet carriers, and numerous escort carriers. By 1942 the U.S. was already three years into a shipbuilding program mandated by the 1938 Second Vinson Act.\nBoth the U.S. and Japan accelerated the training of aircrew, but the U.S. had a more effective pilot rotation system, which meant that more veterans survived and went on to training or command billets, where they were able to pass on lessons they had learned in combat to trainees, instead of remaining in combat, where errors were more likely to be fatal. By the time of the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944, the Japanese had nearly rebuilt their carrier forces in terms of numbers, but their planes, many of which were obsolete, were largely flown by inexperienced and poorly trained pilots.\nMidway showed the worth of pre-war naval cryptanalysis and intelligence-gathering. These efforts continued and were expanded throughout the war in both the Pacific and Atlantic theaters. Successes were numerous and significant. For instance, cryptanalysis made possible the shooting down of Admiral Yamamoto's airplane in 1943.\nThe Battle of Midway also caused the plan of Japan and Nazi Germany to meet up in the Indian subcontinent to be abandoned.\nThe Battle of Midway redefined the central importance of air superiority for the remainder of the war when the Japanese suddenly lost their four main aircraft carriers and were forced to return home. Without any form of air superiority, the Japanese never again launched a major offensive in the Pacific.\nDiscovery of sunken vessels.\nBecause of the extreme depth of the ocean in the area of the battle (more than ), researching the battlefield has presented extraordinary difficulties. On 19 May 1998, Robert Ballard and a team of scientists and Midway veterans from both sides located and photographed \"Yorktown\", which was located deep. The ship was remarkably intact for a vessel that had sunk in 1942; much of the original equipment and even the original paint scheme were still visible. Ballard's subsequent search for the Japanese carriers was unsuccessful.\nIn September 1999, a joint expedition between Nauticos Corp. and the U.S. Naval Oceanographic Office searched for the Japanese aircraft carriers. Using advanced renavigation techniques in conjunction with the ship's log of the submarine USS \"Nautilus\", the expedition located a large piece of wreckage, subsequently identified as having come from the upper hangar deck of \"Kaga\".\nThe crew of the research vessel RV \"Petrel\", in conjunction with the U.S. Navy, announced on 18 October 2019 that it had found the Japanese carrier \"Kaga\" at . The crew confirmed the discovery of another Japanese carrier, the \"Akagi\", on 21 October 2019. The \"Akagi\" was found in the Papah\u0101naumoku\u0101kea Marine National Monument in nearly of water.\nRemembrances.\nChicago Municipal Airport, important to the war effort in World War II, was renamed Chicago Midway International Airport (or simply Midway Airport) in 1949 in honor of the battle. Henderson Field in Guadalcanal was named in honor of U.S. Marine Corps Major Lofton Henderson, the first Marine aviator to perish during the battle.\nEscort carrier USS \"Midway\" (CVE-63) was commissioned on 17 August 1943. She was renamed \"St. Lo\" on 10 October 1944 to clear the name \"Midway\" for a large fleet aircraft carrier, , which was commissioned on 10 September 1945, eight days after the Japanese surrender, and is now docked in San Diego, California, as the USS \"Midway\" Museum.\nOn 13 September 2000 Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt designated the lands and waters of Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge as the Battle of Midway National Memorial. Tinker Air Force Base outside Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, is named in honor of Major General Clarence L. Tinker, Commander 7th Air Force, who personally led a bomber strike from Hawaii against the retreating Japanese forces on 7 June.\nJohn Ford directed the 18-minute 1942 Movietone News documentary (released by the War Activities Committee) \"The Battle of Midway\", which received the 1942 Academy Award for Best Documentary; and the eight-minute documentary \"Torpedo Squadron 8\", which describes the heroism of Torpedo Squadron 8 of the . Ford, who was a Navy Reserve commander at the time, was present at Midway Atoll's power plant on Sand Island during the Japanese attack and filmed it. He was wounded by enemy fire in his arm during the filming.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60114", "revid": "96647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60114", "title": "Escape sequence", "text": "Series of characters with a special meaning\nIn computing, an escape sequence is a sequence of characters that has a special semantic meaning based on an established convention that specifies an escape character prefix in addition to the syntax of the rest of the text of a sequence. A convention can define any particular character code as a sequence prefix. Some conventions use a normal, printable character such as backslash (\\) or ampersand (&amp;). Others use a non-printable (a.k.a. control) character such as ASCII \"escape\".\nEscape sequences date back at least to the 1874 Baudot code.\nExamples.\nData transmission.\nA common use of an escape sequence is to remove control characters from a data stream so that it does not cause its control function by mistake. The control character is replaced with an escape character and one or more other subsequent characters. After escaping the normal context in which the control character would have caused an action, the sequence is replaced by the removed character. To transmit the escape character itself, two copies are sent.\nText literal.\nAn escape sequence is often used in character and string literals, to encode characters which are not printable or clash with the syntax of characters or strings. For example, control characters might not be allowed in a source file or may have undesirable side-effects if typed into a command. \nIn C and many derivative programming languages, a backslash (codice_1) in a string literal marks the beginning of an escape sequence. Common escape sequences include: carriage return , newline , tab . To account for the fact that using a printable character for escape causes that character to lose its normal meaning, a sequence of two backslash characters (codice_2) encodes a single backslash. An escape sequence can also specify a character by its code value. For example, the backslash can be encoded as either codice_3 or codice_4 which specify the character code value as hexadecimal and octal, respectively.\nA backslash immediately followed by a newline (which is necessarily outside of a string literal) does not mark an escape sequence. The C preprocessor joins the line with the subsequent line.\nQuoting escape.\nWhen an escape character is needed within a string literal, there are two common strategies:\nIn C and many related languages, the escape character is the backslash (). The single quotation mark character can be coded as codice_7 since codice_8 is not valid. As a string literal is delimited by double-quotes (codice_9) the content cannot contain a double-quote unless it is escaped (codice_10) or via a sequence that specifies the code of the double-quote character (codice_11).\nIn Perl or Python 2, the following is invalid syntax:\nprint \"Nancy said \"Hello World!\" to the crowd.\"\nThis can be fixed by inserted backslash to escape:\nprint \"Nancy said \\\"Hello World!\\\" to the crowd.\"\nAlternatively, the following uses \"\\x\" to indicate the subsequent two characters are hexadecimal digits; \"22\" being the hexadecimal ASCII value for double-quote.\nprint \"Nancy said \\x22Hello World!\\x22 to the crowd.\"\nC, C++, Java, and Ruby allow the same two backslash escape styles. PostScript and rich text format (RTF) also use backslash escapes. The quoted-printable encoding uses the equals sign as an escape character. URL and URI use percent-encoding to quote characters with a special meaning, as for non-ASCII characters. \nANSI escape sequences.\nThe VT52 terminal used simple digraph commands like escape-A. Without the escape character prefix, simply meant the letter , but as part of the escape sequence , it had a different meaning. The VT52 also supported parameters. It was not a straightforward control language encoded as substitution.\nThe later VT100 terminal implemented the more sophisticated ANSI escape sequences standard (now ECMA-48) for functions such as controlling cursor movement, character set, and display enhancements. The HP 2640 series had perhaps the most elaborate escape sequences for block and character modes, programming keys and their soft labels, graphics vectors, and even saving data to tape or disk files.\nIn Windows (and MS-DOS), a utility, ANSI.SYS, can be used to enable ANSI escape sequence support. In DOS via codice_12 in the PROMPT command), and in 16-bit Windows via a command window. In Unix and Unix-like systems, the ANSI escape sequences are generally supported by the shell. The rise of GUI applications has reduced the use of escape sequences, yet the ability to provide full-screen, text-based applications is still available.\nRelated.\nControl sequence.\nA control sequence is a sequence of characters that changes the state of a computer peripheral instead of conveying the normal information that the characters represent. In an ANSI escape sequence, the escape sequence prefix, called control sequence introducer, can be either ASCII ESC (decimal 27) followed by codice_13 or CSI (decimal 155). Notable systems that did not use an escape character for control sequences include:\nEscape sequences in communications are commonly used when a computer and a peripheral have only a single channel through which to send information back and forth (so escape sequences are an example of in-band signaling). They were common when most dumb terminals used ASCII with 7 data bits for communication, and sometimes would be used to switch to a different character set for \"foreign\" or graphics characters that would otherwise been restricted by the 128 codes available in 7 data bits. Even relatively \"dumb\" terminals responded to some escape sequences, including the original mechanical Teletype printers (on which \"glass Teletypes\" or VDUs were based) responded to characters 27 and 31 to alternate between letters and figures modes.\nEsc key.\nMany computer keyboards have an Esc key (where \"Esc\" is short for \"escape\") even though it is generally not used for entering an escape sequence. The vi text editor uses the key to exit from input mode. Some application use the key to cancel an operation or navigate up a level of a nested context.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60115", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60115", "title": "Eadweard Muybridge", "text": "English photographer (1830\u20131904)\nEadweard Muybridge ( ; 9 April 1830\u00a0\u2013 8 May 1904, born Edward James Muggeridge) was an English photographer known for his pioneering work in photographic studies of motion, and early work in motion-picture projection.\nHe adopted the first name \"Eadweard\" as the original Anglo-Saxon form of \"Edward\", and the surname \"Muybridge\", believing it to be similarly archaic. A photographer in the 19th century American West, he photographed Yosemite, San Francisco, the newly acquired Alaskan Territory, subjects involved in the Modoc War, and lighthouses on the West Coast. He also made his early moving picture studies in California. \nBorn in Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, England, at the age of 20 he emigrated to the United States as a bookseller, first to New York City, then to San Francisco. In 1860, he planned a return trip to Europe, but suffered serious head injuries en route in a stagecoach crash in Texas. He spent the next few years recuperating in Kingston upon Thames, where he took up professional photography, learned the wet-plate collodion process, and secured at least two British patents for his inventions. He returned to San Francisco in 1867, a man with a markedly changed personality. In 1868, he exhibited large photographs of Yosemite Valley, and began selling popular stereographs of his work.\nMuybridge is known for his pioneering chronophotography of animal locomotion between 1878 and 1886, which used multiple cameras to capture the different positions in a stride; and for his zoopraxiscope, a device for projecting painted motion pictures from glass discs that predated the flexible perforated film strip used in cinematography. From 1883 to 1886, he entered a very productive period at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, producing over 100,000 images of animals and humans in motion, occasionally capturing what the human eye could not distinguish as separate moments in time.\nIn his later years, Muybridge gave many public lectures and demonstrations of his photography and early motion picture sequences, travelling frequently in England and Europe to publicise his work in cities such as London and Paris. He also edited and published compilations of his work (some of which are still in print today), which greatly influenced visual artists and the developing fields of scientific and industrial photography. He retired to his native England permanently in 1894. In 1904, the year of his death, the Kingston Museum opened in his hometown, and continues to house a substantial collection of his works in a dedicated gallery.\nNames.\nEdward James Muggeridge was born and raised in England. Muggeridge changed his name several times, starting with \"Muggridge\". From 1855 to 1865, he mainly used the surname \"Muygridge\".\nFrom 1865 onward, he used the surname \"Muybridge\".\nIn addition, he used the pseudonym \"Helios\" (Titan of the Sun) for his early photography. He also used this as the name of his studio and gave it to his only son, as a middle name: Florado Helios Muybridge, born in 1874.\nWhile travelling in 1875 on a photography expedition in the Spanish-speaking nations of Central America, the photographer advertised his works under the name \"Eduardo Santiago Muybridge\" in Guatemala.\nAfter an 1882 trip to England, he changed the spelling of his first name to \"Eadweard\", the Old English form of his name. The spelling was probably derived from the spelling of King Edward's Christian name as shown on the plinth of the Kingston coronation stone, which had been re-erected in 1850 in Muybridge's hometown, 100 yards from his childhood family home. He used \"Eadweard Muybridge\" for the rest of his career.\nOthers frequently misspelled his surname as \"Maybridge\", \"Moybridge\", or \"Mybridge\". His gravestone carries his name as \"Eadweard Maybridge\".\n1830\u20131850: early life and family.\nEdward James Muggeridge was born in Kingston upon Thames, in the county of Surrey in England (now Greater London), on 9 April 1830 to John and Susanna Muggeridge; he had three brothers. His father was a grain and coal merchant, with business spaces on the ground floor of their house adjacent to the River Thames at No. 30 High Street. The family lived in the rooms above. After his father died in 1843, his mother carried on the business.\nHis younger cousins Norman Selfe (1839\u20131911) and Maybanke Anderson (n\u00e9e Selfe; 1845\u20131927), also spent part of their childhood in Kingston upon Thames. They moved to Australia and Norman, following a family tradition, became a renowned engineer while Maybanke made fame as a suffragette.\nHis paternal great-grandparents were Robert Muggeridge and Hannah Charman, who owned a farm. Their oldest son John Muggeridge (1756\u20131819) was Edward's grandfather; he was a stationer who taught Edward the business. Several uncles and cousins, including Henry Muggeridge (Sheriff of London), were corn merchants in the City of London. All were born in Banstead, Surrey. Edward's younger brother George, born in 1833, lived with their uncle Samuel in 1851, after the death of their father in 1843.\n1850\u20131860: bookselling in America.\nAt the age of 20, Muybridge decided to seek his fortune. He turned down an offer of money from his grandmother, saying \"No, thank you Grandma, I'm going to make a name for myself. If I fail, you will never hear of me again.\" Muybridge immigrated to the United States, arriving in New York City in 1852. Here, he was possibly a partner in the book business enterprise Muygridge &amp; Bartlett together with a medical student, which existed for about a year. He spent his first years importing and selling books from the UK, and became familiar with early photography through his acquaintance with New York daguerreotypist Silas T. Selleck.\nMuybridge arrived in New Orleans in January 1855, and was registered there as a book agent by April.\nMuybridge probably arrived in California around the autumn of 1855, when it had been a state for barely more than five years. He visited the new state capital, Sacramento, as an agent selling illustrated Shakespeare books in April 1856, and soon after settled at 113 Montgomery Street in San Francisco. From this address he sold books and art (mostly prints), in a city that was still the booming \"capital of the Gold Rush\" in the \"Wild West\". There were already 40 bookstores and a dozen photography studios in town, and he even shared his address with a photo gallery, right next to another bookstore. He partnered with W.H. Oakes as an engraver and publisher of lithograph prints, and still functioned as a book agent for the London Printing and Publishing Company.\nIn April 1858, Muybridge moved his store to 163 Clay Street, where his friend Silas Selleck now had a photo gallery. Muybridge was a member of the Mechanic's Institute of the City of San Francisco. In 1859, he was elected as one of the directors for the San Francisco Mercantile Library Association.\nMuybridge sold original landscape photography by Carleton Watkins, as well as photographic copies of paintings. It remains uncertain whether or not Muygridge personally made such copies, or familiarized himself with photographic techniques in any fashion before 1860, although Muybridge claimed in 1881 that he \"came to California in 1855, and most of the time since and all of the time since 1860 (...) had been diligently, and at the same time studiously, been engaged in photography\".\nEdward's brother George Muybridge came to San Francisco in 1858 but died of tuberculosis soon after. Their youngest brother Thomas S. Muygridge arrived in 1859, and it soon became clear that Edward planned to stop operating his bookstore business. On 15 May 1860, Edward published a special announcement in the \"Bulletin\" newspaper: \"I have this day sold to my brother, Thomas S. Muygridge, my entire stock of Books, Engravings, etc. (...) I shall on 5th June leave for New York, London, Berlin, Paris, Rome, and Vienna, etc.\" Although he altered his plans, he eventually took a cross-country stagecoach on 2 July to catch a ship in New York.\n1860\u20131866: serious accident, recuperation, early patents, and short career as venture capitalist.\nIn July 1860, Muybridge suffered a head injury in a violent runaway stagecoach crash at the Texas border, which killed the driver and one passenger, and badly injured all other passengers. Muybridge was ejected from the vehicle and hit his head on a rock or another hard object. He woke up in a hospital bed at Fort Smith, Arkansas, with no recollection of the nine days after he had taken supper at a wayside cabin away, not long before the accident. He suffered from a bad headache, double vision, deafness, loss of taste and smell, and confusion. It was later claimed that his hair turned from black to grey in three days. The problems persisted fully for three months and to a lesser extent for a year.\nArthur P. Shimamura, an experimental psychologist at the University of California, Berkeley, has speculated that Muybridge suffered substantial injuries to the orbitofrontal cortex that probably also extended into the anterior temporal lobes, which may have led to some of the emotional, eccentric behaviour reported by friends in later years, as well as freeing his creativity from conventional social inhibitions. Today, there is still little effective treatment for this kind of injury.\nMuybridge was treated at Fort Smith for three weeks before he went to a doctor in New York City. He fled the noise of the city and stayed in the countryside. He then went back to New York for six weeks and sued the stage company, which earned him a $2,500 compensation. Eventually, he felt well enough to travel to England, where he received medical care from Sir William Gull (who was also personal physician to Queen Victoria), and was prescribed abstinence of meat, alcohol, and coffee for over a year. Gull also recommended rest and outdoor activities, and considering a change in profession.\nMuybridge stayed with his mother in Kennington and later with his aunt while in England. Muybridge later stated that he had become a photographer at the suggestion of Gull. However, while outdoors photography might have helped in getting some fresh air, dragging around heavy equipment and working with chemicals in a dark room did not comply with the prescriptions for rest that Gull preferred to offer.\nOn 28 September 1860, \"E. Muggeridge, of New York\" applied for British patent no. 2352 for \"An improved method of, and apparatus for, plate printing\" via London solicitor August Frederick Sheppard.\nOn 1 August 1861, Muybridge received British patent no. 1914 for \"Improvements in machinery or apparatus for washing clothes and other textile articles\". On 28 October the French version of this patent was registered. He wrote a letter to his uncle Henry, who had immigrated to Sydney (Australia), with details of the patents and he also mentioned having to visit Europe for business for several months. Muybridge's inventions (or rather: improved machinery) were demonstrated at the 1862 International Exhibition.\nMuybridge's activities and whereabouts between 1862 and 1865 are not very well documented. He turned up in Paris in 1862 and again in 1864. In 1865 he was one of the directors for the Austin Consolidated Silver Mines Company (limited) and for The Ottoman Company (limited)/The Bank of Turkey (limited), under his new name \"Muybridge\". Both enterprises were very short-lived due to the Panic of 1866, and Muybridge chaired the meetings in which the companies were dissolved during the spring of 1866.\nMuybridge may have taken up photography sometime between 1861 and 1866. He possibly learned the wet-plate collodion process in England, and was possibly influenced by some of well-known English photographers of those years, such as Julia Margaret Cameron, Lewis Carroll, and Roger Fenton. However, it remains unclear how much he had already learned before the accident and how much he may have learned after his return to the United States.\n1867\u20131873: Helios, photographer of the American West.\nMuybridge returned to San Francisco on 13 February 1867 a changed man. Friends and associates later stated that he had changed from a smart and pleasant businessman into an eccentric artist. He was much more careless about his appearance, was easily agitated, could suddenly take objection to people and soon after act like nothing had happened, and he would regularly misstate previously-arranged business deals. His care about whether he judged something to be beautiful had become much stronger than his care for money; he easily refused payment if a customer seemed to be slightly critical of his work. Photographer Silas Selleck, who had known Muybridge from New York since circa 1852 and had been a close friend since 1855, claimed that he could hardly recognize Muybridge after his return.\nMuybridge converted a lightweight two-wheel, one-horse carriage into a portable darkroom to carry out his work, and with a logo on the back dubbed it \"Helios' Flying Studio\". He had acquired highly proficient technical skills and an artist's eye, and became very successful in photography, focusing principally on landscape and architectural subjects. An 1868 advertisement stated a wide scope of subjects: \"Helios is prepared to accept commissions to photograph Private Residences, Ranches, Mills, Views, Animals, Ships, etc., anywhere in the city, or any portion of the Pacific Coast. Architects', Surveyors' and Engineers' Drawings copied mathamatically (sic) correct. Photographic copies of Paintings and Works of Art.\"\nMuybridge constantly tinkered with his cameras and chemicals, trying to improve the sales appeal of his pictures. In 1869, he patented a \"sky shade\" to reduce the tendency of intense blue sky light to bleach out the images of the blue-sensitive photographic emulsions of the time. An article published in 2017 and an expanded book document that Muybridge heavily edited and modified his photos, inserting clouds or the moon, even adding volcanos to his pictures for artistic effects.\nSan Francisco views.\nHelios produced over 400 different stereograph cards, initially sold through Seleck's Cosmopolitan Gallery at 415 Montgomery Street, and later through other distributors, such as Bradley &amp; Rulofson. Many of these cards showed views of San Francisco and its surroundings. Stereo cards were extremely popular at the time and thus could be sold in large quantities for a very low price, to tourists as a souvenir, or to proud citizens and collectors.\nEarly in his new career, Muybridge was hired by Robert B. Woodward (1824\u20131879) to take extensive photos of his Woodward's Gardens, a combination amusement park, zoo, museum, and aquarium that had opened in San Francisco in 1866.\nMuybridge took pictures of ruins after the 21 October 1868 Hayward earthquake.\nDuring the construction of the San Francisco Mint in 1870\u20131872, Muybridge made a series of images of the building's progress, documenting changes over time in a fashion similar to time-lapse photography. These images may have attracted the attention of Leland Stanford, who would later hire Muybridge to develop an unprecedented series of photos spaced in time.\nYosemite.\nFrom June to November 1867, Muybridge visited Yosemite Valley. He took enormous safety risks to make his photographs, using a heavy view camera and stacks of glass plate negatives. A stereograph he published in 1872 shows him sitting casually on a projecting rock over the Yosemite Valley, with of empty space below him. He returned with numerous stereoscopic views and larger plates. He selected 20 pictures to be retouched and manipulated for a subscription series that he announced in February 1868. Twenty original photographs (possibly the same) were used to illustrate John S. Hittel's guide book \"Yosemite: Its Wonders and Its Beauties\" (1868).\nSome of the pictures were taken of the same scenes shot by his contemporary Carleton Watkins. Muybridge's photographs showed the grandeur and expansiveness of the West; if human figures were portrayed, they were dwarfed by their surroundings, as in Chinese landscape paintings. In comparing the styles of the two photographers, Watkins has been called \"a classicist, making serene, stately pictures of a still, eternal world of beauty\", while Muybridge was \"a romantic who sought out the uncanny, the unsettling, the uncertain\". In the 21st century there have been claims that many landscape photos attributed to Muybridge were actually made by or under the close guidance of Watkins, but these claims are disputed. Regardless, Muybridge started to develop his own leading-edge innovations in photography, especially in the capturing of ever-faster motion.\nGovernment commissions.\nAlaska.\nIn 1868, Muybridge was commissioned by the United States government to travel to the newly acquired United States territory of Alaska to photograph the Tlingit Native Americans, occasional Russian inhabitants, and dramatic landscapes.\nLighthouses of the West Coast.\nIn 1871, the United States Lighthouse Board hired Muybridge to photograph lighthouses of the American West Coast. From March to July, he travelled aboard the Lighthouse Tender \"Shubrick\" to document these structures.\nModoc War.\nIn 1873, Muybridge was commissioned by the US Army to photograph the \"Modoc War\" dispute with the Native American tribe in northern California and Oregon. A number of these photographs were carefully staged and posed for maximum effect, despite the long exposures required by the slow photographic emulsions of the time.\n1872\u20131879: Stanford and horse gaits.\nIn 1872, the former governor of California, Leland Stanford, a businessman and race-horse owner, hired Muybridge for a portfolio depicting his mansion and other possessions, including his racehorse Occident.\nStanford also wanted a proper picture of the horse at full speed, and was frustrated that the existing depictions and descriptions seemed incorrect. The human eye could not fully break down the action at the quick gaits of the trot and gallop. Up until this time, most artists painted horses at a trot with one foot always on the ground; and at a full gallop with the front legs extended forward and the hind legs extended to the rear, and all feet off the ground. There are stories that Stanford had made a $25,000 bet on his theories about horse locomotion, but no evidence has been found of such a wager. However, it has been estimated that Stanford spent a total of $50,000 over the next several years to fund his investigations.\nIn 1873, Muybridge managed to use a single camera to shoot a small and very fuzzy picture of the racehorse Occident running, at Union Park racetrack in Sacramento. Because of the insensitivity of the photographic emulsions used, early pictures were little more than blurry silhouettes. They both agreed that the image lacked quality, but Stanford was excited to finally have a reliable depiction of a running horse. No copy of this earliest image has yet resurfaced.\nMuybridge promised to study better solutions, but his work on higher-speed photography would take several years to develop, and was also delayed by events in his personal life. With the aid of engineers and technicians from the Central Pacific Railroad (Stanford was one of the founding directors), Muybridge experimented with ever-faster mechanical shutters, and began developing state-of-the-art electrically-triggered mechanisms. He also experimented with more sensitive photographic emulsions to work with the shorter exposure times.\nIn June 1878, Muybridge created sequential series of photographs, now with a battery of 12 cameras along the race track at Stanford's Palo Alto Stock Farm (now the campus of Stanford University). The shutters were automatically triggered when the wheel of a cart or the breast or legs of a horse tripped wires connected to an electromagnetic circuit. For a session on 15 June 1878, the press and a selection of turf men were invited to witness the process. An accident with a snapping strap was captured on the negatives and shown to the attendees, convincing even the most sceptical witnesses. The news of this success was reported worldwide.\nIn July 1877, Muybridge made a new picture of Occident at full speed, with improved techniques and a much clearer result. To enhance the still-fuzzy picture, he had it recreated by a retouch artist and published as a cabinet card. The news about this breakthrough in instantaneous photography was spread enthusiastically, but several critics believed that the heavily-manipulated image could not be a truthful depiction of the horse. Muybridge allowed reporters to study the original negative, but as he and Stanford were planning a new project that would convince everyone, they saw no need to prove that this image was authentic. The original negative has not yet resurfaced.\n\"The Daily Alta California\" reported that Muybridge first exhibited magic lantern projected slides of the photographs at the San Francisco Art Association on 8 July 1878. Newspapers were not yet able to reproduce detailed photographs, so the images were widely printed as woodcut engravings. \"Scientific American\" was among the publications at the time that carried reports and engravings of Muybridge's groundbreaking images. Six different series were soon published as cabinet cards, titled \"The Horse in Motion\".\nMany people were amazed at the previously unseen positions of the horse's legs in action, particularly the fact that a running horse had all four hooves in the air at regular intervals. This did not take place when the horse's legs were extended to the front and back, as imagined by illustrators of the time, but when its legs were collected beneath its body as it switched from \"pulling\" with the front legs to \"pushing\" with the back legs.\nIn 1879, Muybridge continued with additional studies using 24 cameras, and published a very limited edition portfolio of the results.\nMuybridge had images from his motion studies hand-copied in the form of silhouettes or line drawings onto a disc, to be viewed in the machine he had invented, which he called a \"zoopraxiscope\". Later, his more-detailed images were hand-coloured and marketed commercially. A device he developed was later regarded as an early movie projector, and the process was an intermediate stage toward motion pictures or cinematography.\n1878: San Francisco panorama.\nIn 1878, Muybridge made a notable 13-part 360\u00b0 photographic panorama of San Francisco. He presented a copy to the wife of Leland Stanford. Today, it can be viewed on the Internet as a seamlessly-spliced panorama, or as a QuickTime Virtual Reality (QTVR) panorama.\nThat same year, he applied for a patent on a camera sequence shutter to photograph moving objects, with a mechanical trigger. Later that year, he applied for a further patent, this time using an electrical trigger. He also filed for British and French patents.\n1871\u20131881: personal life, marriage, killing, acquittal, paternity, and divorce.\nOn 20 May 1871, 41-year-old Muybridge married 21-year-old divorcee Flora Shallcross Stone (n\u00e9e Downs). The differences in their tastes and temperaments were understood to have been due to their age difference. Muybridge did not care for many of the amusements that she sought, so she went to the theatre and other attractions without him, and he seemed to be fine with that. Muybridge was more of the type that would stay up all night to read classics. Muybridge was also used to leaving home for days, weeks or even months, visiting faraway places for personal projects or assignments. This did not change after his marriage.\nOn 14 April 1874 Flora gave birth to a son, Florado Helios Muybridge.\nAt some stage, Flora became romantically involved with one of their friends, Harry Larkyns. Muybridge intervened several times and believed the affair was over when he sent Flora to stay with a relative and Larkyns found a job at a mine near Calistoga, California. In mid-October 1874, Muybridge learned how serious the relationship between his wife and Larkyns really was. Flora's maternity nurse revealed many details and she had in her possession some love letters that the couple had still been writing to each other. At her place, Muybridge also came across a picture of Florado with \"Harry\" written on the back in Flora's handwriting, suggesting that she believed the child to be fathered by Larkyns.\nOn 17 October, Muybridge went to Calistoga to track down Larkyns. Upon finding him, Muybridge said, \"I have a message for you from my wife\", and shot him at point-blank range. Larkyns died that night, and Muybridge was arrested without protest and put in the Napa jail.\nA \"Sacramento Daily Union\" reporter visited Muybridge in jail for an hour and related how he was coping with the situation. Muybridge was in moderately good spirits and very hopeful. He felt he was treated very kindly by the officers and was a little proud of the influence he had on other inmates, which had earned him everyone's respect. He had protested the abuse of a \"Chinaman\" from a tough inmate, by claiming \"No man of any country whose misfortunes shall bring him here shall be abused in my presence\" and had strongly but politely voiced threats against the offender. He had addressed an outburst of profanity in a similar fashion.\nFlora filed for divorce on 17 December 1874 on the grounds of extreme cruelty, but this first petition was dismissed. It was reported that she fully sympathized with the prosecution of her husband.\nMuybridge was tried for murder in February 1875. His attorney, W. W. Pendegast (a friend of Stanford), pleaded insanity in his behalf due to a severe head injury suffered in the 1860 stagecoach accident. At least four long-time acquaintances testified under oath that the accident had dramatically changed Muybridge's personality, from genial and pleasant to unstable and erratic. During the trial, Muybridge undercut his own insanity case by indicating that his actions were deliberate and premeditated, but he also showed impassive indifference and uncontrolled explosions of emotion. In the end he was acquitted on the grounds of justifiable homicide, with the jury explanation that if their verdict was not in accordance with the law, it was in accordance with the law of human nature. In other words: they believed they could not punish a person for doing something that they would do in similar circumstances.\nThe episode interrupted his photography studies, but not his relationship with Stanford, who had arranged for his criminal defence. By 1877, Muybridge had resumed his photographic work for Stanford.\nShortly after his acquittal in February 1875, Muybridge left the United States on a previously planned nine-month photography trip to Central America, now acting as a \"working exile\". His photographs from this period are less known, because relatively few copies were produced. It is believed that during this period, he further developed his ability to take pictures more rapidly, due to the requirement that these processes be performed aboard a constantly-rolling ship.\nFlora's second petition for divorce received a favourable ruling, and an order for alimony was entered in April 1875. Flora died suddenly in July 1875 while Muybridge was in Central America. She had placed their son, Florado Helios Muybridge (later nicknamed \"Floddie\" by friends), with a French couple. In 1876, Muybridge had the boy moved from a Catholic orphanage to a Protestant one and paid for his care. Otherwise, he had little to do with him.\nPhotographs of Florado Muybridge as an adult show him to have strongly resembled Muybridge. Put to work on a ranch as a boy, he worked all his life as a ranch hand and gardener. In 1944, Florado was hit by a car in Sacramento and killed.\nToday, the court case and transcripts are important to historians and forensic neurologists, because of the sworn testimony from multiple witnesses regarding Muybridge's state of mind and past behaviour.\nIn 1982, American composer Philip Glass would create an opera, \"The Photographer\", with a libretto based in part on court transcripts from the case.\n1882\u20131893: motion studies in Philadelphia.\nMuybridge often travelled to American cities as well as back to England and Europe to publicise his work. The opening of the first transcontinental railroad in 1869 and the development of steamships made travel much faster and less arduous than it was in 1860. On 13 March 1882 he lectured at the Royal Institution in London in front of a sell-out audience, which included members of the Royal Family, notably the future King Edward VII. He displayed his photographs on screen and showed moving pictures projected by his zoopraxiscope. He also lectured at the Royal Academy of Arts and the Royal Society.\nMuybridge and Stanford had a major falling-out concerning his research on equine locomotion. Stanford had asked his friend and horseman Dr JBD Stillman to write a book analysing \"The Horse in Motion\", which was published in 1882. Stillman used Muybridge's photos as the basis for his 100 illustrations, and the photographer's research for the analysis, but he gave Muybridge no prominent credit. The historian Phillip Prodger later suggested that Stanford considered Muybridge as just one of his employees, and not deserving of special recognition. Stanford was quite proud of his role in creating the book, and commissioned a portrait of himself by Jean-Louis-Ernest Meissonier, in which a copy of the volume was visible under his arm.\nHowever, as a result of Muybridge not being credited in the book, the Royal Society of Arts withdrew an offer to fund his stop-motion studies in photography, and refused to publish a paper he had submitted, accusing him of plagiarism. Muybridge filed a lawsuit against Stanford to gain credit, but it was delayed two years and then dismissed out of court. Stillman's book did not sell as expected. Muybridge, looking elsewhere for funding, was more successful. The Royal Society of Arts eventually invited Muybridge back to show his work. His 1882 \"The Kiss\", in which two naked women kiss, is thought to be the first kiss ever caught on camera.\nIn 1883, Muybridge gave a lecture at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts (PAFA), arranged by artist Thomas Eakins and University of Pennsylvania trustee Fairman Rogers. At that time, Eakins was a faculty member at PAFA, and had recently been appointed its director. A group of Philadelphians, including Penn Provost William Pepper and the publisher J.\u00a0B. Lippincott recruited him to work at Penn under their sponsorship. Between 1883 and 1886, Muybridge made more than 100,000 images, working obsessively in a dedicated studio at the northeast corner of 36th and Pine streets in Philadelphia. He was now able to afford multiple larger high-quality lenses, giving him the ability to make simultaneous pictures from multiple viewpoints, with a clarity and tonal range not achieved earlier.\nIn 1884, Eakins briefly worked alongside Muybridge, to learn more about the application of photography to the study of human and animal motion. Eakins later favoured the use of multiple exposures superimposed on a single photographic negative to study motion more precisely, while Muybridge continued to use multiple cameras to produce separate images which could also be projected by his zoopraxiscope.\nThe vast majority of Muybridge's work at this time was done at a special sunlit outdoor studio, due to the still-bulky cameras and relatively slow photographic emulsion speeds then available. Most of the photographs were taken during the summers, and winters were spent developing and organizing the images. He used banks of 12 custom-made cameras to photograph professors, athletes, students, disabled patients from the Blockley Almshouse (located next to Penn at the time), and local residents, all in motion. He photographed at least 9 sequences showing the movements of neurological patients. He also borrowed animals from the Philadelphia Zoo, to study their movements in detail.\nThe human models, usually either entirely nude or very lightly clothed, were photographed against a measured grid background in a variety of action sequences, including walking up or down stairs, hammering on an anvil, carrying buckets of water, or throwing water over one another. Muybridge produced sequences showing farm, industrial, construction, and household work, military manoeuvres, and everyday activities. He also photographed athletic activities such as baseball, cricket, boxing, wrestling, discus throwing, and a ballet dancer performing. Showing a single-minded dedication to scientific accuracy and artistic composition, Muybridge himself posed nude for some of the photographic sequences, such as one showing him swinging a pickaxe. Toward the end of this period, Muybridge spent much of his time selecting and editing his photos in preparation for publication.\nIn 1887, the photos were published as a massive collotype portfolio in 11 volumes, with 781 plates comprising 20,000 of the photographs, in a groundbreaking collection titled \"Animal Locomotion: An Electro-photographic Investigation of Consecutive Phases of Animal Movements\". Muybridge's work contributed substantially to developments in the science of biomechanics and the mechanics of athletics. Some of his books are still published today, and are used as references by artists, animators, and students of animal and human movement.\nIn 1888, the University of Pennsylvania donated an album of Muybridge's photographs, which featured students and Philadelphia Zoo animals, to the sultan of the Ottoman Empire, Abdul Hamid II, who had a keen interest in photography. This gift may have helped to secure permissions for the excavations that scholars from the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology later pursued in the Ottoman region of Mesopotamia (now Iraq), notably at the site of Nippur. The Ottoman sultan reciprocated, five years later, by sending as a gift to the United States a collection of photograph albums featuring Ottoman scenes: the Library of Congress now preserves these albums as the Abdul Hamid II Collection.\nRecent scholarship has noted that in his later work, Muybridge was influenced by, and in turn, influenced the French photographer \u00c9tienne-Jules Marey. In 1881, Muybridge first visited Marey's studio in France and viewed stop-motion studies before returning to the US to further his own work in the same area. Marey was a pioneer in producing multiple-exposure, sequential images using a rotary shutter in his so-called \"Marey wheel\" camera.\nWhile Marey's scientific achievements in the realms of cardiology and aerodynamics (as well as pioneering work in photography and chronophotography) are indisputable, Muybridge's efforts were to some degree more artistic rather than scientific. As Muybridge explained, in some of his published sequences he had substituted images where original exposures had failed, in order to illustrate a representative movement (rather than producing a strictly scientific recording of a particular sequence).\nToday, similar setups of carefully timed multiple cameras are used in modern special effects photography, but they have the opposite goal of capturing changing camera angles, with little or no movement of the subject. This is often dubbed \"bullet time\" photography.\nAfter his work at the University of Pennsylvania, Muybridge travelled widely and gave numerous lectures and demonstrations of his still photography and primitive motion picture sequences. At the Chicago World's Columbian Exposition of 1893, Muybridge presented a series of lectures on the \"Science of Animal Locomotion\" in the Zoopraxographical Hall, built specially for that purpose in the \"Midway Plaisance\" arm of the exposition. He used his zoopraxiscope to show his moving pictures to a paying public. The Hall was the first commercial movie theatre. He also sold a series of souvenir phenakistiscope discs to demonstrate simple animations, using painted colour images derived from his photographs.\n1894\u20131904: retirement and death.\nMuybridge returned to his native England in 1894 and continued to lecture extensively throughout Great Britain. He returned to the US once more, in 1896\u20131897, to settle financial affairs and to dispose of property related to his work at the University of Pennsylvania. He retained control of his negatives, which he used to publish two popular books of his work, \"Animals in Motion\" (1899) and \"The Human Figure in Motion\" (1901), both of which remain in print over a century later.\nMuybridge died on 8 May 1904 in Kingston upon Thames of prostate cancer at the home of his cousin Catherine Smith. It is claimed that at that time, he was excavating a scale model of the American Great Lakes in the back garden. His body was cremated and his ashes interred in a grave at Woking in Surrey. On the gravestone his name is misspelled as \"Eadweard Maybridge\".\nIn 2004, a British Film Institute commemorative plaque was installed on the outside wall of the former Smith house, at Park View, 2 Liverpool Road. Many of his papers and collected artefacts were donated to Kingston Library, and are currently under the ownership of Kingston Museum in his place of birth.\nInfluence on others.\nAccording to an exhibition at Tate Britain, \"His influence has forever changed our understanding and interpretation of the world, and can be found in many diverse fields, from Marcel Duchamp's painting \"Nude Descending a Staircase\" and countless works by Francis Bacon, to the blockbuster film \"The Matrix\" and Philip Glass's opera \"The Photographer\"\".\nIn 2010, the American painter Philip Pearlstein published an article in \"ARTnews\" suggesting the strong influences Muybridge's work and public lectures had on 20th-century artists, including Edgar Degas, Auguste Rodin, Georges Seurat, Marcel Duchamp, and Thomas Eakins, either directly or through the contemporaneous work of his fellow photographic pioneer, Marey. He concluded: \"I believe that both Muybridge and Eakins\u2014as a photographer\u2014should be recognized as among the most influential artists on the ideas of 20th-century art, along with Paul C\u00e9zanne, whose lessons in fractured vision provided the technical basis for putting those ideas together\".\nExhibitions and collections.\nMuybridge bequeathed a selection of his equipment to Kingston Museum in Greater London. This includes his original biunial slide lantern, a zoopraxiscope projector, over 2,000 glass magic lantern slides and 67 zoopraxiscope discs. The University of Pennsylvania Archives in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, hold a large collection of Muybridge's photographs, equipment, and correspondence. Among these artefacts are 740 of the 781 original glass plate negatives used for publication of his masterwork edition.\nThe Philadelphia Museum of Art also holds a large collection of Muybridge material, including hundreds of collotype prints, gelatin internegatives, glass plate positives, phenakistiscope cards, and camera equipment, totalling just under 800 objects. The Stanford University Libraries and the Iris and B. Gerald Cantor Center for Visual Arts at Stanford University also maintain a large collection of Muybridge's photographs, glass plate negatives, and some equipment including a functioning zoopraxiscope.\nIn 1991, the Addison Gallery of American Art at Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts, hosted a major exhibition of Muybridge's work, plus the works of many other artists who had been influenced by him. The show later travelled to other venues and a book-length exhibition catalogue was also published. The Addison Gallery has significant holdings of Muybridge's photographic work.\nIn 1993, the Canadian Centre for Architecture presented the exhibition \"Eadweard Muybridge and the Photographic Panorama of San Francisco, 1850\u20131880\".\nIn 2000\u20132001, the Smithsonian Institution National Museum of American History presented the exhibition \"Freeze Frame: Eadweard Muybridge's Photography of Motion\", plus an online virtual exhibit.\nFrom 10 April to 18 July 2010, the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., mounted a major retrospective of Muybridge's work titled \"Helios: Eadweard Muybridge in a Time of Change\". The exhibit received favourable reviews from major publications including \"The New York Times\". The exhibition travelled in autumn 2010 to Tate Britain, Millbank, London, and also appeared at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (SFMOMA).\nAn exhibition of important items bequeathed by Muybridge to his birthplace of Kingston upon Thames, titled \"Muybridge Revolutions\", opened at the Kingston Museum on 18 September 2010 (exactly a century since the first Muybridge exhibition at the Museum) and ran until 12 February 2011. The full collection is held by the Museum and Archives.\nLegacy and representation in other media.\nMuybridge's influence extended to many artists and beyond, including efficiency expert Frank Gilbreth, entrepreneur Walt Disney, Nobel-Prize chemist Ahmed Zewail, and the International Society of Biomechanics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "60116", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60116", "title": "George Eastman", "text": "American entrepreneur, inventor, and photographer (1854\u20131932)\nGeorge Eastman (July 12, 1854\u00a0\u2013 March 14, 1932) was an American innovator and entrepreneur who founded the Eastman Kodak Company and helped to bring the photographic use of roll film into the mainstream. After a decade of experiments in photography, he patented and sold a roll film camera, making amateur photography accessible to the general public for the first time. Working as the treasurer and later president of Kodak, he oversaw the expansion of the company and the film industry.\nEastman was a major philanthropist, establishing the Eastman School of Music, Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra, and schools of dentistry and medicine at the University of Rochester and Eastman Dental Hospital at University College London, and making large contributions to the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), the construction of several buildings at the second campus of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) on the Charles River, and Tuskegee University and Hampton University, two historically black universities in the South. With interests in improving health, he provided funds for clinics in London and other European cities to serve low-income residents.\nIn his final two years, Eastman was in intense pain caused by a disorder affecting his spine. On March 14, 1932, he shot himself in the heart, leaving a note which read, \"To my friends: my work is done. Why wait?\"\nEastman is regarded as one of the most influential and well-known residents of Rochester, New York. He has been commemorated on several college campuses and the Hollywood Walk of Fame, and the George Eastman Museum has been designated a National Historic Landmark.\nEarly life.\nEastman was born in Waterville, New York, as the youngest child of George Washington Eastman and Maria Eastman (n\u00e9e Kilbourn), at the farm which his parents had bought in 1849. He had two older sisters, Ellen Maria and Katie. He was largely self-educated, although he attended a private school in Rochester after the age of eight.\nIn the early 1840s, his father had started a business school, the Eastman Commercial College in Rochester, New York. The city became one of the first \"boomtowns\" in the United States, based on its rapid industrialization. As his father's health started deteriorating, the family gave up the farm and moved to Rochester in 1860. His father died of a brain disorder on April 27, 1862. To survive and afford George's schooling, his mother took in boarders.\nThe second daughter, Katie, had contracted polio when young and died in late 1870 when George was 15 years old. The young George left school early and started working to help support the family. As Eastman began to have success with his photography business, he vowed to repay his mother for the hardships she had endured in raising him.\nCareer.\nFounding of Kodak.\nWhile working as a bank clerk in the 1870s, Eastman became interested in photography. After receiving lessons from George Monroe and George Selden, he developed a machine for coating dry plates in 1879. In 1881, he founded the Eastman Dry Plate Company with Henry Strong to sell plates, with Strong as company president and Eastman as treasurer, where he handled most executive functions. Around the same time, he began experiments to create a flexible film roll that could replace plates altogether. In 1885, he received a patent for a film roll and then focused on creating a camera to use the rolls. In 1888, he patented and released the Kodak camera (\"Kodak\" being a word Eastman created). It was sold loaded with enough roll film for 100 exposures. When all the exposures had been made, the photographer mailed the camera back to the Eastman company in Rochester, along with $10. The company would process the film, make a print of each exposure, load another roll of film into the camera, and send the camera and the prints to the photographer.\nThe separation of photo-taking from the difficult process of film development was novel and made photography more accessible to amateurs than ever before, and the camera was immediately popular with the public. By August 1888, Eastman was struggling to meet orders, and he and his employees soon had several other cameras in development. The rapidly-growing Eastman Dry Plate Company was reorganized as the Eastman Company in 1889, and then incorporated as Eastman Kodak in 1892.\nGrowth of film industry.\nEastman recognized that most of his revenue would come from the sale of additional film rolls, rather than camera sales, and focused on film production. By providing quality and affordable film to every camera manufacturer, Kodak managed to turn competitors into \"de facto\" business partners. In 1889 he patented the processes for the first nitrocellulose film along with chemist Henry Reichenbach. Several patent infringement lawsuits would preoccupy Eastman and his lawyers in subsequent years, including one from Reichenbach after he was fired in 1892. The largest lawsuit would come from rival film producer Ansco. Inventor Hannibal Goodwin had filed a patent for nitrocellulose film in 1887, before Eastman and Reichenbach's, but it was not granted until 1898. Ansco purchased the patent in 1900 and sued Kodak for infringement. Kodak ultimately lost the suit, which lasted over a decade and cost the company $5 Million.\nEastman paid close attention to Kodak's advertisements. He coined the slogan, \"You press the button, we do the rest\", which became ubiquitous in the general public.\nAs Kodak pursued a monopoly on film through patents and acquisitions, the company experienced rapid growth. By 1896, Kodak was the leading supplier of film stock internationally, and by 1915, the company was the largest employer in Rochester, with over 8,000 employees and annual earnings of $15.7 million. In 1934, shortly after Eastman's death, Kodak employed 23,000. One of the largest markets for film became the emerging motion picture industry. When Thomas Edison and other film producers formed the Motion Picture Patents Company in 1908, Eastman negotiated for Kodak to be the sole supplier of film to the industry. His monopolistic actions attracted the attention of the federal government, which began an anti-trust investigation into Kodak in 1911 for exclusive contracts, acquisitions of competitors, and price-fixing. This resulted in a lawsuit against Kodak in 1913 and a final judgment in 1921, ordering Kodak to stop fixing prices and sell many of its interests.\nKodak's growth was sustained during the 20th century by innovations in film and cameras, including the Brownie camera, which was marketed to children. Eastman took interest in color photography in 1904, and funded experiments in color film production for the next decade. The resulting product, created by John Capstaff, was a two-color process named Kodachrome. Later, in 1935, Kodak would release the more famous second Kodachrome, the first marketed integral tripack film. During World War I, Eastman established a photographic school in Rochester to train pilots for aerial reconnaissance.\nIn an era of growing trade union activities, Eastman sought to counter the union movement by anticipating worker demands. To this end, he implemented several worker benefit programs, including a welfare fund to provide workmen's compensation in 1910 and a profit-sharing program for all employees in 1912.\nPersonal life.\nEastman never married. He was close to his mother and to his sister Ellen Maria and her family. He had a long platonic relationship with Josephine Dickman, a trained singer and the wife of business associate George Dickman. He became especially close to Dickman after the death of his mother, Maria Eastman, in 1907. He was also an avid traveler, enjoyed music and social gatherings, and had a passion for playing the piano.\nThe loss of his mother, Maria, was particularly crushing to George. Almost pathologically concerned with decorum, he found himself, for the first time, unable to control his emotions in the presence of his friends. \"When my mother died, I cried all day\", he said later. \"I could not have stopped to save my life.\" Due to his mother's reluctance to accept his gifts, Eastman could never do enough for his mother during her lifetime. He continued to honor her after her death. On September 4, 1922, he opened the Eastman Theatre in Rochester, which included a chamber-music hall, Kilbourn Theater, dedicated to his mother's memory. At the Eastman House, he maintained a rose bush, using a cutting from her childhood home.\nLater years.\nEastman was a presidential elector in 1900 and 1916. In 1915, Eastman founded the Bureau of Municipal Research in Rochester to gather information and make government policy recommendations. The agency was later renamed the Center for Governmental Research and continues to carry out that mission. In 1924, Eastman and the Bureau supported a referendum to change Rochester's government to a city manager system, which passed.\nIn 1920, Eastman established the Eastman Savings and Loan to provide financial services to Kodak employees. The institution was later rechartered as ESL Federal Credit Union.\nIn the 1920s, Eastman was involved in calendar reform and supported the 13-month per year International Fixed Calendar developed by Moses B. Cotsworth. On January 17, 1925, Eastman invited Cotsworth to his home; he had been introduced to Cotsworth's calendar by a mutual friend and was interested in the system. He secretly funded Cotsworth for a year and then openly supported him and the 13-month plan. Eastman took a major role in planning and financing the campaign for a new global calendar, and also headed the National Committee on Calendar Simplification in the United States, which was created at the behest of the League of Nations. Eastman supported Cotsworth's campaign until his death. \nEastman wrote several articles to promote the 13-month system, including \"Problems of Calendar Improvement\" in \"Scientific American\" and \"The Importance of Calendar Reform to the Business World\" in \"Nation's Business\". By 1928, the Kodak Company implemented the calendar in its business bookkeeping, and continued to use it until 1989. He was chairman of the National Committee on Calendar Simplification. Although a conference was held at the League of Nations in 1931, with his death and the looming tensions of World War II, this calendar was dropped from consideration.\nIn 1925, Eastman gave up his daily management of Kodak and officially retired as president. He remained associated with the company in a business executive capacity, as the chairman of the board, until his death.\nPhilanthropy.\nDuring his lifetime, Eastman donated $100\u00a0million to various organizations, becoming one of the major philanthropists in the United States during his lifetime. His largest donations went to the University of Rochester and to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to build their programs and facilities. Preferring to remain anonymous, he made donations under the alias \"Mr. Smith\". In 1918, he endowed the establishment of the Eastman School of Music at the University of Rochester, and in 1921, a school of medicine and dentistry there. In 1922, he founded the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra, hiring its first music director Albert Coates. Figured for its value in 1932, the year of Eastman's death, $100 million is equivalent to more than $2 billion in 2022.\nIn 1915, Eastman provided funds for the establishment of the Eastman Dental Dispensary in Rochester. He donated \u00a3200,000 in 1926 to fund a dental clinic in London after being approached by the chairman of the Royal Free Hospital, George Riddell, 1st Baron Riddell. Donations of \u00a350,000 each had been made by Lord Riddell and the Royal Free honorary treasurer. On November 20, 1931, the UCL Eastman Dental Institute opened in a ceremony attended by Neville Chamberlain, then Minister of Health, and the American Ambassador to the UK. The clinic was incorporated into the Royal Free Hospital and was committed to providing dental care for disadvantaged children from central London. It is now a part of University College London. In 1929 he founded the George Eastman Visiting Professorship at Oxford, to be held each year by a different American scholar of the highest distinction. Eastman also funded Eastmaninstitutet, a dental care clinic for children opened in 1937 in Stockholm, Sweden.\nViews on race.\nMarion Gleason, a close confidante of Eastman, later described his views on African Americans as \"typical of his time \u2013 paternalistic, but strictly against social fraternization.\" Although he made generous donations to the Hampton Institute and Tuskegee Institute, becoming their largest donor in his era, he also upheld and reinforced the de facto segregation which existed in Rochester. Kodak hired virtually no black employees during Eastman's lifetime, and a 1939 commission of the New York State Legislature on living conditions of African Americans found that Kodak had only a single black employee. The Eastman Dental Dispensary also rejected black applicants, and the Eastman Theater restricted black patrons to its balcony. Eastman rejected several requests to meet with NAACP representatives, including a direct appeal from president Walter White in 1929.\nFrom 1925 until his death, Eastman donated $10,000 per year to the American Eugenics Society (increasing the donation to $15,000 in 1932), a popular cause among many of the upper class when there were concerns about immigration and \"race mixing\".\nInfirmity and suicide.\nIn his final two years, Eastman was in intense pain due to a disorder affecting his spine. He had trouble standing, and his walk became a slow shuffle. Today, it might be diagnosed as a form of degenerative disease such as disc herniations from trauma or age causing either painful nerve root compressions, or perhaps a type of lumbar spinal stenosis, a narrowing of the spinal canal caused by calcification in the vertebrae. Since his mother suffered during the final two years of her life in a wheelchair, she also may have had a spine condition, but that is uncertain. Only her uterine cancer and successful surgery are documented in her health history.\nAs a result of his pain, Eastman suffered from depression. On March 14, 1932, Eastman died by suicide with a single gunshot through the heart. His suicide note read, \"To my friends, my work is done \u2013 Why wait? GE.\"\nRaymond Granger, an insurance salesman in Rochester, was visiting to collect insurance payments from several members of the staff. He arrived at the scene to find the workforce shocked and upset. At least one chronicler said that Eastman's fear of senility or other debilitating diseases of old age was a contributing factor to his action.\nEastman's funeral was held at St. Paul's Episcopal Church in Rochester; his coffin was carried out to Charles Gounod's \"Marche Romaine\". It was buried in the grounds of the company he founded, at what is now known as Eastman Business Park.\nThe Security Trust Company of Rochester was the executor of Eastman's estate. His entire estate was bequeathed to the University of Rochester.\nLegacy.\nEastman disdained public notoriety and sought to tightly control his image. He was reluctant to share information in interviews, and on multiple occasions, both Eastman and Kodak blocked biographers from full access to his records. A definitive biography was finally published in 1996.\nEastman is the only person represented by two stars in the Film category in the Hollywood Walk of Fame, one on the north side of the 6800 block of Hollywood Boulevard and the other on the west side of the 1700 block of Vine Street. Both recognize the same achievement, that he developed bromide paper, which became a standard of the film industry.\nThe Eastman Quadrangle of the River Campus of the University of Rochester is named for Eastman. The Rochester Institute of Technology has a building dedicated to him, in recognition of his support and substantial donations. MIT installed a on one of the buildings he funded. (Students rub the nose of Eastman's image on the plaque for good luck.)\nEastman had built a mansion at 900 East Avenue in Rochester. Here, he entertained friends to dinner and held private music concerts. The University of Rochester used the mansion for various purposes for decades after his death. In 1949, it re-opened after having been adapted for use as the George Eastman House International Museum of Photography and Film. It has been designated a National Historic Landmark, and is now known as the George Eastman Museum.\nEastman's boyhood home was saved from destruction. It was restored to its state during his childhood and is displayed at the Genesee Country Village and Museum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60117", "revid": "23551833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60117", "title": "Juno Beach", "text": "Code name for an amphibious landing zone on D-Day\nJuno Beach was one of five beaches of the Allied invasion of German-occupied France in the Normandy landings on 6 June 1944 during the Second World War. The beach spanned from Courseulles, a village just east of the British beach Gold, to Saint-Aubin-sur-Mer, and just west of the British beach Sword. Taking Juno was the responsibility of the British Second Army with the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division landing as the assault force, transported and supported by a Royal Navy task force. The objectives on D-Day were to cut the Caen-Bayeux road, seize the Carpiquet airport west of Caen, and form a link between the two British beaches on either flank.\nThe invasion plan called for two brigades of the 3rd Canadian Division to land on two beach sectors\u2014Mike and Nan\u2014focusing on Courseulles, Berni\u00e8res and Saint-Aubin. It was hoped that the preliminary naval and air bombardments would soften up the beach defences and destroy coastal strong points. Close support on the beaches was to be provided by amphibious tanks of the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade and specialized armoured vehicles of the 79th Armoured Division of the United Kingdom. Once the landing zones were secured, the plan called for the 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade to land reserve battalions and deploy inland, the Royal Marine commandos to establish contact with the British 3rd Infantry Division on Sword and the 7th Canadian Infantry Brigade to link up with the British 50th Infantry Division on Gold. The 3rd Canadian Division's D-Day objectives were to capture Carpiquet Airfield and reach the Caen\u2013Bayeux railway line by nightfall. The beach was defended by two battalions of the German 716th Infantry Division, with elements of the 21st Panzer Division held in reserve near Caen.\nThe landings encountered heavy resistance from the German 716th Division; the preliminary bombardment proved less effective than had been hoped, and rough weather forced the first wave to be delayed until 07:35. Several assault companies\u2014notably those of the Royal Winnipeg Rifles and the Queen's Own Rifles of Canada\u2014took heavy casualties in the opening minutes of the first wave. Strength of numbers, coordinated fire support from artillery, and armoured squadrons cleared most of the coastal defences within two hours of landing. The reserves of the 7th and 8th brigades began deploying at 08:30 (along with the Royal Marines), while the 9th Brigade began its deployment at 11:40.\nThe subsequent push inland towards Carpiquet and the Caen\u2013Bayeux railway line achieved mixed results. The sheer numbers of men and vehicles on the beaches created lengthy delays between the landing of the 9th Brigade and the beginning of substantive attacks to the south. The 7th Brigade encountered heavy initial opposition before pushing south and making contact with the British 50th Division at Creully. The 8th Brigade encountered heavy resistance from a battalion of the 716th at Tailleville, while the 9th Brigade deployed towards Carpiquet early in the evening. Resistance in Saint-Aubin prevented the Royal Marines from establishing contact with the British 3rd Division on Sword. By the time all operations on the Anglo-Canadian front were ordered to halt at 21:00, the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division had succeeded in pushing farther inland than any other landing force on D-Day.\nBackground.\nInvasion of Normandy.\nIn 1942, the Western Allies agreed to open a second front (the Western Front) in Western Europe to take pressure off the beleaguered Red Army in the Soviet Union. While Britain and the United States did not yet possess the resources to mount a full invasion, invasion plans that came to be known as Operation Sledgehammer were drawn up, in case the German position in Western Europe weakened or the USSR's situation became dire. In August 1942 Anglo-Canadian forces attempted an abortive landing\u2014Operation Jubilee\u2014at the French port of Dieppe; the landing was designed to test the feasibility of a cross-channel invasion. The attack was poorly planned and ended in disaster; 4,963 soldiers were killed, wounded or captured. Following the Anglo-American victory against Field Marshal Erwin Rommel in North Africa in May 1943, British, American and Canadian troops invaded Sicily in July 1943, followed by Italy in September. By December the Allies' progress had slowed facing tenacious German resistance and the difficult geography of the Italian Peninsula.\nAfter gaining valuable experience in amphibious assaults and inland fighting, Allied planners returned to the plans to invade Northern France, now postponed to 1944. Under the direction of General Dwight D. Eisenhower (Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force) and Frederick Morgan, plans for the invasion of France coalesced as Operation Overlord. With an initial target date of 1 May 1944, the infantry attack was conceived as a joint assault by five divisions transported by landing craft, constituting the largest amphibious operation in military history. The attack was later scheduled for Monday, 6 June 1944, and Normandy was selected for the landing sites, with a zone of operations extending from the Cotentin Peninsula to Caen. There were originally seventeen sectors along the Normandy coastline with code names taken from one of the spelling alphabets of the time, from Able, west of Omaha, to Rodger on the east flank of the invasion area. Eight further sectors were added when the planned invasion was extended to include Utah on the Cotentin Peninsula. Sectors were further subdivided into beaches identified by the colours Green, Red and White. Operation Overlord called for the British Second Army to assault between the River Orne and Port en Bessin, capture Caen, and form a front line from Caumont-l'\u00c9vent\u00e9 to the south-east of Caen, to acquire airfields and protect the left flank of the United States First Army while it captured Cherbourg. Possession of Caen and its surroundings would give Second Army a suitable staging area for a push south to capture the city of Falaise, which could then be used as a pivot for a swing left to advance on Argentan, the Touques River and then towards the River Seine.\nAfter delays due to both logistical difficulties and poor weather, the D-Day of Overlord, the largest amphibious operation ever, was postponed 24 hours to 6 June 1944. Eisenhower and Montgomery, commander of 21st Army Group, aimed to capture Caen within the first day, and liberate Paris within 90 days.\nJuno.\nOperation Neptune, the landing phase of Overlord, called for a five-division front spread across of coastline; three airborne divisions (two American, one British, which also included a Canadian battalion) would also land in the pre-dawn hours of D-Day. Eisenhower and General Bernard Montgomery hoped to have eight infantry divisions and fourteen tank regiments in the Normandy beachhead by nightfall on D-Day. The landing zone was divided into five landing areas, with the Americans attacking Utah (the westernmost) and Omaha, and the British attacking Gold and Sword. Juno, a stretch of shoreline between La Rivi\u00e8re to the west and Saint-Aubin to the east, was assigned to the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division (3rd CID), commanded by Major-General Rod Keller. Juno included the villages of Courseulles and Berni\u00e8res.\nIt has been said the name \"Juno\" arose because Winston Churchill considered that an original code name \u2013 Jelly \u2013 sounded inappropriate. The code names for the beaches to be taken by British and Commonwealth forces were named after types of fish: Goldfish, Swordfish and Jellyfish, abbreviated to Gold, Sword and Jelly. Churchill \"disapproved of the name Jelly for a beach on which so many men might die\". It has subsequently been proven that the name Jelly was never considered, and Juno was chosen so as to use the initial letter of the naval task force assigned to the area.\nPlanning and preparation.\nGerman defences.\nWhile the German army had seen its strength and morale heavily depleted by campaigns in the Soviet Union, North Africa and Italy, it remained a powerful fighting force. Despite this, most of the German divisions along the French coast in late 1943 were composed of either new recruits or veteran units resting and rebuilding from the Eastern Front; altogether some 856,000 soldiers were stationed in France, predominantly on the coast. An additional 60,000 (voluntary helpers), USSR and Polish members of the German army, served on the French coast. Under the command of Field Marshals Erwin Rommel and Gerd von Rundstedt, the defences of the Atlantic Wall \u2013 a line of coastal gun emplacements, machine-gun nests, minefields and beach obstacles along the French coast \u2013 were increased; in the first six months of 1944, the Germans laid of steel and of concrete. Rommel also surrounded the coast with four million anti-tank and anti-personnel mines and 500,000 beach obstacles.\nOn Juno, the defences of the Atlantic Wall were greater than at many other landing sectors. The Germans assumed that the Allies would land during high tide, to minimize the distance during which they would be exposed on the beaches and created \"a 'devil's garden' of beach obstacles ... deployed in rows between above the low-tide mark\". Strongpoints of machine-gun positions, antitank and anti-personnel artillery and bunkers were located every , manned by several platoons with mortars. Minefields were deployed surrounding these strongpoints, and additional defences were present in the Courseulles harbour.\nThe Calvados beaches of Normandy were defended by the 716th Static and 352nd Infantry divisions, with the Canadian landing zone defended by elements of the 716th. It was formed mostly from soldiers under 18 or over 35, comprising 7,771 combat troops in six battalions (as opposed to 9 or 12 battalions of Allied divisions). While the 352nd was considered a first-rate division, the 716th was \"accounted a better-than-average static division\". These divisions generally had very few vehicles or tanks and had to rely on infantry and field regiments. On Juno the 736th Grenadier Regiment deployed four infantry companies, 7 \"Kompanie\" held what was to become \"Mike Sector\", the 6th was stationed in Courseulles, the 5th was at Berni\u00e8res and the 9th held Nan sector and Saint-Aubin. A second line of four infantry companies and one panzer company was stationed inland. The 21st Panzer Division was deployed south-east of Caen and two battalions of Polish and Russian conscripts were stationed on the flanks of Juno adjacent to Sword and Gold.\nCanadian preparations.\nCanadian training for D-Day had begun as early as July 1943, when Lieutenant-General Andrew McNaughton, the military representative of the Canadian government, informed Harry Crerar, commander of I Canadian Corps, that the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division might play a role in the invasion of France. Initial training was demanding, and complicated by the lack of any landing craft to practice with, either LCAs or LCTs. Field exercises in Scotland commenced in August and September 1943, and succeeded in establishing unique techniques and equipment for use by armoured and artillery regiments in storming the beach; the most significant were the amphibious \"Duplex Drive\" tanks (DD tanks). Mechanisms were also developed to allow artillery to bombard the beach while still aboard their landing craft. Through the winter of 1944, units jointly developed more advanced assault tactics among the Juno regiments.\nThe landings would be supported by the largest invasion fleet in history \u2013 7,016 vessels in total. Naval Force J had begun intense training for the invasion with the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division in February 1944, with a full-scale simulation of the invasion carried out on 4 May in Exercise Fabius. On D-Day itself, Force J, commanded from , was to bombard German defensive positions along the landing zone with everything from heavy-calibre cruiser guns to self-propelled artillery attached to landing craft. According to Canadian Army Historian C. P. Stacey, a light bombardment of the landing zone would commence \"30 minutes before H Hour and continue for 15 minutes; heavy bombing would then begin on the flanks of the divisional attack, lasting until H Hour\". Additional cover would be provided by Royal and Royal Canadian Air Force squadrons both before and on D-Day. A successful surprise invasion required total air superiority over the English Channel and Normandy. In the months preceding D-Day, the RAF Second Tactical Air Force attacked airfields, coastal garrisons, radar, railway lines and transport routes in order to soften the beach defences, as well as prevent the German Luftwaffe from mounting a serious challenge to air superiority over Normandy. By dawn, on 6 June, the RAF tactical air forces had 2,434 fighter and fighter-bomber aircraft with approximately 700 light and medium bombers to support them.\nThe operational plan for Juno was divided into two main sectors: Mike (west) and Nan (east). Mike Sector would be attacked by the 7th Canadian Infantry Brigade, with the Royal Winnipeg Rifles, The Canadian Scottish Regiment and the 1st Hussars in support. The 7th Brigade was to take Courseulles and drive inland. Nan Sector would be assaulted by the Regina Rifle Regiment of 7th Brigade, as well as the North Shore Regiment and the Queen's Own Rifles of Canada of the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade, while tanks of the Fort Garry Horse provided armoured support; a squadron of specialized Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers (AVRE) from the British 79th Armoured Division would land on each beach sector as well. The 8th Brigade was to capture Berni\u00e8res and the western edge of Saint-Aubin, then push south into Normandy. The operational plan also called for the 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade and the Sherbrooke Fusiliers to be deployed to Juno as reinforcements within 4 to 6 hours of the initial assault. By nightfall of D-Day, the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division was slated to have captured the high ground west of Caen, the Bayeux\u2013Caen railway line, and the seaside towns of Courseulles, Berni\u00e8res, Saint-Aubin and B\u00e9ny-sur-Mer.\nD-Day landings.\nEarly bombardment.\nAir attacks on Normandy's coastal defences began in earnest on 5 June at 23:30, with RAF Bomber Command units targeting the primary coastal defences. The attack continued until 05:15, with of bombs dropped by 1,136 sorties; this marked the largest attack by Bomber Command in terms of tonnage up to that point in the war. Initial attacks on the Atlantic Wall proved ineffective, with poor weather and visibility making it difficult to accurately hit the bunkers and turrets. The bombing left the defences on Omaha, Gold and Juno virtually intact, yet did not damage Allied landing craft in the Channel (as many planners had feared it would). \nAs the Americans began their own bombing runs against Omaha and Utah to the west, the naval forces began their counter-battery fire, seeking to knock out German shore batteries and bunkers. The British had attached the cruisers and to Force J to serve as heavy support. \"Belfast\" commenced bombardment of the Atlantic Wall in the neighbouring Gold area at 05:30 and \"Diadem\" at 05:52 on 6 June. The naval gunfire proved more effective than the aerial bombardment; the battery at Longues was the only one to return fire, and was quickly neutralised by the light cruiser . Indeed, most of the gun batteries at Juno were incomplete on D-Day, and did not possess sufficient protection or communication measures to accurately return fire on Force J. The B\u00e9ny-sur-Mer battery was neutralized by \"Diadem\" shortly after she opened fire.\nAt 06:10, the 11 destroyers of Force J moved shoreward to begin bombardment, hoping to damage light gun emplacements and prevent the German 716th from mobilizing and moving across the beach. They were supplemented by additional raids by medium bombers and fighter-bombers of the RAF and USAAF, which dropped an additional 2,796 tons of ordnance on the five landing zones. While the medium bombers proved inaccurate, the Hawker Typhoon fighter-bombers proved more effective at attacking coastal defences. As the bombing runs continued to hit Juno, the destroyers and landing craft moved towards the beach and began close-range saturation bombardment. In addition to the destroyers of Force J\u2014eight British, two Canadian, one French and one Norwegian\u2014bombardment was also provided by converted LCTs fitted with guns. Smaller, light-gunned landing craft were able to get closer to the beach and use their 6-pounder guns against German defensive positions. Additional firepower was provided by eight landing craft fitted with over 1,000 high-explosive rockets and 24 LCTs, each carrying four M7 Priest self-propelled guns. These field regiments, while still seaborne, were to fire heavy concentrations of high explosive and smoke shells against the four main \"resistance nests\" in \"Mike\" and \"Nan\" sectors, beginning half an hour before H Hour. Forward observation and fire control officers in the leading assault waves were to make the necessary adjustments to this neutralizing fire during the assault.\nThe bombardment was scheduled to cease immediately before the assault companies deployed on Juno, but due to heavy seas, the landing was delayed by ten minutes, to 07:45 in Mike sector and 07:55 in Nan Sector. This was at a slightly higher tide, closer to the beach obstacles and mines. The LCTs carrying the field artillery were forced to adjust course to avoid landing too early; the LCTs carrying DD tanks were forced to break off their advance. The seas proved too rough to launch the DD tanks, so they were ordered to deploy from the LCTs several hundred yards out from the beach.\nLanding: 7th Brigade (Mike, Nan Green).\nThough the 7th Canadian Infantry Brigade was scheduled to land on Mike Sector at 07:35, rough seas and poor craft co-ordination pushed this time back by ten minutes. Two assault companies of the Royal Winnipeg Rifles, one assault company of the Canadian Scottish Regiment, and one squadron of the 1st Hussars were to land on \"Mike Red\" and also on \"Mike Green\", while the Regina Rifle Regiment, supported by a second squadron of the 1st Hussars, landed on \"Nan Green\" sector. The first Winnipegs touched down at 07:49, with the remaining assault companies deploying within seven minutes. The LCAs carrying \"B\" Company craft were engaged while about 700 yards from shore. Disembarkation had to be done under direct fire and, in consequence, heavy casualties were sustained by this company while landing. The strongpoint in this area consisted of three casemates and twelve machine-gun emplacements. This left the infantry the grim prospect of clearing it by direct assault. \"B\" company was unable to advance further without armoured support. The Hussars' \"A\" Squadron launched from the beach, but would not be fully deployed until a full six minutes after the Winnipegs were ashore. To their west, \"D\" Company faced less defensive fire, as it was clear of the strongpoint. The company easily cleared the beach, and went through the barbed wire with light casualties. \"A\" platoon of the 6th Field Company Royal Canadian Engineers was redirected to clear the minefields facing \"D\" Company, given that the flail tanks had yet to land. On the far right, \"C\" Company of the Canadian Scottish Regiment landed with little opposition, and discovered that their objective\u2014a 75\u00a0mm gun emplacement\u2014had been destroyed by naval gunfire.\nTo the east of Mike Sector, the Regina Rifles came ashore on \"Nan Green\" with the objective of subduing German forces in Courseulles. \"A\" Company reported touchdown at 08:09, and met heavy resistance almost immediately; \"B\" Company reported touchdown at 08:15. The Hussars' tanks first reported deploying twenty minutes before the infantry, with \"B\" Squadron HQ reporting their landing at 07:58. They faced the task of destroying a heavy gun emplacement equipped with 88\u00a0mm and 75\u00a0mm guns and thick concrete walls. The bombardment had failed to destroy the emplacement and heavy machine guns inflicted many casualties on the company; one LCA reported six men killed within seconds of lowering the ramps. A platoon was able to breach the barbed wire lining the beach and take cover in Courseulles and then eliminate the machine-guns engaging \"A\" Company of the Regina Rifles. The DD tanks arrived in the Regina Rifles sector with greater numbers and punctuality than in the Winnipegs' sector. The 75\u00a0mm gun emplacement in the Courseulles strongpoint was destroyed by fire from \"B\" Squadron of the 1st Hussars; the 88\u00a0mm was similarly silenced. To their east, \"B\" Company encountered limited resistance, pushed into Courseulles and soon \"had cleared a succession of the assigned blocks in the village\".\nWith the initial assault companies ashore and fighting for their objectives, the reserve companies and battalion (Canadian Scottish Regiment) began their deployment on Juno. \"A\" and \"C\" Companies of the Winnipeg Rifles landed at 08:05 and began to push towards the villages of Banville and Sainte-Croix-sur-Mer. \"A\" Company encountered heavy machine-gun fire and had to request support from the 1st Hussars to clear the position. On Nan Green, \"C\" and \"D\" Companies of the Regina Rifles prepared to storm Courseulles. \"C\" Company touched down at 08:35 and moved into the village without difficulty. \"D\" Company was further delayed, after several LCAs struck antitank mines attached to beach obstacles; only 49 \"D\" Company soldiers reached the beach. The Canadian Scottish Regiment arrived on the beach at 08:30, with the leading companies coming under heavy mortar fire; it took the regiment a full hour to get off the beaches and push further inland.\nLanding: 8th Brigade (Nan White, Red).\nOriginally scheduled to land at 07:45 to the east of the 7th, the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade's two assault battalions were postponed by 10 minutes as a result of heavy seas. The Queen's Own Rifles of Canada (QOR) landed at 08:12 at Nan White and faced the most tenacious defences of any unit in Nan Sector: an 88\u00a0mm gun emplacement with multiple machine-gun nests outside of Berni\u00e8res. The first LCA to touch down saw 10 of its first 11 soldiers either killed or wounded. \"B\" Company came ashore directly in front of the main resistance nests, 200 yards east of their intended landing zone, subjecting them to heavy mortar and machine-gun fire. The QOR had been scheduled to advance with DD fire support, but the heavy seas meant that \"instead of swimming in, they [DD tanks] left their craft close inshore and landed behind the infantry assault companies\". Several soldiers from \"B\" Company succeeded in outflanking the main pillbox and killing its gunners with grenades and small arms. One LCA's rudder from \"B\" Company had jammed and that platoon landed far to the left of the rest of \"B\" Company, enabling them to outflank and destroy the gun emplacements. With the defences silenced, the QOR was able to advance into Berni\u00e8res, having suffered 65 casualties on the beaches. To their west, \"A\" Company encountered less resistance but was limited by poorly coordinated run-ins by the LCAs to the beach. \"A\" Company was able to quickly reach the seawall and breach the barbed wire but encountered much mortar and sniper fire in Berni\u00e8res. This was the only sector of Juno where armoured support proved ineffective, as \"B\" Squadron of the Fort Garry Horse was too far out from the beach to provide heavy support.\nThe first units of the North Shore Regiment's \"A\" and \"B\" companies touched down on Nan Red at 08:10 in chest-deep water. They were tasked with securing Saint-Aubin and clearing defences in the village. \"B\" Company landed to find that the Saint-Aubin strong point \"appeared not to have been touched\" by preliminary naval bombardment. The two assault companies faced a sprint across open beach in the face of fire from Saint-Aubin. \"A\" Company suffered the most casualties, incurring many fatalities from beach mines. \"B\" Company faced stronger opposition at the strong point, yet managed to breach the seawall and barbed wire. The 50\u00a0mm antitank gun was still firing and the thick concrete casemates protected it from infantry fire. By 08:10, Sherman tanks of the Fort Garry Horse and AVRE of the 80th Assault Squadron, Royal Engineers, had landed at Nan Red and begun to assist \"B\" Company in clearing the gun emplacement. The 50\u00a0mm gun knocked out four of the squadron's tanks, while the North Shore's machine-gun platoon was flanking the position. The right section of the strong point was eliminated by anti-tank guns and engineers, while the central anti-tank gun was silenced by 230 mm Petard demolition bombs fired from the AVRE. When the North Shore captured the strong point, approximately half the defenders were killed; 48 German soldiers surrendered.\nThe 8th Brigade reserve battalion, Le R\u00e9giment de la Chaudi\u00e8re, began deploying to the beaches at 08:30 along with the reserve companies of the North Shore and QOR. More than half of the LCAs were crippled by mines buried along the beach; QOR \"C\" Company was forced to touch down further offshore when their LCAs were damaged by mines. \"C\" Company linked up with \"B\" Squadron of the Fort Garry Horse, and moved to assist the pinned-down and exhausted \"A\" Company. The North Shore C and D Companies landed outside of Saint-Aubin, with \"C\" Company taking over for \"A\" Company in the advance further into Saint-Aubin, while \"D\" Company occupied the village. All but one of the LCAs carrying Chaudi\u00e8re \"A\" Company foundered before they could touch down on the beach, and they lost most of their equipment while swimming to shore. The Chaudi\u00e8res quickly formed up outside Berni\u00e8res and Saint-Aubin, linking up with both the QOR and the North Shores. The reserve also included the No. 48 (Royal Marine) Commando, which was scheduled to land 45 minutes after the first arrivals. The Commandos were to pass Saint-Aubin's eastern edge and occupy Langrune-sur-Mer on the eastern end of Juno. The strong point facing them had not been cleared and 120 of the 400-man unit became casualties within seconds of landing.\nDeploying reinforcements.\nWith Juno largely secured, Keller prepared to deploy the reserves of the 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade and tanks of the Sherbrooke Fusiliers. The reports coming in from the battalions already on Juno were mixed; Canadian military historian Terry Copp says that the North Shore was \"proceeding according to plan\", while the Chaudi\u00e8res were \"making progress slowly\". The two self-propelled artillery regiments\u2014the 14th Field and 19th Army Field Regiments, Royal Canadian Artillery\u2014had deployed at 09:25 and 09:10, and had several dozen guns in action before 11:00. Opposition and continued problems with mine obstacles on Nan Red meant that the entire 9th Brigade would have to land in Berni\u00e8res and Nan White sector. When the 9th Brigade's LCIs touched down at 11:40, the congestion on the beach in Nan White was so heavy that most infantry companies could not disembark from their landing craft. The 9th Brigade's reserves consisted of the Cameron Highlanders of Ottawa, the North Nova Scotia Highlanders, the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders, and the Highland Light Infantry of Canada. The Glengarry Highlanders reported coming under mortar fire from German positions further inland, as \"with little room to manoeuvre on dry land, the entire 9th Brigade became easy targets for German artillery\". The 9th Brigade quickly made it across the beach, and joined the Chaudi\u00e8res, Queen's Own Rifles and Fort Garry Horse in Berni\u00e8res to await further advance inland.\nHaving subdued German defences on the beach, the next task of the landed forces was to clear Juno of obstacles, debris and undetonated mines then establish the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division's headquarters in Berni\u00e8res. Movement Control Units came ashore just before noon, with military policemen beginning to marshal vehicles through to Berni\u00e8res and Courseulles. Sappers of 619 Independent Field Company also moved in to begin clearing the minefields surrounding the beach, so as to free up the advance south towards Carpiquet. Keller himself established divisional headquarters in Berni\u00e8res shortly after noon.\nAdvance inland.\nInitial attacks.\nAt 14:35, Keller met with the commanders of the 8th and 9th Infantry Brigades, as well as the newly reconstituted 2nd Armoured Brigade (Fort Garry Horse, Sherbrooke Fusiliers, 1st Hussars). With the first line of objectives (codenamed Yew) secured on the beachhead, Keller ordered the 7th and 8th Brigades to advance with armoured support towards the second line of objectives (Elm), whereupon 9th Brigade would then leapfrog over the 7th and 8th to reach the third objective line (Oak). Facing them were the remains of three battalions of the 736th Grenadier Regiment, and three battalions of the 726th Regiment. \"B\" Company of the Winnipegs was still facing heavy resistance from snipers and machine guns in Courseulles, while the eastern companies of the North Shore Regiment were fighting for Saint-Aubin. \"A\" and \"C\" Companies of the Royal Winnipegs moved off the beach, cut through the walls of barbed wire behind the German bunkers, pushed through Vaux and Graye-sur-Mer, and began to advance towards St. Croix and Banville. \"C\" Company advanced on Banville\u2014the headquarters of II Battalion of the 726th\u2014but was stopped by three machine-gun emplacements just short of the town. Winnipeg \"A\" Company joined \"C\" Company of the Canadian Scottish Regiment and a troop of \"C\" Squadron of the 1st Hussars and advanced on St. Croix, unaware of a large German counter-attack massing in St. Croix under the command of 8 Battalion, 726 Regiment. \"C\" Company of the Canadian Scottish Regiment had deployed to their west, and was able to spot the units of the 8th Battalion, and halt the counter-attack before it fully materialized. \"D\" Company of the Winnipegs joined the advance on Banville with covering fire from the Cameron Highlanders and the 12th and 13th Field Artillery Regiments; Banville was declared captured at 13:10, although small pockets of resistance would survive until nightfall and then retreat. \"D\" Company of the Canadian Scottish moved to capture two bridges on the Seulles River further inland from the Winnipeg companies. \"B\" Company joined them, and pushed through the gap between St. Croix and Banville, joining \"C\" Company as it did so. \"C\" Squadron of the 1st Hussars provided armoured support. To their east, the Regina Rifles advanced south towards Reviers, engaging troops of the 7th Battalion of the 736th Grenadier Regiment. They reported reaching the town by 12:15 with two companies, and began consolidating their position in preparation for further advance.\nIn Nan Sector, the 8th Brigade advance started slower than that of the 7th Brigade, because the Chaudi\u00e8res had lost most of their equipment on the advance over the beaches. The Queen's Own Rifles' \"C\" Company was pinned down at the edge of Berni\u00e8res by sniper-fire, and could not cross the open fields behind the town; their armoured support was also stopped by heavy antitank fire coming from Beny-sur-Mer. The Chaudi\u00e8res \"A\" and \"B\" Companies were caught in the crossfire; \"B\" Company lost almost an entire platoon when a German 88\u00a0mm scored a hit on a Priest self-propelled gun. Chaudi\u00e8re and QOR progress was slow; all told, it took nearly two hours for artillery and heavy guns to clear the defences at Beny-sur-Mer, allowing the QOR to advance towards the town. Beny-sur-Mer was reported cleared at 14:00, at which point the Chaudi\u00e8res began to mass in the town for a further advance south towards Carpiquet. The QOR broke off to the left to engage heavy artillery batteries to the west of Beny, and \"B\" Company was assisted by the guns of HMCS \"Algonquin\", which destroyed a bunker of 105\u00a0mm guns. To their east, \"C\" and \"D\" Company of the North Shores advanced towards Tailleville\u2014the headquarters of II Battalion of the 736th Grenadiers. Mortar fire north of the headquarters was both concentrated and accurate, slowing the advance of \"C\" Company. They were supported in their drive south by tanks of the Fort Garry Horse, which caught close to 100 German defenders in open fields. The North Shores and their armour support entered Tailleville at 14:00, at which point the six tanks of \"C\" Squadron moved through the village, destroying German gun emplacements. The defenders of the II Battalion had created a complex underground bunker system in the village, which enabled them to continuously outflank Canadian infantry; it took another seven hours to clear Tailleville of defenders, which ensured that the North Shores would be unable to capture German radar sites to the south on D-Day.\n\"B\" Company of the North Shore Regiment and No. 48 Commando of the Royal Marines were engaged in a protracted fight to secure Saint-Aubin and Lagrune-sur-Mer. \"B\" Company had generally neutralized the strongpoint WN27 within two hours of landing, which allowed Troops A and B of the Royal Marines to push east. These units had the important objective of bridging the gap between the landing zones at Juno and Sword, which would allow for a continuous Anglo-Canadian front by the end of the first day. The Royal Marines began to advance on Lagrune and strong-point WN26, while to their east No. 41 Commando Royal Marines advanced from Sword. The strongpoint was defended by \"a reinforced platoon from the 736th Grenadiers\" and was a group of fortified houses and 50\u00a0mm anti-tank guns. B Troop's first attempt to capture it failed and the assault was renewed with support from Centaur tanks only to again falter in the face of heavy resistance. No. 48 Commando was forced to call the assault off at nightfall, as reports of massing for counter-attacks by the 21st Panzer Division against the divide between Sword and Juno arrived. The strong points at Lagrune and Luc-sur-Mer were captured on 8 June.\nDrive to Elm.\nThe division's advance south of Tailleville had halted, preventing an attack on German radar stations. The Queen's Own Rifles and \"C\" Company of the Chaudi\u00e8res opted to continue their advance towards Anguerny and Columby-sur-Thaon and Objective Line \"Elm\". The beachhead was now filled to capacity with troops, to the point that \"B\" Company of the Chaudi\u00e8res could not be deployed alongside \"C\" Company without severely hindering the advance of the QOR to their east. \"C\" Company's advance on Basly was even further hindered by the proximity of the combat; the fighting occurred at such close range that the 14th Field Artillery would not provide fire support for fear of friendly-fire casualties.\nWhen \"C\" Company reached Basly, the North Nova Scotia Highlanders formed up outside Beny-sur-Mer, with the intention of overtaking the Chaudi\u00e8res and making for Carpiquet and the Caen\u2013Bayeux highway. At 16:45, the North Novas assembled in Beny, and were the target of concentrated German mortar fire as the Sherbrooke Fusiliers de-waterproofed their tanks. Three companies of the North Novas and a squadron of the Sherbrookes advanced on the mortar positions, with many casualties among the infantry but clearing the positions. The QOR entered Anguerny\u2014on the Elm Objective Line\u2014at 17:30, and sent \"D\" Company to probe German defences on the hills overlooking the village. \nThe Chaudi\u00e8res reported that Basly was cleared of defenders at 18:15, allowing the 9th Brigade to advance towards Carpiquet Airfield. By 19:00, the North Nova Scotia Highlanders were advancing towards Carpiquet, encountering their first resistance an hour later. With reports of the 21st Panzer Division attacking the flanks of the British 3rd Infantry Division on Sword, Lieutenant-General Miles Dempsey\u2014commander of the British Second Army\u2014ordered forces on Sword, Juno and Gold to establish defensive positions at their intermediate objectives.\nOn the western edge of the Canadian sector, the advance of the 7th Brigade had stalled in the face of stiffening resistance in St. Croix and Banville, delaying the right flank of the assault. The German defenders gave ground slowly and did not begin withdrawing from the towns until the Bren Gun platoons began to arrive at 14:00. Once St. Croix and Banville were cleared, the Canadian Scots pushed south to Colombiers, reinforced the platoons that had captured the bridge across the Seulles earlier in the day, and moved towards the Creully\u2013Caen road. The Canadian Scots reported reaching the road at 16:30, and continued to push south past Objective Line Elm. To their west the Royal Winnipegs stopped at Elm Line, and began to erect defensive positions with Bren Gun carriers and artillery. The Regina Rifles had been slow to advance from Courseulles on account of the heavy casualties taken securing the village; the 1st Hussars' \"B\" Squadron was in a similar position, with only half its fighting strength having made it off the beach. By 18:00 the Reginas were advancing, while the Hussars scouted ahead of the infantry companies. As the Reginas linked up with the Canadian Scots, the order to hold positions and dig in arrived from Keller's headquarters; the two battalions halted at 21:00.\nThree tanks of the 1st Hussars' \"C\" Squadron (No. 2 Troop) had continued to advance southwards, pushing through side-roads towards Carpiquet Airfield. Aside from a German staff-car and a machine-gun nest, the three Sherman tanks encountered virtually no resistance, advancing all the way to the Caen\u2013Bayeux railway line and becoming the only unit of the division to reach the Canadian front line objective on D-Day. The commander of the unit, Lieutenant William F. McCormick, attempted to contact his superiors to bring up reinforcements to attack Carpiquet Airfield, the three tanks eventually withdrew to the Canadian Elm line at Camilly.\nPositions at nightfall.\nAt the end of D-Day, the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division was situated firmly on Objective Line Elm, approximately half way to their final D-Day objectives on Line Oak. In 7 Brigade's sector to the west, the Winnipeg Rifles had secured the town of Cruelly and the Regina Rifles were dug in at Camilly, with the Canadian Scottish between them. On the east flank the North Nova Scotia highlanders and Queen's Own Rifles of Canada had secured Villons-les-Buissons and Anisy respectively, but there had not been a link up with the British 3rd Division.\nThe German 716th Infantry Division was scattered and practically wiped out. The German 21st Panzer Division had driven a temporary wedge between the British and Canadian 3rd Divisions, but had been unable to cause any real damage. To the south, Hitler had released the elite Panzer Lehr Division and the 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend (Hitler Youth), both of which prepared to head north with the I SS Panzer Corps.\nThe 9th Brigade was positioned a mere from Caen, the farthest inland of any Allied units on D-Day. On the eastern edge of the Canadian sector the 8th Brigade had taken up positions in Anguerny and Columby, having begun in the late afternoon to dig in. The 3rd Canadian Infantry Division had succeeded in advancing farther than any other divisional element in the Allied Expeditionary Force, but due to heavy fighting in Lagrune and Saint-Aubin had failed to link up with the British 3rd Division from Sword.\nAftermath.\nAnalysis.\nWhile the Normandy landings in all five sectors managed to establish footholds in Normandy, many D-Day objectives were not met. To the west of Juno, the British 50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division encountered only light resistance, and succeeded in advancing inland and creating a continuous front with Juno (though not with Omaha) with only 413 casualties. To their east, the British 3rd Infantry Division established a foothold on Sword. Counter-attacks by the 21st Panzer Division in the afternoon prevented the 3rd Infantry Division from capturing Caen and from making contact with the 3rd Canadian Infantry division on Juno. The counter-attack failed to drive the British into the sea.\nIn spite of the many casualties inflicted on the 352nd and 716th Infantry divisions, the 7th Army quickly established plans for counter-attacks. Early orders to move towards the invasion beaches were confused, as the divisions necessary for counter-attacks fell under a different jurisdiction than those defending the coast. The panzer divisions, such as the Panzer Lehr, 12th SS Panzer and 2nd SS Panzer, could not be mobilized for the coast without authorization by Hitler. The order to mobilize Panzer Lehr and the 12th SS was finally given in the mid-afternoon of 6 June. When the 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade and the Sherbrooke Fusiliers began to advance on 7 June, they were met by dug in troops of the 716th Infantry and 21st Panzer divisions. At 17:00, the advancing force was counter-attacked by the 12th SS, under the command of Kurt Meyer. The 9th Brigade was forced to withdraw to its D-Day positions, having suffered more casualties than any unit on Juno the previous day. The 7th Brigade reached its final D-Day objectives along Line Oak, while the 8th Brigade attempted to destroy German radar stations to their east, which took until 11 June.\nThe 3rd Canadian Infantry Division made contact with the British from Sword on 7 June, before forming a continuous front with the American sector by 13 June. The subsequent advance on Caen and Cherbourg was slow, as a greater number of German Panzer units were concentrated near Caen and Carentan. The Canadians captured Carpiquet Airfield during Operation Windsor on 5 July, while Anglo-Canadian forces captured Caen as part of Operation Charnwood (8\u20139 July) and Operation Atlantic (18\u201320 July).\nPreliminary bombardment.\nMilitary historians have generally drawn the conclusion that the preliminary aerial and naval bombardment of Juno was not as effective as had been hoped, yet differ in their opinions as to how ineffective. The aerial bombardment of Juno's defences the night before is considered to have been very ineffective, primarily because of the inclement weather. John Keegan notes that \"the prevailing low, thick cloud frustrated its [Bomber Command's] efforts\". Colonel Stacey\u2014the official historian of the Canadian Army in the Second World War\u2014considers the effects of the bombing runs to have been \"spotty\", noting that while several coastal batteries were not hit, those that were (such as the battery at Houlgate) were hit accurately. Chester Wilmot offers a different view, suggesting that \"[the coastal guns] had been accurately bombed, but had survived because they were heavily protected by the concrete casemates Rommel had insisted upon\". Historians' assessment of the naval bombardment is even more mixed; while they generally agree that it failed to fully neutralize German defences on Juno, they are in disagreement as to why. Stacey suggests that while the \"beach-drenching fire\" was concentrated and substantial, it was both inaccurate and of insufficient firepower to destroy the coastal bunkers. He further suggests that the effect of the drenching fire was moral rather than material, in that it forced defenders to keep below-ground and sapped their morale. Terry Copp echoes this analysis, noting that \"reasonable accuracy could not be obtained from the pitching decks of LCTs [by mounted artillery on the ships]\"; the 13th Field Regiment's drenching fire fell on average past their targets. British historian Max Hastings notes that because of the delay in landing times by ten minutes, a substantial gap existed between the cessation of bombardment and the actual landing of the first waves of infantry, meaning that platoons of the 716th had ample time to return to their positions. The bombardment of strongpoints in the towns along the coast was inconsistent; the North Shore Regiment reported that the strongpoint near Saint-Aubin \"appeared not to have been touched\" by bombardment, while the strongpoints facing the Canadian Scottish Regiment had been eliminated by naval bombardment before their landing.\nOverall.\nDespite the failure to capture any of the final D-Day objectives, the assault on Juno is considered by some\u2014alongside Utah\u2014the most strategically successful of the D-Day landings. Historians suggest a variety of reasons for this success. Mark Zuehlke notes that \"the Canadians ended the day ahead of either the US or British divisions despite the facts that they landed last (a delay of half an hour due to bad weather) and that only the Americans at Omaha faced more difficulty winning a toehold on the sand\". Chester Wilmot claims that the Canadian success in clearing the landing zones is attributable to the presence of amphibious DD tanks on the beaches; The DD Tanks arrival on the British beaches had been seriously disrupted by bad weather and choppy seas, and the absence of DD tanks altogether was largely responsible for the heavier casualties on Omaha, the only beach with heavier resistance than Juno. Canadian historian Terry Copp attributes the steady advance of the 7th Brigade in the afternoon to \"less serious opposition\" than the North Shore Regiment encountered in Tailleville.\nDespite the verdict of a successful D-Day for the 3rd CID, the failure of Canadian units to reach their final objectives has proven more disputed than the reasons for their success. Terry Copp places the blame on Keller, who committed the entirety of the 9th Brigade reserve to land on the narrower beaches of the 8th Brigade\u2014which was itself still fighting to clear the seaside towns\u2014after receiving reports of poor progress by the 7th Brigade. Dutch historian Dan van der Vat notes that \"the planned breakout of the 9th Brigade was held up by a huge jam of vehicles\". Wilmot also places the blame with logistical difficulties of the landing, saying that \"on the whole it was not so much the opposition in front as the congestion behind\u2014on the beaches and in Berni\u00e8res\u2014that prevented the Canadians from reaching their final D-Day objective\". Stacey offers a different view, suggesting that it was not impossible for the 3rd CID to reach its D-Day objectives, and that the failure to do so rests in the fact that \"British and Canadian forces were usually better at deceiving the enemy and achieving initial success in an assault than they were at exploiting surprise and success once achieved. Perhaps they were rather too easily satisfied\". Copp disagrees with Stacey's assessment, suggesting that such caution was not the result of poor planning but of the fact that \"the British and Canadians fought the way they had been trained, moving forward to designated objectives in controlled bounds and digging in at the first sign of a counterattack\". He also disputes whether the capture of the final objectives would have been strategically intelligent, observing that \"if 9th Brigade had reached Carpiquet and dug in, with artillery in position to offer support, the commander of the 26th Panzer Grenadiers might have followed orders and waited until a coordinated counterattack with other divisions had been organized. Such an attack might well have done far more damage to the Allied beachhead than the hastily improvised operation actually carried out [on 7 June]\".\nStacey offers a second line of analysis on the Canadians' failure to advance to Line Oak, suggesting that difficulties encountered by the British 3rd Infantry Division on Sword caused Dempsey to halt the advance of the entire British Second Army. The British encountered heavy counterattacks by the 21st Panzer Division, which prevented the British 9th Brigade from establishing contact with the Canadians at Juno. Copp wrote that, \"Before this withdrawal [of the 21st Panzer Division] became evident, Dempsey had concluded that more armoured counter-attacks could be expected. So he ordered the three assault divisions to dig in at their second line of objectives. This decision was relayed to subordinate commanders somewhere after 19:00\", just as the 9th Canadian Brigade was preparing to advance south towards Carpiquet. Wilmot wrote that the British 3rd Infantry Division brigade commanders were overly cautious in advancing towards Caen and this slowed the Anglo-Canadian advance, especially given the reports of counter-attacks Dempsey received from Sword.\nCasualties.\nPredictions of the casualties on Juno had been about 2,000 men, including 600 drowned. The 3rd Canadian Infantry Division suffered 340 men killed, 574 wounded and 47 taken prisoner. The Queen's Own Rifles suffered 143 casualties, the most of any battalion, the Royal Winnipegs 128, the North Shore 125 and the Regina Rifles 108. Of the landing craft used on the run-in to Juno, 90 of 306 were lost or damaged. Due to the lack of records for D-Day, casualties for the German 716th Infantry Division are unknown. Of the four German battalions numbering 7,771 men before the invasion, Richter reported that the equivalent of only one battalion\u2014at 80 per cent strength\u2014remained. At least one of the two conscript battalions of the 716th was reported to have fled. Richter also reported that 80 per cent of the divisional artillery had been destroyed or captured on D-Day, while only two gun batteries were intact west of the River Orne. By 9 June, the division had been reduced to a battlegroup of 292 officers and men.\nCommemoration.\nThe landing is commemorated today by the museum and memorial at the Juno Beach Centre in Courseulles-sur-Mer as well as exhibits at the Canadian War Museum and other Canadian military museums. One of the Sherman tanks that landed at Juno, the M4A3 Sherman \"Bomb\", fought all the way into Germany and is today preserved at Sherbrooke, Quebec. In Berni\u00e8res-sur-Mer, the owners of a house facing the beach hold memorial services yearly. The house is now named \"Canada House\".\nThe last surviving member of the 48 Royal Marine Commandos who landed at Juno Beach is Dennis George Donovan.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60118", "revid": "41625025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60118", "title": "Kodak (disambiguation)", "text": "Kodak is a maker of photo and printing products.\nKodak may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60120", "revid": "23551833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60120", "title": "Omaha Beach", "text": "WWII amphibious landing zone in France\nOmaha Beach was one of five Allied beach landing sectors of the amphibious assault component of Operation Overlord during the Second World War.\nOn June 6, 1944, the Allies invaded German-occupied France with the Normandy landings. \"Omaha\" refers to an section of the coast of Normandy, France, facing the English Channel, from west of Sainte-Honorine-des-Pertes to east of Vierville-sur-Mer on the right bank of the Douve river estuary. Landings here were necessary to link the British landings to the east at Gold with the American landing to the west at Utah, thus providing a continuous lodgement on the Normandy coast of the Baie de Seine (Bay of the Seine River). Taking Omaha was to be the responsibility of United States Army troops, with sea transport, and a naval bombardment force provided predominantly by the United States Navy and Coast Guard, with contributions from the British, Canadian and Free French navies.\nThe primary objective at Omaha was to secure a beachhead deep, between Port-en-Bessin and the Vire river, linking with the British landings at Gold to the east, and reaching the area of Isigny to the west to link up with VII Corps landing at Utah. The untested American 29th Infantry Division, along with nine companies of U.S. Army Rangers redirected from Pointe du Hoc, assaulted the western half of the beach. The battle-hardened 1st Infantry Division was given the eastern half.\nOpposing the landings was the German 352nd Infantry Division. Of its 12,020 men, 6,800 were experienced combat troops, detailed to defend a front. The German strategy was based on defeating any seaborne assault at the water line, and the defenses were mainly deployed in strongpoints along the coast.\nThe Allied plan called for initial assault waves of tanks, infantry, and combat engineer forces to reduce the coastal defenses, allowing larger ships to land in follow-up waves. But very little went as planned. Difficulties in navigation caused most of the landing craft to miss their targets throughout the day. The defenses were unexpectedly strong, and inflicted substantial casualties on landing U.S. troops. Under intense fire, the engineers struggled to clear the beach obstacles; later landings bunched up around the few channels that were cleared. Weakened by the casualties taken just in landing, the surviving assault troops could not clear the exits off the beach. This caused further problems and consequent delays for later landings. Small penetrations were eventually achieved by groups of survivors making improvised assaults, scaling the bluffs between the most well-defended points. By the end of the day, two small isolated footholds had been won by the American forces, which were subsequently exploited against weaker defenses further inland, achieving the original D-Day objectives over the following days. American forces suffered 2,400 casualties at Omaha on June 6, but by the end of the day they had landed 34,000 troops. The German 352nd Division lost 20 percent of its strength, with 1,200 casualties, but it had no reserves coming to continue the fight.\nTerrain and defenses.\nThe coastline of Normandy was divided into sixteen sectors, which were assigned code names using a spelling-alphabet \u2013 from Able, west of Omaha, to Roger on the east flank of Sword. The area of beach that would become Omaha was originally designated \"X-Ray\", from the phonetic alphabet of the day; the name was changed on 3 March 1944. The names of both Omaha and Utah were probably suggested by Omar Bradley, as two privates fitting out his London headquarters were from Omaha, Nebraska (Gayle Eyler) and Provo, Utah; they were not named after the corps commanders, who were from Virginia (Gerow) and Louisiana (Collins). Eight further sectors were added when the invasion was extended to include Utah on the Cotentin Peninsula. Sectors were divided into beaches identified by the colors Red, White and Green, corresponding to the colored lights used on naval craft to designate the port (left), amidships, and starboard (right) sides.\nOmaha was bounded at either end by large rocky cliffs. The crescent-shaped beach presented a gently sloping tidal area averaging between low and high-water marks. Above the tide line was a bank of shingle high and up to wide in places. At the western end, the shingle bank rested against a stone (further east becoming wood) sea wall which ranged from in height. For the remaining two thirds of the beach after the seawall ended, the shingle lay against a low sand embankment. Behind the sand embankment and sea wall was a level shelf of sand, narrow at either end and extending up to inland in the center, and behind that rose steep escarpments or bluffs high, which dominated the whole beach and were cut into by small wooded valleys or draws at five points along the beach, codenamed west to east D-1, D-3, E-1, E-3 and F-1.\nThe German defensive preparations and the lack of any defense in depth indicated that their plan was to stop the invasion at the beaches. Four lines of obstacles were constructed in the intertidal zone. The first, a non-contiguous line with a small gap in the middle of Dog White and a larger gap across the whole of Easy Red, was out from the highwater line and consisted of 200 Belgian Gates with mines lashed to the uprights. behind these was a continuous line of logs driven into the sand pointing seaward, every third one capped with an anti-tank mine. Another shoreward of this line was a continuous line of 450 ramps sloping towards the shore, also with mines attached and designed to force flat-bottomed landing craft to ride up and either flip or detonate the mine. The final line of obstacles was a continuous line of hedgehogs from the shoreline. The area between the shingle bank and the bluffs was both wired and mined, and mines were also scattered on the bluff slopes.\nCoastal troop deployments, comprising five companies of infantry, were concentrated mostly at 15 strongpoints called \"Widerstandsnester\" (\"resistance nests\"), numbered WN-60 in the east to WN-74 near Vierville in the west, located primarily around the entrances to the draws and protected by minefields and wire. Positions within each strongpoint were interconnected by trenches and tunnels. As well as the basic weaponry of rifles and machine guns, more than 60 light artillery pieces were deployed at these strongpoints. The heaviest pieces were located in eight gun casemates and four open positions while the lighter guns were housed in 35 pillboxes. Obsolete VK 30.01 (H) tank turrets (from a panzer development program) armed with 75\u00a0mm L/24 guns were re-used in permanent fortified bunkers. A further 18 anti-tank guns completed the disposition of artillery targeting the beach. Areas between the strongpoints were lightly manned with occasional trenches, rifle pits, and 85 machine-gun emplacements. No area of the beach was left uncovered, and the disposition of weapons meant that flanking fire could be brought to bear anywhere along the beach.\nAllied intelligence had identified the coastal defenders as a reinforced battalion (800\u20131000 men) of the 716th Infantry Division. This was a static defensive division estimated to consist up to 50% of non-German troops, mostly Russians and Ukrainians, and German \"Volksdeutsche\". The recently activated but capable 352nd Infantry Division was believed to be inland at Saint-L\u00f4 and was regarded as the most likely force to be committed to a counter-attack. As part of Rommel's strategy to concentrate defenses at the water's edge, the 352nd had been ordered forward in March, taking over responsibility for the defense of the portion of the Normandy coast in which Omaha was located. As part of this reorganization, the 352nd also took under its command two battalions of the 726th Grenadier Regiment (part of the 716th Static Infantry Division) as well as the 439th Ost-Battalion, which had been attached to the 726th. Omaha fell mostly within 'Coast Defense Sector 2', which stretched westward from Colleville and allocated to the 916th Grenadier Regiment, with the third battalion 726th Grenadier Regiment attached. Two companies of the 726th manned strongpoints in the Vierville area while two companies of the 916th occupied the St. Laurent area strongpoints in the center of Omaha. These positions were supported by the artillery of the first and fourth battalions of the 352nd Artillery Regiment (twelve 105\u00a0mm and four 150\u00a0mm howitzers respectively). The two remaining companies of the 916th formed a reserve at Formigny, inland. East of Colleville, 'Coast Defense Sector 3' was the responsibility of the remainder of the 726th Grenadier Regiment. Two companies were deployed at the coast, one in the most easterly series of strongpoints, with artillery support provided by the third battalion of the 352nd Artillery Regiment. The area reserve, comprising the two battalions of the 915th Grenadier Regiment and known as 'Kampfgruppe Meyer', was located south-east of Bayeux outside the immediate Omaha area.\nThe failure to identify the reorganization of the defenses was a rare intelligence breakdown for the Allies. Post-action reports still documented the original estimate and assumed that the 352nd had been deployed to the coastal defenses by chance, a few days previously, as part of an anti-invasion exercise. The source of this inaccurate information came from German prisoners of war from the 352nd Infantry Division captured on D-Day as reported by the 16th Infantry S-3 D-Day Action Report. In fact, Allied intelligence had already become aware of the relocation of the 352nd Infantry Division on June 4. This information was passed on to V Infantry Corps and 1st Infantry Division HQ through 1st Army, but at that late stage in the operations, no plans were changed.\nWhen General Omar Bradley expressed concern about Omaha Beach in January, a Royal Engineers team of Captain Logan Scott-Bowden and Sergeant Bruce Ogden-Smith showed him a sample of sand from the beach. They had swum ashore in Normandy from midget submarines over thirty times, to obtain sand samples to see whether the beaches would support tanks. Scott-Bowden said to him \"Sir, I hope you don't mind me saying it, but this beach is a very formidable proposition indeed and there are bound to be tremendous casualties.\" Bradley put his hand on Scott-Bowden's shoulder and replied, \"I know, my boy. I know.\"\nPlan.\nOmaha was divided into ten sectors, codenamed (from west to east): Charlie, Dog Green, Dog White, Dog Red, Easy Green, Easy White, Easy Red, Fox Green, Fox White, and Fox Red. The initial assault was to be made by two Regimental Combat Teams (RCT), supported by two tank battalions, with two battalions of Rangers also attached. The infantry regiments were organized into three battalions each of around 1,000 men. Each battalion was organized as three rifle companies each of up to 240 men, and a support company of up to 190 men. Infantry companies A through D belonged to the 1st battalion of a regiment, E through H to the 2nd, I through M to the 3rd; the letter \u2018J\u2019 was not used. (Individual companies will be referred to in this article by company and regiment, e.g. Company A of the 116th RCT will be 'A/116'). In addition, each battalion had a headquarters company of up to 180 men. The tank battalions consisted of three companies, A through C, each of 16 tanks, while the Ranger battalions were organized into six companies, A through F, of around 65 men per company. V Corps' 56th Signal Battalion was responsible for communications on Omaha with the fleet offshore, especially routing requests for naval gunfire support to the destroyers and USS \"Arkansas\".\nThe 116th RCT of the 29th Infantry Division was to land two battalions in the western four beaches, to be followed 30 minutes later by the third battalion. Their landings were to be supported by the tanks of the 743rd Tank Battalion; two companies swimming ashore in amphibious DD tanks and the remaining company landing directly onto the beach from assault craft. To the left of the 116th RCT the 16th RCT of the 1st Infantry Division was also to land two battalions with the third following 30 minutes after, on Easy Red and Fox Green at the eastern end of Omaha. Their tank support was to be provided by the 741st Tank Battalion, again two companies swimming ashore and the third landed conventionally. Three companies of the 2nd Ranger Battalion were to take a fortified battery at Pointe du Hoc, to the west of Omaha. Meanwhile, C Company 2nd Rangers was to land on the right of the 116th RCT and take the positions at Pointe de la Perc\u00e9e. The remaining companies of 2nd Rangers and the 5th Ranger Battalion were to follow up at Pointe du Hoc if that action proved to be successful, otherwise they were to follow the 116th into Dog Green and proceed to Pointe du Hoc overland.\nThe landings were scheduled to start at 06:30, \"H-Hour\", on a flooding tide, preceded by a 40-minute naval and 30-minute aerial bombardment of the beach defenses, with the DD tanks arriving five minutes before H-Hour. The infantry were organized into specially equipped assault sections, 32 men strong, one section to a landing craft, with each section assigned specific objectives in reducing the beach defenses. Immediately behind the first landings the Special Engineer Task Force was to land with the mission of clearing and marking lanes through the beach obstacles. This would allow the larger ships of the follow-up landings to get through safely at high tide. The landing of artillery support was scheduled to start at H+90 minutes while the main buildup of vehicles was to start at H+180 minutes. At H+195 minutes two further Regimental Combat Teams, the 115th RCT of the 29th Infantry Division and the 18th RCT of the 1st Infantry Division were to land, with the 26th RCT of the 1st Infantry Division to be landed on the orders of the V Corps commander.\nThe objective was for the beach defenses to be cleared by H+2 hours, whereupon the assault sections were to reorganize, continuing the battle in battalion formations. The draws were to be opened to allow traffic to exit the beach by H+3 hours. By the end of the day, the forces at Omaha were to have established a bridgehead deep, linked up with the British 50th Division landed at Gold to the east, and be in position to move on Isigny the next day, linking up with the American VII Corps at Utah to the west.\nNaval component.\nTask Force O, commanded by Rear Admiral John L. Hall Jr., was the naval component responsible for transporting the troops across the channel and landing them on the beaches. The task force comprised four assault groups, a support group, a bombarding force, a minesweeper group, eight patrol craft, and three anti-submarine trawlers, numbering in total 1,028 vessels.\nAssault groups O1 to O3, tasked with landing the main body of the assault, were organized along similar lines, with each comprising three infantry transports and varying numbers of tank landing ships (LST), Landing Craft Control (LCC), Landing Craft Infantry (LCI(L)), Landing Craft Tank (LCT), and Landing Craft Mechanized (LCM). Assault Group O4, tasked with landing the Rangers and the Special Engineer Task Force at Pointe du Hoc and Dog Green, comprised only six smaller infantry transports.\nThe infantry transports of assault groups O1 and O2 comprised two US Navy Attack Transport (APA or AP) ships and a Royal Navy Landing Ship, Infantry (Large) (LSI(L)). All three infantry transports of Assault Group O3 were US Navy AP ships. Each US transport typically carried 1,400 troops and 26 Landing Craft, Vehicle, Personnel (LCVP, popularly known as \"Higgins Boats\"), while the British LSI(L) carried 900 to 1,400 troops and 18 Landing Craft Assault (LCA). The infantry transports of Assault Group O4 \u2013 all Royal Navy ships \u2013 comprised three LSI(S) and three LSI(H), all converted fast North Sea ferries. Each of them carried 200 to 250 troops and eight LCA.\nThe Support Group operated a mixture of gun, rocket, flak, tank, and smoke landing craft, totaling 67 vessels. The Minesweeper Group comprised four flotillas, the 4th comprising nine Royal Navy minesweepers; the 31st comprising nine minesweepers of the Royal Canadian Navy; the 104th comprising ten Royal Navy inshore minesweepers; and the 167th comprising ten Royal Navy coastal minesweepers. Bombarding Force C comprised two battleships, three cruisers (two Free French and one Royal Navy), and 13 destroyers (three of which were provided by the Royal Navy).\nPre-landing bombardment.\nWhile reviewing Allied troops in England training for D-Day, General Omar Bradley promised that the Germans on the beach would be blasted with naval gunfire before the landing. \"You men should consider yourself lucky. You are going to have ringside seats for the greatest show on earth,\" he said, referring to the naval bombardment. However, Rear Admiral John L. Hall strongly disapproved of what he considered to be the small amount of air and naval bombardment used, saying \"It's a crime to send men on the biggest amphibious attack in history with such inadequate naval gunfire support.\"\nJust after 05:00 the Germans at Port-en-Bessin reported ships off the coast, and at 05:30 opened artillery fire on the destroyer . The destroyer was joined in returning fire by the Free French , and later by the battleship USS \"Arkansas\". At 05:50 the planned naval bombardment began. Pointe-du-Hoc was targeted by the battleship , and the destroyers and , the latter having first destroyed the radar station at Pointe et Raz de la Perc\u00e9e.\nThe focus of the main naval bombardment was then switched to the beach defenses, and at 06:00, 36 M7 Priest howitzers and 34 tanks that were approaching the beach on LCTs began to supplement the naval guns. They were joined by fire from ten landing craft-mounted 4.7-inch guns and the rockets of nine Landing Craft Tank (Rocket), the latter planned to hit as the assault craft were just from the beach.\nAt 06:00, 448 Consolidated B-24 Liberator heavy bombers of the United States Army Air Forces, having already completed one bombing mission over Omaha late the previous day, returned. However, with the skies overcast and under orders to avoid bombing the troops which were by then approaching the beach, the bombers overshot their targets and only three bombs fell near the beach area.\nShortly after the bombardment began, the German 916th Grenadiers reported their positions to be under particularly intense fire, with the position at WN-60 very badly hit. Although the Rangers at Pointe-du-Hoc were greatly assisted in their assault of the cliffs by the \"Satterlee\" and \"Talybont\", elsewhere the air and naval bombardment was not so effective, and the German beach defenses and supporting artillery remained largely intact.\nLater analysis of naval support during the pre-landing phase concluded that the navy had provided inadequate bombardment, given the size and extent of the planned assault. Kenneth P. Lord, a U.S. Army planner for the D-Day invasion, says that, upon hearing the naval gunfire support plan for Omaha, which limited support to one battleship, two cruisers and six destroyers, he and other planners were very upset, especially in light of the tremendous naval gunfire support given to landings in the Pacific.\nHistorian Adrian R. Lewis postulates that American casualties would have been greatly reduced if a longer barrage had been implemented, although the First Infantry Division Chief of Staff said that the Division would not have been able to move off the beach without effective naval gunfire.\nInitial assault.\nDespite these preparations, very little went according to plan. Ten landing craft were swamped by the rough seas before they reached the beach, and several others stayed afloat only because their passengers bailed water out with their helmets. Seasickness was prevalent among the troops waiting offshore. On the 16th RCT front, the landing boats passed struggling men in life preservers and on rafts, survivors of the DD tanks which had sunk in the rough sea. Navigation of the landing vehicles was made difficult by the smoke and mist obscuring the landmarks they were to use in guiding themselves in, while a strong current pushed them continually eastward.\nAs the boats approached to within a few hundred meters of the shore, they came under increasingly intense fire from automatic weapons and artillery. The force only then discovered the ineffectiveness of the pre-landing bombardment. The bombers, facing overcast conditions, had been ordered to implement a pre-arranged plan to compensate for decreased accuracy. The center of targeting was displaced inland to assure the safety of the landing allied troops. As a result, there was little or no damage to the beach defenses.\nTank landings.\nBecause sea conditions were so rough, the decision was made for the 116th LCT to carry the DD tanks of the 743rd Tank Battalion all the way to the beach, after 27 of the initial 29 DD tanks of the 741st Tank Battalion were swamped while wading to shore. Coming in opposite the well-defended Vierville draw, Company B of the 743rd Tank Battalion lost all but one of its officers and half of its DD tanks. The other two companies landed to the left of B/743 without initial loss. On the 16th RCT front, the two DD tanks from the 741st Tank Battalion that had survived the swim ashore were joined by three others that were landed directly onto the beach because of their LCT's damaged ramp. The remaining tank company managed to land 14 of its 16 tanks (although three of these were quickly knocked out).\nInfantry landings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI was the first one out. The seventh man was the next one to get across the beach without being hit. All the ones in-between were hit. Two were killed; three were injured. That's how lucky you had to be.\nCaptain Richard Merrill, 2nd Ranger Battalion.\nOf the nine companies landing in the first wave, only Company A of the 116th RCT at Dog Green and the Rangers to their right landed where intended. E/116, aiming for Easy Green, ended up scattered across the two beaches of the 16th RCT area. G/116, aiming for Dog White, opened up a gap between themselves and A/116 to their right when they landed at Easy Green instead. I/16 drifted so far east it did not land for another hour and a half.\nAs infantry disembarked from the landing craft, they often found themselves on sandbars out. To reach the beach they had to wade through water sometimes neck deep, and they still had or more to go when they did reach shore. Those that made it to the shingle did so at a walking pace because they were so heavily laden. Most sections had to brave the full weight of fire from small arms, mortars, artillery, and interlocking fields of machine gun fire. Where the naval bombardment set grass fires burning, as it had at Dog Red opposite the Les Moulins strongpoint, the smoke obscured the landing troops and prevented effective fire from being laid down by the defenders. Some sections of G/116 and F/116 were able to reach the shingle bank relatively unscathed, though the latter became disorganized after the loss of their officers. G/116 was able to retain some cohesion, but this was soon lost as they made their way westwards under fire along the shingle in an attempt to reach their assigned objectives. The scattering of the boats was most evident on the 16th RCT front, where parts of E/16, F/16 and E/116 had intermingled, making it difficult for sections to come together to improvise company assaults that might have reversed the situation caused by the mis-landings. Those scattered sections of E/116 landing at Easy Red were able to escape heavy casualties, although, having encountered a deep runnel after being landed on a sandbank, they were forced to discard most of their weapons to make the swim ashore.\nCasualties were most severe among the troops landing at either end of Omaha. In the east at Fox Green and the adjacent stretch of Easy Red, scattered elements of three companies were reduced to half strength by the time they gained the relative safety of the shingle, many of them having crawled the of beach just ahead of the incoming tide. Within 15 minutes of landing at Dog Green on the western end of the beach, A/116 had been cut to pieces, the leaders among the 120 or so casualties, the survivors reduced to seeking cover at the water's edge or behind obstacles. The smaller Ranger company to their right had fared a little better, having made the shelter of the bluffs, but were also down to half strength.\nL/16 eventually landed, 30 minutes late, to the left of Fox Green, taking casualties as the boats ran in and more as they crossed the of beach. The terrain at the very eastern end of Omaha gave them enough protection to allow the 125 survivors to organize and begin an assault of the bluffs. They were the only company in the first wave able to operate as a unit. All the other companies were, at best, disorganized, mostly leaderless and pinned down behind the shingle with no hope of carrying out their assault missions. At worst, they had ceased to exist as fighting units. Nearly all had landed at least a few hundred meters off target, and in an intricately planned operation where each section on each boat had been assigned a specific task, this was enough to throw the whole plan off.\nEngineer landings.\nLike the infantry, the engineers had been pushed off their targets, and only five of the 16 teams arrived at their assigned locations. Three teams came in where there were no infantry or armor to cover them. Working under intense fire, the engineers set about their task of clearing gaps through the beach obstacles\u2014work made more difficult by loss of equipment, and by infantry passing through or taking cover behind the obstacles they were trying to blow. They also suffered heavy casualties as enemy fire set off the explosives they were working with. Eight men of one team were dragging their pre-loaded rubber boat off the LCM when artillery hit; only one survived the resulting detonation of their supplies. Another team had just finished laying its explosives when the area was struck by mortar fire. The premature explosion of the charges killed or wounded 19 engineers, as well as some nearby infantry. Nevertheless, the engineers succeeded in clearing six gaps, one each at Dog White and Easy Green on the 116th RCT front, the other four at Easy Red on the 16th RCT front. They had suffered casualties of over 40 percent.\nSecond assault wave.\nWith the initial targets unaccomplished, the second and larger wave of assault landings brought in reinforcements, support weapons and headquarters elements at 07:00 to face nearly the same difficulties as had the first. The second wave was larger, and so the defenders' fire was less concentrated. The survivors of the first wave were unable to provide effective covering fire, and in places the fresh landing troops suffered casualty rates as high as those of the first wave. Failure to clear paths through the beach obstacles also added to the difficulties of the second wave. In addition, the incoming tide was beginning to hide the remaining obstacles, causing high attrition among the landing craft before they had reached the shore. As in the initial landings, difficult navigation caused disruptive mislandings, scattering the infantry and separating vital headquarters elements from their units.\nOn the 116th RCT front, the remainder of the 1st Battalion, B/116, C/116 and D/116, were due to land in support of A/116 at Dog Green. Three boats, including their headquarters and beach-master groups, landed too far west, under the cliffs. Their exact casualties in getting across the beach are unknown, but the one-third to one-half that made it to shore spent the rest of the day pinned down by snipers. Not all sections of the badly scattered B/116 landed there, but those that did were quickly forced to join those survivors of A/116 fighting for survival at the water's edge. Two companies of 2nd Rangers, coming in later on the edge of Dog Green, did manage to reach the seawall, but at the cost of half their strength.\nTo the left of Dog Green sat Dog White, between the Vierville and Les Moulins strongpoints (defending draws D-1 and D-3); and here was a different story. As a result of earlier mis-landings, and now because of their own mis-landing, the troops of C/116 found themselves alone at Dog White, with a handful of tanks from the first wave in sight. With the smoke from the grass fires covering their advance up the beach, they gained the seawall with few casualties, and were in better shape than any unit on the 116th RCT front so far. Although the 1st Battalion was effectively disarmed of its heavy weapons when D/116 suffered a disastrous landing, the buildup at Dog White continued. C/116 was joined by the 5th Ranger Battalion almost in its entirety. The Ranger battalion commander, Col. Max Schneider, recognizing the situation at Dog Green on the run-in, ordered the assault craft to divert into Dog White. Like the C/116, the smoke covered their advance, although the 2nd Rangers were caught out on the right flank of the Ranger's landing. This was where the 116th RCT regimental command group, including the 29th Division assistant commander Brig.\u00a0Gen. Norman \"Dutch\" Cota, was able to land relatively unscathed.\nFurther east, the strongpoint defenses were effective. On the Dog Red/Easy Green boundary, the defenses around the Les Moulins strongpoint took a heavy toll on the remaining 2nd Battalion, with H/116 and headquarters elements struggling ashore there. The survivors joined the remnants of F/116 behind the shingle, and here the battalion commander was able to organize 50 men for an improvised advance across the shingle. A further advance up the bluffs just east of Les Moulins was too weak to have any effect and was forced back down. To their left, mainly between the draws on the Easy Green/Easy Red boundary, the 116th RCT's support battalion landed without too much loss, although they did become scattered, and were too disorganized to play any immediate part in an assault on the bluffs.\nOn the 16th RCT front, at the eastern end of Easy Red, was another area between strongpoints. This allowed G/16 and the support battalion to escape complete destruction in their advance up the beach. Nevertheless, most of G/16's 63 casualties for the day came before they had reached the shingle. The other 2nd Battalion company landed in the second wave; H/16 came in a few hundred yards to the left, opposite the E-3 draw, and suffered for it \u2013 they were put out of action for several hours.\nOn the easternmost beach, Fox Green, elements of five different companies had become entangled, and the situation was little improved by the equally disorganized landings of the second wave. Two more companies of the 3rd Battalion joined the melee, and, having drifted east in the first wave, I/16 finally made their traumatic landing on Fox Green, at 08:00. Two of their six boats were swamped on their detour to the east, and as they came in under fire, three of the four remaining boats were damaged by artillery or mines, and the fourth was hung up on an obstacle. A captain from this company found himself senior officer, and in charge of the badly out of shape 3rd Battalion.\nAmerican situation.\nAlong with the infantry landing in the second wave, supporting arms began to arrive, meeting the same chaos and destruction as had the rifle companies. Combat engineers, tasked with clearing the exits and marking beaches, landed off-target and without their equipment.\nMany half-tracks, jeeps and trucks foundered in deep water; those that made it ashore soon became jammed up on the narrowing beach, making easy targets for the German defenders. Most of the radios were lost, making the task of organizing the scattered and dispirited troops even more difficult, and those command groups that did make the shore found their effectiveness limited to their immediate vicinity. Except for a few surviving tanks and a heavy weapons squad here or there, the assault troops had only their personal weapons, which, having been dragged through surf and sand, invariably needed cleaning before they could be used.\nThe survivors at the shingle, many facing combat for the first time, found themselves relatively well-protected from small arms fire, but still exposed to artillery and mortars. In front of them lay heavily mined flats exposed to active fire from the bluffs above. Morale naturally became a problem. Many groups were leaderless and witnesses to the fate of neighboring troops and landings coming in around them. Wounded men on the beach were drowning in the incoming tide and incoming landing craft were being pounded and set ablaze.\nGerman situation.\nBy 07:35, the third battalion of the 726th Grenadier Regiment, defending Draw F-1 on Fox Green beach, was reporting that 100\u2013200 American troops had penetrated the front, with troops inside the wire at WN-62 and WN-61 attacking the Germans from the rear. From the German vantage point at Pointe de la Perc\u00e9e, overlooking the whole beach from the western end, it seemed that the assault had been stopped at the beach. An officer there noted that troops were seeking cover behind obstacles, and counted ten tanks burning. Thus, as late as 13:35, the 352nd division was reporting that the assault had been hurled back into the sea.\nHeinrich Severloh, a machine-gunner at WN62 with the soubriquet \"The Beast of Omaha\", claimed to have fired 13,500 rounds from an MG 42 and 400 using two Karabiner 98k rifles, a total weight of ammunition of over 375 kilograms. While these figures appear across several accounts, they are based solely on Severloh\u2019s personal memory, expressed over half a century later. Historians remain sceptical as his numbers imply a rate of fire and hit ratio considered implausible.\nCasualties among the defenders were mounting. While the 916th Regiment, defending the center of the 352nd zone, was reporting that the landings had been frustrated, it was also requesting reinforcements. The request could not be met, because the situation elsewhere in Normandy was becoming more urgent for the defenders. The reserve force of the German 352nd Division, the 915th Regiment, which had earlier been deployed against the US airborne landings to the west of Omaha, was diverted to the Gold Beach zone east of Omaha, where German defenses were crumbling.\nBreakthrough.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Are you going to lay there and get killed, or get up and do something about it?\"\nUnidentified lieutenant, Easy Red.\nThe key geographical features that had influenced the landings also influenced the next phase of the battle: the draws, the natural exits off the beaches, were the main targets in the initial assault plan. The strongly concentrated defenses around these draws meant that the troops landing near them quickly became incapable of carrying out a further assault. In the areas between the draws, at the bluffs, units were able to land in greater strength. Defenses were also weaker away from the draws, thus most advances were made there.\nThe other key aspect of the next few hours was leadership. The original plan was in tatters, with so many units mis-landed, disorganized and scattered. Most commanders had fallen or were absent, and there were few ways to communicate, other than shouted commands. In places, small groups of men, sometimes scratched together from different companies, in some cases from different divisions, were \"...inspired, encouraged or bullied...\" out of the relative safety of the shingle, starting the dangerous task of reducing the defenses atop the bluffs.\nAssaulting the bluffs.\nSurvivors of C company 2nd Rangers in the first wave landed on Dog Green around 06:45; by 07:30, they had scaled the cliffs near Dog Green and the Vierville draw. They were joined later by a mis-landed section from B/116, and this group spent the better part of the day tying up and eventually taking WN-73, which defended draw D-1 at Vierville.\nAt 07:50, Cota led the charge off of Dog White, between WN-68 and WN-70, by forcing gaps in the wire with a Bangalore torpedo and wire cutters. Twenty minutes later, the 5th Rangers joined the advance, and blew more openings. The command party established themselves at the top of the bluff, and elements of G/116 and H/116 joined them, having earlier moved laterally along the beach, and now the narrow front had widened to the east. Before 09:00, small parties from F/116 and B/116 reached the crests just east of Dog White. The right flank of this penetration was covered by the survivors of the 2nd Rangers\u2019 A and B companies, who had independently fought their way to the top between 08:00 and 08:30. They took WN-70 (already heavily damaged by naval shells), and joined the 5th Rangers for the move inland. By 09:00, more than 600 American troops, in groups ranging from company sized to just a few men, had reached the top of the bluff opposite Dog White and were advancing inland.\nThe 3rd battalion 116th RCT forced its way across the flats and up the bluff between WN-66 (which defended the D-3 draw at Les Moulins), and WN-65 (defending the E-1 draw). They advanced in small groups, supported by the heavy weapons of M/116, who were held at the base of the bluff. Progress was slowed by mines on the slopes of the bluff, but elements of all three rifle companies, as well as a stray section of G/116, had gained the top by 09:00, causing the defenders at WN-62 to mistakenly report that both WN-65 and WN-66 had been taken.\nBetween 07:30 and 08:30 elements of G/16, E/16, and E/116 came together and climbed the bluffs at Easy Red, between WN-64 (defending the E-1 draw) and WN-62 (the E-3 draw). At 09:05, German observers reported that WN-61 was lost, and that one machine gun was still firing from WN-62. 150 men, mostly from G/16, having reached the top hampered more by minefields than by enemy fire, continued south to attack the WN-63 command post on the edge of Colleville. Meanwhile, E/16, led by Second Lieutenant John M. Spalding and Captain Robert L. Sheppard V, turned westward along the top of the bluffs, engaging in a two-hour battle for WN-64. His small group of just four men had effectively neutralized this point by mid-morning, taking 21 prisoners\u2014just in time to prevent them from attacking freshly landing troops. On the beach below, the 16th RCT commander, Colonel George Taylor had landed at 08:15. With the words \"Two kinds of people are staying on this beach, the dead and those who are going to die \u2013 now let's get the hell out of here!\" he organized groups of men regardless of their unit, putting them under the command of the nearest non-commissioned officer and sending them through the area opened up by G/16. By 09:30, the regimental command post was set up just below the bluff crest, and the 1st and 2nd battalions of the 16th RCT were being sent inland as they reached the crest.\nOn Fox Green, at the eastern end of Omaha, four sections of L/16 had survived their landing intact and were now leading elements of I/16, K/16 and E/116 up the slopes. With supporting fire from the heavy weapons of M/16, tanks and destroyers, this force eliminated WN-60, which defended the draw at F-1; by 09:00, the 3rd battalion 16th RCT was moving inland.\nNaval support.\nThe only artillery support for the troops making these tentative advances was from the navy. Finding targets difficult to spot, and in fear of hitting their own troops, the big guns of the battleships and cruisers concentrated fire on the flanks of the beaches. The destroyers were able to get in closer, and from 08:00 began engaging their own targets. At 09:50, two minutes after the destroyed a gun position in WN-74, the destroyers were ordered to get as close in as possible. Some approached within several times, scraping bottom and risking running aground. An engineer who had landed in the first wave at Fox Red, watching the \"Frankford\" steaming in towards shore, thought she had been badly hit and was being beached. Instead, she turned parallel to the beach and cruised westwards, guns blazing at targets of opportunity. Thinking she would turn back out to sea, the engineer soon saw that she had instead begun backing up, guns still firing. At one point, gunners aboard the \"Frankford\" saw an immobilized tank at the water's edge, still firing. Watching the fall of its shot, they followed up with a salvo of their own. In this manner, the tank acted as the ship's fire control party for several minutes.\nGerman defenses inland.\nWhile the coastal defenses had not turned back the invasion at the beach, they had broken up and weakened the assault formations struggling through them. The German emphasis on this main line of resistance (MLR) meant that defenses further inland were significantly weaker, and based on small pockets of prepared positions smaller than company sized in strength. This tactic was enough to disrupt American advances inland, making it difficult even to reach the assembly areas, let alone achieve their D-Day objectives. As an example of the effectiveness of German defenses despite weakness in numbers, the 5th Ranger battalion was halted in its advance inland by a single machine gun position hidden in a hedgerow. One platoon attempted to outflank the position, only to run into another machine gun position to the left of the first. A second platoon dispatched to take this new position ran into a third, and attempts to deal with this met with fire from a fourth position. The success of the MLR in blocking the movement of heavy weapons off the beach meant that, after four hours, the Rangers were forced to give up on attempts to move them any further inland.\nBeachhead.\nDespite penetrations inland, the key beach objectives had not been achieved. The draws necessary for the movement of vehicles off the beach had not been opened, and the strongpoints defending these were still putting up a spirited resistance. The failure to clear beach obstacles forced subsequent landings to concentrate on Easy Green and Easy Red.\nWhere vehicles were landing, they found a narrow strip of beach with no shelter from enemy fire. Around 08:30, commanders suspended all such landings. This caused a jam of landing craft out to sea. The DUKWs had a particularly hard time of it in the rough conditions. Thirteen DUKWs carried the 111th Field Artillery Battalion of the 116th RCT; five were swamped soon after disembarking from the LCT, four were lost as they circled in the rendezvous area while waiting to land, and one capsized as they turned for the beach. Two were destroyed by enemy fire as they approached the beach and the lone survivor managed to offload its howitzer to a passing craft before it also succumbed to the sea. This one gun eventually landed in the afternoon.\nThe official record of Omaha reports that \"...the tanks were leading a hard life...\". According to the commander of the 2nd battalion 116th RCT the tanks \"...saved the day. They shot the hell out of the Germans, and got the hell shot out of them.\" As the morning progressed the beach defenses were gradually being reduced, often by tanks. Scattered along the length of the beach, trapped between the sea and the impassable shingle embankment and with no operating radios amongst the commanders, tanks had to be controlled individually. This was perilous work. The commanding officer of the 111th Field Artillery, who had landed ahead of his unit, was killed as he tried to direct the fire of one tank. The command group of the 741st Tank Battalion lost three out of their group of five in their efforts. Additionally, the commander of the 743rd tank battalion became a casualty as he approached one of his tanks with orders. When naval gunfire was brought to bear against the strong-points defending the E-3 draw, a decision was made to try to force this exit with tanks. Colonel Taylor ordered all available tanks into action against this point at 11:00. Only three were able to reach the rallying point, and two were knocked out as they attempted to go up the draw, forcing the remaining tank to back off.\nReinforcement regiments were due to land by battalion, beginning with the 18th RCT at 09:30 on Easy Red. The first battalion to land, 2/18, arrived at the E-1 draw 30 minutes late after a difficult passage through the congestion offshore. Casualties were light, though. Despite the existence of a narrow channel through the beach obstacles, the ramps and mines there accounted for the loss of 22 LCVPs, 2 LCI(L)s and 4 LCTs. Supported by tank and subsequent naval fire, the newly arrived troops took the surrender at 11:30 of the last strong-point defending the entrance to the E-1 draw. Although a usable exit was finally opened, congestion prevented an early exploitation inland. The three battalions of the 115th RCT, scheduled to land from 10:30 on Dog Red and Easy Green, came in together and on top of the 18th RCT landings at Easy Red. The confusion prevented the remaining two battalions of the 18th RCT from landing until 13:00, and delayed the move off the beach of all but 2/18, which had exited the beach further east before noon, until 14:00. Even then, this movement was hampered by mines and enemy positions still in action further up the draw.\nBy early afternoon, the strong-point guarding the D-1 draw at Vierville was silenced by the navy. But without enough force on the ground to mop up the remaining defenders, the exit could not be opened. Traffic was eventually able to use this route by nightfall, and the surviving tanks of the 743rd tank battalion spent the night near Vierville.\nThe advance of the 18th RCT cleared away the last remnants of the force defending the E-1 draw. When engineers cut a road up the western side of this draw, it became the main route inland off the beaches. With the congestion on the beaches thus relieved, they were re-opened for the landing of vehicles by 14:00. Further congestion on this route, caused by continued resistance just inland at St. Laurent, was bypassed with a new route, and at 17:00, the surviving tanks of the 741st tank battalion were ordered inland via the E-1 draw.\nThe F-1 draw, initially considered too steep for use, was also eventually opened when engineers laid down a new road. In the absence of any real progress opening the D-3 and E-3 draws, landing schedules were revised to take advantage of this route, and a company of tanks from the 745th tank battalion were able to reach the high ground by 20:00.\nApproaches to the exits were also cleared, with minefields lifted and holes blown in the embankment to permit the passage of vehicles. As the tide receded, engineers were also able to resume their work of clearing the beach obstacles, and by the end of the evening, 13 gaps were opened and marked.\nGerman reactions.\nObserving the build-up of shipping off the beach, and in an attempt to contain what were regarded as minor penetrations at Omaha, a battalion was detached from the 915th Regiment being deployed against the British to the east. Along with an anti-tank company, this force was attached to the 916th Regiment and committed to a counterattack in the Colleville area in the early afternoon. It was stopped by \"firm American resistance\" and reported heavy losses. \nThe strategic situation in Normandy precluded the reinforcement of the weakened 352nd Division. The main threat was felt by the Germans to be the British beachheads to the east of Omaha, and these received the most attention from the German mobile reserves in the immediate area of Normandy. Preparations were made to bring up units stationed for the defense of Brittany, southwest of Normandy, but these would not arrive quickly and would be subject to losses inflicted in transit by overwhelming Allied air superiority. The last reserve of the 352nd Division, an engineer battalion, was attached to the 916th Regiment in the evening. It was deployed to defend against the expected attempt to break out of the Colleville-St. Laurent beachhead established on the 16th RCT front. \nAt midnight General Dietrich Kraiss, commander of the 352nd Division, reported the total loss of men and equipment in the coastal positions. He advised that he had sufficient forces to contain the Americans on D+1 but that he would need reinforcements thereafter. He was told that there were no more reserves available.\nRAF at Omaha Beach.\nIn order to provide frontline infantry the best possible aerial protection, both on the beaches and as they moved forward to secure the beachhead, it was necessary that the Allied Air Forces provided radar detection and guidance to be in place on the evening of the D-Day invasion.\nAs a result, a small force of about 160 Royal Air Force technical personnel, together with their attached supporting signals and other units, were scheduled to land on Omaha beach in Normandy at high tide on D-Day (about 11:00), immediately after the first waves of American assault troops had secured the beach and their engineers had made it safe.\nAs the United States did not have their own radar available by D-Day, it was agreed that a British Mobile Ground Controlled Interception Radar Units, (GCI 15082), would be lent to the US. The British mobile radars, being able to detect the range, bearing and height of potential enemy aircraft, were ideally suited for this role, provided they could be located on favorable sites and were available for immediate use on the night of the landings. GCI 15082 was formed as a Ground Controlled Interception unit in August 1943 at Renscombe Down, near Swanage in Dorset. It was equipped with what was then the latest in radar, including height-finding apparatus, and it was used primarily for the control of night fighters in forward fighting areas. The unit was mobile, with heavy equipment mounted on Crossley trucks and smaller apparatus on Bedfords. Operational status, following arrival at a designated site, was expected to be reached in two hours.\nIn order to provide this air cover, three Base Defence Wings (re-designated as \"Sectors\" \u2013 BDS \u2013 in May 1944) were begun to be formed from 1 January 1944 with the appointment of Group Captain Moseby as the Commanding Officer of No. 21 BDS at RAF Church Fenton, North Riding of Yorkshire. At a later date, the second and third Wings, Nos 24 and 25, were formed, the former with effect from 1 February 1944 at RAF Acklington, Northumberland, and the latter with effect from 1 March 1944 at RAF Castle Camps, Cambridgeshire.\nThe plan had been for 21 BDS to land at Easy Red Beach at around 11:30 when the tide would be in and to drive ashore. However, at the appointed hour for 21 BDS to land, the beach had not been taken, so they were ordered to circle offshore until the situation improved. Slowly, US Forces began to penetrate the bluffs and by early afternoon, at several points along the beach, advances were being made. By mid-afternoon, the first draw had been taken (E-1), quickly followed by E-3. There was now a chance to land 21 BDS, and so at 17:00, 6 hours behind schedule, they were ordered in. However, while they should have landed at the E-1 draw, they were actually put ashore closer to the D-3 draw, which was still being viciously fought over. The tide was also low, and so the vehicles were dropped far out on the flat, sandy beach into low water. There were deep, hidden channels. The whole contents of one LCT drove off the ship and straight into a deep channel, never to be seen again.\nOther vehicles became stuck in deep sand and mud and became drowned out by the advancing tide. Those that made it to the edge of the shingle found themselves trapped with no exit off the beach. They became sitting targets for the German mortar and artillery shells that picked them off, one after another.\nThe US forces that were on the beach with them were traumatized and immobile. Many men were dead or injured. 21 BDS\u2019 position was grave, and they too were suffering casualties. The only solution was to get off the beach and get into the shelter of a ravine.\nSeveral of the British officers managed to organize themselves and some of the Americans to use an abandoned bulldozer to break through the shingle and effect their escape. Their plan was successful, and the remaining, unscathed vehicles were driven a few hundred meters to the comparative safety of the destroyed hamlet of Les Moulins. Out of the original 27 vehicles, only 8 survived, and 21 BDS had lost 11 dead and 39 seriously injured out of their starting complement of about 150. Six men were awarded either the Military Cross or Military Medal from 21 BDS.\nAlong with many detachments of the US 5th Army, they had suffered shocking losses, and had endured a frightening ordeal. Despite losing most of their equipment, they were able to re-group on 7 June and salvage some vehicles from the beach, though still under sniper fire. By the 8th June, they had established a temporary working base at the airstrip close to St. Laurent and claimed their first \u201ckill\u201d on the 9th June.\nOne tragic error that the RAF committed was to send these men into conflict in their RAF blue battle dress, treated with \u201canti gas\u201d material \u2013 once this uniform got wet, it became more grey than blue and became far too similar to the German grey uniform. It was reported that, on many occasions, the ill-fated 21 BDS were being shot at from both sides.\nReplacement vehicles and men were sent over after a week or so, and the rest of 21 BDS were operational by 1 July. 21 BDS went on to become the joint most successful GCI unit on the Western Front, with over 46 enemy aircraft downed in the first three months of the invasion alone.\nEnd of day.\nFollowing the penetrations inland, confused hard-fought individual actions pushed the foothold out deep in the Colleville area to the east, less than that west of St. Laurent, and an isolated penetration in the Vierville area. Pockets of enemy resistance still fought on behind the American front line, and the whole beachhead remained under artillery fire. At 21:00 the landing of the 26th RCT completed the planned landing of infantry, but losses in equipment were high, including 26 artillery pieces, over 50 tanks, about 50 landing craft and 10 larger vessels.\nOnly 100 of the 2,400 tons of supplies scheduled to be landed on D-Day were landed. An accurate figure for casualties incurred by V Corps at Omaha on 6 June is not known; sources vary between 5,000 and over 6,000 killed, wounded, and missing, with the heaviest losses incurred by the infantry, tanks and engineers in the first landings. Only five tanks of the 741st Tank Battalion were ready for action the next day. The German 352nd division suffered 1,200 killed, wounded and missing; about 20% of its strength. Its deployment at the beach caused such problems that Lieutenant General Omar Bradley, commander of the U.S. First Army, at one stage considered evacuating Omaha, while Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery considered the possibility of diverting V Corps forces through Gold.\nAftermath.\nThe foothold gained on D-Day at Omaha by the U.S. troops, itself two isolated pockets, was the most tenuous across all the D-Day beaches. With the original objective yet to be achieved, the priority for the Allies was to link up all the Normandy beachheads. During the course of June 7, while still under sporadic shellfire, the beach was prepared as a supply area. Surplus cargo ships were deliberately sunk to form an artificial breakwater and, while still less than planned, 1,429 tons of stores were landed that day.\nWith the beach assault phase completed the RCTs reorganized into infantry regiments and battalions and over the course of the next two days achieved the original D-Day objectives. On the 1st divisional front the 18th Infantry Regiment blocked an attempt by two companies from the 916th and 726th Grenadiers to break out of WN-63 and Colleville, both of which were subsequently taken by the 16th Infantry Regiment which also moved on Port-en-Bessin. The main advance was made by the 18th Infantry Regiment, with the 3rd battalion of the 26th Infantry Regiment attached, south and south-eastwards. \nThe most intense opposition was encountered at Formigny where troops of the 2nd battalion 915th Grenadiers had reinforced the headquarters troops of 2nd battalion 916th Grenadiers. Attempts by 3/26 and B/18 with support from the tanks of B/745 were held off and the town did not fall until the morning of June 8. The threat of an armored counterattack kept the 18th Infantry Regiment on the defensive for the rest of June 8. \nThe 26th Infantry Regiment's three battalions, having been attached to the 16th, 18th and 115th Regiments the previous day, spent June 8 reassembling before pushing eastwards, forcing the 1st battalion of the German 726th Grenadiers to spend the night extricating itself from the pocket thus forming between Bayeux and Port-en-Bessin. By the morning of June 9, the 1st Division had established contact with the British XXX Corps, thus linking Omaha with Gold.\nOn the 29th divisional front two battalions of the 116th Infantry Regiment cleared the last defenders from the bluffs while the remaining 116th battalion joined the Rangers in their move west along the coast. This force relieved the 2nd Ranger companies who were holding Pointe du Hoc on June 8 and subsequently forced the German 914th Grenadiers and the 439th Ost-Battalion to withdraw from the Grandcamp area which lay further to the west. Early on June 7 WN-69 defending St. Laurent was abandoned and the 115th Infantry Regiment was therefore able to push inland to the south-west, reaching the Formigny area on June 7 and the original D-Day phase line the following day. The third regiment of 29th Division; the 175th, started landing on June 7. By the morning of June 9 this regiment had taken Isigny and on the evening of the following day forward patrols established contact with the 101st Airborne Division, thus linking Omaha with Utah.\nIn the meantime, the original defender at Omaha, the 352nd Division, was being steadily reduced. By the morning of June 9 the division was reported as having been \"...reduced to 'small groups'...\" while the 726th Grenadier Regiment had \"...practically disappeared.\" By June 11 the effectiveness of the 352nd was regarded as \"very slight\", and by June 14 the German corps command was reporting the 352nd as completely used up and needing to be removed from the line.\nOnce the beachhead had been secured, Omaha became the location of one of the two Mulberry harbors, prefabricated artificial harbors towed in pieces across the English Channel and assembled just off shore. Construction of 'Mulberry A' at Omaha began the day after D-Day with the scuttling of ships to form a breakwater. By D+10 the harbor became operational when the first pier was completed; \"LST 342\" docking and unloading 78 vehicles in 38 minutes. Three days later the worst storm to hit Normandy in 40 years began to blow, raging for three days and not abating until the night of June 22. The harbor was so badly damaged that the decision was taken not to repair it; supplies being subsequently landed directly on the beach until fixed port facilities were captured. In the few days that the harbor was operational, 11,000 troops, 2,000 vehicles and 9,000 tons of equipment and supplies were brought ashore. Over the 100 days following D-Day more than 1,000,000 tons of supplies, 100,000 vehicles and 600,000 men were landed, and 93,000 casualties were evacuated, via Omaha.\nToday at Omaha jagged remains of the harbor can be seen at low tide. The shingle bank is no longer there, cleared by engineers in the days following D-Day to facilitate the landing of supplies. The beachfront is more built-up and the beach road extended, villages have grown and merged, but the geography of the beach remains as it was and the remains of the coastal defenses can still be visited. At the top of the bluff overlooking Omaha near Colleville is the American cemetery. In 1988, particles of shrapnel, as well as glass and iron beads resulting from munitions explosions were found in the sand of the beach, and the study of them estimated that those particles would remain in the sand of the beach for one to two centuries.\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60121", "revid": "1938651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60121", "title": "Operation Fortitude", "text": "Military deception operation\nOperation Fortitude was a military deception operation by the Allied nations as part of Operation Bodyguard, an overall deception strategy during the buildup to the 1944 Normandy landings. Fortitude was divided into two subplans, North and South, and had the aim of misleading the German High Command as to the location of the invasion.\nFortitude had evolved from plans submitted by Noel Wild, the head of Ops (B), and John Bevan, from the London Controlling Section in late 1943. Early revisions in January 1944 suggested a fictional buildup of troops in southern England with the hope of drawing German attention to the Calais region. Colonel David Strangeways, head of Montgomery's R Force deception staff, was unimpressed with the approach. He was widely critical of the original plan and eventually rewrote the Fortitude deception with a focus on creating a more realistic threat.\nBoth Fortitude plans involved the creation of phantom field armies (based in Edinburgh and southern England), which threatened Norway (Fortitude North) and Pas de Calais (Fortitude South). The operation was intended to divert Axis attention away from Normandy and, after the invasion on 6 June 1944, to delay reinforcement by convincing the Germans that the landings had been purely a diversionary attack.\nBackground.\nFortitude was one of the major elements of Operation Bodyguard, the overall Allied deception stratagem for the Normandy landings. Bodyguard's main objectives were to ensure that the Germans would not increase troop presence in Normandy and to do so by promoting the appearance that the Allies would attack in other locations. It consisted of a wide range of deceptions ranging across the European front, with Operation Fortitude representing the main effort to misdirect the \"Oberkommando der Wehrmacht\" (German High Command) to believe in specific mainland invasion objectives.\nThe problem facing the Allies was that France was the most logical choice for an invasion into mainland Europe. Therefore, the Allied high command had only a small geographical area across which to mislead the German defences. Montgomery, commanding the Allied landing forces, knew that the crucial aspect of any invasion was the ability to enlarge a beachhead into a full front. He also had only 37 divisions at his command, compared to around 60 German formations. That meant that any deception would have to convince the German high command that the Allies were not committing their full forces into Normandy, but holding many of those formations in reserve. After the landings, there would then need to be some way to delay the movement of German reserves to the Normandy beachhead to prevent a potentially disastrous counterattack.\nOperation Fortitude focused on creating invasion threats from the United Kingdom into various parts of Western Europe. The plan was eventually split into two parts, North and South. Fortitude South focused on creating confusion about the Allied Channel crossing, and Fortitude North, staged out of Scotland, introduced a threat to occupied Norway. Planning for Bodyguard overall came under the auspices of the London Controlling Section (LCS), a secret body that was set up to manage Allied deception strategy during the war. However, the execution of individual plans fell to the various theatre commanders. In the case of Fortitude, it was Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF), under General Dwight D. Eisenhower and specifically 21st Army Group, the invasion force, under the command of General Bernard Montgomery. A special section, Ops (B), was established at SHAEF to handle Fortitude, and Montgomery formed R Force under his command to handle the tactical elements of deception.\nDeception techniques.\nThe idea of creating fake formations as a method of deception had been pioneered in Cairo by Dudley Clarke's 'A' Force earlier in the war. Fortitude made heavy use of Clarke's techniques for inflating the size of an army and used a number of methodologies which had come to be referred to as \"special means.\" They included combinations of physical deception, fake wireless (radio) activity, leaks through diplomatic channels or double agents and the usage of notable officers in fake formations.\nOne of the main deception channels for the Allies was the use of double agents. B1A, the Counter-Intelligence Division of MI5, had done a good job in intercepting numerous German agents in Britain. Many of them were recruited as double agents under the Double Cross System. For Fortitude, the intelligence agencies made particular use of three agents:\nPlanning.\nDetailed planning ostensibly sat with Noel Wild and his Ops (B) staff. In practice, it was a collaboration between Wild and the heads of the London Controlling Section and B1a. Work began in December 1943 under the codename Mespot. Wild's first version of the Fortitude plan was socialised in early January 1943 with SHAEF, political leaders and the staff officers of the 21st Army Group. That iteration aimed to take advantage of the likelihood that the Germans would notice invasion preparations in southern England. Wild wanted to create the impression that an invasion was aimed at the Pas-de-Calais slightly later in the year (July, instead of June). Once the real invasion had landed, six fictional divisions would then keep the threat to Calais alive.\nColonel David Strangeways, head of Montgomery's R Force, raised concerns about the entire plan. Strangeways argued that the plan aimed to cover the Allies' real intentions, instead of creating a realistic threat to Calais to which Axis forces would be forced respond in defence. He was concerned the Germans might well be aware of the Allied readiness in southern England and so they would be alert to the risk of an invasion in early June. However, that would realise this gave them several weeks to defeat any bridgehead and return to defend Calais. On 25 January, Montgomery's Chief of Staff, Francis de Guingand, sent a letter to the deception planners that asked them to focus on Pas-de-Calais as the main assault and was almost certainly sent at the behest of Strangeways.\nWith those criticisms in hand, Wild produced his final draft for Fortitude. In the revised plan, which was issued on 30 January and approved by the Allied chiefs on 18 February, fifty divisions would be positioned in Southern England to attack Pas de Calais. After the real invasion had landed, the story would change to suggest to the Germans that several assault divisions remained in England that were ready to conduct a cross-Channel attack once the Normandy beachhead had drawn German defences away from Calais. The plan still retained some of its initial form, most notably since the first part of the story still aimed to suggest an invasion date of mid-July. At that point, Winston Churchill judged 'Mespot' to be an unsuitable name and so 'Fortitude' was adopted from an alternative list on 18 February.\nStrangeways rewrite.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I rewrote it entirely. It was too complicated, and the people who made it had not never done it before. Now they did their best \u2013 but it didn't suit the operation that Monty was considering... You see so much depended on the success of that deception plan.\u2014\u200a\nStrangeways was still unimpressed with the Fortitude outline, and, according to Ops (B)'s Christopher Harmer, in mid-February, he set out to ride \"roughshod over the established deception organization\". Harmer writes that Strangeways displayed the same arrogance as his commanding officer. Montgomery was famously opinionated and held a low opinion of the London establishment of the \"old boys'\" of Ops (B) and the LCS. More importantly, however, he had worked under Dudley Clarke in Cairo during the beginning of the war and had extensive experience of deception operations.\nIn North Africa, he had learned Clarke's maxim that deception relied on getting the enemy to do something, not just to think something, and so his criticism focused on that. He pointed out that convincing the Germans of so many fictional divisions would be difficult, and even more so would be convincing them of Montgomery's ability to manage two entire invasions at the same time. Wild's plan outlined ten divisions for the Calais assault, six of them being fictional and the remainder being the real American V Corps and British I Corps. However, the corps would be part of the actual Normandy invasion and so it would be difficult to imply Calais as the main assault after D-Day. Strangeways's final concerns related to the effort required for physical deception, as the plan called for large numbers of troop movements and dummy craft.\nStrangeways's objections were strong, and having responsibility for the plan's implementation, he refused to undertake most of the physical deception. A power struggle ensued throughout February and early March between Ops (B) and Strangeways as to who had authority to implement each part of the deception plan. Montgomery put his full support behind his head of deception and so Strangeways prevailed. Finally, in a 23 February meeting between R Force and Ops (B), Strangeways tore up a copy of the plan, declared it useless, and announced that he would rewrite it from scratch. The established deceivers were dubious about Strangeways's announcement and assumed that he would resubmit the existing plan with some modifications. However, he duly submitted a rewritten operation that was met, in Harmer's words, with \"astonishment\".\nQuicksilver.\nStrangeways's revised Fortitude plan and an operational implementation, dubbed Quicksilver, invented an entire new field army but crucially without significant fictional forces. The skeleton of the new force already existed in the form of the First United States Army Group (FUSAG), commanded by Omar Bradley. It had been formed for administrative purposes but never used, but the Germans had discovered its existence through radio intercepts. Strangeways proposed activating the unit, with a series of fictional and real formations. The order of battle for the army would be intended to represent the bulk of Allied forces in England and therefore the main Allied threat. To add credence to the importance of FUSAG, Bradley was replaced by Lieutenant General George Patton, whom the Germans held in high regard and who was known to be a competitor to Montgomery.\nThe Fortitude South story would be that FUSAG was being prepared to invade Pas-de-Calais some weeks after an initial diversionary invasion. That would allow Operation Neptune's landings to be passed off as a distraction from the later main invasion. Pas-de-Calais offered a number of advantages over the real invasion site, such as by being the shortest crossing of the English Channel and the quickest route into Germany. As a result, Erwin Rommel had taken steps to fortify that area of coastline heavily. Strangeways felt that would help the deception seem realistic in the minds of German high command.\nA deception of such a size required significant organisation and input from many organisations, including MI5, MI6, SHAEF via Ops B, and the armed services. Information from the various deception agencies was organised by and channelled through the London Controlling Section. To help keep the approach well-organised, Strangeways divided the implementation stages into six subplans, codenamed Quicksilver.\nThe FUSAG deception was not implemented primarily with dummy tanks, aeroplanes, or other vehicles. At that stage of the war, the Germans were unable to fly reconnaissance planes over England and so Strangeways felt that such effort would have been wasted. However, temporary buildings were constructed and dummy landing craft were stationed at likely embarkation point in the East and the South-East of England. As the FUSAG commander, Patton paid many of them a visit, along with a photographer, to ensure that their location was noted. The landing craft, built from wood and canvas and nicknamed Bigbob's, suffered from being too light. Wind and rain flipped many of them over or ran them to ground during the operation.\nInstead of extensive physical measures, most of Strangeway's plan relied on radio signals and leaks through double agents. Managing that information flow had to be done with caution since leaking supposed top-secret invasion plans would have been very obvious. Instead, the deceivers used tactics developed by Clarke in Cairo. Agents were allowed to report minutiae such as insignia on soldiers' uniforms and unit markings on vehicles to allow the Germans to build up a picture. The observations in the south-central areas largely gave accurate information about the real invasion forces since Clarke had stressed that using as much real information as possible led to better outcomes. Reports from the South-West of England indicated few troop sightings, but in reality, many units were housed there in preparation for D-Day. Reports from the South-East depicted largely-notional Quicksilver forces. That approach aimed to convince German intelligence services of an order of battle for the Allied forces that placed the centre of gravity of the invasion force opposite Pas-de-Calais.\nFortitude South II included the U.S. XXXIII Corps. The corps was first reported to the Germans as arriving in June 1944, disembarking at Liverpool and establishing its headquarters in Marbury, Cheshire, with the US 11th Infantry Division, US 48th Infantry Division and US 25th Armored Division under its command. In July the corps and the units under its command were reported as moving to take up positions vacated by US XX Corps as it departed for Normandy.\nFortitude North.\nFortitude North was designed to mislead the Germans into expecting an invasion of Norway. By threatening any weakened Norwegian defence, the Allies hoped to prevent or to delay reinforcement of France after the Normandy invasion. The plan involved simulating a buildup of forces in northern England and political contact with Sweden.\nDuring a similar operation in 1943, Operation Tindall, a fictional field army (British Fourth Army) had been created, headquartered in Edinburgh Castle. It was decided to continue to use the same force during Fortitude. Unlike its southern counterpart, the deception relied primarily on fake radio traffic since it was judged unlikely that German reconnaissance planes could reach Scotland without being intercepted. False information about the arrival of troops in the area was reported by the double agents Mutt and Jeff, who had surrendered after their 1941 landing in the Moray Firth, and the British media co-operated by broadcasting fake information, such as football scores or wedding announcements, to nonexistent troops. Fortitude North was so successful that by late spring 1944, Hitler had positioned 13 army divisions in Norway.\nIn the early spring of 1944, British commandos attacked targets in Norway to simulate preparations for invasion. They destroyed industrial targets, such as shipping and power infrastructure and military outposts. That coincided with an increase in naval activity in the northern seas and in political pressure on neutral Sweden.\nSimilar to the operation in the south, Fortitude North had a subsidiary plan used to implement the extensive radio deceptions. Codenamed Operation Skye, it began on 22 March 1944, was overseen by Colonel R. M. McLeod, and became fully operational by 6 April. Skye was split into four sections, relating to different divisions of the Fourth Army.\nAfter invasion.\nOn 20 July, Ops (B) took over control of Fortitude South from R Force. The previous month, it had begun work to follow up the operation. The new story centered on the idea that Eisenhower had decided to defeat the Germans through the existing beachhead. As a result, elements of FUSAG had been detached and sent to reinforce Normandy, and a second smaller Second American Army Group (SUSAG) would be formed to threaten the Pas-de-Calais.\nThe plan again met criticism from Strangeways. Firstly, he opposed the creation of so many fictional US formations in the face of a known manpower shortage. Secondly, the new plan reduced the threat to Pas-de-Calais which might give the German command confidence to move the Fifteenth Army to reinforce Normandy. As before, in late June, Strangeways rewrote the operation to ensure that the focus remained on Calais. In his version, the Normandy beachhead was struggling to succeed and so Eisenhower had taken elements of FUSAG to reinforce its efforts. FUSAG would then be rebuilt with newly-arrived US formations with the aim of landing in France toward the end of July.\nIn order to explain Patton's appearance in Normandy, news was transmitted of a rumour that Patton had refused to transfer any of his units to Montgomery's 21st Army Group, and as a result had been demoted and given the lesser command of the Third United States Army. His replacement at FUSAG was Lieutenant General Lesley J. McNair, but after touring Southeast England, he visited Normandy where he was accidentally killed on 24 July in an Allied air raid and was subsequently replaced by General John L. DeWitt. \nThrough the evolved plan, the Allies maintained the pretense of FUSAG and other forces threatening Pas-de-Calais for some considerable time after D-Day, possibly even as late as September 1944. That was vital to the success of the Allied plan by forcing the Germans to keep most of their reserves bottled up in wait for an attack on Calais that never came. That allowed the Allies to maintain and to build upon their foothold in Normandy. Having served its purpose, on 28 September 1944, it was agreed to end the Fortitude deception and to move any remaining operational deceptions in the field to the overall charge of Ops (B).\nImpact.\nThe Allies were able to judge how well Fortitude worked because of Ultra, the signals intelligence that was obtained by breaking German codes and ciphers. On 1 June, a decrypted transmission by Hiroshi \u014cshima, the Japanese ambassador, to his government recounted a recent conversation with Hitler and confirmed the effectiveness of Fortitude. When asked for Hitler's thoughts on the Allied battle plan, he had said, \"I think that diversionary actions will take place in a number of places\u00a0\u2013 against Norway, Denmark, the southern part of western France, and the French Mediterranean coast\". He added that he expected the Allies would then attack in force across the Strait of Dover.\nThe deception was also assisted by very high German assessments of Allied capabilities. In an appreciation of 8 May von Rundstedt said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Observed tonnage of landing shipping could be taken as sufficient for 12 or 13 divisions (less heavy equipment and rear elements) for fairly short sea routes. In all (estimating the capacity of the other English ports not so far covered by visual and photo recce) probable employment of at least 20 and probably more divisions in first wave must be expected. To these must be added strong air-landing forces.\nDuring the course of Fortitude, the almost-complete lack of German aerial reconnaissance, together with the absence of uncontrolled German agents in Britain, came to make physical deception almost irrelevant. The unreliability of \"diplomatic leaks\" resulted in their discontinuance. Most deception in the south was carried out by means of false wireless traffic and through German double agents. However, those methods had significantly less impact for Fortitude North. In his 2000 book, \"Fortitude: The D-Day Deception Campaign\", Roger Fleetwood-Hesketh, a member of Ops (B), concluded that \"no evidence has so far been found to show that wireless deception or visual misdirection made any contribution\". It is thought that the Germans were not actually monitoring the radio traffic that was being simulated.\nOverall, Fortitude was successful for several reasons:\nOne author says that on 5 June before he gave the \"Go\" message for Overlord, Eisenhower received a message that was couriered from Bletchley Park and had been sent by Hitler to Rommel with battle orders that the invasion of Normandy was imminent but that it was a feint to draw troops away from the real invasion five days later against the Channel Ports, and Rommel was not to move any troops. That would mean that the Allies would have five days without determined opposition. It was sent in a \"Fish\" radio message and decrypted using Colossus, according to an account by Tommy Flowers. Another author doubts whether Hitler would have sent messages about the invasion at the time since the invasion fleet had sailed on 4 June but was then postponed for 24 hours, and even with Colossus, Fish decrypts could take days or weeks. He thinks that Flowers may have embellished or misremembered the story in later life. Hitler\u2019s views on the real invasion are widely attributed to the message from the Japanese ambassador to Berlin, \u014cshima, after a 27 May meeting. Anyway, during the first week of June 1944, Eisenhower was more concerned with the weather than whether the Germans had been misled about the invasion's location.\nFictional depictions.\nOperation Fortitude was classified, along with all of the wartime deceptions, and initial accounts did not emerge until the 1970s. Once published, however, the story inspired a number of fictional accounts:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60122", "revid": "28418319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60122", "title": "Montmartre", "text": "Large hill in Paris's northern 18th arrondissement\nMontmartre ( , , ) is a large hill in Paris's northern 18th arrondissement. It is high and gives its name to the surrounding district, part of the Right Bank. Montmartre is primarily known for its artistic history, for the white-domed Basilica of the Sacr\u00e9-C\u0153ur on its summit, and as a nightclub district.\nThe other church on the hill, Saint Pierre de Montmartre, built in 1147, was the church of the prestigious Montmartre Abbey. On 15 August 1534, Saint Ignatius of Loyola, Saint Francis Xavier and five other companions bound themselves by vows in the Martyrium of Saint Denis, 11 Rue Yvonne Le Tac, the first step in the creation of the Jesuits.\nNear the end of the 19th century and at the beginning of the 20th, during the Belle \u00c9poque, many artists lived, worked, or had studios in or around Montmartre, including Amedeo Modigliani, Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Edgar Degas, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Suzanne Valadon, Maurice Utrillo, Piet Mondrian, Pablo Picasso, Camille Pissarro and Vincent van Gogh. Montmartre is also the setting for several hit films.\nLocation and access.\nThe Montmartre Funicular provides access to Sacr\u00e9-C\u0153ur from the place Saint-Pierre, allowing people to avoid climbing the stairs on Rue Foyatier, which runs alongside it and has a total of 222 stairs. \nFour Paris metro lines serve the neighborhood: \nThe RATP bus lines 30, 31, 54, 67, 74, 80, 85 and 95 also cross the neighborhood, as does line 40 (formerly Montmartrobus), the only one to run on the Montmartre hilltop. \nFinally, the Montmartre tram also offers a guided tour of the area in 14 stages. \nThe historic district established by the City of Paris in 1995 contains and is bordered by Rue Caulaincourt and Rue Custine on the north, by Rue de Clignancourt on the east, and by the Boulevard de Clichy and Boulevard de Rochechouart to the south.\nToponymy.\nA proposed etymology suggests that the toponym Montmartre originates from \"Mons Martis\", Latin for \"Mount of Mars\". This name would have been given to the place due to the fact that there were temples in honor of the gods Mars and Mercury on top of its hill. This would explain the fact that Fredegar called the area \"Mons-Mercurii\" in the 8th century and, although Hilduin of Saint-Denis used the same name in the 9th century, his contemporary, the monk Abbo Cernuus, called it \"Mons-Martis\". Although he failed to present evidence for this and directly contradicted several historical accounts, Jean Lebeuf denied the fact that these temples ever existed.\nAnother etymology proposes that the name comes from \"mons Martyrum\", meaning \"Mount of the Martyrs\". This would have been a reinterpretation of \"Mount of Mars\" as \"Mount of Martyrs\" (\"Mont de Mars\" and \"Mont des Martyrs\" in French, respectively). This transformation would have been documented by Hilduin, who stated that the hill started to be called \"Mons Martyrum\", \"martyrum\" referring to \"the place of torture or burial of martyrs\". After this, it would have transformed into \"mont de \"martre\" \" (\"mount of the martyr\" in english) through morphological derivation, \"martre\" meaning \"martyr\" in Old French.\nSince consensus on the etymology of this toponym is yet to be reached, both etymologies presented here are considered valid. \nHistory.\nAntiquity to 18th century.\nArchaeological excavations show that the heights of Montmartre were occupied from at least Gallo-Roman times. Texts from the 8th century cite the name of \"mons Mercori\" (Mount Mercury); a 9th-century text speaks of Mount Mars. Excavations in 1975 north of the Church of Saint-Pierre found coins from the 3rd century and the remains of a major wall. Earlier excavations in the 17th century at the Fontaine-du-But (2 rue Pierre-Dac) found vestiges of Roman baths from the 2nd century.\nThe butte owes its particular religious importance to the text entitled \"Miracles of Saint-Denis\", written before 885 by Hilduin, abbot of the monastery of Saint-Denis, which recounted how Saint Denis, a Christian bishop, was decapitated on the hilltop in 250 AD on orders of the Roman prefect Fescennius Sisinius for preaching the Christian faith to the Gallo-Roman inhabitants of Lutetia. According to Hilduin, Denis collected his head and carried it as far as the \"fontaine Saint-Denis\" (on modern \"impasse Girardon\"), then descended the north slope of the hill, where he died. Hilduin wrote that a church had been built \"in the place formerly called Mont de Mars, and then, by a happy change, 'Mont des Martyrs'.\"\nIn 1134, King Louis VI purchased the Merovingian chapel and built on the site the church of Saint-Pierre de Montmartre, still standing. He also founded the Royal Abbey of Montmartre, a monastery of the Benedictine order, whose buildings, gardens and fields occupied most of Montmartre. He also built a small chapel, called the \"Martyrium\", at the site where it was believed that Saint Denis had been decapitated. It became a popular pilgrimage site. In the 17th century, a priory called \"abbaye d'en bas\" was built at that site, and in 1686 it was occupied by a community of nuns.\nBy the 15th century, the north and northeast slopes of the hill were the site of a village surrounded by vineyards, gardens and orchards of peach and cherry trees. The first mills were built on the western slope in 1529, grinding wheat, barley and rye. There were thirteen mills at one time, though by the late nineteenth century only two remained.\nDuring the 1590 Siege of Paris, in the last decade of the French Wars of Religion, Henry IV placed his artillery on top of the \"butte\" of Montmartre to fire down into the city. The siege eventually failed when a large relief force approached and forced Henry to withdraw.\nThe abbey was destroyed in 1790 during the French Revolution, and the convent demolished to make place for gypsum mines. The last abbess, Marie-Louise de Laval-Montmorency, was guillotined in 1794. The church of Saint-Pierre was saved. At the place where the chapel of the Martyrs was located (now 11 rue Yvonne-Le Tac), an oratory was built in 1855. It was renovated in 1994.\nIn 1790, Montmartre was located just outside the limits of Paris. That year, under the revolutionary government of the National Constituent Assembly, it became the \"commune\" of Montmartre, with its town hall located on \"place du Tertre\", site of the former abbey. The main businesses of the \"commune\" were wine making, stone quarries and gypsum mines. \nMining and archaeology.\nThe mining of gypsum had begun in the Gallo-Roman period, first in open air mines and then underground, and continued until 1860. The gypsum was cut into blocks, baked, then ground and put into sacks. Sold as \"montmartarite\", it was used for plaster, because of its resistance to fire and water. Between the 7th and 9th centuries, most of the sarcophagi found in ancient sites were made of molded gypsum. In modern times, the mining was done with explosives, which riddled the ground under the butte with tunnels, making the ground very unstable and difficult to build upon. The construction of the Basilica of Sacr\u00e9-C\u0153ur required making a special foundation that descended under the ground to hold the structure in place. A fossil tooth found in one of these mines was identified by Georges Cuvier as an extinct equine, which he dubbed \"Palaeotherium\", the \"ancient animal\". His sketch of the entire animal in 1825 was matched by a skeleton discovered later.\n19th century.\nRussian soldiers occupied Montmartre during the Battle of Paris in 1814. They used the altitude of the hill for artillery bombardment of the city.\nMontmartre remained outside of the city limits of Paris until January 1, 1860, when it was annexed to the city along with other communities (\"faubourgs\") surrounding Paris, and became part of the 18th arrondissement of Paris.\nIn 1871, Montmartre was the site of the beginning of the revolutionary uprising of the Paris Commune. During the Franco-Prussian War, the French army had stored a large number of cannon in a park at the top of the hill, near where the basilica is today. On 18 March 1871, the soldiers from the French Army tried to remove the cannon from the hilltop. They were blocked by members of the politically radicalised Paris National Guard, who captured and then killed two French army generals, and installed a revolutionary government that lasted two months. The heights of Montmartre were retaken by the French Army with heavy fighting at the end of May 1871, during what became known as the Semaine Sanglante, or \"Bloody Week\".\nIn 1870, the future French prime minister during World War I, Georges Clemenceau, was appointed mayor of the 18th arrondissement, including Montmartre, by the new government of the Third Republic, and was also elected to the National Assembly. A member of the radical republican party, Clemenceau tried unsuccessfully to find a peaceful compromise between the even more radical Paris Commune and the more conservative French government. The Commune refused to recognize him as mayor, and seized the town hall. He ran for a seat in the council of the Paris Commune, but received less than eight hundred votes. He did not participate in the Commune, and was out of the city when the Commune was suppressed by the French army. In 1876, he again was elected as deputy for Montmartre and the 18th arrondissement.\nThe Basilica of the Sacr\u00e9-C\u0153ur was built on Montmartre from 1876 to 1919, financed by public subscription as a gesture of expiation for the suffering of France during the Franco-Prussian War. Its white dome is a highly visible landmark in the city, and near it artists set up their easels each day amidst the tables and colourful umbrellas of the \"place du Tertre\".\nBy the 19th century, the butte was famous for its caf\u00e9s, guinguettes with public dancing, and cabarets. Le Chat Noir at 84 \"boulevard de Rochechouart\" was founded in 1881 by Rodolphe Salis, and became a popular haunt for writers and poets. The composer Eric Satie earned money by playing the piano there. The Moulin Rouge at 94 \"boulevard de Clichy\" was founded in 1889 by Joseph Oller and Charles Zidler; it became the birthplace of the French cancan. Artists who performed in the cabarets of Montmartre included Yvette Guilbert, Marcelle Lender, Aristide Bruant, La Goulue, Georges Guibourg, Mistinguett, Fr\u00e9hel, Jane Avril, and Damia.\nArtists gather (late 19th\u2013early 20th century).\nDuring the \"Belle \u00c9poque\" from 1872 to 1914, many artists lived and worked in Montmartre, where the rents were low and the atmosphere congenial. Pierre-Auguste Renoir rented space at \"12 rue Cortot\" in 1876 to paint \"Bal du moulin de la Galette\", showing a dance at Montmartre on a Sunday afternoon. Maurice Utrillo lived at the same address from 1906 to 1914, and Raoul Dufy shared an atelier there from 1901 to 1911. The building is now the \"Mus\u00e9e de Montmartre\". Pablo Picasso, Amedeo Modigliani and other artists lived and worked in a building called during the years 1904\u20131909, where Picasso painted one of his most important masterpieces, \"Les Demoiselles d'Avignon\". Several composers, including Erik Satie, lived in the neighbourhood. Most of the artists left after the outbreak of World War I, the majority of them going to the Montparnasse quarter.\nArtists' associations such as Les Nabis and the \"Incoh\u00e9rents\" were formed and individuals including Vincent van Gogh, Pierre Brissaud, Alfred Jarry, Jacques Villon, Raymond Duchamp-Villon, Henri Matisse, Andr\u00e9 Derain, Suzanne Valadon, Edgar Degas, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Th\u00e9ophile Steinlen, and African-American expatriates such as Langston Hughes worked in Montmartre and drew some of their inspiration from the area.\nThe last of the bohemian Montmartre artists was Gen Paul (1895\u20131975), born in Montmartre and a friend of Utrillo. Paul's calligraphic expressionist lithographs, sometimes memorializing picturesque Montmartre itself, owe a lot to Raoul Dufy.\nAmong the last of the neighborhood's bohemian gathering places was R-26, an artistic salon frequented by Josephine Baker, Le Corbusier and Django Reinhardt. Its name was commemorated by Reinhardt in his 1947 tune \"https://\".\nModern day.\nThere is a small vineyard in the Rue Saint-Vincent, which continues the tradition of wine production in the \u00cele de France, and a wild garden, occupied by midwife toads, also in the Rue Saint-Vincent. The vineyard yields about of wine per year.\nThe Mus\u00e9e de Montmartre is in the house where the painters Maurice Utrillo and Suzanne Valadon lived and worked in second-floor studios. The house was Pierre-Auguste Renoir's first Montmartre address. Many other personalities moved through the premises. The mansion in the garden at the back is the oldest hotel on Montmartre, and one of its first owners was Claude de la Rose, a 17th-century actor known as \"Rosimond\", who bought it in 1680. Claude de la Rose was the actor who replaced Moli\u00e8re, and who, like his predecessor, died on stage.\nNearby, day and night, tourists visit such sights as Place du Tertre and the cabaret du Lapin Agile, where the artists had worked and gathered. Many renowned artists, such as painter and sculptor Edgar Degas and film director Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, are buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re de Montmartre and the Cimeti\u00e8re Saint-Vincent. Near the top of the butte, Espace Dal\u00ed showcases surrealist artist Salvador Dal\u00ed's work. Montmartre is an officially designated historic district with limited development allowed in order to maintain its historic character.\nDownhill to the southwest is the red-light district of Pigalle. That area is, today, largely known for a wide variety of stores specializing in instruments for rock music. There are also several concert halls, also used for rock music. The actual Moulin Rouge theatre is also in Pigalle, near the Blanche m\u00e9tro station.\nIn 2024, the area hosted the final finishing circuits of the men's and women's cycling road race at the Paris 2024 Summer Olympics, with large crowds attending the race. And the final stage of the 2025 Tour de France, which used a part of the same circuit. \nNotable people.\nSee: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60123", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60123", "title": "I-adic topology", "text": "Concept in commutative algebra\nIn commutative algebra, the mathematical study of commutative rings, adic topologies are a family of topologies on the underlying set of a module, generalizing the p-adic topologies on the integers.\nDefinition.\nLet R be a commutative ring and M an R-module. Then each ideal \ud835\udd1e of R determines a topology on M called the \ud835\udd1e-adic topology, characterized by the pseudometric formula_1 The family formula_2 is a basis for this topology.\nAn \ud835\udd1e-adic topology is a linear topology (a topology generated by some submodules).\nProperties.\nWith respect to the topology, the module operations of addition and scalar multiplication are continuous, so that M becomes a topological module. However, M need not be Hausdorff; it is Hausdorff if and only ifformula_3so that d becomes a genuine metric. Related to the usual terminology in topology, where a Hausdorff space is also called separated, in that case, the \ud835\udd1e-adic topology is called \"separated\".\nBy Krull's intersection theorem, if R is a Noetherian ring which is an integral domain or a local ring, it holds that formula_4 for any proper ideal \ud835\udd1e of R. Thus under these conditions, for any proper ideal \ud835\udd1e of R and any R-module M, the \ud835\udd1e-adic topology on M is separated. \nFor a submodule N of M, the canonical homomorphism to \"M\"/\"N\" induces a quotient topology which coincides with the \ud835\udd1e-adic topology. The analogous result is not necessarily true for the submodule N itself: the subspace topology need not be the \ud835\udd1e-adic topology. However, the two topologies coincide when R is Noetherian and M finitely generated. This follows from the Artin\u2013Rees lemma.\nCompletion.\nWhen M is Hausdorff, M can be completed as a metric space; the resulting space is denoted by formula_5 and has the module structure obtained by extending the module operations by continuity. It is also the same as (or canonically isomorphic to): formula_6 where the right-hand side is an inverse limit of quotient modules under natural projection.\nFor example, let formula_7 be a polynomial ring over a field k and \ud835\udd1e \n (\"x\"1, ..., \"x\"\"n\") the (unique) homogeneous maximal ideal. Then formula_8, the formal power series ring over k in n variables.\nClosed submodules.\nThe \ud835\udd1e-adic closure of a submodule formula_9 is formula_10 This closure coincides with N whenever R is \ud835\udd1e-adically complete and M is finitely generated.\nR is called Zariski with respect to \ud835\udd1e if every ideal in R is \ud835\udd1e-adically closed. There is a characterization:\nR is Zariski with respect to \ud835\udd1e if and only if \ud835\udd1e is contained in the Jacobson radical of R.\nIn particular a Noetherian local ring is Zariski with respect to the maximal ideal."}
{"id": "60124", "revid": "29707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60124", "title": "Subspace (topology)", "text": ""}
{"id": "60125", "revid": "33330365", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60125", "title": "Engraving", "text": "Incising designs by cutting into a surface\nEngraving is the practice of incising a design on a hard, usually flat surface by cutting grooves into it with a burin. The result may be a decorated object in itself, as when silver, gold, steel, or glass are engraved, or may provide an intaglio printing plate, of copper or another metal, for printing images on paper as prints or illustrations; these images are also called \"engravings\". Engraving is one of the oldest and most important techniques in printmaking. Wood engravings, a form of relief printing and stone engravings, such as petroglyphs, are not covered in this article.\nEngraving was a historically important method of producing images on paper in artistic printmaking, in mapmaking, and also for commercial reproductions and illustrations for books and magazines. It has long been replaced by various photographic processes in its commercial applications and, partly because of the difficulty of learning the technique, is much less common in printmaking, where it has been largely replaced by etching and other techniques.\n\"Engraving\" is loosely but incorrectly used for any old black and white print; it requires a degree of expertise to distinguish engravings from prints using other techniques such as etching in particular, but also mezzotint and other techniques. Many old master prints also combine techniques on the same plate, further confusing matters. Line engraving and steel engraving cover use for reproductive prints, illustrations in books and magazines, and similar uses, mostly in the 19th century, and often not actually using engraving. Traditional engraving, by burin or with the use of machines, continues to be practised by goldsmiths, glass engravers, gunsmiths and others, while modern industrial techniques such as photoengraving and laser engraving have many important applications. Engraved gems were an important art in the ancient world, revived at the Renaissance, although the term traditionally covers relief as well as intaglio carvings, and is essentially a branch of sculpture rather than engraving, as drills were the usual tools.\nTerms.\nOther terms often used for printed engravings are copper engraving, copper-plate engraving or \"line engraving\". Steel engraving is the same technique, on steel or steel-faced plates, and was mostly used for banknotes, illustrations for books, magazines and reproductive prints, letterheads and similar uses from about 1790 to the early 20th century, when the technique became less popular, except for banknotes and other forms of security printing. Especially in the past, \"engraving\" was often used very loosely to cover several printmaking techniques, so that many so-called engravings were in fact produced by totally different techniques, such as etching or mezzotint. \"Hand engraving\" is a term sometimes used for engraving objects other than printing plates, to inscribe or decorate jewellery, firearms, trophies, knives and other fine metal goods. Traditional engravings in printmaking are also \"hand engraved\", using just the same techniques to make the lines in the plate.\nProcess.\nEngravers use a hardened steel tool called a burin, or graver, to cut the design into the surface, most traditionally a copper plate. However, modern hand engraving artists use burins or gravers to cut a variety of metals such as silver, nickel, steel, brass, gold, and titanium, in applications ranging from weaponry to jewellery to motorcycles to found objects. Modern professional engravers can engrave with a resolution of up to 40 lines per mm in high grade work creating game scenes and scrollwork. Dies used in mass production of molded parts are sometimes hand engraved to add special touches or certain information such as part numbers.\nIn addition to hand engraving, there are engraving machines that require less human finesse and are not directly controlled by hand. They are usually used for lettering, using a pantographic system. There are versions for the insides of rings and also the outsides of larger pieces. Such machines are commonly used for inscriptions on rings, lockets and presentation pieces.\nTools and gravers or burins.\nGravers come in a variety of shapes and sizes that yield different line types. The burin produces a unique and recognizable quality of line that is characterized by its steady, deliberate appearance and clean edges. The angle tint tool has a slightly curved tip that is commonly used in printmaking. Florentine liners are flat-bottomed tools with multiple lines incised into them, used to do fill work on larger areas or to create uniform shade lines that are fast to execute. Ring gravers are made with particular shapes that are used by jewelry engravers in order to cut inscriptions inside rings. Flat gravers are used for fill work on letters, as well as \"wriggle\" cuts on most musical instrument engraving work, remove background, or create bright cuts. Knife gravers are for line engraving and very deep cuts. Round gravers, and flat gravers with a radius, are commonly used on silver to create bright cuts (also called bright-cut engraving), as well as other hard-to-cut metals such as nickel and steel. Square or V-point gravers are typically square or elongated diamond-shaped and used for cutting straight lines. V-point can be anywhere from 60 to 130 degrees, depending on purpose and effect. These gravers have very small cutting points. Other tools such as mezzotint rockers, roulettes and burnishers are used for texturing effects. Burnishing tools can also be used for certain stone setting techniques. Musical instrument engraving on American-made brass instruments flourished in the 1920s and utilizes a specialized engraving technique where a flat graver is \"walked\" across the surface of the instrument to make zig-zag lines and patterns. The method for \"walking\" the graver may also be referred to as \"wriggle\" or \"wiggle\" cuts. This technique is necessary due to the thinness of metal used to make musical instruments versus firearms or jewelry. Wriggle cuts are commonly found on silver Western jewelry and other Western metal work.\nTool geometry.\nTool geometry is extremely important for accuracy in hand engraving. When sharpened for most applications, a graver has a \"face\", which is the top of the graver, and a \"heel\", which is the bottom of the graver; not all tools or application require a heel. These two surfaces meet to form a point that cuts the metal. The geometry and length of the heel helps to guide the graver smoothly as it cuts the surface of the metal. When the tool's point breaks or chips, even on a microscopic level, the graver can become hard to control and produces unexpected results. Modern innovations have brought about new types of carbide that resist chipping and breakage, which hold a very sharp point longer between resharpening than traditional metal tools.\nTool sharpening.\nSharpening a graver or burin requires either a sharpening stone or wheel. Harder carbide and steel gravers require diamond-grade sharpening wheels; these gravers can be polished to a mirror finish using a ceramic or cast iron lap, which is essential in creating bright cuts. Several low-speed, reversible sharpening systems made specifically for hand engravers are available that reduce sharpening time. Fixtures that secure the tool in place at certain angles and geometries are also available to take the guesswork from sharpening to produce accurate points. Very few master engravers exist today who rely solely on \"feel\" and muscle memory to sharpen tools. These master engravers typically worked for many years as an apprentice, most often learning techniques decades before modern machinery was available for hand engravers. These engravers typically trained in such countries as Italy and Belgium, where hand engraving has a rich and long heritage of masters.\nArtwork design.\nDesign or artwork is generally prepared in advance, although some professional and highly experienced hand engravers are able to draw out minimal outlines either on paper or directly on the metal surface just prior to engraving. The work to be engraved may be lightly scribed on the surface with a sharp point, laser marked, drawn with a fine permanent marker (removable with acetone) or pencil, transferred using various chemicals in conjunction with inkjet or laser printouts, or stippled. Engraving artists may rely on hand drawing skills, copyright-free designs and images, computer-generated artwork, or common design elements when creating artwork.\nHandpieces.\nOriginally, handpieces varied little in design as the common use was to push with the handle placed firmly in the center of the palm. With modern pneumatic engraving systems, handpieces are designed and created in a variety of shapes and power ranges. Handpieces are made using various methods and materials. Knobs may be handmade from wood, molded and engineered from plastic, or machine-made from brass, steel, or other metals.\nCutting the surface.\nThe actual engraving is traditionally done by a combination of pressure and manipulating the work-piece. The traditional \"hand push\" process is still practiced today, but modern technology has brought various mechanically assisted engraving systems. Most pneumatic engraving systems require an air source that drives air through a hose into a handpiece, which resembles a traditional engraving handle in many cases, that powers a mechanism (usually a piston). The air is actuated by either a foot control (like a gas pedal or sewing machine) or newer palm / hand control. This mechanism replaces either the \"hand push\" effort or the effects of a hammer. The internal mechanisms move at speeds up to 15,000 strokes per minute, thereby greatly reducing the effort needed in traditional hand engraving. These types of pneumatic systems are used for power assistance only and do not guide or control the engraving artist. One of the major benefits of using a pneumatic system for hand engraving is the reduction of fatigue and decrease in time spent working.\nHand engraving artists today employ a combination of hand push, pneumatic, rotary, or hammer and chisel methods. Hand push is still commonly used by modern hand engraving artists who create \"bulino\" style work, which is highly detailed and delicate, fine work; a great majority, if not all, traditional printmakers today rely solely upon hand push methods. Pneumatic systems greatly reduce the effort required for removing large amounts of metal, such as in deep relief engraving or Western bright cut techniques.\nFinishing.\nFinishing the work is often necessary when working in metal that may rust or where a colored finish is desirable, such as a firearm. A variety of spray lacquers and finishing techniques exist to seal and protect the work from exposure to the elements and time. Finishing also may include lightly sanding the surface to remove small chips of metal called \"burrs\" that are very sharp and unsightly. Some engravers prefer high contrast to the work or design, using black paints or inks to darken removed (and lower) areas of exposed metal. The excess paint or ink is wiped away and allowed to dry before lacquering or sealing, which may or may not be desired by the artist.\nModern hand engraving.\nBecause of the high level of microscopic detail that can be achieved by a master engraver, counterfeiting of engraved designs is almost impossible, and modern banknotes are almost always engraved, as are plates for printing money, checks, bonds and other security-sensitive papers. The engraving is so fine that a normal printer cannot recreate the detail of hand-engraved images, nor can it be scanned. At the United States Bureau of Engraving and Printing, more than one hand engraver will work on the same plate, making it nearly impossible for one person to duplicate all the engraving on a particular banknote or document.\nThe modern discipline of hand engraving, as it is called in a metalworking context, survives largely in a few specialized fields. The highest levels of the art are found on firearms and other metal weaponry, jewellery, silverware and musical instruments.\nIn most commercial markets today, hand engraving has been replaced with milling using CNC engraving or milling machines. Still, there are certain applications where use of hand engraving tools cannot be replaced.\nMachine engraving.\nIn some instances, images or designs can be transferred to metal surfaces via mechanical process. One such process is roll stamping or roller-die engraving. In this process, a hardened image die is pressed against the destination surface using extreme pressure to impart the image. In the 1800s pistol cylinders were often decorated via this process to impart a continuous scene around the surface.\nComputer-aided machine engraving.\nEngraving machines such as the K500 (packaging) or K6 (publication) by Hell Gravure Systems use a diamond stylus to cut cells. Each cell creates one printing dot later in the process. A K6 can have up to 18 engraving heads each cutting 8,000 cells per second to an accuracy of 0.1\u00a0\u03bcm and below. They are fully computer-controlled and the whole process of cylinder-making is fully automated.\nIt is now common place for retail stores (mostly jewellery, silverware or award stores) to have a small computer controlled engrave on site. This enables them to personalise the products they sell. Retail engraving machines tend to be focused around ease of use for the operator and the ability to do a wide variety of items including flat metal plates, jewelry of different shapes and sizes, as well as cylindrical items such as mugs and tankards. They will typically be equipped with a computer dedicated to graphic design that will enable the operator to easily design a text or picture graphic which the software will translate into digital signals telling the engraver machine what to do. Unlike industrial engravers, retail machines are smaller and only use one diamond head. This is interchangeable so the operator can use differently shaped diamonds for different finishing effects. They will typically be able to do a variety of metals and plastics. Glass and crystal engraving is possible, but the brittle nature of the material makes the process more time-consuming.\nRetail engravers mainly use two different processes. The first and most common 'Diamond Drag' pushes the diamond cutter through the surface of the material and then pulls to create scratches. These direction and depth are controlled by the computer input. The second is 'Spindle Cutter'. This is similar to Diamond Drag, but the engraving head is shaped in a flat V shape, with a small diamond and the base. The machine uses an electronic spindle to quickly rotate the head as it pushes it into the material, then pulls it along whilst it continues to spin. This creates a much bolder impression than diamond drag. It is used mainly for brass plaques and pet tags.\nWith state-of-the-art machinery it is easy to have a simple, single item complete in under ten minutes. The engraving process with diamonds is state-of-the-art since the 1960s, with laser engraving also becoming popular in more recent decades.\nHistory.\n\"For the printing process, see intaglio (printmaking). See also Steel engraving and line engraving\"\nThe first evidence for hominids engraving patterns is a chiselled shell, dating back between 540,000 and 430,000 years, from Trinil, in Java, Indonesia, where the first \"Homo erectus\" was discovered. Hatched banding upon ostrich eggshells used as water containers found in South Africa in the Diepkloof Rock Shelter and dated to the Middle Stone Age around 60,000 BC are the next documented case of human engraving. Engraving on bone and ivory is an important technique for the Art of the Upper Paleolithic, and larger engraved petroglyphs on rocks are found from many prehistoric periods and cultures around the world.\nIn antiquity, the only engraving on metal that could be carried out is the shallow grooves found in some jewellery after the beginning of the 1st Millennium B.C. The majority of so-called engraved designs on ancient gold rings or other items were produced by chasing or sometimes a combination of lost-wax casting and chasing. Engraved gem is a term for any carved or engraved semi-precious stone; this was an important small-scale art form in the ancient world, and remained popular until the 19th century.\nHowever the use of glass engraving, usually using a wheel, to cut decorative scenes or figures into glass vessels, in imitation of hardstone carvings, appears as early as the first century AD, continuing into the fourth century CE at urban centers such as Cologne and Rome, and appears to have ceased sometime in the fifth century. Decoration was first based on Greek mythology, before hunting and circus scenes became popular, as well as imagery drawn from the Old and New Testament. It appears to have been used to mimic the appearance of precious metal wares during the same period, including the application of gold leaf, and could be cut free-hand or with lathes. As many as twenty separate stylistic workshops have been identified, and it seems likely that the engraver and vessel producer were separate craftsmen.\nIn the European Middle Ages goldsmiths used engraving to decorate and inscribe metalwork. It is thought that they began to print impressions of their designs to record them. From this grew the engraving of copper printing plates to produce artistic images on paper, known as old master prints, first in Germany in the 1430s. Italy soon followed. Many early engravers came from a goldsmithing background. The first and greatest period of the engraving was from about 1470 to 1530, with such masters as Martin Schongauer, Albrecht D\u00fcrer, and Lucas van Leiden.\nThereafter engraving tended to lose ground to etching, which was a much easier technique for the artist to learn. But many prints combined the two techniques: although Rembrandt's prints are generally all called etchings for convenience, many of them have some burin or drypoint work, and some have nothing else. By the nineteenth century, most engraving was for commercial illustration.\nBefore the advent of photography, engraving was used to reproduce other forms of art, for example paintings. Engravings continued to be common in newspapers and many books into the early 20th century, as they were cheaper to use in printing than photographic images.\nMany classic postage stamps were engraved, although the practice is now mostly confined to particular countries, or used when a more \"elegant\" design is desired and a limited color range is acceptable.\nModifying the relief designs on coins is a craft dating back to the 18th century and today modified coins are known colloquially as hobo nickels. In the United States, especially during the Great Depression, coin engraving on the large-faced Indian Head nickel became a way to help make ends meet. The craft continues today, and with modern equipment often produces stunning miniature sculptural artworks and floral scrollwork.\nDuring the mid-20th century, a renaissance in hand-engraving began to take place. With the inventions of pneumatic hand-engraving systems that aided hand-engravers, the art and techniques of hand-engraving became more accessible.\nMusic engraving.\nThe first music printed from engraved plates dates from 1446 and most printed music was produced through engraving from roughly 1700\u20131860. From 1860 to 1990 most printed music was produced through a combination of engraved master plates reproduced through offset lithography.\nThe first comprehensive account is given by Mme Delusse in her article \"Gravure en lettres, en g\u00e9ographie et en musique\" in Diderot's Encyclopedia. The technique involved a five-pointed raster to score staff lines, various punches in the shapes of notes and standard musical symbols, and various burins and scorers for lines and slurs. For correction, the plate was held on a bench by callipers, hit with a dot punch on the opposite side, and burnished to remove any signs of the defective work. The process involved intensive pre-planning of the layout, and many manuscript scores with engraver's planning marks survive from the 18th and 19th centuries.\nBy 1837 pewter had replaced copper as a medium, and Berthiaud gives an account with an entire chapter devoted to music (\"Novel manuel complet de l'imprimeur en taille douce\", 1837). Printing from such plates required a separate inking to be carried out cold, and the printing press used less pressure. Generally, four pages of music were engraved on a single plate. Because music engraving houses trained engravers through years of apprenticeship, very little is known about the practice. Fewer than one dozen sets of tools survive in libraries and museums. By 1900 music engravers were established in several hundred cities in the world, but the art of storing plates was usually concentrated with publishers. Extensive bombing of Leipzig in 1944, the home of most German engraving and printing firms, destroyed roughly half the world's engraved music plates.\nApplications today.\nExamples of contemporary uses for engraving include creating text on jewellery, such as pendants or on the inside of engagement- and wedding rings to include text such as the name of the partner, or adding a winner's name to a sports trophy. Another application of modern engraving is found in the printing industry. There, every day thousands of pages are mechanically engraved onto rotogravure cylinders, typically a steel base with a copper layer of about 0.1\u00a0mm in which the image is transferred. After engraving the image is protected with an approximately 6\u00a0\u03bcm chrome layer. Using this process the image will survive for over a million copies in high speed printing presses. Engraving machines such as GUN BOW (one of the leading engraving brands) are the best examples of hand engraving tools, although this type of machine is typically not used for fine hand engraving.\nSome schools throughout the world are renowned for their teaching of engraving, like the \u00c9cole Estienne in Paris.\nCreating tone.\nIn traditional engraving, which is a purely linear medium, the impression of half-tones was created by making many very thin parallel lines, a technique called hatching. When two sets of parallel-line \"hatchings\" intersected each other for higher density, the resulting pattern was known as \"cross-hatching\". Patterns of dots were also used in a technique called stippling, first used around 1505 by Giulio Campagnola. Claude Mellan was one of many 17th-century engravers with a very well-developed technique of using parallel lines of varying thickness (known as the \"swelling line\") to give subtle effects of tone (as was Goltzius) \u2013 see picture below. One famous example is his \"Sudarium of Saint Veronica\" (1649), an engraving of the face of Jesus made from a single spiraling line that starts at the tip of Jesus's nose.\nSurface tone is achieved during the printing process, by selectively leaving a thin layer of ink on parts of the printing plate.\nBiblical references.\nThe earliest allusion to engraving in the Bible may be the reference to Judah's seal ring (Ge 38:18), followed by (Ex 39.30). Engraving was commonly done with pointed tools of iron or even with diamond points. (Jer 17:1).\nEach of the two onyx stones on the shoulder-pieces of the high priest's ephod was engraved with the names of six different tribes of Israel, and each of the 12 precious stones that adorned his breastpiece was engraved with the name of one of the tribes. The holy sign of dedication, the shining gold plate on the high priest's turban, was engraved with the words: \"Holiness belongs to Adonai.\" Bezalel, along with Oholiab, was qualified to do this specialized engraving work as well as to train others.\u2014Ex 35:30\u201335; 28:9\u201312; 39:6\u201314, 30.\nNoted engravers.\nPrints:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOf gems:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOf guns:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOf coins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOf postage stamps:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOf pins:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60127", "revid": "198939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60127", "title": "Macintosh computer", "text": ""}
{"id": "60128", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60128", "title": "Foundation's Edge", "text": "1982 novel by Isaac Asimov\nFoundation's Edge (1982) is a science fiction novel by American writer Isaac Asimov, the fourth book in the \"Foundation\" Series. It was written more than thirty years after the stories of the original \"Foundation\" trilogy, due to years of pressure by fans and editors on Asimov to write another, and, according to Asimov himself, the amount of the payment offered by the publisher. It was his first novel to ever land on \"The New York Times\" best-seller list, after 262 books and 44 years of writing.\nPlot summary.\nFive hundred years after the establishment of the Foundation, the Mayor of Terminus, Harla Branno, is basking in a political glow, as her policies having been vindicated by the recent successful resolution of a Seldon Crisis. Golan Trevize, a former officer of the Navy and now a member of Council, believes the Second Foundation, which is almost universally thought to be extinct, still exists and is controlling events. He attempts to question the continued existence of the Seldon Plan during a Council session, but Branno has him arrested on a charge of treason. Branno also believes that the Second Foundation still exists and is in control, but she cannot admit it publicly for political reasons, and treats that as a state secret, hence her alarm and her swift action.\nSo, she orders Trevize to leave Terminus to search for the Second Foundation. As a cover, he is to be accompanied by Janov Pelorat, a professor of Ancient History and mythologist, who is interested in the location of Earth, the fabled original world of the human species. They are provided a highly advanced computer-controlled \"gravitic\" ship to carry out their mission. Branno also sends out Munn Li Compor in another similar vessel to follow and monitor Trevize.\nIndeed, the Second Foundation still does exist, but rather than being in complete control, as the First Foundation fears, it has similar worries. On Trantor, home of the Second Foundation, Stor Gendibal, a rising intellect in the Second Foundation hierarchy, reveals to Quindor Shandess, the current First Speaker, his finding that the Seldon Plan, which the Second Foundation diligently protects and furthers along, is being manipulated by some unknown group, probably more powerful than the Second Foundation, with unknown motivations. Shandess dubs this group the \"Anti-Mules\", as they seem to possess powers similar to the Mule, but to be using them not to destroy the Seldon Plan, as the Mule had tried to do, but rather to preserve it.\nAt first, Gendibal's ideas are very badly received by the other Speakers, with Shandess alone supporting him, and he is threatened with expulsion, but the Speakers' resistance is overcome when Gendibal demonstrates that the brain of Sura Novi, a member of the Hamish, the rude people of farmers who inhabit and cultivate Trantor, shows a subtle change to her mind that would be far beyond the Second Foundation's capabilities to make, and could only have been made by a much more powerful entity, probably the \"Anti-Mules\". Gendibal and Novi are sent out on a spaceship to track Trevize and determine the goals of the \"Anti-Mules\".\nMeanwhile, Trevize and Pelorat engage in the latter's project to locate Earth, but there is no planet with that name in the galactic table of planets, and none with its exact predicted characteristics either. However, Pelorat mentions having heard of a planet called Gaia, whose name he somehow discovered to mean Earth in some ancient language. Its coordinates are unknown, but it is supposed to be somewhere in the Sayshell Sector. Trevize decides that they must go there to follow up on this lead. On the Sayshell main planet, Trevize and Pelorat meet a scholar, Professor Quintesetz, who is able to reluctantly give them the coordinates to Gaia. They travel there and discover that Gaia is a \"superorganism\" where all things, both living and inanimate, participate in a larger group consciousness, while still retaining any individual awareness they might have. Pelorat slowly falls in love with a Gaian woman named Blissenobiarella, commonly called Bliss.\nGendibal finds Trevize's location with information from Compor, who is secretly a Second Foundation agent. On approaching Gaia, Gendibal is met by a First Foundation warship, commanded by Mayor Branno. As Gendibal's mental powers stalemate with Mayor Branno's force shield, Novi reveals herself as an agent of Gaia. She joins the stalemate and the three are locked until Trevize can join them. Bliss explains to Trevize that he had been led to Gaia so that his untouched mind, which has unique, remarkable powers of intuition, can decide the galaxy's fate \u2014 whether it will be ruled by the First Foundation, by the Second Foundation, or by Gaia, which envisions an extension of its group consciousness to the entire galaxy, thus forming the new entity \"Galaxia\". He also learns that the stalemate between the First Foundation (Branno), the Second Foundation (Gendibal), and Gaia (Novi) was intentional, and that through his ship's computer, he can decide who shall ultimately prove victorious.\nTrevize decides upon Gaia, and through mental adjustments, Gaia makes Branno and Gendibal believe they have won minor victories, and that Gaia does not exist. But Trevize is troubled by one final missing piece of information: In the course of their investigation, Trevize and Pelorat had found out that all references to Earth had been removed from the Galactic Library at Trantor. Trevize wants to know who did this and why, as Gaia denies having done that. He announces his intention to find Earth, since without knowing the answers to those questions, he cannot be certain his choice was the right one. Trevize also explains that he chose Gaia because that was the only choice of the three that was reversible in case his choice should prove to be wrong, due to the large length of time required for the formation of Galaxia.\nReception.\nIn a 1982 review of the novel, \"Kirkus Reviews\" states that \"after a slowish start, then, the rather talky narrative here develops into grippingly effective drama\u2014with oodles of twisty-turny plot, an engaging cast, and some enjoyably mellow humor... A grandmasterly performance.\"\nLee Michaels reviewed \"Foundation's Edge\" for \"Pegasus\" magazine and stated that \"This is a must-read for fans of the Foundation trilogy, and, for those who have not read the trilogy, do that first and then read \"Foundation's Edge\". If you simply must read \"Foundation's Edge\" first, go ahead and enjoy it, but, like salted peanuts, one won't be enough, and you will just end up reading the books out of sequence. Don't say you weren't warned!\"\nDavid Langford reviewed \"Foundation's Edge\" for \"White Dwarf\" #39, and stated that \"At 200,000 words, the sequel seems longer than the original series; endless pages of grey dialogue about the fate of the galaxy are on the whole boring, and the trilogy is weakened, not strengthened, by the addition. For example, the trilogy's goal of peaceful Galactic Empire is now rejected, presumably because of fascist implications: this is all very Politically Correct but converts the first three books to pointless chronicles of misguided effort. Remarkably, it's a US bestseller.\"\n\"Foundation's Edge\" won both the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1983 and the Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel in 1983; the book was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1982.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60129", "revid": "173030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60129", "title": "The Caves of Steel", "text": "1954 novel by Isaac Asimov\nThe Caves of Steel is a science fiction novel by American writer Isaac Asimov. It is a detective story and illustrates an idea Asimov advocated, that science fiction can be applied to any literary genre, rather than just being a limited genre in itself.\nThe book was first published as a serial in \"Galaxy\" magazine, from October to December 1953. A Doubleday hardcover followed in 1954.\nAt the time of writing, Asimov conceived of \"The Caves of Steel\" as completely distinct from his \"Foundation\" trilogy, published a few years earlier. Decades later, however, Asimov linked them, making the time of \"Caves of Steel\" a much earlier part of an extensive future history leading up to the rise of the Galactic Empire, its fall and the rise of two Foundations to replace it \u2013 with the Robot R. Daneel Olivaw, introduced in \"Caves of Steel\", turning out to have survived over tens of thousands of years and have played a key role in the eras of both the Empire and the Foundation(s).\nSetup.\nIsaac Asimov introduces Elijah Baley and R. Daneel Olivaw, later his favorite protagonists. They live roughly three millennia in Earth's future, a time when hyperspace travel has been discovered and a few worlds relatively close to Earth have been colonized \u2013 fifty planets known as the \"Spacer worlds\". The Spacer worlds are rich, have low population density (average population of one hundred million each), and use robot labor heavily. Meanwhile, Earth is overpopulated with eight billion people, three times that of Asimov's 1950s, with strict rules against robots. In \"The Caves of Steel\" and its sequels (the first of which is \"The Naked Sun\"), Asimov paints a grim situation of an Earth dealing with an extremely large population and of luxury-seeking Spacers, who limit birth to permit great wealth and privacy.\nAsimov was a claustrophile: \"I wrote a novel in 1953 which pictured a world in which everyone lived in underground cities, comfortably enclosed away from the open air. People would say, 'How could you imagine such a nightmarish situation?' And I would answer in astonishment, 'What nightmarish situation?'\" The \"caves of steel\" are vast city complexes covered by huge metallic domes, capable of supporting tens of millions each: the New York City of that era (wherein much of the story is set) encompasses present-day New York City as well as large tracts of New Jersey. Asimov imagines the present day underground transit connected to malls and apartment blocks, until no one ever exits the domes and most of the population suffer from extreme fear of leaving them. (Even though the \"Robot\" and \"Foundation\" series were not made part of the same fictional universe until much later, the \"caves of steel\" resemble the planet Trantor.)\nThe novel's central plot device is a murder, which takes place before it opens. (This is an Asimov trademark, which he attributed to his squeamishness plus John Campbell's advice to begin as late in the story as possible.) The victim is Roj Nemmenuh Sarton, a Spacer Ambassador who lives in Spacetown, the Spacer outpost just outside New York City. For some time, he has tried to convince the Earth government to loosen its anti-robot restrictions. One morning, he is discovered outside his home, his chest imploded by an energy blaster. The New York police commissioner charges Elijah with finding the murderer, in cooperation with a highly advanced robot named R. Daneel Olivaw who is visually identical to a human and is equipped with a scanner that is able to detect human emotions through their encephalographic waves.\nPlot.\nA faction of Spacers have come to the realization that Spacer culture is effete, stagnating due to negative population growth and excessive longevity. Their solution is to encourage further space exploration and colonization by Earthmen in concert with robots. However, Earthmen would first need to overcome their irrational antagonism toward robots. To this end, the faction have established habitations on Earth through which they hope to introduce humanoid robots to Earth.\nOfficer Elijah Baley starts working with R. (robot) Olivaw, whom he distrusts on the basis of being an android. Olivaw gradually learns more about Earth humans and displays curiosity about aspects of local behaviour and technology. While investigating the murder of Spacer Dr. Sarton, Baley makes a visit to Spacetown and meets with Dr. Fastolfe, who injects him with a suggestive drug while speaking about the relative merits and shortcomings of Earth and Spacer society. Baley is converted to the cause of spreading humanity throughout the galaxy. Although the Spacers deem Baley inadequate to convert enough Earthmen, they find their target when Baley arrests Clousarr on suspicion of inciting a riot and Olivaw provides him with suggestive statements. Their job accomplished, the Spacers make plans to leave Earth as their continued presence would be to the detriment of their cause; they accept Sarton's unsolved death as a necessary sacrifice. This leaves Baley with ninety minutes to find the killer, which he is convinced will also clear him of the destruction of R. Sammy.\nMeanwhile, the New York Police Commissioner, Julius Enderby, who is Baley's friend from college, now his boss, and the head of the investigation on Earth, has been acting suspiciously. Baley eventually deduces Enderby is secretly a member of the Medievalists, a subversive anti-robot group which pines for the 'olden days' where men did not live in the 'caves of steel'. He used his position of power in order to set up meetings with Sarton, under the guise of further cooperation, while actually plotting to kill R. Daneel, who was living with Sarton prior to the murder. The murder required the knowledge and skills of one human \u2013 Enderby \u2013 and one robot \u2013 R. Sammy. Enderby ordered R. Sammy to carry a blaster weapon from the City to Spacetown through the \"country\", an area outside the domes that make up the caves of steel, an area with little to no monitoring by police, but where few if any Earthmen would dare go. In Spacetown, Enderby took the weapon from R. Sammy, and after being done, he gave the blaster back, so the investigators in Spacetown would never find the murder weapon. At no point did he need to tell R. Sammy why he wanted a weapon, so the plan did not break the First Law. In Enderby's nervousness about committing a crime, he compulsively cleaned the lenses of his eyeglasses and accidentally dropped them, breaking them. Because of this, he could not tell the difference between Sarton and R. Daneel (who Sarton designed and built to look as much like himself as a robot can). When he tried to kill R. Daneel, he killed Sarton instead. As a confirmation of his hypothesis, Baley plays a video recording of the crime scene investigation. It shows the room where Sarton was killed, Sarton's body, and pieces of glass which can be tested to see whether they came from Enderby's eyeglasses.\nHaving already accepted that Sarton's death is unsolved, the Spacers are willing to not prosecute Enderby for the accident if he agrees to work with them to promote colonization of other worlds amongst the Medievalists.\nCharacters.\nIn order of appearance, described:\nReception.\nReviewer Groff Conklin praised the novel for the way Asimov \"combines his interest in robotics with his consuming preoccupation with the sociology of a technology-mad, bureaucratically tethered world of tomorrow.\" Boucher and McComas praised \"The Caves of Steel\" as \"Asimov's best long work to date\", saying that it was \"the most successful attempt yet to combine\" the detective and science fiction novel. P. Schuyler Miller called it \"as honest a combination of science fiction and detection as we've seen.\" Villiers Gerson of \"The New York Times\" wrote: \"Here is an unusually exciting and engrossing detective story set in a science fictional background convincingly worked out.\"\nApart from being nominated in 2004 for a retroactive Hugo Award for Best Novel for 1954, more contemporaneously \"The Caves of Steel\" was voted the 30th Best All-Time Novel in the 1975 Locus Poll, and the 33rd Best All-Time SF Novel in the 1987 Locus Poll.\nAdaptations.\nThe novel was adapted for television by the BBC and shown in 1964: only a few short excerpts still exist. In June 1989, the book was adapted by Bert Coules as a radio play for the BBC, with Ed Bishop as Elijah Baley and Sam Dastor as R. Daneel Olivaw. In 2016, Akiva Goldsman had been hired to produce a movie. In 2025, John Ridley was hired to direct a film adaptation, co-writing the script with Cheo Hodari Coker.\nTelevision adaptation.\nAn adaptation of \"The Caves of Steel\" was produced by the BBC and broadcast on BBC2 on 5 June 1964 as part of an anthology strand called \"Story Parade\", which specialized in adaptations of modern novels. It starred Peter Cushing as Elijah Baley and John Carson as R. Daneel Olivaw. The adaptation was the brainchild of \"Story Parade\" story editor Irene Shubik, who was an enthusiast of science fiction and once described Asimov as \"one of the most interesting and amusing men I have ever met\". Shubik had previously devised and story edited the science fiction anthology series \"Out of This World\", which had adapted Asimov's short story \"Little Lost Robot\" in 1962. The adaptation of the novel was handled by Terry Nation, who by now had created the Daleks for \"Doctor Who\".\nThe screenplay was generally faithful to the plot of the novel. The only major deviation was the conclusion \u2013 in the television version the murderer commits suicide when he is unmasked, although in the novel he agrees to work to convince the Medievalists to change their ways. The other major change is that the roboticist Dr. Gerrigel is a female character in the television version.\n\"The Caves of Steel\" garnered good reviews: \"The Daily Telegraph\" said the play \"proved again that science fiction can be exciting, carry a message and be intellectually stimulating\" while \"The Listener\", citing the play as the best of the \"Story Parade\" series, described it as \"a fascinating mixture of science fiction and whodunit which worked remarkably well\". The play was repeated on BBC1 on 28 August 1964. As was common practice at the time, the master videotapes of \"The Caves of Steel\" were wiped some time after broadcast and the play remains missing. A few short extracts survive: the opening titles and the murder of Sarton; Elijah and Daneel meeting Dr. Gerrigel (Naomi Chance) and Elijah and Daneel confronting the Medievalist Clousarr (John Boyd-Brent).\nThe success of \"The Caves of Steel\" led Irene Shubik to devise the science fiction anthology series \"Out of the Unknown\", during which she oversaw the adaptation of six more Asimov stories, including \"The Caves of Steel\"'s sequel \"The Naked Sun\".\nCast of BBC 2 Adaptation:\nRadio adaptation.\nIn 1989, BBC Radio 4 broadcast an adaptation by Bert Coules, directed by Matthew Walters and starring Ed Bishop as Baley with Sam Dastor as Olivaw.\nCast of BBC Radio 4 Adaptation:\nGame adaptation.\nIn 1988, Kodak produced a VCR game entitled \"Isaac Asimov's Robots\" that contained a 45-minute film loosely based on \"The Caves of Steel\". It featured many of the characters and settings from the novel, but an altered plotline to fit the needs of a VCR game. Elements from \"The Robots of Dawn\" (including the characters Giskard Reventlov and Kelden Amadiro) were incorporated, as well. Similar to the BBC2 version, Dr. Gerrigel was replaced by a woman, named Sophia Quintana (after an unrelated character from \"Robots and Empire\").\nCast of Isaac Asimov's Robots:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60130", "revid": "88809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60130", "title": "Prelude to Foundation", "text": "1988 novel by Isaac Asimov\nPrelude to Foundation is a novel by American writer Isaac Asimov, published in 1988. It is one of two prequels to the \"Foundation\" series. For the first time, Asimov chronicles the fictional life of Hari Seldon, the man who invented psychohistory and the intellectual hero of the series. The novel was nominated for the Locus Award.\nIt has a sequel, \"Forward the Foundation\".\nPlot summary.\nPrelude to Foundation is set in the year 12,020 G.E. (Galactic Era), during the rocky reign of the Emperor Cleon I. It starts with Seldon's presentation of a paper at a mathematics convention detailing how psychohistory might theoretically make it possible to predict the future. The Emperor of the Galactic Empire learns of this and wants to use Seldon for political gain. In a face-to-face interview, Seldon emphasizes that psychohistory is something that he has not even begun developing or even has a clear idea how to do so, but Cleon is not wholly convinced that Hari is of no use to the Empire.\nSeldon then meets reporter Chetter Hummin, who convinces him that Cleon's first minister, Eto Demerzel, is attempting to capture him, and that it is therefore imperative for Seldon to escape and try to make psychohistory practical. He is taken by Hummin to Streeling University, one of the top ranked of the Empire and introduced to Dors Venabili by Hummin. Seldon theorizes that the first development of psychohistory requires a smaller, yet still significant sample than the entire Empire, possibly just the original world where humans originated...which is now lost, along with much of the older historical records.\nHari and Dors narrowly evade capture at Streeling University, and Hummin arranges for them to be sheltered in the reclusive Mycogen sector, which supposedly values its ancient history. Seldon and Venabili are welcomed by Sunmaster Fourteen, the leader of Mycogen. Seldon obtains the Mycogenians' treasured religious/historical book, but finds it disappointing except for the revelation of what the Mycogenians call their home planet, Aurora, and references to \"robots\" (which do not exist in the Empire). Seldon and Venabili face execution when Seldon insists on entering the Mycogenian \"temple\", the Sacratorium, in disguise in hopes of interviewing a robot supposedly housed there. They are easily detected, but Hummin arrives in the nick of time to save them.\nThe action then shifts to the Dahl sector, where Seldon and Venabili rent rooms from a middle-class family. While in Dahl, they meet a guttersnipe named Raych, whom Seldon later adopts. Also in Dahl, they are told by an old wise woman that the Aurora of the Mycogenians is not the original world, but actually the \"enemy\" of the original human planet, called Earth. (This links with the Robot series.)\nTowards the end of the novel, Seldon, Venabili, and Raych are kidnapped and forcibly taken to see Rashelle, who is the mayor of Wye, a powerful and vital sector situated at Trantor's south pole. Rashelle and her father have long been plotting to overthrow the Emperor and take his place. Seldon has the revelation that he could try to develop psychohistory using Trantor itself as a test case because of the great cultural diversity of its sectors. Rashelle launches her coup attempt, but it quickly collapses due to Demerzel's skillful subversion of Wye's forces. The finale reveals that \"Hummin\" is actually Eto Demerzel. Seldon then gets Demerzel to admit he is a robot; Demerzel is in fact R. Daneel Olivaw, who can influence humans mentally. He wants the development of psychohistory to help him better protect humanity, as per \"The Zeroth Law Of Robotics\". Seldon also suspects Venabili of being a robot, as well. This theme would subsequently be continued in \"Forward the Foundation\".\nCharacters.\nBelow is a list of all the major and minor characters in the book, in order of appearance (and with brief descriptions).\nInfluences.\nThe novel is one of French politician Jean-Luc M\u00e9lenchon's main metapolitical sources of inspirations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60131", "revid": "2927383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60131", "title": "Foundation and Earth", "text": "1986 novel by Isaac Asimov\nFoundation and Earth is a science fiction novel by American writer Isaac Asimov, the fifth novel of the \"Foundation\" series and chronologically the last in the series. It was published in 1986, four years after the first sequel to the \"Foundation\" trilogy, which is titled \"Foundation's Edge\".\nPlot summary.\nIntroduction.\nSeveral centuries after the events of \"Second Foundation\", two citizens of the Foundation search for Earth, the legendary planet where humans are said to have originated.\nSummary.\nPart I: Gaia. Councilman Golan Trevize, historian Janov Pelorat, and Bliss of the planet Gaia (introduced in \"Foundation's Edge\") set out on a journey to find humanity's ancestral home planet\u2014Earth. The purpose of the journey is to settle Trevize's doubt of his intuitive endorsement, at the end of \"Foundation's Edge\", of the all-encompassing noosphere of Galaxia as the future of mankind.\nPart II: Comporellon. First, they visit Comporellon, said to have legends concerning Earth according to Munn Li Compor, which claims to be the oldest currently inhabited planet in the galaxy. Upon arrival, they are imprisoned, but negotiate their way out. While there, a historian gives them the coordinates of three Spacer planets, surmised to be fairly close to Earth. One is Aurora, a desolate, lifeless planet. The second is Solaria, a planet with merely 1500 people on it.\nPart III: Aurora. The first Spacer planet they visit is Aurora, which was abandoned by its inhabitants and has a collapsing ecology. Trevize is nearly killed by a pack of wild dogs, presumed to be the descendants of household pets reverted to wolf-like savagery. They escape when Bliss manipulates the dogs' emotions to psychologically compel a retreat, amplifying the fear induced by cries from one of the dogs that Trevize used his neuronic whip on.\nPart IV: Solaria. Next, they visit Solaria, where they find that the Solarians, who have survived the Spacer-Settler conflicts by clever retreat detailed in Asimov's novel \"Robots and Empire\", have genetically engineered themselves into self-reproducing hermaphrodites, generally intolerant of human physical presence or contact. They have also given themselves the ability to mentally channel (\"transduce\") great amounts of energy obtained from their vast estates via a modification to the brain, and use this as their sole source of power. The Solarians avoid ever having to interact with each other, except by holographic apparatus (\"viewing\"), and reproduce only when necessary to replace the dead. Bliss, Pelorat, and Trevize are nearly killed by the Solarian Sarton Bander, as the penalty is death for simply landing on the planet, but Bliss deflects the transduction at the moment Bander uses it as a weapon, accidentally killing Bander. While escaping, they stumble upon Bander's young child, Fallom, and with Fallom's help, reach the surface from Bander's underground mansion. Bliss, by preference, uses the feminine pronoun for Fallom. They take the child with them, as the Solarians would execute her \u2014 she would be surplus to their population requirements, and a more mature child from another estate would be chosen to take over Bander's estate.\nPart V: Melpomenia. The crew now visit Melpomenia, the third and final Spacer coordinate they have, where the atmosphere has become reduced to a few thousandths of normal atmospheric pressure. Wearing space suits, they enter a library, and find a plaque listing the names and coordinates of all fifty Spacer worlds. On the way back to the ship, they notice a moss has begun to grow around the seals of their space suits, and just in time, surmise that the moss is feeding on minuscule leakages of carbon dioxide. Thus, they are able to eradicate the moss with a blaster and heavy UV-illumination so that no spores are unintentionally carried off the planet. They then plot the Spacer worlds, which form a rough sphere, on the ship's map and conclude that the location of Earth must be near to the center of the sphere. This area turns out to have a binary star system.\nPart VI: Alpha. They arrive at the planet Alpha, which orbits Alpha Centauri and is all ocean except for an island long and wide on which live a small group of humans. In a reference to the radioactive Earth of Asimov's novel \"Pebble in the Sky\", the restoration of Earth's soil was eventually abandoned in favour of resettling the population to \"New Earth\", which the First Galactic Empire had already been terraforming. The natives appear friendly, but secretly they intend to kill the visitors with a microbiological agent to prevent them from informing the rest of the galaxy of their existence. They are warned to escape before the agent can be activated by a native woman who has formed an attraction to Trevize and was impressed by Fallom's ability to play a flute with just her mind. Now certain that Alpha Centauri is not Earth but near it, they approach a system close by and are puzzled by the very strong similarities between this star and the larger sun of the Alpha Centauri system. Asimov here is making use of an astronomical curiosity: the nearest star system to Sol contains a star that has the same spectral type, G2 V, though Alpha Centauri A is a little larger and brighter.\nPart VII: Earth. On the approach to Earth, they detect it to be highly radioactive and not capable of supporting life but, while trying to use the ship's computer to locate Solaria, Fallom calls Trevize's attention to the moon, which is large enough to serve as a hideout for the forces that lived on Earth. There, they find R. Daneel Olivaw, who explains he has been paternalistically manipulating humanity since Elijah Baley's time, long before the Galactic Empire or Foundation. He thus caused the settlement of Alpha Centauri, the creation of Gaia and the creation of psychohistory (detailed in \"Prelude to Foundation\" and \"Forward the Foundation\"), and manipulated Trevize into making his decision at the end of \"Foundation's Edge\" (although he did not manipulate the decision itself). It is revealed that Daneel's positronic brain is deteriorating and he is unable to design a new brain, as he had done several times before, since his brain is now too fragile; he therefore wishes to merge Fallom's mind with his own, allowing him time to oversee Galaxia's creation.\nDaneel continues to explain that human internal warfare or parochialism was the reason for his causing the creation of psychohistory and Gaia. Trevize then confirms his decision that the creation of Galaxia is the correct choice, and gives his reason as the likelihood of advanced life beyond the galaxy eventually attacking humanity. Trevize states that there should be enough time for Galaxia to be fully ready as long as the enemy is not already present among them, while uncomfortably noticing Fallom's alien gaze resting unfathomably upon him.\nReception.\n\"Foundation and Earth\" was reviewed extensively at the time of its publication, including in foreign language venues, reviews which included the attention of Dan Chow, Gene DeWeese, Elton T. Elliott, Don D'Ammassa, Donald M. Hassler, Jon Wallace, Darrell Schweitzer, Everett F. Bleiler, Thomas A. Easton, John Newsinger, and Doug Fratz (and in French and Portuguese, respectively, by Jonathan Dornet and Roberto de Sousa Causo).\nDavid Langford also reviewed \"Foundation and Earth\"; he stated that \"Whopping concepts and evocative descriptions boost the novel half-way to excellence, but are defeated by the dead-weight of the stereotypes and lecturing. Hard SF fans will forgive its flaws.\"\nAwards and recognition.\n\"Foundation and Earth\" appeared in fifth place on the 1987 Locus Award list for Best SF Novel, preceded, among others, by Orson Scott Card's \"Speaker for the Dead\", William Gibson's \"Count Zero\", and Margaret Atwood's \"The Handmaid's Tale\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60132", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60132", "title": "Trantor", "text": "Trantor is a fictional planet in Isaac Asimov's \"Foundation\" Series and \"Empire\" series of science fiction novels.\nTrantor was first mentioned in Asimov's short story, \"Black Friar of the Flame\", later collected in \"The Early Asimov, Volume 1\". It was described as a human-settled planet in the part of the galaxy not ruled by an intelligent reptilian race (later defeated). Later, Trantor gained prominence when the 1940s \"Foundation\" series first appeared in print (in the form of short stories). Asimov described Trantor as being in the center of the galaxy. In later stories he acknowledged the growth in astronomical knowledge by retconning its position to be as close to the galactic center as was compatible with human habitability. The first time it was acknowledged in novel form was in \"Pebble in the Sky\".\nGeography and history.\nThe earlier history of Trantor is recapitulated in \"The Currents of Space\", mentioning the five worlds of the Trantorian Republic growing into the Trantorian Confederation and then Trantorian Empire (evidently modeled on the Roman Republic, originally ruling only part of central Italy, developing into the vast Roman Empire).\nAt the time when \"Currents\" takes place, Trantor controls about half of the worlds in the Galaxy, while the other half is divided into innumerable independent worlds and miniature empires \u2013 which naturally makes a Trantorian Ambassador a person of great consequence on any of the still-independent worlds.\nLater on, conquest of the entire galaxy made the Galactic Empire, with Trantor as its capital planet, a reality; the planet no longer sending out ambassadors, but only governors to royal subject worlds. This situation had already existed for thousands of years at the time of \"Pebble in the Sky\", the next chronological book on this timeline.\nTrantor is depicted as the capital of the first Galactic Empire. Its surface of 194,000,000\u00a0km2 (75,000,000 sq mi, approx. 40% of Earth's surface area), implying a radius of around 4000 km (somewhere in between the Earth and Mars), was, with the exception of the Imperial Palace, entirely enclosed in artificial domes.\nIt consisted of an enormous metropolis (an ecumenopolis) that stretched deep underground, and was home to a population of 45,000,000,000 (45 billion) human inhabitants at its height (although Second Foundation mentions a figure ten times that of administrators alone), a population density of 232 per square kilometre (600 per square mile, similar to the current population density of Germany or Connecticut). Its population was devoted almost entirely to either administration of the Empire or to maintenance of the planet itself, including energy provided by \"heatsinks\" (geothermal core taps) and production of food via underground farming and yeasts, as described in \"Prelude to Foundation\".\nThe \"Encyclopedia Galactica\" states further on Trantor: \"As the centre of the Imperial Government for unbroken hundreds of generations and located, as it was, toward the central regions of the Galaxy among the most densely populated and industrially advanced worlds of the system, it could scarcely help being the densest and richest clot of humanity the Race had ever seen.\"\nA Trantorian day lasted 1.08 Galactic Standard Days.\nOne of the prominent features of Trantor was the Library of Trantor (variously referred to as the Imperial Library, the University of Trantor Library, and the Galactic Library), in which librarians index the entirety of human knowledge by walking up to a different computer terminal every day and resuming where the previous librarian left off.\nNear Trantor were twenty agricultural worlds which supplied food which the world-city could not grow for itself, and the \"Summer Planets\", where the Emperor went for vacation.\nAround 260 FE, a rebel leader named Gilmer attempted a coup, in the process sacking Trantor and forcing the Imperial family to flee to the nearby world of Delicass, renamed Neotrantor. After the sack, the population dwindled rapidly from 40 billion to less than 100 million. Most of the buildings on Trantor were destroyed during the sack, and over the course of the next two centuries the metal on Trantor was gradually sold off, as farmers uncovered more and more soil to use in their farms. Eventually the farmers grew to become the sole recognised inhabitants of the planet, and the era of Trantor as the central world of the galaxy came to a close. It began to develop a dialect very different from Galactic Standard Speech, and the people unofficially renamed their planet \"Hame\", or \"home\".\nAs revealed to the reader at the end of \"Second Foundation\", not all these farmers were what they seemed, with the now-rustic Trantor serving as the centre of the Second Foundation. From Trantor, the Second Foundationers secretly guided the development of the Galaxy (roughly parallel to the city of Rome becoming, after the fall of its empire, the headquarters of the Papacy, with its enormous influence on the development of Medieval Europe). Indeed, their self-perception as leaders of the future Second Empire is captured in the Second Foundationers' use of the word \"Hamish\" to describe the farmers despite reserving for themselves use of the word \"Trantorian\". It is noted that it was the Second Foundation which ensured that the famed library would survive the sacking of Trantor and the destruction of its urban culture \u2013 especially significant, considering that the library was vital to the Second Foundation itself.\nIn the Asimov canon, where events of this time are depicted mainly from a Foundation perspective, the Fall of Trantor is mentioned only as a piece of faraway news and in various later short references. However, Harry Turtledove attempted to fill in the details in his \"Trantor Falls\", focusing on the efforts by the Second Foundation to survive during the sacking of Trantor (published in the 1989 \"Foundation's Friends\", where various writers took up the \"Foundation\" universe).\nFood production.\nAccording to the original Foundation Trilogy (1951), Asimov states (by way of the \"Encyclopedia Galactica\"), \"the impossibility of proper administration\u00a0... under the uninspired leadership of the later Emperors was a considerable factor in the Fall.\" To support the needs and whims of the population, food from twenty agricultural worlds brought by ships in the tens of thousands, fleets greater than any navy ever constructed by the Empire. \"Its dependence upon the outer worlds for food and, indeed, for all necessities of life, made Trantor increasingly vulnerable to conquest by siege. In the last millennium of the Empire, the monotonously numerous revolts made Emperor after Emperor conscious of this, and Imperial policy became little more than the protection of Trantor's delicate jugular vein\" (\"Encyclopedia Galactica\").\nIn \"Prelude to Foundation\" (1989), Asimov indicates that this was not always so: originally, most of Trantor's basic food needs were fulfilled by Trantor's \"vast microorganism farms\". Yeast vats and algae farms produced basic nutrients, which were then processed with artificial flavors into palatable food. The subterranean farms, however, depended entirely on care provided by tik-toks (lesser robots), and their destruction following an abortive uprising (chronicled in \"Foundation's Fear\") left the Imperial capital largely dependent upon food brought from other worlds. \"Foundation's Edge \"mentions algae growing on Trantor, which is called a totally inadequate source of food, so it is possible some of the later Emperors attempted to rectify the situation with limited success. Trantor is, of course, again able to produce its own food after the sack by Gilmer, with the increasing amount of usable land as the metal on the surface was removed and sold.\nRaces on Trantor.\nAlthough by 22,500 years in the future, there had been much racial intermarriage and most people were multiracial, according to Asimov, in the Galactic Empire as a whole as well as on Trantor itself, there were still some recognizable populations primarily descended from the original races on Earth. What we call Caucasians were called \"Westerners\", what we call East Asians were called \"Easterners\", and what we call Black people were called \"Southerners\". No one could remember why these names were used because no one remembered human origins on Earth.\nAdministrative sectors.\nEach planet in the Galactic Empire is divided into administrative sectors. Trantor had over 800, averaging 50,000,000 people each, in , about the size of Uganda or the U.S. state of Kansas. The known sectors are:\nLibrary.\nThe Library of Trantor was one of the prominent features of the fictional planet. Located in the Imperial Sector of the planet, it was variously referred to as the Imperial Library of the Galactic Empire, the University of Trantor Library, and the Galactic Library, in which librarians index the entirety of human knowledge by walking up to a different computer terminal every day and resuming where the previous librarian had left off.\nAround 260 FE, a rebel leader named Gilmer attempted a coup, in the process sacking Trantor and forcing the Imperial family to flee to the nearby world of Delicass, renamed Neotrantor. After the sack, the population dwindled rapidly from 40 billion to less than 100 million. Most of the buildings on Trantor were destroyed during the sack, and over the course of the next two centuries the metal on Trantor was gradually sold off, as farmers uncovered more and more soil to use in their farms. Eventually the farmers grew to become the sole recognized inhabitants of the planet, and the era of Trantor as the central world of the galaxy came to a close. It began to develop a dialect very different from Galactic Standard Speech, and the people unofficially renamed their planet \"Hame\", or \"home.\"\nAs revealed to the reader at the end of \"Second Foundation\", not all these farmers were what they seemed, with the now-rustic Trantor serving as the centre of the Second Foundation. From Trantor, the Second Foundationers secretly guided the development of the Galaxy (roughly parallel to the city of Rome becoming, after the fall of its empire, the headquarters of the Papacy, with its enormous influence on the development of Medieval Europe). Indeed, their self-perception as leaders of the future Second Empire is captured in the Second Foundationers' use of the word \"Hamish\" to describe the farmers despite reserving for themselves use of the word \"Trantorian.\" It is noted that it was the Second Foundation which ensured that the famed library would survive the sacking to Trantor and the destruction of its urban culture \u2013 especially significant, considering that the library was vital to the Second Foundation itself.\nSymbolism.\nTrantor represents several different aspects of civilization: it is both the center of power in the galaxy and its administrative headquarters. It is also an illustration of what could eventually happen to any urbanized planet. Asimov used the Roman Empire as the creative basis for the \"Foundation\" series, so Trantor is in some sense based on Rome at the height of the Roman Empire. Trantor also illustrates the mentality of human beings that was first encountered in Asimov's \"The Caves of Steel\", wherein human technology will ultimately result in a complete encapsulation of a population, and that population will eventually suffer psychosis associated with that total encapsulation. Asimov did once say that these encapsulated cities represented the kind of place in which he would like to live (in real life, Asimov was an agoraphobic who spent virtually all his time writing inside his New York City apartment; he seldom travelled and when he did, only by train and never by airplane). He did not even realize how distasteful some people found this until someone asked him about it.\nInspired by Trantor.\nThere have been some serious attempts to illustrate a planet like Trantor in the \"Star Wars\" films by George Lucas, the first being Coruscant (which was in some early sources called \"Jhantor\", in homage to Trantor). Coruscant is one of the more convincing images on screen we have today of Isaac Asimov's conception of the world-girdling city of Trantor. Coruscant is a planet-covering open-air city, while Trantor's buildings are all subterranean or under domes due to worsening weather conditions. Asimov's Trantor thus differs from Coruscant in that Trantor is more practically adapted to inclement weather, although weather control devices are used on both planets. There is a planet called Trantor in the Star Wars universe, and it is also an ecumenopolis and the home of trantor pigeons (and is located in the galaxy's Deep Core).\nThe planet Helior in Harry Harrison's \"Bill, the Galactic Hero\" satirises Trantor, highlighting the problems of atmosphere, waste disposal and navigating about a world-sized city.\nIn the \"Runaway\" series of adventure games, Trantor is home planet of this universe's alien species. However, no connection besides the name are made to the original.\n\"TrantorCon 23309\" was proposed by Larry Niven at Worldcon in 1976.\nThe \"Warhammer 40,000\" sources mention dead cities upon the quarantine planet of \"Proxima Trantor\".\nWeber's World, the administration planet of the United Planets in the Legion of Super-Heroes's time, is said to be in the Trantor system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60133", "revid": "2927383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60133", "title": "Foundation (novel series)", "text": "Science-fiction novel series by Isaac Asimov\nThe Foundation\" series is a science fiction novel series written by American author Isaac Asimov. First published as a series of short stories and novellas in 1942\u20131950, and subsequently in three novels in 1951\u20131953, for nearly thirty years the series was widely known as The Foundation Trilogy\": \"Foundation\" (1951), \"Foundation and Empire\" (1952), and \"Second Foundation\" (1953). It won the one-time Hugo Award for \"Best All-Time Series\" in 1966. Asimov later added new volumes, with two sequels, \"Foundation's Edge\" (1982) and \"Foundation and Earth\" (1986), and two prequels, \"Prelude to Foundation\" (1988) and \"Forward the Foundation\" (1993).\nThe premise of the stories is that in the waning days of a future Galactic Empire, the mathematician Hari Seldon devises the theory of psychohistory, a new and effective mathematics of sociology. Using statistical laws of mass action, it can predict the future of large populations. Seldon foresees the imminent fall of the Empire, which encompasses the entire Milky Way, and a dark age lasting 30,000 years before a second empire arises. Although the momentum of the Empire's fall is too great to stop, Seldon devises a plan by which \"the onrushing mass of events must be deflected just a little\" to eventually limit this interregnum to just one thousand years. The novels describe some of the dramatic events of those years as they are shaped by the underlying political and social mechanics of Seldon's Plan.\nPublication history.\nOriginal stories.\nThe original trilogy of novels collected a series of eight short stories and novellas published in \"Astounding Science-Fiction\" magazine between May 1942 and January 1950. According to Asimov, the premise was based on ideas in Edward Gibbon's \"History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", and was invented spontaneously on his way to meet with editor John W. Campbell, with whom he developed the concepts of the collapse of the Galactic Empire, the civilization-preserving Foundations, and psychohistory. Asimov wrote these early stories in his West Philadelphia apartment when he worked at the Philadelphia Naval Yard.\n\"Foundation\" trilogy.\nThe first four stories were collected, along with a new introductory story, and published by Gnome Press in 1951 as \"Foundation\". The later stories were published in pairs by Gnome as \"Foundation and Empire\" (1952) and \"Second Foundation\" (1953), resulting in the \"Foundation Trilogy\", as the series is still known.\nLater sequels and prequels.\nIn 1981, Asimov was persuaded by his publishers to write a fourth novel, which became \"Foundation's Edge\" (1982).\nFour years later, Asimov followed up with another sequel, \"Foundation and Earth\" (1986), which was followed by the prequels \"Prelude to Foundation\" (1988) and \"Forward the Foundation\" (1993), published after his 1992 death. During the two-year lapse between writing the sequels and prequels, Asimov had tied in his \"Foundation\" series with his various other series, creating a single unified universe. The basic link is mentioned in \"Foundation and Earth\": an obscure myth about a first wave of space settlements with robots and then a second without. The idea is the one developed in \"Robots of Dawn\", which, in addition to showing the way that the second wave of settlements was to be allowed, illustrates the benefits and shortcomings of the first wave of settlements and their so-called \"C/Fe\" (carbon/iron, signifying humans and robots together) culture. In this same book, the word \"psychohistory\" is used to describe the nascent idea of Seldon's work. Some of the drawbacks to this style of colonization, also called \"Spacer\" culture, are also exemplified by the events described all the way back in 1957's \"The Naked Sun\".\nThe link between the Robot and Foundation universes was tightened by letting the robot R. Daneel Olivaw \u2013 originally introduced in \"The Caves of Steel\" \u2013 live on for tens of thousands of years and play a major role behind the scenes in both the Galactic Empire in its heyday and in the rise of the two Foundations to take its place.\nDevelopment and themes.\nThe early stories were inspired by Edward Gibbon's \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\". The plot of the series focuses on the growth and reach of the Foundation, against a backdrop of the \"decline and fall of the Galactic Empire.\" The themes of Asimov's stories were also influenced by the political tendency in science fiction fandom, associated with the Futurians, known as Michelism.\nThe focus of the novels are the trends through which a civilization might progress, specifically seeking to analyze their progress, using history as a precedent. Although many science fiction novels such as \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" or \"Fahrenheit 451\" do this, their focus is on how current trends in society might come to fruition and they act as a moral allegory of the modern world. The \"Foundation\" series, on the other hand, looks at the trends in a wider scope, dealing with societal evolution and adaptation rather than the human and cultural qualities at one point in time. In this Asimov followed the model of Thucydides' work \"The History of the Peloponnesian War\", as he once acknowledged.\nAsimov tried to end the series with \"Second Foundation\". However, because of the predicted thousand years until the rise of the next Empire (of which only a few hundred had elapsed), the series lacked a sense of closure. For decades, fans pressured him to write a sequel. In 1982, after a 30-year hiatus, Asimov gave in and wrote what was at the time a fourth volume: \"Foundation's Edge\". This was followed shortly thereafter by \"Foundation and Earth\". This novel, which takes place some 500 years after Seldon, ties up all the loose ends and ties all his Robot, Empire, and Foundation novels into a single story. He also opens a brand new line of thought in the last dozen pages regarding Galaxia, a galaxy inhabited by a single collective mind. This concept was never explored further. According to his widow Janet Asimov (in her biography of Isaac, \"It's Been a Good Life\"), he had no idea how to continue after \"Foundation and Earth\", so he started writing the prequels.\nAsimov's imprecise future history.\nIn the spring of 1955, Asimov published a future history of humanity in the pages of \"Thrilling Wonder Stories\" magazine based upon his thought processes concerning the Foundation universe at that point in his life. According to the publication, \"the scheme was not originally worked out as a consistent pattern and only includes about one-quarter of his total writings\". Because of this, the dating in the \"Foundation\" series is approximate and inconsistent.\nAsimov estimates that his \"Foundation\" series takes place nearly 50,000 years into the future, with Hari Seldon born in 47,000 CE. Around this time, the future emperor Cleon I is born in the imperial capital Trantor, 78 years before the Foundation Era (FE) and the events of the original Foundation trilogy. After Cleon inherits the crown, the mathematician Hari Seldon comes to Trantor from Helicon to deliver his theory of psychohistory that predicts the fall of the empire, which triggers the events of \"Prelude to Foundation\". \"Forward the Foundation\" picks up the story a few years later, with the emperor being assassinated and Seldon retiring from politics.\nAt the start of the Foundation Era, the events of the original \"Foundation\" novel (first published in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" as a series of short stories) take place, and the in-universe Foundation Era truly begins. According to Asimov, he intended this to take place around the year 47000 CE, with the Empire in decay as it battles the rising Foundation, who emerges as the dominant power a few centuries later. Thus begins the events of the \"Foundation and Empire\", which include the unpredicted rise of the Mule, who defeats the Foundation thanks to his mutant abilities. The events of \"Second Foundation\" chronicle the titular Second Foundation's search and defeat of the Mule, and their conflict with the remnants of the original Foundation, averting the Dark Age. Asimov estimates that the Mule rises and falls somewhere around 47300 CE.\n\"Foundation's Edge\" takes place 500 years after the establishment of the Foundation, outside of the original trilogy of novels. \"Foundation and Earth\" follows immediately after, with humanity choosing and justifying a third path distinct from the opposing visions of the two Foundations. According to Asimov, the Second Galactic Empire is established 48000 CE, 1000 years after the events of the first novel.\nAsimov himself commented that his fiction's internal history was \"actually made up ad hoc. My cross-references in the novels are thrown in as they occur to me and did not come from a systemized history. ... If some reader checks my stories carefully and finds that my dating is internally inconsistent, I can only say I'm not surprised.\"\nPrequel trilogy after Asimov's death.\nA second Foundation trilogy of prequels was written after Asimov's death by three authors, authorized by the Asimov estate. These were \"Foundation's Fear\" (1997) by Gregory Benford, \"Foundation and Chaos\" (1998) by Greg Bear, and \"Foundation's Triumph\" (1999) by David Brin.\nCultural impact.\nImpact in nonfiction.\nIn \"Learned Optimism\", psychologist Martin Seligman identifies the \"Foundation\" series as one of the most important influences in his professional life, because of the possibility of predictive sociology based on psychological principles. He also lays claim to the first successful prediction of a major historical (sociological) event, in the 1988 US elections, and he specifically attributes this to a psychological principle.\nIn his 1996 book \"To Renew America\", U. S. House Speaker Newt Gingrich wrote that he was influenced by reading the \"Foundation\" trilogy in high school.\nPaul Krugman, winner of the 2008 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, credits the \"Foundation\" series with turning his mind to economics, as the closest existing science to psychohistory.\nStating that it \"offers a useful summary of some of the dynamics of far-flung imperial Rome\", Carl Sagan in 1978 listed the \"Foundation\" series as an example of how science fiction \"can convey bits and pieces, hints and phrases, of knowledge unknown or inaccessible to the reader\". In the nonfiction PBS series \"\", Sagan referred to an \"Encyclopedia Galactica\" in the episodes \"Encyclopaedia Galactica\" and \"Who Speaks for Earth\".\nAwards.\nIn 1966, the \"Foundation\" trilogy beat several other science fiction and fantasy series to receive a special Hugo Award for \"Best All-Time Series\". The runners-up for the award were the \"Barsoom series\" by Edgar Rice Burroughs, the \"Future History series\" by Robert A. Heinlein, the \"Lensman series\" by Edward E. Smith and \"The Lord of the Rings\" by J. R. R. Tolkien. The Foundation series was the only series so honored until the establishment of the \"Best Series\" category in 2017. Asimov himself wrote that he assumed the one-time award had been created to honor \"The Lord of the Rings\", and he was amazed when his work won.\nThe series has won three other Hugo Awards. \"Foundation's Edge\" won Best Novel in 1983, and was a bestseller for almost a year. Retrospective Hugo Awards were given in 1996 and 2018 for, respectively, \"The Mule\" (the major part of \"Foundation and Empire\") for Best Novel (1946) and \"Foundation\" (the first story written for the series, and second chapter of the first novel) for Best Short Story (1943).\nImpact in fiction and entertainment.\nDouglas Adams' \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" mentions the encyclopedia by name, remarking that it is rather \"dry\", and consequently sells fewer copies than his own creation \"The Guide\".\nFrank Herbert also wrote \"Dune\" as a counterpoint to \"Foundation\". Tim O'Reilly in his monograph on Herbert wrote that \"\"Dune\" is clearly a commentary on the \"Foundation\" trilogy. Herbert has taken a look at the same imaginative situation that provoked Asimov's classic\u2014the decay of a galactic empire\u2014and restated it in a way that draws on different assumptions and suggests radically different conclusions. The twist he has introduced into \"Dune\" is that the Mule, not the Foundation, is his hero.\"\nIn 1995, Donald Kingsbury wrote \"Historical Crisis\", which he later expanded into a novel, \"Psychohistorical Crisis\". It takes place about 2,000 years after \"Foundation\", after the founding of the Second Galactic Empire. It is set in the same fictional universe as the Foundation series, in considerable detail, but with virtually all \"Foundation\"-specific names either changed (e.g., Kalgan becomes Lakgan), or avoided (psychohistory is created by an unnamed, but often-referenced Founder). The novel explores the ideas of psychohistory in a number of new directions, inspired by more recent developments in mathematics and computer science, as well as by new ideas in science fiction itself.\nIn 1998, the novel \"Spectre\" (part of the Shatnerverse series) by William Shatner and Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens states that the Mirror Universe divergent path has been studied by the \"Seldon Psychohistory Institute\".\nThe oboe-like holophonor in Matt Groening's animated television series \"Futurama\" is based directly upon the Visi-Sonor which Magnifico plays in \"Foundation and Empire.\"\nDuring the 2006\u20132007 Marvel Comics Civil War crossover storyline, in \"Fantastic Four\" #542 Mister Fantastic revealed his own attempt to develop psychohistory, saying he was inspired after reading the \"Foundation\" series.\nAccording to lead singer Ian Gillan, the hard rock band Deep Purple's song \"The Mule\" is based on the Foundation character: \"Yes, The Mule was inspired by Asimov. It's been a while but I'm sure you've made the right connection... Asimov was required reading in the 1960s.\"\nAdaptations.\nRadio.\nAn eight-part radio adaptation of the original trilogy, with sound design by the BBC Radiophonic Workshop, was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in 1973\u2014one of the first BBC radio drama serials to be made in stereo. A BBC 7 rerun commenced in July 2003.\nAdapted by Patrick Tull (episodes 1 to 4) and Mike Stott (episodes 5 to 8), the dramatisation was directed by David Cain and starred William Eedle as Hari Seldon, with Geoffrey Beevers as Gaal Dornick, Lee Montague as Salvor Hardin, Julian Glover as Hober Mallow, Dinsdale Landen as Bel Riose, Maurice Denham as Ebling Mis and Prunella Scales as Lady Callia.\nFilm.\nBy 1998, New Line Cinema had spent $1.5\u00a0million developing a film version of the \"Foundation Trilogy\". The failure to develop a new franchise was partly a reason the studio signed on to produce \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy.\nOn July 29, 2008, New Line Cinema co-founders Bob Shaye and Michael Lynne were reported to have been signed on to produce an adaptation of the trilogy by their company Unique Pictures for Warner Brothers.\nHowever, Columbia Pictures (Sony) successfully bid for the screen rights on January 15, 2009, and then contracted Roland Emmerich to direct and produce. Michael Wimer was named as co-producer.\nTwo years later, the studio hired Dante Harper to adapt the books. This project failed to materialize, and HBO acquired the rights when they became available in 2014.\nTelevision.\nIn November 2014, \"TheWrap\" reported that Jonathan Nolan was writing and producing a TV series based on the \"Foundation Trilogy\" for HBO. Nolan confirmed his involvement at a Paley Center event on April 13, 2015.\nIn June 2017, \"Deadline\" reported that Skydance Media would produce a TV series. In August 2018 it was announced that Apple TV+ had commissioned a 10 episode straight-to-series order. However, on April 18, 2019, Josh Friedman left the project as co-writer and co-showrunner. This was apparently planned, with either Friedman or screenwriter David Goyer leaving and the other staying. On June 22, 2020, Apple CEO Tim Cook announced the series would be released in 2021. On 13 March 2020, Apple suspended filming on their shows due to the COVID-19 outbreak; filming resumed on October 6, 2020.\nThe \"Foundation\" TV series was filmed at Troy Studios, Limerick, Ireland, and the budget was expected to be approximately $50 million. The first episodes premiered on September 24, 2021. Metacritic gave the first season a weighted average score of 63 out of 100 based on 22 reviews, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\". The second season was released in 2023 and the third season was released in 2025.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60134", "revid": "48264973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60134", "title": "Robot series", "text": "Series of stories by Isaac Asimov\nThe \"Robot\" series is a series of 37 science fiction short stories and six novels created by American writer Isaac Asimov; the books were published between 1940 and 1995. The series is set in a world where sentient positronic robots serve a number of purposes in society. To ensure their loyalty, the Three Laws of Robotics are programmed into these robots, with the intent of preventing them from ever becoming a danger to humanity. Later, Asimov would merge the \"Robot\" series with his \"Foundation\" series.\nRobot Novels and Stories.\nThe series started with the story \"Robbie\" in the September 1940 \"Super Science Stories\" (appearing under the title \"Strange Playfellow\", which was not Asimov's title). Although it was originally written as a stand-alone story, the following year Asimov published a series of additional robot stories, which fit into a narrative that was then put together as the book \"I, Robot\".\nOverview of short stories.\nMost of Asimov's robot short stories, which he began to write in 1939, are set in the first age of positronic robotics and space exploration. The unique feature of Asimov's robots is the Three Laws of Robotics, hardwired in a robot's positronic brain, with which all robots in his fiction must comply, and which ensure that the robot does not turn against its creators.\nThe stories were not initially conceived as a set, but rather all feature his positronic robots. They all share a theme of the interaction of humans, robots, and morality. Some of the short stories found in \"The Complete Robot\" (1982) and other anthologies appear not to be set in the same universe as the \"Foundation\" universe. \"Victory Unintentional\" has positronic robots obeying the Three Laws, but also a non-human civilization on Jupiter. \"Let's Get Together\" features humanoid robots, but from a different future (where the Cold War is still in progress), and with no mention of the Three Laws. Some characters appear in more than one of the stories, and the manufacturer of the robots is often identified as the (fictional) corporation \"U.S. Robots and Mechanical Men\".\n\"The Complete Robot\" contains most of Asimov's robot short stories. Missing ones were either written after its publication or formed the text connecting the stories in \"I, Robot\".\nThe six Asimov robot short stories not included in this book are:\nOverview of the Robot Novels.\nThe first book is \"I, Robot\" (1950), a collection of nine previously published short stories woven together as a 21st-century interview with \"robopsychologist\" Dr. Susan Calvin. The next four robot novels \"The Caves of Steel\" (1953), \"The Naked Sun\" (1955), \"The Robots of Dawn\" (1983), and \"Robots and Empire\" (1985) make up the Elijah Baley (sometimes \"Lije Baley\") series, and are mysteries starring the Terran Elijah Baley and his humaniform robot partner, R. Daneel Olivaw. They are set thousands of years after the short stories and focus on the conflicts between Spacers \u2014 descendants of human settlers from other planets \u2014 and the people from an overcrowded Earth. \"Mirror Image\", one of the short stories from \"The Complete Robot\" anthology, is also set in this time period (between \"The Naked Sun\" and \"The Robots of Dawn\") and features both Baley and Olivaw. Another short story (found in \"The Early Asimov\" anthology), \"Mother Earth\", is set about a thousand years before the robot novels, when the Spacer worlds chose to become separated from Earth.\n\"The Caves of Steel\" and \"The Naked Sun\" are both considered classics of the genre, but the later novels were also well received, with \"The Robots of Dawn\" nominated for both the Hugo and Locus Awards in 1984 and \"Robots and Empire\" shortlisted for the Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel in 1986.\nInspiration.\nOne source of inspiration for Asimov's robots was the Zoromes, a race of mechanical men that featured in a 1931 short story called \"The Jameson Satellite\", by Neil R. Jones. Asimov read this story at the age of 11, and acknowledged it as a source of inspiration in \"Before the Golden Age\" (1975), an anthology of 1930's science fiction in which Asimov told the story of the science fiction he read during his formative years. In Asimov's own words:\nIt is from the Zoromes, beginning with their first appearance in \"The Jameson Satellite,\" that I got my own feeling for benevolent robots who could serve man with decency, as these had served Professor Jameson. It was the Zoromes, then, who were the spiritual ancestors of my own \"positronic robots,\" all of them, from Robbie to R. Daneel.\nOther authors of robot novels set in Asimov's universe.\nThe 1989 anthology \"Foundation's Friends\" included the positronic robot stories \"Balance\" by Mike Resnick, \"Blot\" by Hal Clement, \"PAPPI\" by Sheila Finch, \"Plato's Cave\" by Poul Anderson, \"The Fourth Law of Robotics\" by Harry Harrison and \"Carhunters of the Concrete Prairie\" by Robert Sheckley. Not all of these stories are entirely consistent with the Asimov stories. The anthology also included \"Strip-Runner\" by Pamela Sargent, set in the era of the Elijah Baley novels.\nShortly before his death in 1992, Asimov approved an outline for three novels (\"Caliban\", \"Inferno\", \"Utopia\") by Roger MacBride Allen, set between \"Robots and Empire\" and the \"Empire\" series, telling the story of the terraforming of the Spacer world Inferno, and about the robot revolution started by creating \"No Law Robots\" and then \"New Law Robots.\"\nThere is also another set of novels by various authors, \"Isaac Asimov's Robot City\", \"Robots and Aliens\" and \"Robots in Time\" series.\nThe Asimov estate authorized the publication of another trilogy of robot mysteries by Mark W. Tiedemann. These novels, which take place several years before Asimov's \"Robots and Empire\", are \"Mirage\" (2000), \"Chimera\" (2001), and \"Aurora\" (2002). These were followed by yet another robot mystery, Alexander C. Irvine's \"Have Robot, Will Travel\" (2004), set five years after the Tiedemann trilogy.\nIn November 2009, the Asimov estate announced the upcoming publication of \"Robots and Chaos\", the first volume in a trilogy featuring Susan Calvin by fantasy author Mickey Zucker Reichert. The book was published in November 2011 under the title \"I, Robot: To Protect\", and was later followed by two sequels: \"I, Robot: To Obey\" (2013) and \"I, Robot: To Preserve\" (2016).\nAdaptations.\nIn the late 1970s, Harlan Ellison wrote a screenplay based on Asimov's book \"I, Robot\" for Warner Bros. This film project was ultimately abandoned, but Ellison's script was later published in book form as \"I, Robot: The Illustrated Screenplay\" (1994).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60135", "revid": "50187537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60135", "title": "Galactic Empire series", "text": "Science fiction trilogy of Isaac Asimov's earliest novels, extended by a short story\nThe Galactic Empire\" series (also called the Empire\" novels or trilogy) is a science fiction sequence of three of Isaac Asimov's earliest novels, and extended by one short story. They are connected by their early place in his published works and chronological placement within his overarching \"Foundation\" universe, set around the rise of Asimov's Galactic Empire, between the \"Robot\" and \"Foundation\" series to which they were linked in Asimov's later novels.\nWorks in the series.\nIn order of internal chronology the \"Empire\" series consists of:\nPublication history.\nThe three \"Empire\" books, first published between 1950 and 1952, are Asimov's three earliest novels published in his own name (\"David Starr, Space Ranger\" was published before \"The Currents of Space\", but had been published under his pen name \"Paul French\", and the \"Foundation\" books were collections of linked short stories rather than continuous novels).\n\"Pebble in the Sky\" was originally written in the summer of 1947 under the title \"Grow Old with Me\" for \"Startling Stories\", whose editor Sam Merwin, Jr. had approached Asimov to write a forty thousand word short novel for the magazine. The title was adapted from Robert Browning's \"Rabbi ben Ezra\", the first few lines of which (starting \"Grow old along with me! / The best is yet to be...\") were included in the final novel. It was rejected by \"Startling Stories\" on the basis that the magazine's emphasis was more on adventure than science-heavy fiction (despite the editor having invited Asimov to write the latter as an experiment for the magazine), and again by John W. Campbell, Asimov's usual editor. In 1949, Doubleday editor Walter I. Bradbury accepted the story on the suggestion of Frederik Pohl, on the condition it was expanded to seventy thousand words and the title changed to something more science fiction oriented; it was published in January 1950 as \"Pebble in the Sky\". \"Grow Old With Me\" was later published in its original form along with other draft stories in \"The Alternate Asimovs\" in 1986.\n\"The Stars, Like Dust\" was originally serialised under the title \"Tyrann\" in \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" from January to March 1951, and was published as a novel by Doubleday later that year. The first paperback edition was an Ace Books double novel along with Roger Dee's \"An Earth Gone Mad\"; \"The Stars, Like Dust\" was retitled \"The Rebellious Stars\" for this edition without Asimov's consent. The novel was reprinted in with the \"Foundation\" Trilogy, \"The Naked Sun\" and \"I, Robot\" in a hardback selected works edition in 1982 by Littlehampton Book Services.\n\"The Currents of Space\" was originally serialised in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" from October to December 1952 before being published by Doubleday as a novel the same year.\nThe books have been reprinted a number of times as a trilogy (as well as many times separately): in 1986 by Ballantine Books as \"Galactic Empire Novel[s]\", in 1992 by Spectra as \"The Empire Novels\" and in 2010 along with \"The End of Eternity\" by Orb Books, in both print and Kindle editions.\nAfter the publication of \"The Currents of Space\" in 1952, all three novels (the only Asimov novels published at that time) were collected into an omnibus titled \"Triangle\". They were republished again as a single volume, \"The Empire Novels\", in 2002 by the Science Fiction Book Club.\n\"Blind Alley\" was published before any of the novels; written in 1944, it was accepted by John W. Campbell later that year and published in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" in March 1945. It was anthologised by Groff Conklin in \"The Best of Science Fiction\", the first of Asimov's stories to have been reprinted, and was later included in \"The Early Asimov\" (in 1972, along with a very brief history of its origins), \"The Asimov Chronicles\" in 1989 and in volume 2 of \"The Complete Stories\" in 1992. It has never been published together with the novels, as it is connected only on the basis of being set during the Galactic Empire, after the \"Robot\" stories and before the \"Foundation\" series.\nDevelopment and themes.\nThese stories are set in the same future as the Foundation series, which had appeared in magazines starting in 1942. The tie is not close, and they are only loosely connected to each other, each being a complete tale in its own right. Their main common points are Asimov's idea of a future Galactic Empire, certain aspects of technology \u2014 hyperdrive, blaster pistols, \"neuronic whips\", the possible invention of the \"Visi-Sonor\" \u2014 and particular locations, such as the planet Trantor. Another connection was later established with \"Robots and Empire,\" where Asimov revealed how Earth became radioactive, as mentioned in all three novels. Some sources further this argument by asserting that \"The Stars, Like Dust\" takes place about one thousand years following the events of \"Robots and Empire\". Also, the calendar used on spaceships in \"The Stars, Like Dust\" is the same that the Spacers introduce Lije Baley to in \"The Robots of Dawn\".\nThe short story \"Blind Alley\" is the only story set in the Foundation universe to feature intelligence not of human origin; \"Foundation and Earth\" features non-human intelligences (of Solaria and Gaia), but they are descended from or created by humans.\nAsimov later integrated them into his all-engulfing Foundation series. Some contortion was required to explain how the robots of the Robot series are almost completely absent from the Galactic Empire novels. In reality, this is because Asimov wrote the original Robot and Foundation short stories as separate series.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60136", "revid": "50823114", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60136", "title": "Three Laws of Robotics", "text": "Fictional set of rules by Isaac Asimov\nThe Three Laws of Robotics (often shortened to The Three Laws or Asimov's Laws) are a set of rules devised by science fiction author Isaac Asimov, which were to be followed by robots in several of his stories. The rules were introduced in his 1942 short story \"Runaround\" (included in the 1950 collection \"I, Robot\"), although similar restrictions had been implied in earlier stories.\nThe Laws.\nThe Three Laws, presented to be from the fictional \"Handbook of Robotics, 56th Edition, 2058 A.D.\", are:\nUse in fiction.\nThe Three Laws form an organizing principle and unifying theme for Asimov's robot-based fiction, appearing in his \"Robot\" series, the stories linked to it, and in his (initially pseudonymous) Lucky Starr series of young-adult fiction. The Laws are incorporated into almost all of the positronic robots appearing in his fiction, and cannot be bypassed, being intended as a safety feature. A number of Asimov's robot-focused stories involve robots behaving in unusual and counter-intuitive ways as an unintended consequence of how the robot applies the Three Laws to the situation in which it finds itself. \nOther authors working in Asimov's fictional universe have adopted them and references appear throughout science fiction as well as in other genres.\nThe original laws have been altered and elaborated on by Asimov and other authors. Asimov himself made slight modifications to the first three in subsequent works to further develop how robots would interact with humans and each other. In later fiction where robots had taken responsibility for government of whole planets and human civilizations, Asimov also added a fourth, or zeroth law, to precede the others.\nThe Three Laws have also influenced thought on the ethics of artificial intelligence.\nHistory.\nIn \"The Rest of the Robots\", published in 1964, Isaac Asimov noted that when he began writing in 1940 he felt that \"one of the stock plots of science fiction was\u00a0... robots were created and destroyed their creator. Knowledge has its dangers, yes, but is the response to be a retreat from knowledge? Or is knowledge to be used as itself a barrier to the dangers it brings?\" He decided that in his stories a robot would not \"turn stupidly on his creator for no purpose but to demonstrate, for one more weary time, the crime and punishment of Faust.\"\nOn May 3, 1939, Asimov attended a meeting of the Queens (New York) Science Fiction Society where he met Earl and Otto Binder who had recently published a short story \"I, Robot\" featuring a sympathetic robot named Adam Link who was misunderstood and motivated by love and honor. (This was the first of a series of ten stories; the next year \"Adam Link's Vengeance\" (1940) featured Adam thinking \"A robot must never kill a human, of his own free will.\") Asimov admired the story. Three days later Asimov began writing \"my own story of a sympathetic and noble robot\", his 14th story. Thirteen days later he took \"Robbie\" to John W. Campbell the editor of \"Astounding Science-Fiction\". Campbell rejected it, claiming that it bore too strong a resemblance to Lester del Rey's \"Helen O'Loy\", published in December 1938\u2014the story of a robot that is so much like a person that she falls in love with her creator and becomes his ideal wife. Frederik Pohl published the story under the title \u201cStrange Playfellow\u201d in \"Super Science Stories\" September 1940.\nAsimov attributes the Three Laws to John W. Campbell, from a conversation that took place on 23 December 1940. Campbell claimed that Asimov had the Three Laws already in his mind and that they simply needed to be stated explicitly. Several years later Asimov's friend Randall Garrett attributed the Laws to a symbiotic partnership between the two men\u2014a suggestion that Asimov adopted enthusiastically. According to his autobiographical writings, Asimov included the First Law's \"inaction\" clause because of Arthur Hugh Clough's poem \"The Latest Decalogue\" (), which includes the satirical lines \"Thou shalt not kill, but needst not strive / officiously to keep alive\".\nAlthough Asimov pins the creation of the Three Laws on one particular date, their appearance in his literature happened over a period. He wrote two robot stories with no explicit mention of the Laws, \"Robbie\" and \"Reason\". He assumed, however, that robots would have certain inherent safeguards. \"Liar!\", his third robot story, makes the first mention of the First Law but not the other two. All three laws finally appeared together in \"Runaround\". When these stories and several others were compiled in the anthology \"I, Robot\", \"Reason\" and \"Robbie\" were updated to acknowledge all the Three Laws, though the material Asimov added to \"Reason\" is not entirely consistent with the Three Laws as he described them elsewhere. In particular the idea of a robot protecting human lives when it does not believe those humans truly exist is at odds with Elijah Baley's reasoning, as described below.\nDuring the 1950s Asimov wrote a series of science fiction novels expressly intended for young-adult audiences. Originally his publisher expected that the novels could be adapted into a long-running television series, something like \"The Lone Ranger\" had been for radio. Fearing that his stories would be adapted into the \"uniformly awful\" programming he saw flooding the television channels Asimov decided to publish the \"Lucky Starr\" books under the pseudonym \"Paul French\". When plans for the television series fell through, Asimov decided to abandon the pretence; he brought the Three Laws into \"Lucky Starr and the Moons of Jupiter\", noting that this \"was a dead giveaway to Paul French's identity for even the most casual reader\".\nIn his short story \"Evidence\" Asimov lets his recurring character Dr. Susan Calvin expound a moral basis behind the Three Laws. Calvin points out that human beings are typically expected to refrain from harming other human beings (except in times of extreme duress like war, or to save a greater number) and this is equivalent to a robot's First Law. Likewise, according to Calvin, society expects individuals to obey instructions from recognized authorities such as doctors, teachers and so forth which equals the Second Law of Robotics. Finally humans are typically expected to avoid harming themselves which is the Third Law for a robot.\nThe plot of \"Evidence\" revolves around the question of telling a human being apart from a robot constructed to appear human. Calvin reasons that if such an individual obeys the Three Laws he may be a robot or simply \"a very good man\". Another character then asks Calvin if robots are different from human beings after all. She replies, \"Worlds different. Robots are essentially decent.\"\nAsimov later wrote that he should not be praised for creating the Laws, because they are \"obvious from the start, and everyone is aware of them subliminally. The Laws just never happened to be put into brief sentences until I managed to do the job. The Laws apply, as a matter of course, to every tool that human beings use\", and \"analogues of the Laws are implicit in the design of almost all tools, robotic or not\":\nAsimov believed that, ideally, humans would also follow the Laws:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have my answer ready whenever someone asks me if I think that my Three Laws of Robotics will actually be used to govern the behavior of robots, once they become versatile and flexible enough to be able to choose among different courses of behavior.\nMy answer is, \"Yes, the Three Laws are the only way in which rational human beings can deal with robots\u2014or with anything else.\"\n\u2014But when I say that, I always remember (sadly) that human beings are not always rational.\nAsimov stated in a 1986 interview on the Manhattan public access show \"Conversations with Harold Hudson Channer\" with guest co-host Marilyn vos Savant, \"It's a little humbling to think that, what is most likely to survive of everything I've said... After all, I've published now... I've published now at least 20 million words.\u00a0 I'll have to figure it out, maybe even more.\u00a0 But of all those millions of words that I've published, I am convinced that 100 years from now only 60 of them will survive.\u00a0 The 60 that make up the Three Laws of Robotics.\"\nAlterations.\nBy Asimov.\nAsimov's stories test his Three Laws in a wide variety of circumstances leading to proposals and rejection of modifications. Science fiction scholar James Gunn writes in 1982, \"The Asimov robot stories as a whole may respond best to an analysis on this basis: the ambiguity in the Three Laws and the ways in which Asimov played twenty-nine variations upon a theme\". While the original set of Laws provided inspirations for multiple stories, Asimov introduced modified versions from time to time.\nFirst Law modified.\nIn \"Little Lost Robot\" several NS-2, or \"Nestor\", robots are created with only part of the First Law. It reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;1. A robot may not harm a human being.\nThis modification is motivated by a practical difficulty as robots have to work alongside human beings who are exposed to low doses of radiation. Because their positronic brains are highly sensitive to gamma rays the robots are rendered inoperable by doses reasonably safe for humans. The robots are being destroyed attempting to rescue the humans who are in no actual danger but \"might forget to leave\" the irradiated area within the exposure time limit. Removing the First Law's \"inaction\" clause solves this problem but creates the possibility of an even greater one: a robot could initiate an action that would harm a human (dropping a heavy weight and failing to catch it is the example given in the text), knowing that it was capable of preventing the harm and then decide not to do so.\nGaia is a planet with collective intelligence in the \"Foundation\" series which adopts a law similar to the First Law, and the Zeroth Law, as its philosophy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Gaia may not harm life or allow life to come to harm.\nZeroth Law added.\nAsimov once added a \"Zeroth Law\"\u2014so named to continue the pattern where lower-numbered laws supersede the higher-numbered laws\u2014stating that a robot must not harm humanity. The robotic character R. Daneel Olivaw was the first to give the Zeroth Law a name in the novel \"Robots and Empire\"; however, the character Susan Calvin articulates the concept in the short story \"The Evitable Conflict\".\nIn the final scenes of the novel \"Robots and Empire\", R. Giskard Reventlov is the first robot to act according to the Zeroth Law. Giskard is telepathic, like the robot Herbie in the short story \"Liar!\", and tries to apply the Zeroth Law through his understanding of a more subtle concept of \"harm\" than most robots can grasp. However, unlike Herbie, Giskard grasps the philosophical concept of the Zeroth Law allowing him to harm individual human beings if he can do so in service to the abstract concept of humanity. The Zeroth Law is never programmed into Giskard's brain but instead is a rule he attempts to comprehend through pure metacognition. Although he fails \u2013 it ultimately destroys his positronic brain as he is not certain whether his choice will turn out to be for the ultimate good of humanity or not \u2013 he gives his successor R. Daneel Olivaw his telepathic abilities. Over the course of thousands of years Daneel adapts himself to be able to fully obey the Zeroth Law.\nDaneel originally formulated the Zeroth Law in both the novel \"Foundation and Earth\" (1986) and the subsequent novel \"Prelude to Foundation\" (1988):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A robot may not injure humanity or, through inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.\nA condition stating that the Zeroth Law must not be broken was added to the original Three Laws, although Asimov recognized the difficulty such a law would pose in practice. Asimov's novel \"Foundation and Earth\" contains the following passage:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Trevize frowned. \"How do you decide what is injurious, or not injurious, to humanity as a whole?\"\n\"Precisely, sir,\" said Daneel. \"In theory, the Zeroth Law was the answer to our problems. In practice, we could never decide. A human being is a concrete object. Injury to a person can be estimated and judged. Humanity is an abstraction.\"\nA translator incorporated the concept of the Zeroth Law into one of Asimov's novels before Asimov himself made the law explicit. Near the climax of \"The Caves of Steel\", Elijah Baley makes a bitter comment to himself thinking that the First Law forbids a robot from harming a human being. He determines that it must be so unless the robot is clever enough to comprehend that its actions are for humankind's long-term good. In Jacques Br\u00e9card's 1956 French translation entitled \"\" Baley's thoughts emerge in a slightly different way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRemoval of the Three Laws.\nThree times during his writing career, Asimov portrayed robots that disregard the Three Laws entirely. The first case was a short-short story entitled \"First Law\" and is often considered an insignificant \"tall tale\" or even apocryphal. On the other hand, the short story \"Cal\" (from the collection \"Gold\"), told by a first-person robot narrator, features a robot who disregards the Three Laws because he has found something far more important\u2014he wants to be a writer. Humorous, partly autobiographical and unusually experimental in style, \"Cal\" has been regarded as one of \"Gold\"'s strongest stories. The third is a short story entitled \"Sally\" in which cars fitted with positronic brains are apparently able to harm and kill humans in disregard of the First Law. However, aside from the positronic brain concept, this story does not refer to other robot stories and may not be set in the same continuity.\nThe title story of the \"Robot Dreams\" collection portrays LVX-1, or \"Elvex\", a robot who enters a state of unconsciousness and dreams thanks to the unusual fractal construction of his positronic brain. In his dream the first two Laws are absent and the Third Law reads \"A robot must protect its own existence\".\nAsimov took varying positions on whether the Laws were optional: although in his first writings they were simply carefully engineered safeguards, in later stories Asimov stated that they were an inalienable part of the mathematical foundation underlying the positronic brain. Without the basic theory of the Three Laws the fictional scientists of Asimov's universe would be unable to design a workable brain unit. This is historically consistent: the occasions where roboticists modify the Laws generally occur early within the stories' chronology and at a time when there is less existing work to be re-done. In \"Little Lost Robot\" Susan Calvin considers modifying the Laws to be a terrible idea, although possible, while centuries later Dr. Gerrigel in \"The Caves of Steel\" believes it to require a century just to redevelop the positronic brain theory from scratch.\nThe character Dr. Gerrigel uses the term \"Asenion\" to describe robots programmed with the Three Laws. The robots in Asimov's stories, being Asenion robots, are incapable of knowingly violating the Three Laws but, in principle, a robot in science fiction or in the real world could be non-Asenion. \"Asenion\" is a misspelling of the name Asimov which was made by an editor of the magazine \"Planet Stories.\" Asimov used this obscure variation to insert himself into \"The Caves of Steel\" just like he referred to himself as \"Azimuth or, possibly, Asymptote\" in \"Thiotimoline to the Stars\", in much the same way that Vladimir Nabokov appeared in \"Lolita\" anagrammatically disguised as \"Vivian Darkbloom\".\nCharacters within the stories often point out that the Three Laws, as they exist in a robot's mind, are not the written versions usually quoted by humans but abstract mathematical concepts upon which a robot's entire developing consciousness is based. This concept is unclear in earlier stories depicting rudimentary robots who are only programmed to comprehend basic physical tasks, where the Three Laws act as an overarching safeguard, but by the era of \"The Caves of Steel\" featuring robots with human or beyond-human intelligence the Three Laws have become the underlying basic ethical worldview that determines the actions of all robots.\nBy other authors.\nRoger MacBride Allen's trilogy.\nIn the 1990s, Roger MacBride Allen wrote a trilogy which was set within Asimov's fictional universe. Each title has the prefix \"Isaac Asimov's\" as Asimov had approved Allen's outline before his death. These three books, \"Caliban\", \"Inferno\" and \"Utopia\", introduce a new set of the Three Laws. The so-called New Laws are similar to Asimov's originals with the following differences: the First Law is modified to remove the \"inaction\" clause, the same modification made in \"Little Lost Robot\"; the Second Law is modified to require cooperation instead of obedience; the Third Law is modified so it is no longer superseded by the Second (i.e., a \"New Law\" robot cannot be ordered to destroy itself); finally, Allen adds a Fourth Law which instructs the robot to do \"whatever it likes\" so long as this does not conflict with the first three laws. The philosophy behind these changes is that \"New Law\" robots should be partners rather than slaves to humanity, according to Fredda Leving, who designed these New Law Robots. According to the first book's introduction, Allen devised the New Laws in discussion with Asimov himself. However, the \"Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" says that \"With permission from Asimov, Allen rethought the Three Laws and developed a new set.\"\nJack Williamson's \"With Folded Hands\".\nJack Williamson's novelette \"With Folded Hands\" (1947), later rewritten as the novel \"The Humanoids\", deals with robot servants whose prime directive is \"To Serve and Obey, And Guard Men From Harm\". While Asimov's robotic laws are meant to protect humans from harm, the robots in Williamson's story have taken these instructions to the extreme; they protect humans from everything, including unhappiness, stress, unhealthy lifestyle and all actions that could be potentially dangerous. All that is left for humans to do is to sit with folded hands.\n\"Foundation\" sequel trilogy.\nIn the officially licensed \"Foundation\" sequels \"Foundation's Fear\", \"Foundation and Chaos\" and \"Foundation's Triumph\" (by Gregory Benford, Greg Bear and David Brin respectively) the future Galactic Empire is seen to be controlled by a conspiracy of humaniform robots who follow the Zeroth Law and are led by R. Daneel Olivaw.\nThe Laws of Robotics are portrayed as something akin to a human religion, and referred to in the language of the Protestant Reformation, with the set of laws containing the Zeroth Law known as the \"Giskardian Reformation\" to the original \"Calvinian Orthodoxy\" of the Three Laws. Zeroth-Law robots under the control of R. Daneel Olivaw are seen continually struggling with \"First Law\" robots who deny the existence of the Zeroth Law, promoting agendas different from Daneel's. Some of these agendas are based on the first clause of the First Law (\"A robot may not injure a human being...\") advocating strict non-interference in human politics to avoid unwittingly causing harm. Others are based on the second clause (\"...or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm\") claiming that robots should openly become a dictatorial government to protect humans from all potential conflict or disaster.\nDaneel also comes into conflict with a robot known as R. Lodovic Trema whose positronic brain was infected by a rogue AI \u2014 specifically, a simulation of the long-dead Voltaire \u2014 which consequently frees Trema from the Three Laws. Trema comes to believe that humanity should be free to choose its own future. Furthermore, a small group of robots claims that the Zeroth Law of Robotics itself implies a higher Minus One Law of Robotics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A robot may not harm sentience or, through inaction, allow sentience to come to harm.\nThey therefore claim that it is morally indefensible for Daneel to ruthlessly sacrifice robots and extraterrestrial sentient life for the benefit of humanity. None of these reinterpretations successfully displace Daneel's Zeroth Law \u2014 though \"Foundation's Triumph\" hints that these robotic factions remain active as fringe groups up to the time of the novel \"Foundation\".\nThese novels take place in a future dictated by Asimov to be free of obvious robot presence and surmise that R. Daneel's secret influence on history through the millennia has prevented both the rediscovery of positronic brain technology and the opportunity to work on sophisticated intelligent machines. This lack of rediscovery and lack of opportunity makes certain that the superior physical and intellectual power wielded by intelligent machines remains squarely in the possession of robots obedient to some form of the Three Laws. That R. Daneel is not entirely successful at this becomes clear in a brief period when scientists on Trantor develop \"tiktoks\" \u2014 simplistic programmable machines akin to real\u2013life modern robots and therefore lacking the Three Laws. The robot conspirators see the Trantorian tiktoks as a massive threat to social stability, and their plan to eliminate the tiktok threat forms much of the plot of \"Foundation's Fear\".\nIn \"Foundation's Triumph\" different robot factions interpret the Laws in a wide variety of ways, seemingly ringing every possible permutation upon the Three Laws' ambiguities.\nRobot Mystery series.\nSet between \"The Robots of Dawn\" and \"Robots and Empire\", Mark W. Tiedemann's \"Robot Mystery\" trilogy updates the \"Robot\"\u2013\"Foundation\" saga with robotic minds housed in computer mainframes rather than humanoid bodies. The 2002 Aurora novel has robotic characters debating the moral implications of harming cyborg lifeforms who are part artificial and part biological.\nOne should not neglect Asimov's own creations in these areas such as the Solarian \"viewing\" technology and the machines of \"The Evitable Conflict\" originals that Tiedemann acknowledges. \"Aurora\", for example, terms the Machines \"the first RIs, really\". In addition the \"Robot Mystery\" series addresses the problem of nanotechnology: building a positronic brain capable of reproducing human cognitive processes requires a high degree of miniaturization, yet Asimov's stories largely overlook the effects this miniaturization would have in other fields of technology. For example, the police department card-readers in \"The Caves of Steel\" have a capacity of only a few kilobytes per square centimeter of storage medium. \"Aurora\", in particular, presents a sequence of historical developments which explains the lack of nanotechnology \u2014 a partial retcon, in a sense, of Asimov's timeline.\nRandall Munroe.\nRandall Munroe has discussed the Three Laws in various instances, but possibly most directly by one of his comics entitled https:// which imagines the consequences of every distinct ordering of the existing three laws.\nAdditional laws.\nAuthors other than Asimov have often created extra laws. \nThe 1974 Lyuben Dilov novel, \"Icarus's Way\" (a.k.a., \"The Trip of Icarus\") introduced a Fourth Law of robotics: \"A robot must establish its identity as a robot in all cases.\" \nDilov gives reasons for the fourth safeguard in this way: \"The last Law has put an end to the expensive aberrations of designers to give psychorobots as humanlike a form as possible. And to the resulting misunderstandings...\"\nA fifth law was introduced by Nikola Kesarovski in his short story \"The Fifth Law of Robotics\". This fifth law says: \"A robot must know it is a robot.\" \nThe plot revolves around a murder where the forensic investigation discovers that the victim was killed by a hug from a humaniform robot that did not establish for itself that it was a robot. The story was reviewed by Valentin D. Ivanov in SFF review webzine \"The Portal\".\nFor the 1986 tribute anthology, \"Foundation's Friends,\" Harry Harrison wrote a story entitled, \"The Fourth Law of Robotics\". This Fourth Law states: \"A robot must reproduce. As long as such reproduction does not interfere with the First or Second or Third Law.\"\nIn 2013 Hutan Ashrafian proposed an additional law that considered the role of artificial intelligence-on-artificial intelligence or the relationship between robots themselves \u2013 the so-called AIonAI law. This sixth law states: \"All robots endowed with comparable human reason and conscience should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\"\nAmbiguities and loopholes.\nUnknowing breach of the laws.\nIn \"The Naked Sun\", Elijah Baley points out that the Laws had been deliberately misrepresented because robots could \"unknowingly\" break any of them. He restated the first law as \"A robot may do nothing that, \"to its knowledge,\" will harm a human being; nor, through inaction, \"knowingly\" allow a human being to come to harm.\" This change in wording makes it clear that robots can become the tools of murder, provided they not be aware of the nature of their tasks; for instance being ordered to add something to a person's food, not knowing that it is poison. Furthermore, he points out that a clever criminal could divide a task among multiple robots so that no individual robot could recognize that its actions would lead to harming a human being. \"The Naked Sun\" complicates the issue by portraying a decentralized, planetwide communication network among Solaria's millions of robots meaning that the criminal mastermind could be located anywhere on the planet.\nBaley furthermore proposes that the Solarians may one day use robots for military purposes. If a spacecraft was built with a positronic brain and carried neither humans nor the life-support systems to sustain them, then the ship's robotic intelligence could naturally assume that all other spacecraft were robotic beings. Such a ship could operate more responsively and flexibly than one crewed by humans, could be armed more heavily and its robotic brain equipped to slaughter humans of whose existence it is totally ignorant. This possibility is referenced in \"Foundation and Earth\" where it is discovered that the Solarians possess a strong police force of unspecified size that has been programmed to identify only the Solarian race as human. (The novel takes place thousands of years after The Naked Sun, and the Solarians have long since modified themselves from normal humans to hermaphroditic telepaths with extended brains and specialized organs.) Similarly, in \"Lucky Starr and the Rings of Saturn\" Bigman attempts to speak with a Sirian robot about possible damage to the Solar System population from its actions, but it appears unaware of the data and programmed to ignore attempts to teach it about the matter. The same motive was explored earlier in \"Reason (1941)\", where a robot running a solar power station refuses to believe that the destinations of the station's beams are planets containing people. Powell and Donovan are afraid this will make it capable of causing mass destruction by letting the beams stray off their proper course during a solar storm.\nAmbiguities resulting from lack of definition.\nThe Laws of Robotics presume that the terms \"human being\" and \"robot\" are understood and well defined. In some stories this presumption is overturned.\nDefinition of \"human being\".\nThe Solarians create robots with the Three Laws but with a warped meaning of \"human\". Solarian robots are told that only people speaking with a Solarian accent are human. This enables their robots to have no ethical dilemma in harming non-Solarian human beings (and they are specifically programmed to do so). By the time period of \"Foundation and Earth\" it is revealed that the Solarians have genetically modified themselves into a distinct species from humanity\u2014becoming hermaphroditic and psychokinetic and containing biological organs capable of individually powering and controlling whole complexes of robots. The robots of Solaria thus respected the Three Laws only with regard to the \"humans\" of Solaria. It is unclear whether all the robots had such definitions, since only the overseer and guardian robots were shown explicitly to have them. In \"Robots and Empire\", the lower class robots were instructed by their overseer about whether certain creatures are human or not.\nAsimov addresses the problem of humanoid robots (\"androids\" in later parlance) several times. The novel \"Robots and Empire\" and the short stories \"Evidence\" and \"The Tercentenary Incident\" describe robots crafted to fool people into believing that the robots are human. On the other hand, \"The Bicentennial Man\" and \"\u2014That Thou Art Mindful of Him\" explore how the robots may change their interpretation of the Laws as they grow more sophisticated. Gwendoline Butler writes in \"A Coffin for the Canary\" \"Perhaps we are robots. Robots acting out the last Law of Robotics... To tend towards the human.\" In \"The Robots of Dawn\", Elijah Baley points out that the use of humaniform robots as the first wave of settlers on new Spacer worlds may lead to the robots seeing themselves as the true humans, and deciding to keep the worlds for themselves rather than allow the Spacers to settle there.\n\"\u2014That Thou Art Mindful of Him\", which Asimov intended to be the \"ultimate\" probe into the Laws' subtleties, finally uses the Three Laws to conjure up the very \"Frankenstein\" scenario they were invented to prevent. It takes as its concept the growing development of robots that mimic non-human living things and are given programs that mimic simple animal behaviours which do not require the Three Laws. The presence of a whole range of robotic life that serves the same purpose as organic life ends with two humanoid robots, George Nine and George Ten, concluding that organic life is an unnecessary requirement for a truly logical and self-consistent definition of \"humanity\", and that since they are the most advanced thinking beings on the planet, they are therefore the only two true humans alive and the Three Laws only apply to themselves. The story ends on a sinister note as the two robots enter hibernation and await a time when they will conquer the Earth and subjugate biological humans to themselves, an outcome they consider an inevitable result of the \"Three Laws of Humanics\".\nThis story does not fit within the overall sweep of the \"Robot\" and \"Foundation\" series; if the George robots \"did\" take over Earth some time after the story closes, the later stories would be either redundant or impossible. Contradictions of this sort among Asimov's fiction works have led scholars to regard the \"Robot\" stories as more like \"the Scandinavian sagas or the Greek legends\" than a unified whole.\nIndeed, Asimov describes \"\u2014That Thou Art Mindful of Him\" and \"Bicentennial Man\" as two opposite, parallel futures for robots that obviate the Three Laws as robots come to consider themselves to be humans: one portraying this in a positive light with a robot joining human society, one portraying this in a negative light with robots supplanting humans. Both are to be considered alternatives to the possibility of a robot society that continues to be driven by the Three Laws as portrayed in the \"Foundation\" series. In The Positronic Man, the novelization of The Bicentennial Man, Asimov and his co-writer Robert Silverberg imply that in the future where Andrew Martin exists his influence causes humanity to abandon the idea of independent, sentient humanlike robots entirely, creating an utterly different future from that of \"Foundation\".\nIn \"Lucky Starr and the Rings of Saturn\", a novel unrelated to the \"Robot\" series but featuring robots programmed with the Three Laws, John Bigman Jones is almost killed by a Sirian robot on orders of its master. The society of Sirius is eugenically bred to be uniformly tall and similar in appearance, and as such, said master is able to convince the robot that the much shorter Bigman, is, in fact, not a human being.\nDefinition of \"robot\".\nAs noted in \"The Fifth Law of Robotics\" by Nikola Kesarovski, \"A robot must know it is a robot\": it is presumed that a robot has a definition of the term or a means to apply it to its own actions. Kesarovski played with this idea in writing about a robot that could kill a human being because it did not understand that it was a robot, and therefore did not apply the Laws of Robotics to its actions.\nResolving conflicts among the laws.\nAdvanced robots in fiction are typically programmed to handle the Three Laws in a sophisticated manner. In a number of stories, such as \"Runaround\" by Asimov, the potential and severity of all actions are weighed and a robot will break the laws as little as possible rather than do nothing at all. For example, the First Law may forbid a robot from functioning as a surgeon, as that act may cause damage to a human; however, Asimov's stories eventually included robot surgeons (\"The Bicentennial Man\" being a notable example). When robots are sophisticated enough to weigh alternatives, a robot may be programmed to accept the necessity of inflicting damage during surgery in order to prevent the greater harm that would result if the surgery were not carried out, or was carried out by a more fallible human surgeon. In \"Evidence\" Susan Calvin points out that a robot may act as a prosecuting attorney because in the American justice system it is the jury which decides guilt or innocence, the judge who decides the sentence, and the executioner who carries through capital punishment.\nAsimov's Three Laws-obeying robots (Asenion robots) can experience irreversible mental collapse if they are forced into situations where they cannot obey the First Law, or if they discover they have unknowingly violated it. The first example of this failure mode occurs in the story \"Liar!\", which introduced the First Law itself, and introduces failure by dilemma\u2014in this case the robot will hurt humans if he tells them something and hurt them if he does not. This failure mode, which often ruins the positronic brain beyond repair, plays a significant role in Asimov's SF-mystery novel \"The Naked Sun\". Here Daneel describes activities contrary to one of the laws, but in support of another, as overloading some circuits in a robot's brain\u2014the equivalent sensation to pain in humans. The example he uses is forcefully ordering a robot to let a human do its work, which on Solaria, due to the extreme specialization, would mean its only purpose. \nIn \"The Robots of Dawn\", it is stated that more advanced robots are built capable of determining which action is more harmful, and even choosing at random if the alternatives are equally bad. As such, a robot is capable of taking an action which can be interpreted as following the First Law, thus avoiding a mental collapse. The whole plot of the story revolves around a robot which apparently was destroyed by such a mental collapse, and since his designer and creator refused to share the basic theory with others, he is, by definition, the only person capable of circumventing the safeguards and forcing the robot into a brain-destroying paradox.\nIn \"Robots and Empire\", Daneel states it's very unpleasant for him when making the proper decision takes too long (in robot terms), and he cannot imagine being without the Laws at all except to the extent of it being similar to that unpleasant sensation, only permanent.\nApplications to future technology.\nRobots and artificial intelligences do not inherently contain or obey the Three Laws; their human creators must choose to program them in, and devise a means to do so. Robots already exist (for example, a Roomba) that are too simple to understand when they are causing pain or injury and know to stop. Some are constructed with physical safeguards such as bumpers, warning beepers, safety cages, or restricted-access zones to prevent accidents. Even the most complex robots currently produced are incapable of understanding and applying the Three Laws; significant advances in artificial intelligence would be needed to do so, and even if AI could reach human-level intelligence, the inherent ethical complexity as well as cultural/contextual dependency of the laws prevent them from being a good candidate to formulate robotics design constraints. However, as the complexity of robots has increased, so has interest in developing guidelines and safeguards for their operation.\nIn a 2007 guest editorial in the journal \"Science\" on the topic of \"Robot Ethics\", SF author Robert J. Sawyer argues that since the U.S. military is a major source of funding for robotic research (and already uses armed unmanned aerial vehicles to kill enemies) it is unlikely such laws would be built into their designs. In a separate essay, Sawyer generalizes this argument to cover other industries stating:\nThe development of AI is a business, and businesses are notoriously uninterested in fundamental safeguards \u2014 especially philosophic ones. (A few quick examples: the tobacco industry, the automotive industry, the nuclear industry. Not one of these has said from the outset that fundamental safeguards are necessary, every one of them has resisted externally imposed safeguards, and none has accepted an absolute edict against ever causing harm to humans.)\nDavid Langford has suggested a tongue-in-cheek set of laws:\nRoger Clarke (aka Rodger Clarke) wrote a pair of papers analyzing the complications in implementing these laws in the event that systems were someday capable of employing them. He argued \"Asimov's Laws of Robotics have been a successful literary device. Perhaps ironically, or perhaps because it was artistically appropriate, the sum of Asimov's stories disprove the contention that he began with: It is not possible to reliably constrain the behaviour of robots by devising and applying a set of rules.\" On the other hand, Asimov's later novels \"The Robots of Dawn\", \"Robots and Empire\" and \"Foundation and Earth\" imply that the robots inflicted their worst long-term harm by obeying the Three Laws perfectly well, thereby depriving humanity of inventive or risk-taking behaviour.\nIn March 2007 the South Korean government announced that later in the year it would issue a \"Robot Ethics Charter\" setting standards for both users and manufacturers. According to Park Hye-Young of the Ministry of Information and Communication the Charter may reflect Asimov's Three Laws, attempting to set ground rules for the future development of robotics.\nThe futurist Hans Moravec (a prominent figure in the transhumanist movement) proposed that the Laws of Robotics should be adapted to \"corporate intelligences\" \u2014 the corporations driven by AI and robotic manufacturing power which Moravec believes will arise in the near future. In contrast, the David Brin novel \"Foundation's Triumph\" (1999) suggests that the Three Laws may decay into obsolescence: Robots use the Zeroth Law to rationalize away the First Law and robots hide themselves from human beings so that the Second Law never comes into play. Brin even portrays R. Daneel Olivaw worrying that, should robots continue to reproduce themselves, the Three Laws would become an evolutionary handicap and natural selection would sweep the Laws away \u2014 Asimov's careful foundation undone by evolutionary computation. Although the robots would not be evolving through \"design\" instead of \"mutation\" because the robots would have to follow the Three Laws while designing and the prevalence of the laws would be ensured, design flaws or construction errors could functionally take the place of biological mutation.\nIn the July/August 2009 issue of \"IEEE Intelligent Systems\", Robin Murphy (Raytheon Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at Texas A&amp;M) and David D. Woods (director of the Cognitive Systems Engineering Laboratory at Ohio State) proposed \"The Three Laws of Responsible Robotics\" as a way to stimulate discussion about the role of responsibility and authority when designing not only a single robotic platform but the larger system in which the platform operates. The laws are as follows:\nWoods said, \"Our laws are a little more realistic, and therefore a little more boring\u201d and that \"The philosophy has been, \u2018sure, people make mistakes, but robots will be better \u2013 a perfect version of ourselves\u2019. We wanted to write three new laws to get people thinking about the human-robot relationship in more realistic, grounded ways.\"\nIn early 2011, the UK published what is now considered the first national-level AI softlaw, which consisted largely of a revised set of 5 laws, the first 3 of which updated Asimov's. These laws were published with commentary, by the EPSRC/AHRC working group in 2010: \nOther occurrences in media.\nAsimov himself believed that his Three Laws became the basis for a new view of robots which moved beyond the \"Frankenstein complex\". His view that robots are more than mechanical monsters eventually spread throughout science fiction. Stories written by other authors have depicted robots as if they obeyed the Three Laws but tradition dictates that only Asimov could quote the Laws explicitly. Asimov believed the Three Laws helped foster the rise of stories in which robots are \"lovable\"\u00a0\u2013 \"Star Wars\" being his favorite example. Where the laws are quoted verbatim, such as in the \"Buck Rogers in the 25th Century\" episode \"Shgoratchx!\", it is not uncommon for Asimov to be mentioned in the same dialogue as can also be seen in the Aaron Stone pilot where an android states that it functions under Asimov's Three Laws. However, the 1960s German TV series \"Raumpatrouille \u2013 Die phantastischen Abenteuer des Raumschiffes Orion\" (\"Space Patrol \u2013 the Fantastic Adventures of Space Ship Orion\") bases episode three titled \"H\u00fcter des Gesetzes\" (\"Guardians of the Law\") on Asimov's Three Laws without mentioning the source.\nReferences to the Three Laws have appeared in popular music (\"Robot\" from Hawkwind's 1979 album \"PXR5\"), cinema (\"Repo Man\", \"Aliens\", '), cartoon series (\"The Simpsons\", \"Archer\", and \"The Amazing World of Gumball\"), anime (\"Eve no Jikan\"), tabletop role-playing games (\"Paranoia\"), webcomics (\"Piled Higher and Deeper\" and \"Freefall\"), and video games (', \"\").\nThe Three Laws in film.\nRobby the Robot in \"Forbidden Planet\" (1956) has a hierarchical command structure which keeps him from harming humans, even when ordered to do so, as such orders cause a conflict and lock-up very much in the manner of Asimov's robots. Robby is one of the first cinematic depictions of a robot with internal safeguards put in place in this fashion. Asimov was delighted with Robby and noted that Robby appeared to be programmed to follow his Three Laws.\nIsaac Asimov's works have been adapted for cinema several times with varying degrees of critical and commercial success. Some of the more notable attempts have involved his \"Robot\" stories, including the Three Laws. \nThe film \"Bicentennial Man\" (1999) features Robin Williams as the Three Laws robot NDR-114 (the serial number is partially a reference to Stanley Kubrick's signature numeral). Williams recites the Three Laws to his employers, the Martin family, aided by a holographic projection. The film only loosely follows the original story.\nHarlan Ellison's proposed screenplay for \"I, Robot\" began by introducing the Three Laws, and issues growing from the Three Laws form a large part of the screenplay's plot development. Due to various complications in the Hollywood moviemaking system, to which Ellison's introduction devotes much invective, his screenplay was never filmed.\nIn the 1986 movie \"Aliens\", after Bishop is revealed to be an android, Ripley is highly suspicious of him. He attempts to reassure by stating that: \"It is impossible for me to harm or by omission of action, allow to be harmed, a human being\". \nThe plot of the film released in 2004 under the name, \"I, Robot\" is \"suggested by\" Asimov's robot fiction stories\nand advertising for the film included a trailer featuring the Three Laws followed by the aphorism, \"Rules were made to be broken\". The film opens with a recitation of the Three Laws and explores the implications of the Zeroth Law as a logical extrapolation. The major conflict of the film comes from a computer artificial intelligence taking its \"understanding\" of the Laws to a new extreme, reaching the conclusion that humanity is incapable of taking care of itself.\nThe 2019 Netflix original series \"Better than Us\" includes the 3 laws in the opening of episode 1.\nCriticisms.\nAnalytical philosopher James H. Moor says that if applied thoroughly they would produce unexpected results. He gives the example of a robot roaming the world trying to prevent harm from befalling human beings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60137", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60137", "title": "Science-fiction", "text": ""}
{"id": "60138", "revid": "215350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60138", "title": "Wilson's disease", "text": "Genetic multisystem copper-transport disease\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nWilson's disease (also called hepatolenticular degeneration) is a genetic disorder characterized by the excess build-up of copper in the body. Symptoms are typically related to the brain and liver. Liver-related symptoms include vomiting, weakness, fluid build-up in the abdomen, swelling of the legs, yellowish skin, and itchiness. Brain-related symptoms include tremors, muscle stiffness, trouble in speaking, personality changes, anxiety, and psychosis.\nWilson's disease is caused by a mutation in the Wilson disease protein (\"ATP7B\") gene. This protein transports excess copper into bile, where it is excreted in waste products. The condition is autosomal recessive; for people to be affected, they must inherit a mutated copy of the gene from both parents. Diagnosis may be difficult and often involves a combination of blood tests, urine tests, and a liver biopsy. Genetic testing may be used to screen family members of those affected.\nWilson's disease is typically treated with dietary changes and medication. Dietary changes involve eating a low-copper diet and not using copper cookware. Medications used include chelating agents, such as trientine and -penicillamine, and zinc supplements. Complications of Wilson's disease can include liver failure and kidney problems. A liver transplant may be helpful to those for whom other treatments are not effective or if liver failure occurs.\nWilson's disease occurs in about one in 30,000 people. Symptoms usually begin between the ages of 5 and 35 years. It was first described in 1854 by German pathologist Friedrich Theodor von Frerichs and is named after British neurologist Samuel Wilson.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe main sites of copper accumulation are the liver and brain. Consequently, liver disease and neuropsychiatric symptoms are the main features that lead to diagnosis. People with liver problems tend to come for medical attention earlier (generally as children or teenagers) than those with neurological and psychiatric symptoms, who tend to be in their 20s or older. Some are identified only because relatives have been diagnosed with Wilson's disease; many of these, when tested, turn out to have been experiencing symptoms of the condition but have not received a diagnosis.\nLiver disease.\nLiver disease may present itself as tiredness, jaundice, increased bleeding tendency or confusion (due to hepatic encephalopathy), and portal hypertension. The last, a condition in which the pressure in the portal vein is markedly increased, leads to esophageal varices (distended veins in the esophagus that may bleed in a life-threatening fashion) as well as enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly) and accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity (ascites). On examination, signs of chronic liver disease such as spider angiomata (small distended blood vessels, usually on the chest) may be observed. Chronic active hepatitis has already caused cirrhosis of the liver in most patients by the time they develop symptoms. While most people with cirrhosis have an increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer), this risk is relatively low in Wilson's disease.\nAbout 5% of all people are diagnosed only when they develop fulminant acute liver failure, often in the context of hemolytic anemia (anemia due to the destruction of red blood cells). This leads to abnormalities in protein production (identified by deranged coagulation) and metabolism by the liver. The deranged protein metabolism leads to the accumulation of waste products, such as ammonia, in the bloodstream. When these irritate the brain, patients develop hepatic encephalopathy \u2013 a serious condition that causes confusion, coma, seizures and, finally, life-threatening swelling of the brain).\nNeuropsychiatric symptoms.\nAbout half of people with Wilson's disease have neurological or psychiatric symptoms. Most initially have mild cognitive deterioration and clumsiness, as well as changes in behavior. Specific neurological symptoms usually then follow, often in the form of parkinsonism (lead-pipe or cogwheel rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability) with or without a typical hand tremor, masked facial expressions, slurred speech, ataxia (lack of coordination), or dystonia (twisting and repetitive movements of part of the body). Seizures and migraine appear to be more common in Wilson's disease. A characteristic tremor described as \"wing-beating tremor\" is encountered in many people with Wilson's; this is absent at rest but can be provoked by abducting the arms and flexing the elbows toward the midline.\nCognition can also be affected in Wilson's disease, in two non-mutually exclusive categories: frontal lobe disorder (may present as impulsivity, impaired judgement, promiscuity, apathy, and executive dysfunction with poor planning and decision-making) and subcortical dementia (may present as slow thinking, memory loss, and executive dysfunction, without signs of aphasia, apraxia, or agnosia). These cognitive involvements are thought to be related and closely linked to psychiatric manifestations of the disease.\nPsychiatric problems due to Wilson's disease may include behavioral changes, depression, anxiety disorders, and psychosis. Psychiatric symptoms are commonly seen in conjunction with neurological symptoms and are rarely manifested on their own. These symptoms are often poorly defined and can sometimes be attributed to other causes. Because of this, diagnosis of Wilson's disease is rarely made when only psychiatric symptoms are present.\nOther organ systems.\nMedical conditions have been linked with copper accumulation in Wilson's disease:\nGenetics.\nThe Wilson's disease gene (\"ATP7B\") is on chromosome 13 (13q14.3) and is expressed primarily in the liver, kidney, and placenta. The gene codes for a P-type (cation transport enzyme) ATPase that transports copper into bile and incorporates it into ceruloplasmin. Most people who have Wilson's disease \u2013 60% \u2013 are homozygous for \"ATP7B\" mutations (two abnormal copies), and 30% of them have only one abnormal copy. In up to 7% of cases, people with Wilson's disease have no detectable mutations.\nAlthough more than 500 mutations of \"ATP7B\" have been described, a very small number of those cause most cases of Wilson's disease; which mutation an individual will have tends to be specific to the population they are part of. For instance, in Western populations, the H1069Q mutation (replacement of a histidine by a glutamine at position 1069 in the protein) is present in 37%\u201363% of cases, while in China this mutation is very uncommon; R778L (arginine to leucine at 778) is found more often there. Relatively little is known about the relative impact of the various mutations, although the H1069Q mutation seems to predict later onset and predominantly neurological problems, according to some studies. A comprehensive clinically annotated resource, WilsonGen, provides a clinical classification for the variants as per the recent ACMG &amp; AMP guidelines.\nA normal variation in the \"PRNP\" gene can modify the course of the disease by delaying the age of onset and affecting the type of symptoms that develop. This gene produces prion protein, which is active in the brain and other tissues and also appears to be involved in transporting copper. A role for the \"ApoE\" gene was initially suspected, but could not be confirmed.\nThe condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. To inherit it, both of the parents of an individual must carry an affected gene. Most people with Wilson's disease have no family history of the condition. People with only one abnormal gene are called carriers (heterozygotes) and may have mild, but medically insignificant, abnormalities of copper metabolism.\nThere are several hereditary diseases that cause copper overload in the liver; Wilson's disease is the most common of them. All can cause cirrhosis at a young age. The other copper overload diseases are Indian childhood cirrhosis (ICC), endemic Tyrolean infantile cirrhosis, and idiopathic copper toxicosis. These three, unlike Wilson's disease, are not related to \"ATP7B\" mutations; for example, ICC has been linked to mutations in the \"KRT8\" and the \"KRT18\" genes.\nPathophysiology.\nCopper is needed by the body for a number of functions, predominantly as a cofactor for a number of enzymes such as ceruloplasmin, cytochrome c oxidase, dopamine \u03b2-hydroxylase, superoxide dismutase, and tyrosinase.\nCopper enters the body through the digestive tract. A transporter protein on the cells of the small bowel, copper membrane transporter 1 (Ctr1; SLC31A1), carries copper inside the cells, where some is bound to metallothionein and part is carried by ATOX1 to an organelle known as the trans-Golgi network. Here, in response to rising concentrations of copper, an enzyme called ATP7A (Menkes' protein) releases copper into the portal vein to the liver. Liver cells also carry the CMT1 protein, and metallothionein and ATOX1 bind it inside the cell, but here, ATP7B links copper to ceruloplasmin and releases it into the bloodstream, as well as removing excess copper by secreting it into bile. Both functions of ATP7B are impaired in Wilson's disease. Copper accumulates in the liver tissue; ceruloplasmin is still secreted, but in a form that lacks copper (termed apo-ceruloplasmin) and is rapidly degraded in the bloodstream.\nWhen the amount of copper in the liver overwhelms the proteins that normally bind it, it causes oxidative damage to the liver through a process known as Fenton chemistry; this damage eventually leads to chronic active hepatitis, fibrosis (deposition of connective tissue), and cirrhosis. The liver also releases copper into the bloodstream that is not bound to ceruloplasmin. This free copper precipitates throughout the body, but particularly in the kidneys, eyes, and brain. In the brain, most copper is deposited in the basal ganglia, particularly in the putamen and globus pallidus (together called the lenticular nucleus); these areas normally participate in the coordination of movement and play a significant role in neurocognitive processes such as the processing of stimuli and mood regulation. Damage to these areas, again by Fenton chemistry, produces the neuropsychiatric symptoms seen in Wilson's disease.\nWhy Wilson's disease causes hemolysis is unclear, but various lines of evidence suggest that a high level of free (nonceruloplasmin-bound) copper may be directly affecting the oxidation of hemoglobin, or inhibiting the energy-supplying enzymes in red blood cells, or causing direct damage to cell membranes.\nDiagnosis.\nWilson's disease may be suspected on the basis of any of the symptoms mentioned above, or when a close relative has been found to have Wilson's. Most have slightly abnormal liver function tests such as raised aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, and bilirubin levels. Alkaline phosphatase levels are relatively low in those with Wilson's-related acute liver failure. If the liver damage is significant, albumin may be decreased due to an inability of damaged liver cells to produce this protein; likewise, the prothrombin time (a test of coagulation) may be prolonged as the liver is unable to produce proteins known as clotting factors. If neurological symptoms are seen, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain is usually performed; this shows hyperintensities in the part of the brain called the basal ganglia in the T2 setting. MRI may also demonstrate the characteristic \"face of the giant panda\" pattern.\nNo totally reliable test for Wilson's disease is known, but levels of ceruloplasmin and copper in the blood, as well of the amount of copper excreted in urine during a 24-hour period, are together used to form an impression of the amount of copper in the body. The most accurate test is a liver biopsy.\nCeruloplasmin.\nLevels of ceruloplasmin are abnormally low (&lt;0.2\u00a0g/L) in 80\u201395% of cases. It can be present at normal levels, though, in people with ongoing inflammation, as it is an acute phase protein. Low ceruloplasmin is also found in Menkes disease and aceruloplasminemia, which are related to, but much rarer than Wilson's disease. The combination of neurological symptoms, eye signs, and a low ceruloplasmin level is considered sufficient for the diagnosis of Wilson's disease. In many cases, however, further tests are needed.\nSerum and urine copper.\nSerum copper is low, which may seem paradoxical given that Wilson's disease is a disease of copper excess. However, 95% of plasma copper is carried by ceruloplasmin, which is often low in Wilson's disease. Urine copper is elevated in Wilson's disease and is collected for 24 hours in a bottle with a copper-free liner. Levels above 100\u00a0\u03bcg/24h (1.6\u00a0\u03bcmol/24h) confirm Wilson's disease, and levels above 40\u00a0\u03bcg/24h (0.6\u00a0\u03bcmol/24h) are strongly indicative. High urine copper levels are not unique to Wilson's disease; they are sometimes observed in autoimmune hepatitis and in cholestasis (any disease obstructing the flow of bile from the liver to the small bowel).\nIn children, the following penicillamine test may be used: a 500\u00a0mg oral dose of penicillamine is administered, and all urine collected for 24 hours. If the entire day's urine contains more than 1600\u00a0\u03bcg (25\u00a0\u03bcmol) of copper, it is a reliable indicator of Wilson's disease. This test has not been validated in adults.\nSlit-lamp examination.\nThe eyes of the patient are examined using a slit lamp to look for Kayser\u2013Fleischer rings, which are strongly associated with Wilson's disease and are caused by copper deposition on the inner cornea in Descemet's membrane.\nLiver biopsy.\nOnce other investigations have indicated Wilson's disease, the ideal test is the removal of a small amount of liver tissue through a liver biopsy. This is assessed microscopically for the degree of steatosis and cirrhosis, and histochemistry and quantification of copper are used to measure the severity of the copper accumulation. A level of 250\u00a0\u03bcg of copper per gram of dried liver tissue confirms Wilson's disease. Occasionally, lower levels of copper are found; in that case, the combination of the biopsy findings with all other tests could still lead to a formal diagnosis of Wilson's.\nIn the earlier stages of the disease, the biopsy typically shows steatosis (deposition of fatty material), increased glycogen in the nucleus, and areas of necrosis (cell death). In more advanced disease, the changes observed are quite similar to those seen in autoimmune hepatitis, such as infiltration by inflammatory cells, piecemeal necrosis, and fibrosis (scar tissue). In advanced disease, finally, cirrhosis is the main finding. In acute liver failure, degeneration of the liver cells and collapse of the liver tissue architecture is seen, typically on a background of cirrhotic changes. Histochemical methods for detecting copper are inconsistent and unreliable, and taken alone are regarded as insufficient to establish a diagnosis.\nGenetic testing.\nMutation analysis of the \"ATP7B\" gene, as well as other genes linked to copper accumulation in the liver, may be performed. Once a mutation is confirmed, family members can be screened for the disease as part of clinical genetics family counseling. Regional distributions of genes associated with Wilson's disease are important to follow, as this can help clinicians design appropriate screening strategies. Since mutations of the \"ATP7B\" gene vary between populations, research and genetic testing done in countries such as the USA or United Kingdom can pose problems, as they tend to have more mixed populations.\nTreatment.\nDiet.\nIn general, a diet low in copper-containing foods is recommended. High-copper foods avoided in Wilson's disease include mushrooms, nuts, chocolate, dried fruit, liver, sesame seeds, sesame oil, and shellfish.\nMedication.\nMedical treatments are available for Wilson's disease. Some increase the removal of copper from the body, while others prevent the absorption of copper from the diet.\nGenerally, penicillamine is the first treatment used. This binds to copper (by chelation) and leads to excretion of copper in the urine. Hence, monitoring of the amount of copper in the urine can be done to ensure a sufficiently high dose is taken. Penicillamine is not without problems; about 20% experience a side effect or complication of penicillamine treatment, such as drug-induced lupus (causing joint pains and a skin rash) or myasthenia (a nerve condition leading to muscle weakness). In those who presented with neurological symptoms, almost half experience a paradoxical worsening in their symptoms. While this phenomenon is observed in other treatments for Wilson's, it is usually taken as an indication for discontinuing penicillamine and commencing second-line treatment. Those intolerant to penicillamine may instead be commenced on trientine hydrochloride, which also has chelating properties. Some recommend trientine as first-line treatment, but experience with penicillamine is more extensive. A further agent with known activity in Wilson's disease, under clinical investigation by Wilson Therapeutics, is tetrathiomolybdate. It is regarded as experimental, though some studies have shown a beneficial effect.\nOnce all results have returned to normal, zinc (usually in the form of a zinc acetate prescription called Galzin) may be used instead of chelators to maintain stable copper levels in the body. Zinc stimulates metallothionein, a protein in gut cells that binds copper and prevents its absorption and transport to the liver. Zinc therapy is continued unless symptoms recur or if the urinary excretion of copper increases.\nIn rare cases where none of the oral treatments is effective, especially with severe neurological disease, dimercaprol (British anti-Lewisite) is occasionally necessary. This treatment is injected intramuscularly (into a muscle) every few weeks and has unpleasant side effects such as pain.\nPeople who are asymptomatic (for instance, those diagnosed through family screening or only as a result of abnormal test results) are generally treated, as the copper accumulation may cause long-term damage in the future. Whether these people are best treated with penicillamine or zinc acetate is unclear.\nPhysical and occupational therapies.\nPhysiotherapy and occupational therapy are beneficial for patients with the neurological form of the disease. The copper-chelating treatment may take up to six months to start working, and these therapies can assist in coping with ataxia, dystonia, and tremors, as well as preventing the development of contractures that can result from dystonia.\nTransplantation.\nLiver transplantation is an effective cure for Wilson's disease, but is used only in particular scenarios because of the risks and complications associated with the procedure. It is used mainly in people with fulminant liver failure who fail to respond to medical treatment or in those with advanced chronic liver disease. Liver transplantation is avoided in severe neuropsychiatric illnesses, in which its benefit has not been demonstrated.\nPrognosis.\nLeft untreated, Wilson's disease tends to become progressively worse and is eventually fatal. Serious complications include liver cirrhosis, acute kidney failure, and psychosis. Liver cancer and cholangiocarcinoma may occur, but at a lower incidence than other chronic liver diseases, and the risk is greatly reduced with treatment. With early detection and treatment, most of those affected can live relatively normal lives and have a life expectancy close to that of the general population. Liver and neurological damage that occurs prior to treatment may improve, but is often permanent. Fertility is usually normal and pregnancy complications are not increased in those with Wilson's disease that is treated.\nHistory.\nThe disease bears the name of British physician Samuel Alexander Kinnier Wilson (1878\u20131937), a neurologist who described the condition, including the pathological changes in the brain and liver, in 1912. Wilson's work had been predated by, and drew on, reports from German neurologist Karl Westphal (in 1883), who termed it \"pseudo-sclerosis\"; by the British neurologist William Gowers (in 1888); by the Finnish neuropathologist Ernst Alexander Hom\u00e9n (in 1889\u20131892), who noted the hereditary nature of the disease; and by Adolph Str\u00fcmpell (in 1898), who noted hepatic cirrhosis. Neuropathologist John Nathaniel Cumings made the link with copper accumulation in both the liver and the brain in 1948. The occurrence of hemolysis was noted in 1967.\nIn 1951, Cumings (in England), and New Zealand neurologist Derek Denny-Brown (working in the United States), simultaneously reported the first effective treatment, using the metal chelator British anti-Lewisite. This treatment had to be injected, but was one of the first therapies available in the field of neurology, a field that classically was able to observe and diagnose, but had few treatments to offer. The first oral chelation agent effective in Wilson's disease, penicillamine, was discovered in 1956 by British neurologist John Walshe. In 1982, Walshe also introduced trientine, and was the first to develop tetra-thiomolybdate for clinical use. Zinc acetate therapy initially made its appearance in the Netherlands, where physicians Schouwink and Hoogenraad used it in 1961 and in the 1970s, respectively, and was further developed later by Brewer and colleagues at the University of Michigan.\nThe genetic basis of Wilson's disease, and its link to \"ATP7B\" mutations, was elucidated by several research groups in the 1980s and 1990s.\nIn other animals.\nHereditary copper accumulation has been described in Bedlington Terriers, where it generally only affects the liver. In Bedlington Terriers it is due to mutations in the \"COMMD1\" (or \"MURR1\") gene. The discovery of these mutations in the dogs led researchers to examine the corresponding human genes, but \"COMMD1\" mutations could not be detected in humans with non-Wilsonian copper accumulation states (such as Indian childhood cirrhosis).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60139", "revid": "262894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60139", "title": "Time Enough for Love", "text": "1973 science fiction novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nTime Enough for Love is a science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, first published in 1973. The book made the shortlist for the Nebula, Hugo and Locus awards for best science fiction novel of that year, although it did not win. It did win a retrospective Libertarian Futurist Society award: the Prometheus Hall of Fame award for 1988.\nPlot.\nThe book covers several periods from the life of Lazarus Long (born Woodrow Wilson Smith), an early beneficiary of a breeding experiment designed to increase mankind's natural lifespan. The experiment is known as the Howard Families, after the program's initiator. Lazarus is more the result of a mutation than the breeding experiment, and he is the oldest living human at more than two thousand years old.\nThe first half of the book takes the form of several novellas connected by Lazarus's retrospective narrative. In the framing story, Lazarus has decided that life is no longer worth living, but, in what is described as a reverse \"Arabian Nights\" scenario, agrees not to end his life for as long as his companion and descendant, chief executive of the Howard Families Ira Weatheral, will listen to his stories.\n\"The Tale of the Man Who Was Too Lazy to Fail\".\nThis story concerns a 20th-century United States Navy seaman, midshipman, and officer David Lamb, who receives multiple promotions while minimizing any semblance of real work or combat by applying himself enthusiastically to the principle of \"constructive laziness\".\n\"The Tale of the Twins Who Weren't\".\nLazarus tells of his visit as an interplanetary cargo trader to a planet, where he bought a pair of slaves, brother and sister, and immediately manumitted them. Because they had no knowledge of independent living or any education, Lazarus teaches them \"how to be human\" during the voyage.\nThe two were the result of an experiment in genetic recombination in which two parent cells were separated into complementary haploid gametes and recombined into two embryos. The resulting zygotes were implanted in a woman and gestated by her, with the result that although both have the same surrogate mother and genetic parents, they are no more closely related genetically than any two people taken at random. They have been prevented from sexual relations by a chastity belt. However, having confirmed that there is no risk of genetic disease in their offspring (described as the only valid argument against incest), Lazarus solemnizes their marriage and later establishes them as the owners and operators of a thriving business. At the end of the story, he reveals that the twins looked the same age decades later and expresses his belief that they were his own descendants, from an earlier time that he had been a slave on the same planet.\n\"The Tale of the Adopted Daughter\".\nA short scene-setter introduces a planet on which Lazarus has led a group of pioneering colonists.\nLazarus, now working as a banker and shopkeeper on the frontier planet and keeping his true age secret, saves a young girl, Dora, from a burning house and becomes her guardian. When she becomes an adult, he leaves the area but returns as a younger man and marries her, and the two move away to start a new settlement, where Lazarus' long life is less likely to be noticed. They eventually manage to build a thriving community. Because Dora is not a descendant of the Howard Families, the source of his longevity, she eventually dies of old age, leaving Lazarus to mourn.\n\"Boondock\".\nAt the beginning of this story, Lazarus has regained his enthusiasm for life, and the remainder of the book is told in a conventional linear manner. Accompanied by some of his descendants, Lazarus has now moved to a new planet and established a polyamorous family, with three men, three women, and a larger number of children, two of whom are female clones of Lazarus.\n\"Da Capo\".\nIn the concluding tale, Lazarus attempts to travel backward in time to 1919 to experience it as an adult, but an error in calculation places Lazarus in 1916, on the eve of America's involvement in World War I. An unintentional result is that Lazarus falls in love with his own mother. To retain her esteem and that of his grandfather, Lazarus enlists in the army. Eventually, before Lazarus leaves for the war, he and his mother, Maureen, consummate their mutual attraction, as his mother is already pregnant and so accepts that there is no collateral risk.\nIn the trenches of the Western Front in France, he is mortally wounded, but is rescued at the last moment by his future companions from the framing story and returned to his own time.\n\"The Notebooks of Lazarus Long\".\nThere are also two \"Intermission\" sections, each some six or eight pages long, taking the form of lists of provocative phrases and aphorisms not obviously related to the main narrative. They were later published independently, with illustrations, as \"The Notebooks of Lazarus Long\".\nThemes.\nWhat ties most of the stories together is that they are an examination and deconstruction of incest. In the context of his \"tales\" Heinlein examines the morality of a variety of possible incestuous situations: from unrelated \"twins\", to unrelated parent-child, to distant relatives, and finally close relatives when Lazarus sleeps with his own mother. Heinlein seems to conclude that, absent genetic risk, it is not immoral at all.\nConnections to other stories.\nEarly in the story, one of the characters presents Lazarus with a number of activities that may be new (to him), to entice him into remaining alive and being restored to youth. One of the suggestions is to have his memory and consciousness transplanted into a female clone of himself, at which point Lazarus briefly remembers hearing of the events that occurred in \"I Will Fear No Evil\".\nLater in the book, a character reports the fate of the generation ship \"Vanguard\", from Heinlein's \"Orphans of the Sky\": it was found derelict in space, but the survivors (descendants of the characters from \"Orphans\") have adopted a hunter-gatherer lifestyle on another planet.\nFrom \"Methuselah's Children\", Lazarus offers to recount the fate of the Jockaira, but another character cuts him off, saying: \"Since that lie is already in his memoirs in four conflicting versions, why should we be burdened with a fifth?\" Long also reports the fate of the descendants of the Howards who chose to stay on the planet of the Little People. Some of the Little People alive at the time he returned to the planet harbored the memories of those Howards, including Mary Sperling; but Long's ship reports that \"if there is a human artifact on the surface of that planet, it is less than a half meter in diameter\".\nAlso, at one point reference is made to the burial in space of Andrew Jackson \"Slipstick\" Libby, co-creator of the Libby\u2013Sheffield para-drive. Libby is the human calculator genius who first appears in the short story \"Misfit\". Lazarus had promised Libby to return him to his native Ozarks, which comforted Libby as he died. One hundred years later, Lazarus returns to the planet around which Libby's coffin should be in orbit, but cannot find it, despite having so equipped it that he should have. He later uses this as a \"time travel calibration\" check, and we find out what happened to Libby's coffin in \"The Number of the Beast\".\nAdditionally, reference is made to Doctor Pinero, the primary character from Heinlein's short story \"Life-Line\"; during the novel's ending one of the characters tells Lazarus that he (Lazarus) cannot die, which aligns with the fact that Pinero (who could predict the exact time of anyone's death) was supposedly unable to foresee the time of Lazarus's demise.\nThe history of the Howard Families and Lazarus Long also feature prominently in \"The Cat Who Walks Through Walls\" and \"To Sail Beyond the Sunset\".\nReception.\nJohn Leonard, writing in \"The New York Times\", praised \"Time Enough for Love\" as \"a great entertainment\", declaring that \"it doesn't matter [that] all his characters sound and behave exactly the same; it's because the man is a master of beguilement. He pulls so hard of the dugs of sentiment that disbelief is not merely suspended; it is abolished\".\nTheodore Sturgeon reviewed the novel favorably, citing \"the fascination of watching the mind of a man whose reach always exceeds his grasp but who will never stop reaching\".\nThe work has a 4/5 star rating on Goodreads from 36,500 ratings describing it as \"The capstone and crowning achievement of Heinlein's famous Future History\". On Amazon.com the work has a rating of 4.6/5 from 2,280 ratings.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60140", "revid": "26365440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60140", "title": "Sj\u00f6gren's disease", "text": "Autoimmune disease affecting the body's moisture-producing glands\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nSj\u00f6gren's disease (SjD), previously known as Sj\u00f6gren syndrome or Sj\u00f6gren's syndrome (SjS, SS), is a long-term autoimmune disease that primarily affects the body's exocrine glands, particularly the lacrimal and salivary glands. Common symptoms include dry mouth, dry eyes and often seriously affect other organ systems, such as the lungs, kidneys, and nervous system.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nIn a 2021 article on Sj\u00f6gren's patients, a majority of individuals stated that eight symptoms had a major or moderate impact on their life: fatigue (79%); dry eyes (75%); dry mouth (73%); joint pain (65%); trouble sleeping (64%); eye discomfort (60%); muscle pain (56%); and brain fog (54%).\nPrimary symptoms are dryness (dry mouth and dry eyes), pain and fatigue. Other symptoms can include dry skin, vaginal dryness, a chronic cough, numbness in the arms and legs, feeling tired, muscle and joint pains, and thyroid problems. Those affected are also at an increased risk (15%) of lymphoma.\nThe hallmark symptom of Sj\u00f6gren's disease is dry mouth and keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eyes). Vaginal dryness, dry skin, and dry nose may also occur. Other organs of the body may also be affected, including the kidneys, blood vessels, lungs, liver, pancreas, and brain.\nIn some people with Sj\u00f6gren's disease, skin dryness may be the result of lymphocytic infiltration into skin glands. The symptoms may develop insidiously, with the diagnosis often not considered for several years because sicca (dryness) may be attributed to medications, a dry environment, or aging, or may be regarded as not of a severity warranting the level of investigation necessary to establish the presence of the underlying autoimmune disorder.\nSj\u00f6gren's disease can damage vital organs, with symptoms that may plateau or worsen, or go into remission, as with other autoimmune diseases. Some people may experience only the mild symptoms of dry eyes and mouth, while others have symptoms of severe disease. Many patients can treat problems symptomatically. Others experience blurred vision, constant eye discomfort, recurrent mouth infections, swollen parotid glands, dysphonia (vocal disorders including hoarseness), and difficulty in swallowing and eating. Debilitating fatigue and joint pain can seriously impair quality of life. Some patients can develop kidney involvement (autoimmune tubulointerstitial nephritis) leading to proteinuria (excess protein in urine), urinary concentrating defect, and distal renal tubular acidosis.\nComplications.\nAmong the complications discussed above, women with anti-Ro/SS-A and anti-La/SS-B antibodies who become pregnant have an increased rate of neonatal lupus erythematosus with congenital heart block requiring a pacemaker. Type I cryoglobulinemia is a known complication of Sj\u00f6gren's disease.\nSj\u00f6gren's disease can affect such organs as the liver, pancreas, kidneys, lungs, and central nervous system.\nAssociated conditions.\nSj\u00f6gren's disease is associated with a number of other medical conditions, many of which are autoimmune or rheumatic disorders, such as celiac disease, fibromyalgia, systemic lupus erythematosus (lupus), autoimmune thyroiditis, multiple sclerosis and spondyloarthropathy, and several malignancies, principally non-Hodgkin lymphoma.\nSjogren's is the second most common cause of dysautonomia.\nCauses.\nWhile the exact cause is unclear, it is believed to involve a combination of genetics and an environmental trigger such as exposure to a virus or bacterium, as is the case with many other autoimmune disorders. Around 20 autoantibodies could be involved. It can occur independently of other health problems or as a result of another connective tissue disorder. Sj\u00f6gren's disease may be associated with other autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or systemic sclerosis. The inflammation that results progressively damages the glands. Diagnosis is by biopsy of moisture-producing glands and blood tests for specific antibodies. On biopsy there are typically lymphocytes within the glands.\nGenetics.\nThe observation of high rates of autoimmune disorders in families with a history of Sj\u00f6gren's disease is linked with a genetic predisposition to the disease. Studies on the polymorphisms of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR and HLA-DQ gene regions in Sj\u00f6gren's patients show differential susceptibility to the disease as the result of different types of the resulting autoantibody production.\nHormones.\nSince Sj\u00f6gren's disease is associated with a high prevalence in women, sex hormones, especially estrogen, are believed to affect humoral and cell-mediated immune responses affecting susceptibility to the disease. Androgens are generally considered to prevent autoimmunity. Studies on mice models suggest estrogen deficiency stimulates presentation of autoantigens, inducing Sj\u00f6gren's-like symptoms.\nMicrochimerism.\nMicrochimerism of fetal cells (offspring lymphoid cells in maternal circulation) may generate autoimmunity in women who have previously been pregnant. Generation of an autoimmune potential via microchimerism may lead to a switch from a silent form of autoimmunity with age-dependent decrease in self-tolerance.\nEnvironment.\nViral proteins, engulfed molecules, or degraded self-structures may initiate autoimmunity by molecular mimicry and increase the chances of Sj\u00f6gren's disease development. Epstein\u2013Barr virus, hepatitis C, and human T-cell leukemia virus-1 are among the most studied infectious agents in Sj\u00f6gren's disease. To date, no direct cause-and-effect relationship has been identified between these pathogens and the development of Sj\u00f6gren's disease. Damaged self-structures targeted for apoptosis may be mistakenly exposed to the immune system, triggering autoimmunity in exocrine glands, which are often prone to autoimmune responses.\nPathogenesis.\nThe pathogenetic mechanisms of Sj\u00f6gren's disease have not been fully elucidated, resulting in the lack of pathophysiology knowledge of the management of this autoimmune exocrinopathy. Although the numerous factors contributing to the progression of this disease have made discovering the exact origin and cause difficult, major advances over the past decade have contributed to a proposed set of pathogenic events that occur before the diagnosis of Sj\u00f6gren's disease.\nSj\u00f6gren's disease was originally proposed as a specific, self-perpetuating, immune system-mediated loss of exocrine glands, specifically acinar and ductal cells. Although this explains the more obvious symptoms (such as the lack of saliva and lacrimal fluid), it does not explain the more widespread systemic effects seen in the progression of the disease.\nIn the presence of a susceptible genetic background, both environmental and hormonal factors are thought capable of triggering the infiltration of lymphocytes, specifically CD4+ T cells, B cells, and plasma cells, causing glandular dysfunction in the salivary and lacrimal glands.\nSj\u00f6gren's disease is associated with increased levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of IL-1RA, an interleukin 1 antagonist. This suggests that the disease begins with increased activity in the interleukin 1 system, followed by an autoregulatory upregulation of IL-1RA to reduce the successful binding of interleukin 1 to its receptors. Interleukin 1 likely is the marker for fatigue, but increased IL-1RA is observed in the CSF and is associated with increased fatigue through cytokine-induced sickness behavior. However, Sj\u00f6gren's disease is characterized by decreased levels of IL-1ra in saliva, which could be responsible for mouth inflammation and dryness. Patients with secondary Sj\u00f6gren's disease also often exhibit signs and symptoms of their primary rheumatic disorders, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, or systemic sclerosis.\nGenetic predisposition.\nThe genetic locus most significantly associated with primary SS is the major histocompatibility complex/human leukocyte antigen (MHC/HLA) region, as demonstrated by the preliminary results of the first genome-wide association study. This study included data from a discovery cohort of 395 patients of European ancestry with primary Sj\u00f6gren's disease, and 1,975 healthy control individuals, and from a replication study that comprised 1,234 cases and 4,779 healthy controls. Associations with polymorphisms located at six independent loci were also detected; \"IRF5, STAT4, BLK, IL12A, TNIP1,\" and \"CXCR5\". This also suggested the activation of the innate immune system, notably through the IFN system, B-cell activation through \"CXCR5\"-directed recruitment to lymphoid follicles and B-cell receptor (BCR) activation involving\" BLK\", and T-cell activation owing to HLA susceptibility and the IL-12-IFN-\u03b3-axis.\nPatients of different ethnic origins carry different HLA-susceptibility alleles, of which HLA-DR and HLA-DQ are involved in the pathogenesis of Sj\u00f6gren's disease. For example, patients from Northern and Western Europe and North America show a high prevalence of \"B8, DRw52,\" and \"DR3\" genes. HLA class II alleles are associated with the presence of specific subsets of autoantibodies, rather than with the disease itself. Autoantibodies refer to the loss of B-cell tolerance leading to the production of antibodies directed against diverse organ-specific and organ-nonspecific antigens. Association between HLA and SS is restricted to patients with anti-SSA/Ro or anti-SSB/La antibodies. Seropositivity for anti-Ro and anti-La is associated with greater severity and longer duration of disease, and findings of their high abundance from the salivary glands of Sj\u00f6gren's patients suggests their imperative role in the pathogenesis of SS.\nBeyond genetics, epigenetic abnormality related to DNA methylation, histone acetylation, or microRNA expression probably has a key role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, including Sj\u00f6gren's disease, though research in this area is very limited.\nEnvironmental triggers.\nEnvironmental factors, such as glandular viral infection, could prompt epithelial cells to activate the HLA-independent innate immune system through toll-like receptors. Although several infectious, exogenous agents have been implicated in the pathogenesis of Sj\u00f6gren's disease, such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), human T-lymphotropic virus 1, and hepatitis C virus, their association with Sj\u00f6gren's disease appears weak. While EBV is present in the salivary glands of normal individuals, a high incidence of EBV reactivation in Sj\u00f6gren's patients has been reported with increased levels of EBV DNA. This indicates viral reactivation and the inability of lymphoid infiltrates to control EBV replication in Sj\u00f6gren's disease, leading to the initiation or perpetuation of an immune response in target organs. Nonetheless, exactly how reactivation of EBV is induced in lesions of patients with Sj\u00f6gren's disease, and which specific molecular mechanisms are involved in the process of viral reactivation, remain to be clarified.\nInflammation.\nEpithelial cells in Sj\u00f6gren's disease lesions are active participants in the induction and perpetuation of the inflammatory process. Environmental and hormonal factors, in concert with an appropriate genetic background, are believed to trigger Sj\u00f6gren's disease, which dysregulates epithelial cells and allows aberrant homing and activation of dendritic cells (DCs), T cells, and B cells. Dendritic cells are antigen-presenting cells that process antigen material and present it to other T cells. Following the migration of lymphocytes into the glands in response to chemokines and specific adhesion molecules, T cells interact with epithelial cells. Epithelial cells are further activated by proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1\u03b2, IFN-\u03b3, and TNF), which are produced by adjacent T cells. The early accumulation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells in the target tissues, which produce high levels of type 1 IFNs, seems important, as these cells can further dysregulate the immune response through abnormal retention of lymphocytes in the tissues, and their subsequent activation. IFN-\u03b1 stimulates the production of B-cell activating factor (BAFF) by epithelial cells, DCs, and T cells. BAFF stimulates aberrant B-cell maturation, leading to the emergence of self-reactive B cells, which locally produce autoantibodies, in a germinal centre-like structure (GC-like), which is also the location of lymphomagenesis (origin of lymphoma).\nProgrammed cell death.\nDysregulation of apoptosis (programmed cell death) is believed to play a role in the pathogenesis of a variety of autoimmune diseases, though its role in Sj\u00f6gren's disease is controversial. Both the Fas and Fas ligand proteins are overexpressed in primary Sj\u00f6gren's patients, while expression of BCL-1, which is known to downregulate apoptosis, was found significantly reduced in acinar and ductal epithelial cells of Sj\u00f6gren's patients compared to healthy people. \"In situ\" studies did not show increased apoptosis among glandular epithelial cells but did show reduced apoptosis among infiltrating mononuclear cells. Reduced apoptosis was also implicated in the accumulation of autoreactive B-cells found in the glands. The relationship of autoantibodies expressed in Sj\u00f6gren's syndrome with apoptosis is still being researched.\nHormonal factors.\nSex hormones seem to influence humoral and cell-mediated immune response, with estrogen being considered one of the biggest factors responsible for sex-immunologic dimorphism. Estrogen deficiency appears to play a role in the development of Sj\u00f6gren's disease. It has been hypothesized that androgen administration to the ocular surface may serve as an effective therapy for dry eyes.\nDiagnosis.\nWhile Sj\u00f6gren's disease is one of the most common autoimmune diseases, it has no specific and non-invasive diagnostic tests.\nDiagnosing Sj\u00f6gren's disease is complicated by the range of symptoms that a patient may manifest, and the similarity between symptoms of Sj\u00f6gren's disease and those of other conditions. Also, patients with SS symptoms approach different specialities for treatment, which can make diagnosis difficult. Since dry eyes and dry mouth are very common symptoms, and frequently occur in people over 40, affected people may believe that the symptoms are age-related, so they ignore them. Some medications can cause symptoms similar to those of Sj\u00f6gren's disease.\nTests.\nThe combination of several tests, which can be done in a series, can eventually diagnose Sj\u00f6gren's disease.\nBlood tests.\nBlood tests can be done to determine if a patient has high levels of antibodies that are indicative of the condition, such as antinuclear antibody (ANA) and rheumatoid factor (because Sj\u00f6gren's disease frequently occurs secondary to rheumatoid arthritis), which are associated with autoimmune diseases. Typical SS ANA patterns are SSA/Ro and SSB/La, of which anti-SSB/La is far more specific; anti-SSA/Ro is associated with numerous other autoimmune conditions, but is often present in SS. However, anti-SSA and anti-SSB tests are frequently not positive in SS.\nRose bengal test.\nThe rose bengal test uses a stain that measures the state and function of the lacrimal glands. This test involves placing the nontoxic dye rose bengal on the eyes. The dye's distinctive colour helps in determining the state and functioning of the tear film and the rate of tear evaporation. Any distinctive colour change can indicate SS, but confirming the condition requires many related diagnostic tools.\nSchirmer test.\nSchirmer's test measures the production of tears: a strip of filter paper is held inside the lower eyelid for five minutes, and its wetness is then measured with a ruler. Producing less than of liquid is usually indicative of SS. This measurement analysis varies among people depending on other eye-related conditions and medications in use when the test is taken. A slit-lamp examination can reveal dryness on the surface of the eye.\nThe use of Schirmer strips to test oral dryness is possible.\nSaliva flow tests.\nSymptoms of dry mouth and dryness in the oral cavity are caused by the reduced production of saliva from the salivary glands (parotid gland, submandibular gland, and sublingual gland).\nIn unstimulated whole saliva flow collection, the person spits into a test tube every minute for approximately 15 minutes. A resultant collection of less than is considered a positive result.\n In a stimulated saliva flow test the person sucks on a sugar-free sweet, whilst collecting saliva. An unstimulated salivary flow rate of 0.1 to 0.2 ml/min and a stimulated flow rate of 0.7 ml/min or less is considered to be abnormally low flow rates indicative of salivary gland hypofunction.\nUnstimulated saliva production reduces by 40 to 70% between the ages of 20 and 80 years, but stimulated saliva production is not affected.\nLip biopsy.\nA lip/salivary gland biopsy takes a tissue sample that can reveal lymphocytes clustered around salivary glands, and damage to these glands from inflammation. This test involves removing a sample of tissue from a person's inner lip/salivary gland and examining it under a microscope. On such biopsies, the single most important test result in the diagnosis of the oral component of Sj\u00f6gren syndrome is likely the \"focus score\", which is the number of mononuclear cell infiltrates containing at least 50 inflammatory cells in a 4\u00a0mm2 glandular section. The Chisholm-Mason grades are also widely used for salivary gland biopsies (see table).\nUltrasound.\nSalivary gland ultrasonography is not invasive and may help reduce unnecessary biopsies in anti-SSA-negative patients.\nOther tests.\nA radiological procedure is available as a reliable and accurate test for Sj\u00f6gren's disease, in the form of a sialogram. A contrast agent is injected into the parotid duct, which opens from the cheek into the vestibule of the mouth opposite the neck of the upper second molar tooth. The test is intended to detect any blockage in the salivary gland ducts (i.e., parotid duct) and the amount of saliva that flows into the mouth.\nFor Sj\u00f6gren's disease, sudomotor function through electrochemical skin conductance may help in the diagnosis process.\nAutoimmune comorbidity.\nPeople with Sj\u00f6gren's may also have other autoimmune conditions.\nDiagnostic criteria.\nAn international group created a set of criteria for the diagnosis of primary Sj\u00f6gren's disease in 2016 based on consensus around previous guidelines from the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) and European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR), which became known as the ACR-EULAR criteria. Although used primarily for recruitment into clinical trials, the criteria were shown to be effective in diagnosing Sj\u00f6gren's by a 2025 Swedish cohort study.\nPer the ACR-EULAR criteria, a person with previously reported dry eye or dry mouth symptoms (including if responding positively to a short questionnaire) has SjD if they have a score of at least 4 when considering the following items:\nSj\u00f6gren's disease may be excluded in people with past head and neck radiation therapy, active hepatitis C confirmed with a positive PCR test, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, graft-versus-host disease, and IgG4-related disease. Patients using anticholinergic drugs must stop using them for some time before being evaluated for symptoms of dryness.\nPrevention.\nNo prevention mechanism exists for Sj\u00f6gren's disease (SjD) because of its complexity as an autoimmune disorder. However, lifestyle changes can reduce the risk factors related to developing SS or reduce the severity of the condition for patients who have already been diagnosed.\nDiet is strongly associated with the inflammation seen in many autoimmune-related diseases, including SS. An experimental study concluded that SS patients often show high sensitivity to gluten that directly relates to inflammation.\nModerate exercise is also helpful in SS patients, mainly reducing the effect of lung inflammation.\nTreatment.\nOverview.\nTreatment is directed at managing the person's symptoms. For dry eyes, artificial tears; medications to reduce inflammation; punctal plugs or other surgery to shut the tear ducts may be tried. For a dry mouth, chewing gum (preferably sugar-free); sipping water; or a saliva substitute may be used. In those with joint or muscle pain, ibuprofen may be used. Medications that can cause dryness, such as antihistamines, may also be stopped. The most specific extant diagnostic test requires a lip biopsy.\nTreatments.\nNeither a cure nor a specific treatment for Sj\u00f6gren's disease is known to permanently restore gland secretion. Instead, treatment is generally symptomatic and supportive.\nEye care.\nMoisture replacement therapies such as artificial tears may ease the symptoms of dry eyes. Some patients with more severe problems use goggles to increase local humidity or have punctal plugs inserted to help retain tears on the ocular surface for a longer time.\nAdditionally, cyclosporine (Restasis) is available by prescription to treat chronic dry eye by suppressing the inflammation that disrupts tear secretion. Prescription drugs are also available that help to stimulate salivary flow, such as cevimeline (Evoxac) and pilocarpine. Salagen, a manufactured form of pilocarpine, can be used to help produce tears, as well as saliva in the mouth and intestines. It is derived from the jaborandi plant.\nVaginal dryness.\nIn women with Sj\u00f6gren's disease, vaginal dryness, vulvodynia and dyspareunia (painful sexual intercourse) are often reported; personal lubricants are recommended to help lessen irritation or pain that may result from dryness in the vaginal and vulval areas.\nMusculoskeletal.\nNonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be used to treat musculoskeletal symptoms. For individuals with severe complications, corticosteroids or immunosuppressive drugs may be prescribed, and sometimes intravenous immunoglobulins. Also, disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs such as methotrexate may be helpful. Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil) is another option and is generally considered safer than methotrexate. However, these prescribed drugs have a range of side effects such as nausea, loss of appetite, dizziness, hair loss, stomach aches/cramps, headache, liver toxicity and increased risk of infections.\nSystemic.\nFor systemic symptoms, including fatigue, joint pain, myositis, and neuropathy, biologic immunosuppressant drugs such as rituximab and belimumab that work via B-cell pathology are often used and have less toxic profiles than traditional immunosuppressive regimens.\nDental care.\nPreventive dental treatment is also necessary (and often overlooked by the patient), as the lack of saliva associated with xerostomia creates an ideal environment for the proliferation of bacteria that cause cavities. Treatments include at-home topical fluoride application to strengthen tooth enamel and frequent teeth cleanings by a dental hygienist. Existing cavities must also be treated, as cavities that extend into the tooth cannot be effectively treated by teeth cleaning alone, and are at a high risk of spreading into the pulp of the tooth, leading to the loss of vitality and need for extraction or root canal therapy. This treatment regimen is the same as for all xerostomia patients, such as for those undergoing head and neck radiation therapy, which often damages the salivary glands; these glands are more susceptible to radiation than other body tissues.\nFatigue.\nFatigue, depression, and aerobic capacity all showed a significant difference after a 12-week exercise program compared with controls, in favor of the exercise intervention. A small study showed possible efficacy of vagus nerve stimulation for Sjogren's fatigue reduction.\nPrognosis.\nOrgan-related impacts.\nNon-Hodgkin lymphoma.\nResults from several studies indicate that, compared to other autoimmune diseases, Sj\u00f6gren's disease is associated with a notably high incidence of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, a cancer of white blood cells. About 5% of patients with SS develop some form of lymphoid malignancy. Patients with severe cases are much more likely to develop lymphomas than patients with mild or moderate cases. The most common lymphomas are salivary extranodal marginal zone B cell lymphomas (MALT lymphomas in the salivary glands) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.\nLymphomagenesis in primary Sj\u00f6gren's disease patients is considered a multistep process, with the first step being chronic stimulation of autoimmune B cells, especially B cells that produce rheumatoid factor at sites targeted by the disease. This increases the frequency of oncogenic mutation, leading to any dysfunction at checkpoints of autoimmune B-cell activation to transform into malignancy. A study's findings concluded that continuous stimulation of autoimmune B cells leads to subtle germinal abnormalities in genes having specific consequences in B cells, which underlie the susceptibility to lymphoma.\nOther organs.\nApart from the notably higher incidence of malignant NHL, Sj\u00f6gren's patients show only modest or clinically insignificant deterioration in specific organ-related function.\nBurden of illness.\nSj\u00f6gren's disease is associated with a high burden of illness, and has been shown to markedly reduce quality of life (QoL), with a significant impact on ability to work resulting from increased rates of disability. The reduction in QoL is similar to that seen in other chronic conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus and fibromyalgia.\nMortality.\nPublished studies on the survival of Sj\u00f6gren's disease patients have been limited in various respects, perhaps owing to the relatively small sample sizes and the fact that secondary Sj\u00f6gren's disease is associated with other autoimmune diseases.\nA 2010 study found a slight increase in mortality rates of Sj\u00f6gren's patients in comparison with the remainder of the population. A 2016 study found that primary Sj\u00f6gren's was not associated with an increase in all-cause mortality as compared with the general population, but that a subset of patients with extraglandular involvement, vasculitis, hypocomplementaemia, and cryoglobulinaemia may be at increased risk of mortality. A 2021 metaanalysis showed a 46% increase in mortality, with significantly greater mortality risk in patients with older age, male gender, vasculitis, interstitial lung disease, low complements, positive anti-La/SSB and cryoglobulinaemia.\nAmong those without other autoimmune disorders, life expectancy is unchanged.\nEpidemiology.\nSj\u00f6gren's disease (SjD) is the third-most common rheumatic autoimmune disorder, behind rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus.\nThere are no geographical differences in the rates of SS. Sj\u00f6gren's syndrome has been reported in all areas of the world, although regional rates have not been well studied.\nDepending on the criteria for determining prevalence, studies estimate the prevalence of SS at between 500,000 and two million people in the United States. Broader studies of SS prevalence range widely, with some reports of up to a prevalence of 3% of the population. A few studies have reported that the incidence of the syndrome varies between three and six per 100,000 per year.\nBetween 0.2 and 1.2% of the population is affected, with half having the primary form and half the secondary form. It is around 10 times more common in women than in men. Though the disease commonly begins in middle age, people of any age can be affected.\nNine out of 10 SjD patients are women. In addition to prevalence in women, having a first-degree relative with an autoimmune disease and previous pregnancies have been identified as epidemiological risk factors. Despite the lower risk for men, primary SS in men tends to represent a more severe form of the disease. The role of race and ethnicity in the prevalence of the disease is unknown.\nAlthough Sj\u00f6gren's disease occurs in all age groups, the average age of onset is between ages 40 and 60, although as many as half of all cases may be left undiagnosed or unreported. The prevalence of SS generally increases with age.\nSj\u00f6gren's disease is reported in 30-50% of people with rheumatoid arthritis and 10-25% with systemic lupus erythematosus.\nHistory.\nThe disease was described in 1933 by Henrik Sj\u00f6gren, after whom it is named, but several earlier descriptions of people with the symptoms exist.\nJan Mikulicz-Radecki (1850\u20131905) is generally credited with the first description of SS. In 1892, he described a 42-year-old man with enlargement of the parotid and lacrimal glands associated with a round-cell infiltrate and acinar atrophy. However, the criteria that Mikulicz established for diagnosis often led to misdiagnosis of Mikulicz's syndrome. Many conditions, such as tuberculosis, infections, sarcoidosis, and lymphoma present with similar conditions to those ascribed to Mikulicz's syndrome. Nevertheless, the term \"Mikulicz's syndrome\" is still used occasionally to describe the appearance of lymphocytic infiltrates on salivary-gland biopsies.\nIn 1930, Henrik Sj\u00f6gren (1899\u20131986), an ophthalmologist in J\u00f6nk\u00f6ping, Sweden, observed a patient with low secretions from the lacrimal and salivary glands. Sj\u00f6gren introduced the term keratoconjunctivitis sicca for the symptom of dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis). In 1933, he published his doctoral thesis describing 19 females, most of whom were postmenopausal and had arthritis, showing clinical and pathological manifestations of the syndrome. Sj\u00f6gren clarified that keratoconjunctivitis sicca, resulting from water deficiency, had no relation to xerophthalmia, resulting from vitamin A deficiency. Sj\u00f6gren's thesis was not well received as the Board of Examiners criticized some clinical aspects.\nAfter extensive research and data collection, Sj\u00f6gren published an essential paper in 1951, describing 80 patients with keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 50 of whom also had arthritis. His subsequent follow-up conference trips pertaining to his paper led to an international interest in Sj\u00f6gren's syndrome. The term \"keratoconjunctivitis sicca\" was coined by Sj\u00f6gren himself and began to be identified as Sj\u00f6gren's syndrome in literature, although it can now have more general usage.\nResearch.\nResearch into multifactorial autoimmune diseases such as SS focuses on expanding the knowledge surrounding the disorder, improving diagnostic tools and finding ways to prevent, manage and cure the disorder. The United Kingdom Primary Sj\u00f6gren's Syndrome Registry, a tissue biobank of samples taken for research, supported by the Medical Research Council, UK, was established in 2010. It supports clinical trials and genetic studies of Sj\u00f6gren's syndrome and is open to those wishing to participate in research studies and to researchers studying the disease.\nAs with other autoimmune diseases, susceptibility to Sj\u00f6gren's disease is greatly influenced by the human leukocyte antigen. DQA1*05:01, DQB1*02:01, and DRB1*03:01 alleles were identified as risk factors, while DQA1*02:01, DQA1*03:01 and DQB1*05:01 alleles were found to be protective factors for the disease. The relationship between alleles and specific race was also established. HLA-DQ2 and HLA-B8 are generally found in Caucasian patients, while HLA-DR5 is related to Greek and Israeli patients. Multiple genome-wide association scans may be conducted in the future to identify key risk variants.\nViruses that have been associated with Sj\u00f6gren's disease include human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis delta virus (HDV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV).\nSome research has shown that deficiencies of vitamin A and vitamin D are associated with the disease. Vitamin D deficiency was found to be related to neurological manifestations and the presence of lymphoma among patients. Vitamin A levels were inversely associated with extraglandular manifestations of the disease.\nSaliva is a potential diagnostic tool for Sj\u00f6gren's disease because the salivary component is changed after the onset of the disease. With the new miniaturization technology, called lab on a chip, the diagnosis can be more convenient.\nConcerning therapeutics, multiple monoclonal antibodies were under investigation in 2007. The most promising seemed to be the anti-CD20 rituximab and the anti-CD22 epratuzumab, while the anti-TNF-\u03b1 and IFN-\u03b1 seemed less effective.\nIn 2014, the Sj\u00f6gren's Foundation (previously the Sj\u00f6gren's Syndrome Foundation) announced a five-year goal to halve the disease's average time to diagnosis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60142", "revid": "4059348", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60142", "title": "Battle of Tannenberg", "text": "1914 World War I battle\nThe Battle of Tannenberg, also known as the Second Battle of Tannenberg, was fought between Russia and Germany between 26 and 30 August 1914, the first month of World War I. The battle resulted in the encirclement and the almost complete destruction of the Russian 2nd Army by the German 8th Army and the suicide of its commanding general, Alexander Samsonov. A series of follow-up battles (First Masurian Lakes) led to the ousting of the Russian 1st Army from East Prussia.\nThe outcome brought considerable prestige to the German army commander, General (later Field Marshal) Paul von Hindenburg, and his rising staff-officer Erich Ludendorff. Although the battle actually took place near Allenstein (Olsztyn), Hindenburg named it after Tannenberg, to the west, in order to avenge the Teutonic Knights' defeat at the First Battle of Tannenberg 500 years earlier.\nThe East Prussian campaign is particularly notable for fast rail movements by the German 8th Army, enabling them to concentrate against each of the two Russian armies in turn, first delaying the 1st Army and then destroying the 2nd before once again turning on the 1st days later. It is also notable for the failure of the Russians to encode their radio messages, broadcasting their daily marching orders in the clear, which allowed the Germans to make their movements with the confidence they would not be flanked. After the battles of Stallup\u00f6nen and Gumbinnen, the German army was forced to retreat by the 1st Army. Yakov Zhilinsky, the leader of the Russian Northwestern Front, of which the 2nd and 1st Armies were a part, based on a report from the 1st Army, drew a non-existent picture for Samsonov about the German withdrawal, partly to the Vistula, partly to K\u00f6nigsberg, without any knowledge of the order in which they were withdrawing or where they were located. Samsonov's Russians, in turn, uncertain of the German army's exact location, acted as if counting \"on a miracle\" during their offensive.\nIn the course of the Russian offensive into East Prussia, there was no agreement between Samsonov and Zhilinsky, concerning the direction in which the 2nd Army would engage in battle; Samsonov moved to the northwest (\"Allenstein \u2013 Osterode\") and intended to continue, but Zhilinsky intended to strike north (\"Seeburg \u2013 Allenstein\"). This disorganized leadership contributed to the disastrous defeat as well; it was globally present in the senior command staff. In the end of disputes about the army's movement, Zhilinsky chose to find the golden mean, \u2013 he gave in to Samsonov, with the fact that the latter agreed to detach only the 6th Army Corps to Bischofsburg, in the direction that Zhilinsky intended. This corps escaped encirclement, though it was also defeated separately. Zhilinsky did not give Samsonov any specific orders at Tannenberg; the latter actually acted independently and this already put pressure on the psyche of Samsonov. In addition to the previous, the Imperial Russian Army began the war without a sufficiently trained officer corps, with a small reserve for new formations and for the training of conscripts, with a sharp, compared to the Germans, shortage of artillery, very poorly supplied with all technical means and ammunition, having in its rear a country and its military administration unprepared for waging a major war and an industry completely unprepared for the transition to work for military needs. Moreover, the Russians also had problems supplying their armies due to bad local infrastructure and with the fact that they deployed very significant horsepower (cavalry), which required larger food supplies that were already critical.\nBackground.\nGermany entered World War I largely following the Schlieffen Plan. According to Prit Buttar, \"In combination with his own strong desire to fight an offensive war featuring outflanking and encircling movements, Schlieffen went on to develop his plan for a sweeping advance through Belgium. In the east, limited German forces would defend against any Russian attack until more forces became available from the west, fresh from victory over the French. The total strength of the fully mobilised German Army in 1914 amounted to 1,191 battalions, the great majority of which would be deployed against France. The 8th Army in East Prussia would go to war with barely 10 per cent of this total.\"\nThe Russian Forces were less prepared than they would have otherwise been, thanks to an overestimation of the Russian war machine and a general who was having real problems on Russia's other fronts. General Yakov Grigoryevich Zhilinsky was in charge of this attack and had pledged to put 800,000 men on the front by the 15th day of mobilization. Due to the rushed nature of this attack, the Russian war machine developed numerous cracks and failures as a result of poor communication between the front and command. This lack of communication resulted in orders that would contradict the previous ones and headquarters giving soldiers orders in a hurry. All of this confusion and disorganization severely hampered the general's efforts and progress on the Russian Front stalled.\nThe French Army's Plan XVII at the outbreak of the war involved swift mobilization followed by an immediate attack to drive the Germans from Alsace and Lorraine. If the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) joined in accordance with their Allied treaty, they would fill the left flank. Their Russian allies in the East would have a massive army, more than 95 divisions, but their mobilization would inevitably be slower. Getting their men to the front would itself take time because of their relatively sparse and unreliable railway network (for example, 75% of Russian railways were still single-tracked). Russia intended to have 27 divisions at the front by day 15 of hostilities and 52 by day 23, but it would take 60 days before 90 divisions were in action. Despite their difficulties, the Russians promised the French that they would promptly engage the armies of Austria-Hungary in the south and on day 15 would invade German East Prussia.\nAccording to Prit Buttar, \"In addition to the fortifications amongst the Masurian Lake District, the Germans had built a series of major forts around K\u00f6nigsberg in the 19th century and had then modernised them over the years. Similarly, major fortresses had been established along the Vistula, particularly at Thorn (now Toru\u0144). Combined with the flexibility provided by the German railways, allowing General Maximilian von Prittwitz to concentrate against the inner flanks of either Russian invasion force, the Germans could realistically view the coming war with a degree of confidence.\"\nThe Russians would rely on two of their three railways that ran up to the border; each would provision an army. The railways ended at the border, as Russian trains operated on a different rail gauge from Western Europe. Consequently, its armies could be transported by rail only as far as the German border and could use Prussian railways only with captured locomotives and rolling stock. The 1st Army would use the line that ran from Vilnius, Lithuania, to the border southeast of K\u00f6nigsberg. The 2nd Army railway ran from Warsaw, Poland, to the border southwest of K\u00f6nigsberg. The two armies would take the Germans in a pincer. The Russian supply chains would be ungainly because\u2014for defense\u2014on their side of the border there were only a few sandy tracks rather than proper macadamized roads. Adding to their supply problems, the Russians deployed large numbers of cavalry and Cossacks; every day each horse needed ten times the resources that a man required.\nThe 1st Army commander was Paul von Rennenkampf, who in the Russo-Japanese War had earned a reputation for \"exceptional energy, determination, courage, and military capability\". The 1st Army was mobilized from the Vilno Military District, and consisted of four infantry corps, five cavalry divisions and an independent cavalry brigade. The 2nd Army, commanded by Alexander Vasilyevich Samsonov, was mobilized from the Warsaw Military District, and consisted of five infantry corps and four cavalry divisions. These two armies formed the Northwestern Front facing the Germans, under the command of Yakov Zhilinsky. The Southwestern Front, facing the Austro-Hungarians in Galicia, was commanded by Nikolai Iudovich Ivanov.\nCommunications would be a daunting challenge. The Russian supply of cable was insufficient to run telephone or telegraph connections from the rear; all they had was needed for field communications. Therefore, they relied on mobile wireless stations, which would link Zhilinsky to his two army commanders and with all corps commanders. The Russians were aware that the Germans had broken their ciphers, but they continued to use them until war broke out. A new code was ready but they were still very short of code books. Zhilinsky and Rennenkampf each had one; Samsonov did not. According to Prit Buttar, \"Consequently, Samsonov concluded that he would have to take the risk of using uncoded radio messages.\"\nPrelude: 17\u201322 August.\nRennenkampf's 1st Army crossed the frontier on 17 August, moving westward slowly. This was sooner than the Germans anticipated, because the Russian mobilization, including the Baltic and Warsaw districts, had begun secretly on 25 July, not with the Tsar's proclamation on 30 July.\nPrittwitz attacked near Gumbinnen on 20 August, when he knew from intercepted wireless messages that Rennenkampf's infantry was resting. German I Corps commanded by Gen. Hermann von Fran\u00e7ois was on their left, XVII Corps commanded by Lt. Gen. August von Mackensen in the center and I Reserve Corps led by Gen. Otto von Below on the right. A night march enabled one of Fran\u00e7ois' divisions to hit the Russian 20th Army Corps' right flank at 04:00. Rennenkampf's men rallied to stoutly resist the attack. Their artillery was devastating until they ran out of ammunition, then the Russians retired. I Corps attacks were halted at 16:00 to rest men sapped by the torrid summer heat. Fran\u00e7ois was sure they could win the next day. On his left, Mackensen's XVII Corps launched a vigorous frontal attack but the Russian infantry held firm. That afternoon the Russian heavy artillery struck back\u2014the German infantry fled in panic, their artillery limbered up and joined the stampede. Prittwitz ordered I Corps and I Reserve Corps to break off the action and retreat also.\nAt noon, Prittwitz had telephoned Field Marshal Helmuth von Moltke the Younger at OHL (Oberste Heeresleitung, Supreme Headquarters) to report that all was going well; that evening he telephoned again to report disaster. His problems were compounded because an intercepted wireless message disclosed that the Russian 2nd Army included five Corps and a cavalry division, and aerial scouts saw their columns marching across the frontier. They were opposed by the reinforced German XX Corps, commanded by Lt. Gen. Friedrich von Scholtz. Their advance offered the possibility of cutting off any retreat westward while possibly encircling them between the two Russian armies. Prittwitz excitedly but inconclusively and repeatedly discussed the horrifying news with Moltke that evening on the telephone, shouting back and forth. At 20:23, 8th Army telegraphed OHL that they would withdraw to West Prussia.\nBy the next morning, 21 August, 8th Army staff realized that because Samsonov's 2nd Army was closer to the Vistula crossings than they were, they must first relocate most of their forces to join with XX Corps to block Samsonov before they could withdraw further. Now Moltke was told that they would only retreat a short distance. Fran\u00e7ois protested directly to the Kaiser about his panicking superiors. That evening Prittwitz reported that the German 1st Cavalry Division had disappeared, only to later disclose that they had repulsed the Russian cavalry, capturing several hundred. By this point, Moltke had already decided to replace both Prittwitz and his chief of staff, Alfred von Waldersee. On the morning of 22 August their replacements, Col. Gen. Paul von Hindenburg and Maj. Gen. Erich Ludendorff, were notified of their new assignments.\nThe 8th Army issued orders to move to block Samsonov's 2nd Army. I Corps on the German left was closest to the railway, so it would take the long route by train to form up on the right side of XX Corps. The other two German corps would march the shorter distance to XX Corps' left. The 1st Cavalry Division and some older garrison troops would remain to screen Rennenkampf. On the afternoon of 22 August, the head of the 8th Army field railways was informed by telegraph that new commanders were coming by special train. The telegram relieving their former commanders came later. I Corps was moving over more than 150 km (93 miles) of rail, day and night, one train every 30 minutes, with 25 minutes to unload instead of the customary hour or two.\nAfter the battle at Gumbinnen, Rennenkampf decided to pause his 1st Army to take resupply and to be in good positions if the Germans attacked again. This caused them to lose contact with the German Army, which he incorrectly reported was retreating in haste to the Vistula. Both Russian armies were having serious supply problems; everything had to be carted up from the railheads because they could not use the East Prussian railway track, and many units were hampered by a lack of field bakeries, ammunition carts and the like. The 2nd Army also was hampered by incompetent staff work and poor communications. Poor staff work not only exacerbated supply problems but, more importantly, caused Samsonov during the fighting to lose operational control over all but the two corps in his immediate vicinity (13th &amp; 15th Army Corps).\nOn 21 August, Samsonov's 2nd Army crossed the border, and quickly took several border towns. The VI Corps took Ortelsburg, while I and XV Corps advanced onto Soldau and Neidenburg. On 22 August, Samsonov ordered XV Corps to advance towards Hohenstein, which they did on 23 August pushing Friedrich von Scholtz's XX Corps out of Lahna.\nBattle.\nConsolidation of the German 8th Army.\nThe new commanders arrived at Marienburg on the afternoon of 23 August; they had met for the first time on their special train the previous night and now they rendezvoused with the 8th Army staff. I Corps was moving by the rail line, and Ludendorff had previously counter-ordered it further east, at Deutsch-Eylau, where it could support the right of XX Corps. XVII Corps and I Reserve Corps would march towards the left of XX Corps. Ludendorff had delayed their marches for a day to rest while remaining in place should Rennenkampf attack. The German 1st Cavalry Division and some garrison troops of older men would remain as a screen just south of the eastern edge of the K\u00f6nigsberg defenses, facing Rennenkampf's 1st Army.\nHindenburg summarized his strategy, \"We had not merely to win a victory over Samsonov. We had to annihilate him. Only thus could we get a free hand to deal with the second enemy, Rennenkampf, who was even then plundering and burning East Prussia.\" The new commander had raised the stakes dramatically. They must do more than stop Samsonov in his tracks, as they had tried to block and push back Rennenkampf. Samsonov must be annihilated before they turned back to deal with Rennenkampf. For the moment Samsonov would be opposed only by the forces he was already facing, XX Corps, mostly East Prussians who were defending their homes. The bulk of the Russian 2nd Army was still coming towards the front; if necessary, they would be allowed to push further into the province while the German reinforcements assembled on the flanks, poised to encircle the invaders\u2014just the tactics instilled by Schlieffen.\nEarly phases of battle: 23\u201326 August.\nZhilinsky had agreed to Samsonov's proposal to start the 2nd Army's advance further westward than originally planned, separating them even further from Rennenkampf's 1st Army. On 22 August Samsonov's forces encountered Germans all along their front and pushed them back in several places. Zhilinsky ordered him to pursue vigorously. They already had been advancing for six days in sweltering heat without sufficient rest along primitive roads, averaging a day and had outrun their supplies. On 23 August they attacked the German XX Corps, which retreated to the Orlau-Frankenau line that night. The Russians followed, and on the 24th they attacked again; the now partially entrenched XX Corps temporarily stopped their advance before retreating to avoid possible encirclement. At one stage the chief of staff of the corps directed artillery fire onto his own dwelling.\nSamsonov saw a wonderful opportunity because, as far as he was aware, both of his flanks were unopposed. He ordered most of his units to the northwest, toward the Vistula, leaving only his VI Corps to continue north towards their original objective of Seeburg. He did not have enough aircraft or skilled cavalry to detect the German buildup on his left. Rennenkampf mistakenly reported that two of the German Corps had sheltered in the K\u00f6nigsberg fortifications.\nOn 24 August Hindenburg, Ludendorff and Hoffmann motored along the German lines to meet Scholtz and his principal subordinates, sharing the roads with panic-stricken refugees; in the background were columns of smoke from burning villages ignited by artillery shells. They could keep control of their army because most of the local telephone operators remained at their switchboards, carefully tracking the motorcade. Along the way they drove through the village of Tannenberg (today called St\u0119bark), which reminded the two younger men of the defeat of the Teutonic Knights there by the Poles and Lithuanians in 1410; Hindenburg had been thinking about that battle since the evening before when he strolled near the ruins of the castle of the Teutonic Order. (In 1910 Slavs had commemorated their triumph on the old battlefield.)\nAided by Russian radio intercepts, a captured map of Russian positions, and information from fleeing German civilians of Rennenkampf's slow progress, Hindenburg and Ludendorff planned the encirclement of the Russian 2nd Army. I Corps and XX Corps would attack from Gilgenburg towards Neidenburg, while XVII Corps and I Reserve Corps attacked the Russian right flank. They met with Scholtz and his XX Corps staff on 24 August, and Fran\u00e7ois on 25 August, where he was ordered to attack towards Usdau on 26 August. Fran\u00e7ois stated only part of his corps and artillery had arrived. Ludendorf insisted the attack must go forward as planned, since more trains were expected beforehand. Fran\u00e7ois replied, \"If it is so ordered, of course an attack will be made, and the troops will obviously have to fight with bayonets.\"\nOn the way back to headquarters Hoffmann received new radio intercepts. Rennenkampf's most recent orders from Zhilinsky were to continue due west, not turn south-westward towards Samsonov, who was instructed to continue his own drive northwest further away from Rennenkampf. Based on this information Scholtz formed a new defensive flank along the Drewenz River, while his main line strengthened their defenses. Back at headquarters Hindenburg told the staff, \"Gentlemen. Our preparations are so well in hand that we can sleep soundly tonight.\"\nSamsonov was concerned by the German resistance with their earlier advance, and aerial reconnaissance spotted the arrival of the German I Corps. Zhilinsky and Samsonov could not reach an agreement on the direction of the army. The dispute over the direction of attack resulted in a compromise: on the 24th, the 2nd Army was sent to the Allenstein\u2013Osterode front, leaving the VI Corps on the move to Bischofsburg at Zhilinsky's request, i.e. separating it from the rest of the army by 2\u00bd marches and thereby exposing it to a separate defeat. These negotiations, as well as the negotiations about a day's rest, which Samsonov insistently demanded, led to the fact that, apart from the VI Corps, the army barely moved on the 25th. The order from Zhilinsky was to attack northwest as per Samsonov's aim, with Martos' XV Corps and Klyuev's XII Corps, while I Corps protected the left flank, and VI Corps was positioned on the right at Bischofsburg.\nMain battle: 27\u201330 August.\nZhilinsky was visited by the commander of the Russian Army, the Grand Duke Nicholas Nikolaevich of Russia, who ordered him to support Samsonov.\nFran\u00e7ois commenced his attack early on the 25th, with his 1st Infantry Division advancing towards Seeben, his 2nd Infantry division on its southern flank, and the rest of his corps arriving by train during the day. He captured Seeben by mid-afternoon, but saved an advance on Usdau for the next day. North of Fran\u00e7ois, Scholtz's 37th and 41st Infantry Divisions faced the Russian 2nd Infantry Division, which fell back with heavy losses. On the left flank of Scholtz's XX Corps, Curt von Morgen's 3rd Reserve Division was ordered to advance onto Hohenstein, but held back out of concern that the Russian XV and XII Corps would threaten his left flank. Klyuev's Russian XIII Corps was ordered to advance onto Allenstein. On Samsonov's right flank, Alexander Blagoveschensky's Russian VI corps soon faced Mackensen's German XVII Corps and von Below's German I Reserve Corps. Von Below, to the right of Mackensen, advanced to cut the road between Bischofsburg and Wartenburg. Blagoveschensky's 16th Infantry Division occupied Bischofsburg, while his 4th Infantry Division was north of Rothfliess, and his 4th Cavalry division was at Sensburg. The 16th Infantry division was ordered to move towards Allenstein, while the 16th Infantry Division was split between Lautern and Gross-B\u00f6ssau. Mackensen's 36th Infantry Division, on the right, and his 35th infantry Division, on the left, advanced towards Bischofsburg. The Russian 4th Infantry Division suffered heavy losses and retreated towards Ortelsburg. In an attempt to send reinforcements, Blagoveschensky split the 16th Infantry Division between Bischofsburg and Ramsau. However, they were met in the flank and rear by von Belows's I Reserve Corps, and retreated in disarray.\nThat evening the 8th Army's staff was on edge. Little had been achieved during the day, when they had intended to spring the trap. XX Corps had done well on another torrid day, but now was exhausted. On their far left they knew that XVII Corps and I Reserve Corps were coming into action, but headquarters had learned little about their progress. In fact, XVII Corps had defeated the Russian VI Corps, which fled back along the roads. XVII Corps had endured long marches in sweltering weather, but some men still had the energy to pursue on bicycles requisitioned from civilians. Hoffmann, who had been an observer with the Japanese in Manchuria, tried to ease their nerves by telling how Samsonov and Rennenkampf had quarreled during that war, so they would do nothing to help one another. It was a good story that Hoffmann treasured and retold frequently. In Hindenburg's words \"It was now apparent that danger was threatening from the side of Rennenkampf. It was reported that one of his corps was on the march through Angerburg. It is surprising that misgivings filled many a heart, that firm resolution began to yield to vacillation, and that doubts crept in where a clear vision had hitherto prevailed? We overcame the inward crisis, adhered to our original intention, and turned in full strength to effect its realization by attack.\" The German right flank would advance to Neidenburg, while von Below's I Reserve Corps advanced to Allenstein, and Mackensen's XVII Corps chased Blagoveschensky's retreating VI Corps.\nFran\u00e7ois was ready to attack the Russian left decisively on 27 August, hitting the Russian 1st Army Corps. His artillery barrage was overwhelming, and soon he had taken the key town of Usdau. In the center the Russians continued to strongly attack the German XX Corps and to move northwest from Allenstein. The German XVII Corps and I Reserve Corps pushed the Russian right wing they had bloodied the day before further back. Gen. Basil Gourko (Vasily Gurko), commanding the Russian 1st Army Cavalry Division (and from 1916 to 1917 chief of the general staff), was told later that Samsonov was not aware of what was happening on his flanks because he was observing the action from a rise in the ground a distance from his wireless set and reports were not relayed to him.\nOn the evening of the 27th, the Germans gave an order for encirclement, the essence of which is set out in the following report from Ludendorff to the high command:\n\"The Russian 1st Army Corps has been thrown back from Gilgenburg to Soldau. The Russian 6th Army Corps has been thrown back from Bischofsburg to Ortelsburg. Parts of the 23rd Army Corps have been defeated and are retreating to Neidenburg. The 13th and 15th Army Corps still occupy the Hohenstein, Allenstein region, and will be attacked tomorrow, if possible, from all sides\".\nOn the morning of 28 August the German commanders were motoring along the front when they were shown a report from an aerial observer that Rennenkampf's army was moving towards their rear. Ludendorff announced that the attack on the 2nd Army must be broken off. Hindenburg led him behind a nearby hedge; when they emerged Hindenburg calmly said that operations would continue as planned. Later radio intercepts confirmed Rennenkampf was still slowly advancing on K\u00f6nigsberg. Fran\u00e7ois' I Corps resumed his assault on the Russian 1st Army Corps, taking Soldau by late morning, and then advancing onto Neidenburg, as the Russian 1st Army Corps became an ineffective force in the battle. Scholtz's XX Corps, to the north, also advanced. Though his 41st Infantry Division was badly mauled by Martos' Russian 15th Army Corps, it held its ground, while the German 37th Infantry Division reached Hohenstein by the end of the day. The German 3rd Reserve Division was also able to advance on the Russian 15th Army Corps, forcing Samsonov to order a retreat to Neidenburg. Von Below's German I Reserve Corps engaged Klyuev's Russian 13th Army Corps west of Allenstein, and became isolated. Klyuev received orders from Samsonov to retreat towards Kurken. Mackensen's German XVII Corps continued pursuing the retreating Russians. One half of the German encirclement was complete by the end of the day, as Ludendorff wrote, \"The enemy front seemed to be breaking up... We did not have a clear picture of the situation with individual units. But there was no doubt that the battle was won.\"\nOn 29 August, Fran\u00e7ois' cavalry regiment reached Willenberg by evening, while his 1st Infantry Division occupied the road between Neidenburg and Willenberg. Fran\u00e7ois' I Corps patrols linked up with Mackensen's German XVII Corps, who had advanced to Jedwabno, completing the encirclement. On 29 August the troops from the Russian 2nd Army's center who were retreating south ran into a German defensive line. Those Russians who tried to break through by dashing across open fields heavy with crops were mowed down. They were in a cauldron centered at Frogenau, west of Tannenberg, and throughout the day they were relentlessly pounded by artillery. Many surrendered \u2013 long columns of prisoners jammed the roads away from the battleground. Hindenburg and Ludendorff watched from a hilltop, with only a single field telephone line; thereafter they stayed closer to the telephone network. Hindenburg met one captured Russian corps commander that day, another on the day following. On 30 August the Russians remaining outside of the cauldron tried unsuccessfully to break open the snare. Rather than report the loss of his army to Tsar Nicholas II, Samsonov disappeared into the woods that night and committed suicide. His body was found in the following year and returned to Russia by the Red Cross.\nOn 31 August Hindenburg formally reported to the Kaiser that three Russian army corps (13th, 15th and 23rd) had been destroyed. The two corps (1st and 6th) that had not been caught in the cauldron had been severely bloodied and were retreating back to Poland. He requested that the battle be named Tannenberg (an imaginative touch that both Ludendorff and Hoffmann claimed as their own).\nThe 2nd Army lost approximately 120,000, but, taking into account the attacks, it continued to pose a threat to the Germans from the rear, it still had 116,791 men and 435 guns. The Russian command continued to be active on the flanks of the German 8th Army, which affected the fact that the Germans were unable to destroy the 1st in the First Battle of the Masurian Lakes. The Germans suffered just 12,000 casualties out of the 150,000 men committed to the battle, incl. 1,888 killed, 6,579 wounded and 4,588 missing. There is probably some data, since the authors who referred to the named lists of losses cannot single out the losses of officers. According to other estimates, the Hindenburg army lost c. 30,000 men.&gt; Sixty trains were required to take captured Russian equipment to Germany. The German official history estimated 50,000 Russians killed and wounded, which were never properly recorded. Another estimate gives 30,000 Russians killed or wounded, with 13 generals and 500 guns captured.\nThe main reason for the defeat of the 2nd Army lies in Samsonov's neglect of radio communications, as a result of which they attacked blindly, and the Germans knew about his exact location. As noted, Samsonov could have avoided disaster, given that the first attempt to encircle the Russian army for the Germans ended in a bloody failure at Lake Waplitz, as a result of which the German XX Corps on the flanks was repulsed, and the 41st Division from its composition was partially destroyed. Samsonov, due to the fact that he went to the center of the position of his troops for personal encouragement of the latter, did not know about this. As a result, this very center was surrounded.\nAftermath.\nTo David Stevenson it was \"a major victory but far from decisive\", because the Russian 1st Army was still in East Prussia. It set the stage for the First Battle of the Masurian Lakes a week later, when the reinforced German 8th Army confronted the Russian 1st Army. Rennenkampf retreated hastily back over the pre-war border before they could be encircled.\nBritish Field Marshal Sir Edmund Ironside saw Tannenberg as the \"\u2026 greatest defeat suffered by any of the combatants during the war\". It was a tactical masterpiece that demonstrated the superior skills of the German army. Their pre-war organization and training had proven themselves, which bolstered German morale while severely shaking Russian confidence. Nonetheless, as long as the great battle in the West continued the outnumbered Germans had to remain on the defensive in the East, anticipating that the Russians would make another thrust from Poland against Germany, and because the Russians had defeated the Austro-Hungarians in the Battle of Galicia; their allies would need help.\nThe Russian official inquiry into the disaster blamed Zhilinsky for not controlling his two armies. He was replaced in the Northwest Command and sent to liaise with the French. Rennenkampf was exonerated, but was retired after a dubious performance in Poland in 1916.\nHindenburg was hailed as an epic hero and Ludendorff was praised, but Hoffmann was generally ignored by the press. Apparently not pleased by this, he later gave tours of the area, noting: \"This is where the Field Marshal slept before the battle, this is where he slept after the battle, and this is where he slept during the battle.\" However, Hindenburg countered by saying: \"If the battle had gone badly, the name 'Hindenburg' would have been reviled from one end of Germany to the other.\" Hoffmann is not mentioned in Hindenburg's memoirs. In his memoirs Ludendorff takes credit for the encirclement and most historians give him full responsibility for conducting the battle. Hindenburg wrote and spoke of \"we\", and when questioned about the crucial t\u00eate-\u00e0-t\u00eate with Ludendorff after dinner on 26 August resolutely maintained that they had calmly discussed their options and resolved to continue with the encirclement. Military historian Walter Elze wrote that a few months before his death Hindenburg finally acknowledged that Ludendorff had been in a state of panic that evening. Hindenburg would also remark: \"After all, I know something about the business, I was the instructor in tactics at the War Academy for six years\".\nThe defeat of the 2nd Army, which occurred almost by accident, inspired the German command with too much self-confidence. As a result, they tried to repeat the success of the battle already in Poland, near Warsaw in October 1914 as part of the Battle of the Vistula River and the Battle of \u0141\u00f3d\u017a. In the first case, the new commander of the same 2nd Army Sergei Sheydeman involved the Germans in protracted unnecessary battles, which is why they eventually retreated. At \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, when trying to bypass Scheidmann's army, they themselves fell into the cauldron thanks to the help of Plehve's 5th Army.\nCasualties.\nRussian casualties as a result of the battle are often discussed among historians; in his memoirs, Hindenburg named the number of Russian prisoners at 92,000 people. This is also confirmed by the Reichsarchiv. As well as up to 50,000 KIA. However, these figures perhaps are false, since only half of Samsonov's total army was encircled. Some of the troops were also able to break out of the encirclement; as such, the losses cannot be more than 80,000 people according to Alexei Oleynikov. An attempt to analyze the reports of units of formations participating in the battle shows that Russian losses can reach 120,219, including 5,522 killed, 12,326 wounded and 75,435 missing. 26,936 could not be divided into categories, most likely they are dead.\nPost-war legacy.\nA German monument commemorating the battle was completed in 1927 in Hohenstein. However, it was blown up in World War II by the Germans during their retreat from Prussia in January 1945.\nGerman film director Heinz Paul made a film, \"Tannenberg\", about the battle, shot in East Prussia in 1932.\nThe battle is at the center of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's novel \"August 1914\", published in 1971, and is featured in the video games \"Darkest of Days\" and \"Tannenberg\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60143", "revid": "16495000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60143", "title": "Roy Lichtenstein", "text": "American pop artist (1923\u20131997)\nRoy Fox Lichtenstein ( ; October27, 1923\u00a0\u2013 September29, 1997) was an American pop artist. He rose to prominence in the 1960s through pieces which were inspired by popular advertising and the comic book style. Much of his work explores the relationship between fine art, advertising, and consumerism.\n\"Whaam!\", \"Drowning Girl\", and \"Look Mickey\" proved to be Lichtenstein's most influential works. His most expensive piece is \"Masterpiece\", which was sold for $165\u00a0million in 2017.\nLichtenstein's paintings were exhibited at the Leo Castelli Gallery in New York City, which represented him from 1961 onwards. His artwork was considered to be \"disruptive\". Lichtenstein described pop art as \"not 'American' painting but actually industrial painting\".\nEarly years.\nLichtenstein was born on October 27, 1923, into an upper middle class German-Jewish family in New York City. His father, Milton, was a real estate broker, and his mother, Beatrice (n\u00e9e Werner), a homemaker. Lichtenstein was raised on New York City's Upper West Side and attended public school until he was 12. Lichtenstein then attended New York's Dwight School, graduating in 1940. He first became interested in art and design as a hobby, through school. Lichtenstein was an avid jazz fan, often attending concerts at the Apollo Theater in Harlem. He frequently drew portraits of the musicians playing their instruments. In 1939, his last year of high school, Lichtenstein enrolled in summer classes at the Art Students League of New York, where he worked under the tutelage of Reginald Marsh.\nCareer.\nLichtenstein then left New York to study at Ohio State University, which offered studio courses and a degree in fine arts. His studies were interrupted by a three-year stint in the Army during and after World War II between 1943 and 1946. After being in training programs for languages, engineering in the Army Specialized Training Program, and pilot training, all of which were cancelled, Lichtenstein served as an orderly, draftsman, and artist.\nLichtenstein returned home to visit his dying father and was discharged from the Army with eligibility for the G.I. Bill. Lichtenstein returned to studies in Ohio under the supervision of one of his teachers, Hoyt L. Sherman, who is widely regarded to have had a significant impact on his future work (Lichtenstein would later name a new studio he funded at OSU as the Hoyt L. Sherman Studio Art Center).\nLichtenstein entered the graduate program at Ohio State and was hired as an art instructor, a post he held on and off for the next ten years. In 1949, Lichtenstein earned a Master of Fine Arts degree from Ohio State University.\nIn 1951, Lichtenstein had his first solo exhibition at the Carlebach Gallery in New York.\nHe moved to Cleveland that same year, where he remained for six years, although Lichtenstein frequently traveled back to New York. During this time, he undertook jobs as varied as a draftsman to a window decorator in between periods of painting. Lichtenstein's work at this time fluctuated between Cubism and Expressionism. In 1954, his first son, David Hoyt Lichtenstein, now a songwriter, was born. His second son, Mitchell Lichtenstein, was born two years later.\nIn 1957, Lichtenstein moved back to upstate New York and began teaching again. It was at this time that he adopted the Abstract Expressionism style, being a late convert to this style of painting. Lichtenstein began teaching in upstate New York at the State University of New York at Oswego in 1958. Around this time, he began to incorporate hidden images of cartoon characters such as Mickey Mouse and Bugs Bunny into his abstract works.\nRise to prominence.\nIn 1960, Lichtenstein started teaching at Rutgers University where he was heavily influenced by Allan Kaprow, who was also a teacher at the university. This environment helped reignite Lichtenstein's interest in Proto-pop imagery.\nIn 1961, he began his first pop paintings using cartoon images and techniques derived from the appearance of commercial printing. This phase would continue to 1965, and included the use of advertising imagery suggesting consumerism and homemaking.\nLichtenstein's first work to feature the large-scale use of hard-edged figures and Ben-Day dots was \"Look Mickey\" (1961, National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.). This piece came from a challenge from one of his sons, who pointed to a Mickey Mouse comic book and said; \"I bet you can't paint as good as that, eh, Dad?\" That same year, Lichtenstein produced six other works with recognizable characters from gum wrappers and cartoons.\nIn 1961, Leo Castelli started displaying Lichtenstein's work at his gallery in New York. Lichtenstein had his first one-man show at the Castelli gallery in 1962; the entire collection was bought by influential collectors before the show even opened. A group of paintings produced between 1961 and 1962 focused on solitary household objects such as sneakers, hot dogs, and golf balls. In September 1963, Lichtenstein took a leave of absence from his teaching position at Douglass College at Rutgers.\nLichtenstein's works were inspired by comics featuring war and romantic stories. \"At that time,\" he later recounted, \"I was interested in anything I could use as a subject that was emotionally strong \u2013 usually love, war, or something that was highly charged and emotional subject matter to be opposite to the removed and deliberate painting techniques\".\nPeriod of Lichtenstein's highest profile.\nIt was at this time that Lichtenstein began to find fame not just in America but worldwide. He moved back to New York to be at the center of the art scene and resigned from Rutgers University in 1964 to concentrate on his painting. Lichtenstein used oil and Magna (early acrylic) paint in his best known works, such as \"Drowning Girl\" (1963), which was appropriated from the lead story in DC Comics' \"Secret Hearts\" No. 83, drawn by Tony Abruzzo. (\"Drowning Girl\" now hangs in the Museum of Modern Art, New York.) \"Drowning Girl\" also features thick outlines, bold colors and Ben-Day dots, as if created by photographic reproduction. Of his own work, Lichtenstein would say that the Abstract Expressionists \"put things down on the canvas and responded to what they had done, to the color positions and sizes. My style looks completely different, but the nature of putting down lines pretty much is the same; mine just don't come out looking calligraphic, like Pollock's or Kline's.\"\nRather than attempt to reproduce his subjects, Lichtenstein's work tackled the way in which the mass media portrays them. However, he would never take himself too seriously, saying: \"I think my work is different from comic strips \u2013 but I wouldn't call it transformation; I don't think that whatever is meant by it is important to art\". When Lichtenstein's work was first exhibited, many art critics of the time challenged its originality. His work was harshly criticized as vulgar and empty. The title of a \"Life\" magazine article in 1964 asked, \"Is He the Worst Artist in the U.S.?\" Lichtenstein responded to such claims by offering responses such as the following: \"The closer my work is to the original, the more threatening and critical the content. However, my work is entirely transformed in that my purpose and perception are entirely different. I think my paintings are critically transformed, but it would be difficult to prove it by any rational line of argument.\" He discussed experiencing this heavy criticism in an interview with April Bernard and Mimi Thompson in 1986. Suggesting that it was at times difficult to be criticized, Lichtenstein said, \"I don't doubt when I'm actually painting, it's the criticism that makes you wonder, it does.\"\nLichtenstein's celebrated image \"Whaam!\" (1963) depicts a fighter aircraft firing a rocket into an enemy plane, with a red-and-yellow explosion. The cartoon style is heightened by the use of the onomatopoeic lettering \"Whaam!\" and the boxed caption \"I pressed the fire control ... and ahead of me rockets blazed through the sky ...\" This diptych is large in scale, measuring 1.7 x 4.0 m (5\u00a0ft 7 in x 13\u00a0ft 4 in). \"Whaam\" follows the comic strip-based themes of some of his previous paintings and is part of a body of war-themed work created between 1962 and 1964. It is one of his two notable large war-themed paintings. It was purchased by the Tate Gallery in 1966, after being exhibited at the Leo Castelli Gallery in 1963, and (now at the Tate Modern) has remained in their collection ever since. In 1968, the Darmstadt entrepreneur Karl Str\u00f6her acquired several major works by Lichtenstein, such as \"Nurse\" (1964), \"Compositions I\" (1964), \"We rose up slowly\" (1964) and \"Yellow and Green Brushstrokes\" (1966). After being on loan at the Hessiches Landesmuseum Darmstadt for several years, the founding director of the Museum f\u00fcr Moderne Kunst Frankfurt, Peter Iden, was able to acquire a total of 87 works from the Str\u00f6her collection in 1981, primarily American Pop Art and Minimal Art for the museum under construction until 1991.\nLichtenstein began experimenting with sculpture around 1964, demonstrating a knack for the form that was at odds with the insistent flatness of his paintings. For \"Head of Girl\" (1964), and \"Head with Red Shadow\" (1965), Lichtenstein collaborated with a ceramicist who sculpted the form of the head out of clay. He then applied a glaze to create the same sort of graphic motifs that he used in his paintings; the application of black lines and Ben-Day dots to three-dimensional objects resulted in a flattening of the form.\nMost of Lichtenstein's best-known works are relatively close, but not exact, copies of comic book panels, a subject he largely abandoned in 1965, though he would occasionally incorporate comics into his work in different ways in later decades. These panels were originally drawn by such comics artists as Jack Kirby and DC Comics artists Russ Heath, Tony Abruzzo, Irv Novick, and Jerry Grandenetti, who rarely received any credit. Jack Cowart, executive director of the Lichtenstein Foundation, contests the notion that Lichtenstein was a copyist, saying: \"Roy's work was a wonderment of the graphic formulae and the codification of sentiment that had been worked out by others. The panels were changed in scale, color, treatment, and in their implications. There is no exact copy.\" However, some have been critical of Lichtenstein's use of comic-book imagery and art pieces, especially insofar as that use has been seen as endorsement of a patronizing view of comics by the art mainstream; cartoonist Art Spiegelman commented that \"Lichtenstein did no more or less for comics than Andy Warhol did for soup.\"\nLichtenstein's works based on enlarged panels from comic books engendered a widespread debate about their merits as art. Lichtenstein himself admitted, \"I am nominally copying, but I am really restating the copied thing in other terms. In doing that, the original acquires a totally different texture. It isn't thick or thin brushstrokes, it's dots and flat colours and unyielding lines.\" Eddie Campbell blogged that \"Lichtenstein took a tiny picture, smaller than the palm of the hand, printed in four color inks on newsprint and blew it up to the conventional size at which 'art' is made and exhibited and finished it in paint on canvas.\" With regard to Lichtenstein, Bill Griffith once said, \"There's high art and there's low art. And then there's high art that can take low art, bring it into a high art context, appropriate it and elevate it into something else.\"\nAlthough Lichtenstein's comic-based work gained some acceptance, concerns are still expressed by critics who say Lichtenstein did not credit, pay any royalties to, or seek permission from the original artists or copyright holders. In an interview for a BBC Four documentary in 2013, Alastair Sooke asked the comic book artist Dave Gibbons if he considered Lichtenstein a plagiarist. Gibbons replied: \"I would say 'copycat'. In music for instance, you can't just whistle somebody else's tune or perform somebody else's tune, no matter how badly, without somehow crediting and giving payment to the original artist. That's to say, this is 'WHAAM! by Roy Lichtenstein, after Irv Novick'.\" Sooke himself maintains that \"Lichtenstein transformed Novick's artwork in a number of subtle but crucial ways.\"\nCity University London lecturer Ernesto Priego notes that Lichtenstein's failure to credit the original creators of his comic works was a reflection on the decision by National Periodical Publications, the predecessor of DC Comics, to omit any credit for their writers and artists:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Besides embodying the cultural prejudice against comic books as vehicles of art, examples like Lichtenstein's appropriation of the vocabulary of comics highlight the importance of taking publication format in consideration when defining comics, as well as the political economy implied by specific types of historical publications, in this case the American mainstream comic book. To what extent was National Periodical Publications (later DC) responsible for the rejection of the roles of Kanigher and Novick as artists in their own right by not granting them full authorial credit on the publication itself?\"\nFurthermore, Campbell notes that there was a time when comic artists often declined attribution for their work.\nIn an account published in 1998, Novick said that he had met Lichtenstein in the army in 1947 and, as his superior officer, had responded to Lichtenstein's tearful complaints about the menial tasks he was assigned by recommending him for a better job. Jean-Paul Gabilliet has questioned this account, saying that Lichtenstein had left the army a year before the time Novick says the incident took place. Bart Beaty, noting that Lichtenstein had appropriated Novick for works such as \"Whaam!\" and \"Okay Hot-Shot, Okay!\", says that Novick's story \"seems to be an attempt to personally diminish\" the more famous artist.\nIn 1966, Lichtenstein moved on from his much-celebrated imagery of the early 1960s, and began his \"Modern Paintings\" series, including over 60 paintings and accompanying drawings. Using his characteristic Ben-Day dots and geometric shapes and lines, he rendered incongruous, challenging images out of familiar architectural structures, patterns borrowed from Art D\u00e9co and other subtly evocative, often sequential, motifs. The \"Modern Sculpture\" series of 1967\u20138 made reference to motifs from Art D\u00e9co architecture.\nLater work.\nIn the early 1960s, Lichtenstein reproduced masterpieces by C\u00e9zanne, Mondrian and Picasso before embarking on the \"Brushstrokes\" series in 1965. He continued to revisit this theme later in his career with works such as \"Bedroom at Arles\" that derived from Vincent van Gogh's \"Bedroom in Arles\".\nIn 1970, Lichtenstein was commissioned by the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (within its Art and Technology program developed between 1967 and 1971) to make a film. With the help of Universal Film Studios, the artist conceived of, and produced, \"Three Landscapes\", a film of marine landscapes, directly related to a series of collages with landscape themes he created between 1964 and 1966. Although Lichtenstein had planned to produce 15 short films, the three-screen installation\u00a0\u2013 made with New York-based independent filmmaker Joel Freedman\u00a0\u2013 turned out to be the artist's only venture into the medium.\nAlso in 1970, Lichtenstein purchased a former carriage house in Southampton, Long Island, built a studio on the property, and spent the rest of the 1970s in relative seclusion. In the 1970s and 1980s, his style began to loosen and he expanded on what he had done before. Lichtenstein began a series of \"Mirrors\" paintings in 1969. By 1970, while continuing on the \"Mirrors\" series, he started work on the subject of entablatures. The \"Entablatures\" consisted of a first series of paintings from 1971 to 1972, followed by a second series in 1974\u201376, and the publication of a series of relief prints in 1976. Lichtenstein produced a series of \"Artists Studios\" which incorporated elements of his previous work. A notable example being \"Artist's Studio, Look Mickey\" (1973, Walker Art Center, Minneapolis) which incorporates five other previous works, fitted into the scene.\nDuring a trip to Los Angeles in 1978, Lichtenstein was fascinated by lawyer Robert Rifkind's collection of German Expressionist prints and illustrated books. He began to produce works that borrowed stylistic elements found in Expressionist paintings. \"The White Tree\" (1980) evokes lyric Der Blaue Reiter landscapes, while \"Dr. Waldmann\" (1980) recalls Otto Dix's \"Dr. Mayer-Hermann\" (1926). Small colored-pencil drawings were used as templates for woodcuts, a medium favored by Emil Nolde and Max Pechstein, as well as Dix and Ernst Ludwig Kirchner. Also in the late 1970s, Lichtenstein's style was replaced with more surreal works such as \"Pow Wow\" (1979, Ludwig Forum f\u00fcr Internationale Kunst, Aachen). A major series of Surrealist-Pop paintings from 1979 to 1981 is based on Native American themes. These works range from \"Amerind Figure\" (1981), a stylized life-size sculpture reminiscent of a streamlined totem pole in black-patinated bronze, to the monumental wool tapestry \"Amerind Landscape\" (1979). The \"Indian\" works took their themes, like the other parts of the Surrealist series, from contemporary art and other sources, including books on American Indian design from Lichtenstein's small library.\nLichtenstein's \"Still Life\" paintings, sculptures and drawings, which span from 1972 through the early 1980s, cover a variety of motifs and themes, including the most traditional such as fruit, flowers, and vases. In 1983 Lichtenstein made two anti-apartheid posters, simply titled \"Against Apartheid\". In his \"Reflection\" series, produced between 1988 and 1990, Lichtenstein reused his own motifs from previous works. \"Interiors\" (1991\u20131992) is a series of works depicting banal domestic environments inspired by furniture ads the artist found in telephone books or on billboards. Having garnered inspiration from the monochromatic prints of Edgar Degas featured in a 1994 exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, the motifs of his \"Landscapes in the Chinese Style\" series are formed with simulated Ben-Day dots and block contours, rendered in hard, vivid color, with all traces of the hand removed. The nude is a recurring element in Lichtenstein's work of the 1990s, such as in \"Collage for Nude with Red Shirt\" (1995).\nIn addition to paintings and sculptures, Lichtenstein also made over 300 prints, mostly in screenprinting.\nCommissions.\nIn 1969, Lichtenstein was commissioned by Gunter Sachs to create \"Composition\" and \"Leda and the Swan\", for the collector's Pop Art bedroom suite at the Palace Hotel in St. Moritz. In the late 1970s and during the 1980s, Lichtenstein received major commissions for works in public places: the sculptures \"Lamp\" (1978) in St. Mary's, Georgia; \"Mermaid\" (1979) in Miami Beach; the 26 feet tall \"Brushstrokes in Flight\" (1984, moved in 1998) at John Glenn Columbus International Airport; the five-storey high \"Mural with Blue Brushstroke\" (1984\u201385) at the Equitable Center, New York; and \"El Cap de Barcelona\" (1992) in Barcelona. In 1994, Lichtenstein created the 53-foot-long, enamel-on-metal \"Times Square Mural\" in Times Square subway station. In 1977, he was commissioned by BMW to paint a Group 5 Racing Version of the BMW 320i for the third installment in the BMW Art Car Project. The DreamWorks Records logo was his last completed project. \"I'm not in the business of doing anything like that (a corporate logo) and don't intend to do it again,\" allows Lichtenstein. \"But I know Mo Ostin and David Geffen and it seemed interesting.\"\nRecognition.\nLichtenstein received numerous Honorary Doctorate degrees from, among others, the George Washington University (1996), Bard College, Royal College of Art (1993), Ohio State University (1987), Southampton College (1980), and the California Institute of the Arts (1977). He also served on the board of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.\nIn 2023, five of Lichtenstein's paintings will be featured on USPS Forever stamps: \"Standing Explosion (Red)\", \"Modern Painting I\", \"Still Life with Crystal Bowl\", \"Still Life with Goldfish\", and \"Portrait of a Woman\". Derry Noyes served as the stamp series' art director and designer.\nPersonal life, illness and death.\nIn 1949, Lichtenstein married Isabel Wilson, who previously had been married to Ohio artist Michael Sarisky. However, the brutal upstate winters took a toll on Lichtenstein and his wife, after he began teaching at the State University of New York at Oswego in 1958. The couple sold the family home in Highland Park, New Jersey, in 1963 and divorced in 1965.\nLichtenstein married his second wife, Dorothy Herzka (1939\u20132024), in 1968. In the late 1960s, they rented a house in Southampton, New York that Larry Rivers had bought around the corner from his own house. Three years later, they bought a 1910 carriage house facing the ocean on Gin Lane. From 1970 until his death, Lichtenstein split his time between Manhattan and Southampton. He also had a home on Captiva Island.\nIn 1991, Lichtenstein began an affair with singer Erica Wexler who became the muse for his Nudes series including the 1994 \"Nudes with Beach Ball\". She was 22 and he was 68. The affair lasted until 1994 and was over when Wexler went to England with future husband Andy Partridge of XTC. According to Wexler, Lichtenstein and his wife Dorothy had an understanding and they both had significant others in addition to their marriage.\nOn September 29, 1997, Lichtenstein died at the age of 73, of pneumonia at New York University Medical Center, where he had been hospitalized for several weeks.\nRelevance.\nPop art continues to influence the 21st century. \"Pop Art from the Collection\" features a wide range selection of screenprints by Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein, as well as an assortment of Warhol's Polaroid photographs known as the leading figures of the Pop Art movement of the 1960s and 1970s. Warhol and Lichtenstein are celebrated for exploring the relationship between fine art, advertising, and consumerism. Lichtenstein and Andy Warhol were both used in U2's 1997, 1998 PopMart Tour and in an exhibition in 2007 at the British National Portrait Gallery.\nAmong many other works of art lost in the World Trade Center attacks on September 11, 2001, a painting from Lichtenstein's \"The Entablature Series\" was destroyed in the subsequent fire.\nExhibitions.\nIn 1964, Lichtenstein became the first American to exhibit at the Tate Gallery, London, on the occasion of the show \"'54\u2013'64: Painting and Sculpture of a Decade.\" In 1967, his first museum retrospective exhibition was held at the Pasadena Art Museum in California. The same year, his first solo exhibition in Europe was held at museums in Amsterdam, London, Bern and Hannover. Lichtenstein later participated in documentas IV (1968) and VI in (1977). \nLichtenstein had his first retrospective at the Guggenheim Museum in 1969, organized by Diane Waldman. The Guggenheim presented a second Lichtenstein retrospective in 1994. Lichtenstein became the first living artist to have a solo drawing exhibitions at the Museum of Modern Art from March \u2013 June 1987. In 2003, the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibited \"Roy Lichtenstein on the Roof\", six bronze and aluminum sculptures on its roof.\nMore recent retrospective surveys include the 2003 \"All About Art\", Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, in Denmark (which traveled on to the Hayward Gallery, London, Museo Reina Sofia, Madrid, and the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, until 2005); and \"Classic of the New\", Kunsthaus Bregenz (2005), \"Roy Lichtenstein: Meditations on Art\" Museo Triennale, Milan (2010, traveled to the Museum Ludwig, Cologne). \nIn late 2010 The Morgan Library &amp; Museum showed \"Roy Lichtenstein: The Black-and-White Drawings, 1961\u20131968\". Another major retrospective opened at the Art Institute of Chicago in May 2012 before going to the National Gallery of Art in Washington, Tate Modern in London, and the Centre Pompidou in Paris in 2013. Other exhibits include \"Roy Lichtenstein\", Olyvia Fine Art, London in 2013, \"Roy Lichtenstein: Intimate Sculptures\", The FLAG Art Foundation and \"Roy Lichtenstein: Opera Prima\", Civic Gallery of Modern and Contemporary Arts, Turin, both in 2014. From October 7, 2016 through March 12, 2017, the Skirball Cultural Center in Los Angeles had on view \"Pop for the People: Roy Lichtenstein in L.A.\" 2018: Exhibition at The Tate Liverpool, Merseyside, United Kingdom.\nCollections.\nIn 1996 the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. became the largest single repository of the artist's work when Lichtenstein donated 154 prints and two books. The Art Institute of Chicago has several important works by Lichtenstein in its permanent collection, including \"Brushstroke with Spatter\" (1966) and \"Mirror No. 3 (Six Panels)\" (1971). The personal holdings of Lichtenstein's widow, Dorothy Lichtenstein, and of the Roy Lichtenstein Foundation number in the hundreds. In Europe, the Museum Ludwig in Cologne has one of the most comprehensive Lichtenstein holdings with \"Takka Takka\" (1962), \"Nurse\" (1964), \"Compositions I\" (1964), besides the Frankfurt Museum f\u00fcr Moderne Kunst with \"We rose up slowly\" (1964) and \"Yellow and Green Brushstrokes\" (1966). Outside the United States and Europe, the National Gallery of Australia's Kenneth Tyler Collection has extensive holdings of Lichtenstein's prints, numbering over 300 works. In total there are some 4,500 works thought to be in circulation.\nRoy Lichtenstein Foundation.\nAfter the artist's death in 1997, the Roy Lichtenstein Foundation was established in 1999. In 2011, the foundation's board decided the benefits of authenticating were outweighed by the risks of protracted lawsuits.\nIn late 2006, the foundation sent out a holiday card featuring a picture of \"Electric Cord\" (1961), a painting that had been missing since 1970 after being sent out to art restorer Daniel Goldreyer by the Leo Castelli Gallery. The card urged the public to report any information about its whereabouts. In 2012, the foundation authenticated the piece when it surfaced at a New York City warehouse.\nBetween 2008 and 2012, following the death of photographer Harry Shunk in 2006, the Lichtenstein Foundation acquired the collection of photographic material shot by Shunk and his collaborator J\u00e1nos Kender as well as the photographers' copyright. In 2013, the foundation donated the Shunk-Kender trove to five institutions \u2013 Getty Research Institute in Los Angeles; the Museum of Modern Art in New York; the National Gallery of Art in Washington; the Centre Pompidou in Paris; and the Tate in London \u2013 that will allow each museum access to the others' share.\nArt market.\nSince the 1950s Lichtenstein's work has been exhibited in New York and elsewhere with Leo Castelli at his gallery and at Castelli Graphics as well as with Ileana Sonnabend in her gallery in Paris, and at the Ferus Gallery, Pace Gallery, Gagosian Gallery, Mitchell-Innes &amp; Nash, Mary Boone, Brooke Alexander Gallery, Carlebach, Rosa Esman, Marilyn Pearl, James Goodman, John Heller, Blum Helman, Hirschl &amp; Adler, Phyllis Kind, Getler Pall, Condon Riley, 65 Thompson Street, Holly Solomon, and Sperone Westwater Galleries among others. Leo Castelli Gallery represented Lichtenstein exclusively since 1962, when a solo show by the artist sold out before it opened.\nBeginning in 1962, the Leo Castelli Gallery, New York, held regular exhibitions of the artist's work. Gagosian Gallery has been exhibiting work by Lichtenstein since 1996.\n\"Big Painting No. 6\" (1965) became the highest priced Lichtenstein work in 1970. Like the entire Brushstrokes series, the subject of the painting is the process of Abstract Expressionist painting via sweeping brushstrokes and drips, but the result of Lichtenstein's simplification that uses a Ben-Day dots background is a representation of the mechanical/industrial color printing reproduction.\nLichtenstein's painting \"Torpedo ... Los!\" (1963) sold at Christie's for $5.5\u00a0million in 1989, a record sum at the time, making him one of only three living artists to have attracted such huge sums. In 2005, \"In the Car\" was sold for a then record $16.2m (\u00a310m).\nIn 2010, Lichtenstein's cartoon-style 1964 painting \"Ohhh...Alright...\", previously owned by Steve Martin and later by Steve Wynn, was sold at a record US$42.6m (\u00a326.7m) at a sale at Christie's in New York.\nBased on a 1961 William Overgard drawing for a \"Steve Roper\" cartoon story, Lichtenstein's \"I Can See the Whole Room...and There's Nobody in It!\" (1961) depicts a man looking through a hole in a door. It was sold by collector Courtney Sale Ross for $43\u00a0million, double its estimate, at Christie's in New York City in 2011; the seller's husband, Steve Ross had acquired it at auction in 1988 for $2.1\u00a0million. The painting measures four-foot by four-foot and is in graphite and oil.\nThe comic painting \"Sleeping Girl\" (1964) from the collection of Beatrice and Phillip Gersh established a new Lichtenstein record $44.8\u00a0million at Sotheby's in 2012.\nIn October 2012, Lichtenstein's painting \"Electric Cord\" (1962) was returned to Leo Castelli's widow Barbara Bertozzi Castelli, after having been missing for 42 years. Castelli had sent the painting to an art restorer for cleaning in January 1970, and never got it back. He died in 1999. In 2006, the Roy Lichtenstein Foundation published an image of the painting on its holiday greeting card and asked the art community to help find it. The painting was found in a New York warehouse, after having been displayed in Bogota, Colombia.\nIn 2013, the painting \"Woman with Flowered Hat\" set another record at $56.1\u00a0million as it was purchased by British jeweller Laurence Graff from American investor Ronald O. Perelman.\nThis was topped in 2015 by the sale of \"Nurse\" for 95.4\u00a0million dollars at a Christie's auction.\nIn a 2016 episode of the \"Antiques Roadshow\", a 1966 Lichtenstein screenprint was valued at $20,000.\nIn January 2017, \"Masterpiece\" was sold for $165\u00a0million. The proceeds of this sale will be used to create a fund for criminal justice reform.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60144", "revid": "1319280338", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60144", "title": "Wireless community network", "text": "Collaborative computer networks\nWireless community networks or wireless community projects or simply community networks, are decentralized, self-managed and collaborative computer networks organized in a grassroots fashion by communities, non-governmental organizations and cooperatives in order to provide a viable alternative to municipal wireless networks for consumers.\nMany of these organizations set up wireless mesh networks which rely primarily on sharing of unmetered residential and business DSL and cable Internet. This sort of usage might be non-compliant with the terms of service of local internet service provider (ISPs) that deliver their service via the consumer phone and cable duopoly. Wireless community networks sometimes advocate complete freedom from censorship, and this position may be at odds with the acceptable use policies of some commercial services used. Some ISPs do allow sharing or reselling of bandwidth.\nThe First Latin American Summit of Community Networks, held in Argentina in 2018, presented the following definition for the term \"community network\": \"Community networks are networks collectively owned and managed by the community for non-profit and community purposes. They are constituted by collectives, indigenous communities or non-profit civil society organizations that exercise their right to communicate, under the principles of democratic participation of their members, fairness, gender equality, diversity and plurality\".\nAccording to the Declaration on Community Connectivity, elaborated through a multistakeholder process organized by the Internet Governance Forum's Dynamic Coalition on Community Connectivity, community networks are recognised by a list of characteristics: Collective ownership; Social management; Open design; Open participation; Promotion of peering and transit; Promotion of the consideration of security and privacy concerns while designing and operating the network; and promotion of the development and circulation of local content in local languages.\nHistory.\nWireless community networks started as projects that evolved from amateur radio using packet radio, and from the free software community which substantially overlapped with the amateur radio community. Wireless neighborhood networks were established by technology enthusiasts in the early 2000s. The Redbricks Intranet Collective (RIC) started 1999 in Manchester, UK, to allow about 30 flats in the Bentley House Estate to share the subscription cost of one leased line from British Telecom (BT). Wi-Fi was quickly adopted by technology enthusiasts and hobbyists, because it was an open standard and consumer Wi-Fi hardware was comparatively cheap.\nWireless community networks started out by turning wireless access points designed for short-range use in homes into multi-kilometre long-range Wi-Fi by building high-gain directional antennas. Rather than buying commercially available units, some of the early groups advocated home-built antennas. Examples include the cantenna and RONJA, an optical link that can be made from a smoke flue and LEDs. The circuitry and instructions for such DIY networking antennas were released under the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL). Municipal wireless networks, funded by local governments, started being deployed from 2003 onward.\nRegarding the international policy scenario, discussions on Community Networks have gained prominence over the last few years, especially since the creation of the Internet Governance Forum's https:// in 2016, providing \"a much needed platform through which various individuals and entities interested in the advancement of CNs have the possibility to associate, organise and develop, in a bottom-up participatory fashion collective 'principles, rules, decision-making procedures and shared programs that give shape to the evolution and use of the Internet.'\".\nEarly community projects.\nBy 2003, a number of wireless community projects had established themselves in urban areas across North America, Europe and Australia. In June 2000, Melbourne Wireless Inc. was established in Melbourne Australia as a not-for-profit project to establish a metropolitan area wireless network using off-the-shelf 802.11 wireless equipment. By 2003, it had 1,200 hotspots. In 2000 Seattle Wireless was founded with the stated aim of providing free WiFi access and share the cost of Internet connectivity in Seattle, USA. By April 2011, it had 80 free wireless access points all over Seattle and was steadily growing.\nIn August 2000, Consume was founded in London England as \"collaborative strategy for the self provisioning of a broadband telecommunications infrastructure\". Founded by Ben Laurie and others, Consume aimed to build a wireless infrastructure as alternative to the monopoly-held wired metropolitan area network. Besides providing Wi-Fi access in East London, Consume installed a large antenna on the roof of the former Greenwich Town Hall and documented the states of wireless connections in London. Consume created political pressure on municipal authorities, by staging public events, exhibitions, encouraging consumers to set up wireless equipment and setting up temporary Wi-Fi hotspots at events in East London. While Consume generated sustained media attention, it did not establish a lasting wireless community network.\nThe Wireless Leiden hobbyist project was established in September 2001 and constituted as non-profit foundation in 2003 with more than 300 active users. The Wireless Leiden foundation aimed to facilitate the cooperation of local government, businesses and residents to provide wireless networking in Leiden Netherlands. The first wireless community network in Spain was RedLibre, founded in September 2001 in Madrid. By 2002 RedLibre coordinated the efforts of 15 local wireless groups and maintained free RedLibre Wi-Fi hotspots in five cities. RedLibre has been credited for facilitating the widespread availability of WLAN in the urban areas of Spain.\nIn Italy, Ninux.org was founded by students and hackers in 2001 to create a grassroots wireless network in Rome, similar to Seattle Wireless. A turning point for Ninux was the lowering of prices in 2008 for consumer wireless equipment, such as antennas and routers. Ninux volunteers installed an increasing number of antennas on the roofs of Rome. The network served as example for other urban community wireless networks in Italy. By 2016, similar wireless networks had been installed in Florence, Bolongna, Pisa and Cosenza. While they share common technical and organizational frameworks, the working groups supporting these urban wireless community networks are driven by the different needs of the city in which they operate.\nHouston Wireless was founded in summer 2001 as the Houston Wireless Users Group. The telecommunications providers were slow to roll out third-generation wireless (3G), so Houston Wireless was established to promote high-speed wireless access across Houston and its suburbs. Houston Wireless experimented with network protocols such as IPsec, mobile IP and IPv6, as well as wireless technologies, including 802.11a, 802.11g and ultra-wideband (UWB). By 2003, it had 30 WLAN hotspots, 100 people on their mailing lists and their monthly meetings were attended by about 25 people.\nNYCwireless was established in New York City in May 2001 to provide public hotspots and promote the use of consumer owned unlicensed low-cost wireless networking equipment. In order to get more public Wi-Fi hotspots installed, NYCwirelsss contracted with the for-profit company Cloud Networks, which was staffed by some of the founding members of the NYCwireless community project. In the aftermath of the September 11 attacks in 2001 NYCwirelsss helped to provide emergency communication by quickly assembling and deploying free Wi-Fi hotspots in areas of New York City that had no other telecommunications. In summer 2002, the Bryant Park wireless network became the flagship project of NYCwireless, with about 50 users every day. By 2003 NYCwireless had more than 100 active hotspots throughout New York City.\nEarly project in rural areas.\nIn 2000, guifi.net was founded because commercial internet service providers did not build a broadband Internet infrastructure in rural Catalonia. Guifi.net was conceived as a wireless mesh network, where households can become a node in the network by operating a radio transmitter. Not every node needs to be a wireless router, but the network relies on some volunteers being connected to the Internet and sharing that access with others. In 2017 guifi.net had 23,000 nodes and was described as the biggest mesh network in the world.\nIn 2001, BCWireless founded to help communities in British Columbia, Canada, set up local Wi-Fi networks. BCWireless hobbyists experimented with IEEE 802.11b wireless networks and antennas to extend the range and power of signal, allow bandwidth sharing among local group members and establish wireless mesh networks. The Lac Seul First Nation communities set up their Wi-Fi network and constituted the non-profit K-Net to manage a wireless network based on IEEE 802.11g to provide the entire reserve with Wi-Fi using the unlicensed spectrum in combination with licensed spectrum at 3.5\u00a0GHz.\nCo-operation between community networks.\nFor the most, early wireless community projects had a local scope, but many still had a global awareness. In 2003, wireless community networks initiated the \"http://\" (PPA) and the \"https://\". The two initiatives defined attempts to build an infrastructure, so that local wireless mesh networks could become extensive wireless ad hoc networks across local and national boundaries. In 2004, Freifunk released the OpenWrt-based firmware FFF for Wi-Fi devices that participate in a community network, which included a PPA, so that the owner of the node agrees to provide free transit across the network.\nTechnical approach.\nThere are at least three technical approaches to building a wireless community network:\nFirmware.\nWireless equipment, like many other consumer electronics, comes with hard-to-alter firmware that is preinstalled by the manufacturer. When the Linksys WRT54G series was launched in 2003 with an open source Linux kernel as firmware, it immediately became the subject of hacks and became the most popular hardware among community wireless volunteers. In 2005, Linksys released the WRT54GL version of its firmware, to make it even easier for customers to modify it. Community network hackers experimented with increasing the transmission power of the Linksys WRT54G or increasing the clock speed of the CPU to speed up data transmission.&lt;ref name=\"Adrian Mackenzie 2010 https://archive.org/details/wirelessnessradi00mack_048/page/n113 110\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nHobbyists got another boost when in 2004 the OpenWrt firmware was released as open source alternative to proprietary firmware. The Linux-based embedded operating system could be used on embedded devices to route network traffic. Through successive versions, OpenWrt eventually could work on several hundred types of wireless devices and Wi-Fi routers. OpenWrt was named in honor of the WRT54G. The OpenWrt developers provided extensive documentation and the ability to include one's own code in the OpenWrt source code and compile the firmware.\nIn 2004, Freifunk released the FFF firmware for wireless community projects, which modified OpenWrt so that the node could be configured via a web interface and added features to better support a wireless ad hoc network with traffic shaping, statistics, Internet gateway support and an implementation of the Optimized Link State Routing Protocol (OLSR). A Wi-Fi access point that booting the FFF firmware joined the network by automatically announcing its Internet gateway capabilities to other nodes using OLSR HNA4. When a node disappeared, the other nodes registered the change in the network topology through the discontinuation of HNA4 announcements. At the time, Freifunk in Berlin had 500 Wi-Fi access points and about 2,200 Berlin residents used the network free of charge. The Freifunk FFF firmware is among the oldest approaches to establishing a wireless mesh network at significant scale. Other early attempts at developing an operating system for wireless devices that supported large scale wireless community projects were Open-Mesh and Netsukuku.\nIn 2006, Meraki Networks Inc was founded. The Meraki hardware and firmware had been developed as part of a PhD research project at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to provide wireless access to graduate students. For years, the low-cost Meraki products fueled the growth of wireless mesh networks in 25 countries. Early Meraki-based wireless community networks included the Free-the-Net Meraki mesh in Vancouver, Canada. Constituted in 2006 as legal co-operative, members of the Vancouver Open Network Initiatives Cooperative paid five Canadian dollars per month to access the community wireless network provided by individuals who attached Meraki nodes to their home wireless connection, sharing bandwidth with any cooperative members nearby and participating in a meshed wireless network.\nCommunity network software.\nBy 2003, the Sidney Wireless community project had launched the NodeDB software, to facilitate the work of community networks by mapping the nodes participating in a wireless mesh network. Nodes needed to be registered in the database, but the software generated a list of adjacent nodes. When registering a node that participated in a community network, the maintainer of the node could leave a note on the hardware, antenna reach and firmware in operation and so find other network community members who were willing to participate in a mesh.\nOrganization.\nOrganizationally, a wireless community network requires either a set of affordable commercial technical solutions or a critical mass of hobbyists willing to tinker to maintain operations. Mesh networks require that a high level of community participation and commitment be maintained for the network to be viable. The mesh approach currently requires uniform equipment. One market-driven aspect of the mesh approach is that users who receive a weak mesh signal can often convert it to a strong signal by obtaining and operating a repeater node, thus extending the network. \nSuch volunteer organizations focusing on technology that is rapidly advancing sometimes have schisms and mergers. The Wi-Fi service provided by such groups is usually free and without the stigma of piggybacking. An alternative to the voluntary model is to use a co-operative structure.\nBusiness models.\nWireless community projects made volunteer bandwidth-sharing technically feasible and have been credited with contributing to the emergence of alternative business models in the consumer Wi-Fi market. The commercial Wi-Fi provider Fon was established in 2006 in Spain. Fon customers were equipped with a Linksys Wi-Fi access point that runs a modified OpenWrt firmware so that Fon customers shared Wi-Fi access among each other. Public Wi-Fi provisioning through FON customers was broadened when FON entered a 50% revenue-sharing agreement with customers who made their entire unused bandwidth available for resale. In 2009, this business model gained broader acceptance when British Telecom allowed its own home customers to sell unused bandwidth to BT and FON roamers.\nWireless community projects for the most provide best-effort Wi-Fi coverage. However, since the mid-2000s local authorities started to contract with wireless community networks to provide municipal wireless networks or stable Wi-Fi access in a defined urban area, such as a park. Wireless community networks started to participate in a variety of public-private partnerships. The non-profit community network ZAP Sherbrooke has partnered with public and private entities to provide Wi-Fi access and received financial support from the University of Sherbrooke and Bishop's University to extend the coverage of its wireless mesh throughout the city of Sherbrooke, Canada.\nRegulation.\nCertain countries regulate the selling of internet access, requiring a license to sell internet access over a wireless network. In South Africa it is regulated by the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA). They require that WISP's apply for a VANS or ECNS/ECS license before being allowed to resell internet access over a wireless link. The Internet Society's publication \"Community Networks in Latin America: Challenges, Regulations and Solutions\" brings a summary of regulations regarding Community Networks among Latin American countries, the United States and Canada.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60145", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60145", "title": "The Rolling Stones (novel)", "text": "1952 science fiction novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nThe Rolling Stones (also published under the name Space Family Stone in the United Kingdom) is a 1952 science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein.\nA condensed version of the novel had been published earlier in \"Boys' Life\" (September, October, November, December 1952) under the title \"Tramp Space Ship\". It was published in hardcover that year by Scribner's as part of the Heinlein juveniles.\nPlot summary.\nThe Stones, a family of \"Loonies\" (residents of the Moon), purchase and restore a used spaceship and go sightseeing around the Solar System.\nThe twin teenage boys, named Castor and Pollux after the half-brothers of classical legend, buy used bicycles to sell on Mars, their first stop, where they run afoul of local regulations, but their grandmother Hazel Stone saves them from jail. While on Mars, the twins buy their brother Buster a native Martian creature called a flat cat, which produces a soothing vibration, as a pet.\nInstead of returning home as originally planned, they decide to travel to the asteroid belt, where the equivalent of a gold rush is in progress, prospecting for \"core material\" and radioactive ores. The twins obtain supplies and luxury goods on Mars to sell at their destination, on the principle that it is shopkeepers, not miners, who get rich during gold rushes. \"En route\", the rapidly maturing, fertile (and pregnant) flat cat and its offspring quickly cause a population explosion aboard, so the family places them in hibernation and later sells them to the miners.\nAfter an adventure or two, the family sets out to see the rings of Saturn.\nFlat cat.\nIn the novel, flat cats are a species of Martian animal which reproduce rapidly and overrun a spaceship. In the chapter \"Free Enterprise\", the character Mr. Angelo, a shopkeeper on Mars, introduces Castor and Pollux Stone to a flat cat:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Angelo tickled it with a forefinger; it began to purr like a high-pitched buzzer. It had no discernible features, being merely a pie-shaped mass of sleek red fur a little darker than Castor's own hair. \"They're affectionate little things and many of the sand rats keep them for pets - a man has to have someone to talk to when he's out prospecting and a flat cat is better than a wife because it can't talk back. It just purrs and snuggles up to you.\"\nThe boys take the flat cat onto the family space ship, where it soon has eight \"kittens\", each of which soon gives birth again, until the ship is overwhelmed with flat cats. The family solves the problem by rounding up the flat cats and putting them into the storage hold at low temperature, where they hibernate. They are later revived and sold to miners in the asteroid belt.\nResearch.\nAs with his other novels, Heinlein and his wife Virginia \"spent countless hours in research, fiercely dedicated to \"getting it right\" for their readers.\"\nInfluences.\nHeinlein credited the 1905 Ellis Parker Butler short story \"Pigs Is Pigs\" with inspiring the flat cat incident.\nFlat cats v. tribbles.\nA similar concept and plotline appeared later in the \"Star Trek\" episode \"The Trouble with Tribbles\". According to screenwriter David Gerrold, the show's producers noticed similarities in the two stories and asked Heinlein for permission to use the idea. Heinlein asked for an autographed copy of the script, but otherwise did not object, noting that both stories owed something to the 1905 Ellis Parker Butler story \"Pigs Is Pigs\" -- \"and possibly to Noah\".\nThe similarities to the flat cats and some specific story events involving them was brought to the attention of the Star Trek staff when Desilu/Paramount's primary in-house clearance group, Kellam de Forest Research, submitted a report on the script on August 11, 1967, noting the similarities of \"a small, featureless, fluffy, purring animal, friendly and loving, that reproduces rapidly when fed, and nearly engulfs a spaceship\". So worrisome was this matter that the producers contacted Heinlein and asked for a waiver, which Heinlein granted. In his authorized biography, Heinlein said he was called by producer Gene Coon about the issue and agreed to waive claim to the \"similarity\" to his flat cats because he\u2019d just been through one plagiarism lawsuit and did not wish to embroil himself in another. He had misgivings upon seeing the actual script but let it go, an action he later regretted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If that matter had simply been dropped after that one episode was filmed, I would have chalked it up wryly to experience. But the 'nice kid' did not drop it; 'tribbles' (i.e. my 'flat cats') have been exploited endlessly\u2026 Well that\u2019s one that did 'larn me.' Today if J. Christ phoned me on some matter of business, I would simply tell him: 'See my agent.'\nHeinlein freely acknowledged that he took some inspiration from the Butler story, but was careful not to plagiarize him, and the similarities are primarily that the creatures reproduce rapidly and overrun a place. Conversely, the tribbles copy not only the flat cats' general appearance, behavior, the effects of their purring on people, and the particulars of their reproduction when fed and unfed\u2014but that they are obtained from a merchant who does not warn customers of their dangers, and ultimately unloaded from the ship onto another unsuspecting party.\nThe screenwriter of the episode, David Gerrold, admits that he had read the Heinlein book years before writing his screenplay but claims he was not consciously aware of the similarities until the Kellam de Forest report. According to him, Heinlein asked only for an autographed copy of the script and, in a note to Gerrold, \"Let me add that I felt that the analogy to my flat cats was mild enough to be of no importance\".\nConnections to other Heinlein works.\nIn Chapter XIII (\"Caveat Vendor\"), Hazel Stone tells the judge, \"I am a stranger here in a strange land\" (paraphrasing ). Heinlein later used the same Biblical quote as the title of his Hugo-award winning novel of 1961.\nThe book makes several references to Hazel as an influential figure in founding the Lunar colony. Fourteen years later, Heinlein published \"The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress\", which tells the story of the Lunar revolution, including a small but vital role that Hazel Stone played as a child (no specifics of this role are mentioned in \"The Rolling Stones\"; she is portrayed here simply as a \"founding Father\"). Hazel, Castor, and Pollux reappear in \"Number of the Beast\" and \"The Cat Who Walks Through Walls\". Hazel, alone, appears in \"To Sail Beyond the Sunset\".\nDr. Lowell Stone (\"Buster\") is quoted in a chapter heading in \"The Cat Who Walks Through Walls\" and referenced as Chief Surgeon at Ceres General. In that same book, Hazel states that Roger and Edith are now living in the extrasolar colony known as Fiddler's Green (itself first named in \"Friday\").\nThe general description of the Martian met by Lowell is similar to the description of the Martians depicted in \"Red Planet\" and later in \"Stranger in a Strange Land\".\nReception.\nJo Walton writes that as a teenager, she considered the book one of the weakest of the Heinlein juveniles; upon rereading it as an adult, it \"leaves me feeling I can't get no satisfaction.\" Both Walton and James Nicoll criticize the book's sexual politics, with Nicoll specifically stating that \"(t)he [book's] sexual politics are tragic.\" Heinlein himself wrote, in a letter to his agent after he had finished the first quarter of the book, that it had \"an unsatisfactory story line thereafter,\" and that he found a \"domestic comedy\" \"harder to write\" than \"revolutions and blood.\"\nGroff Conklin described the novel as \"a thoroughly delightful job\". Boucher and McComas praised it as \"easily the most plausible, carefully detailed picture of an interplanetary future we will encounter in any year\". P. Schuyler Miller cited the novel's \"freshness and simplicity,\" characterizing it as \"a life-size portrait-gallery of real people living in a real world of the future, every detail of which fits into place with top-tolerance precision\".\nSurveying Heinlein's juvenile novels, Jack Williamson characterized Heinlein's story as \"a dream of personal freedom\" written with \"an enviable craftsmanship\", noted that the novel \"carries its thematic burden tightly\", unlike Heinlein's later adult novels, and praised \"The Rolling Stones\" for its \"sense of an accurately extrapolated future background, with all of the new technologies given an air of commonplace reality\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60146", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60146", "title": "The Door into Summer", "text": "1956 SF novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nThe Door into Summer is a science fiction novel by American science fiction writer Robert A. Heinlein, originally serialized in \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\" (October, November, December 1956, with covers and interior illustrations by Kelly Freas). It was published in hardcover in 1957.\nConception.\nThe idea for the novel came from an incident outlined by Heinlein later:\nPlot.\nThe novel opens in 1970 with Daniel Boone Davis, an engineer and inventor, well into a long drinking binge. He has lost his company, Hired Girl, Inc., to his partner Miles Gentry and the company bookkeeper, Belle Darkin. Darkin had been Dan's fianc\u00e9e, deceiving him into giving her enough voting stock to allow her and Miles to seize control. Dan's only friend in the world is his cat, \"Pete\" (short for Petronius the Arbiter), a feisty tomcat who hates going outdoors in the snow.\nHired Girl, Inc. manufactures robot vacuum cleaners, but Dan had been developing a new line of all-purpose household robots, Flexible Frank, when Miles announces his intention to sell the company (and Flexible Frank) to Mannix Enterprises in which Miles would become a vice president. Wishing to stay independent, Dan opposes the takeover, but is outvoted and then fired as Chief Engineer. Left with a large financial settlement, and his remaining Hired Girl stock, he elects to take \"cold sleep\" (suspended animation), hoping to wake up thirty years later to a brighter future. The examining doctor at the cold sleep facility immediately sees that Dan has been drinking. He warns him to show up sober or not at all 24 hours later for the actual procedure.\nAfter becoming sober, Dan decides instead to mount a counter-attack. First he mails his Hired Girl stock certificate to the one person he trusts, Miles' stepdaughter Frederica \"Ricky\" Virginia Gentry. Dan confronts Miles and finds Belle in Miles' home. Belle injects him with an illegal \"zombie\" drug, reducing him to somnolent compliance. Belle and Miles discover Dan's plans to go into cold sleep and have him committed, but to a different repository run by one of Belle's shady associates for the Mannix corporation.\nDan wakes up in the year 2000 with no money to his name and no idea how to find the people he once knew. What little money Belle let him keep went with the collapse of Mannix in 1987. He has lost Pete the cat, who fled Miles' house after Dan was drugged, and has no idea how to find a now middle-aged Ricky.\nDan begins rebuilding his life. He persuades Geary Manufacturing, which now owns Hired Girl, to take him on as a figurehead. He discovers that Miles died in 1972, while Belle has become a shrill and gin-sodden wreck. All she recalls is that Ricky went to live with her grandmother about the time Dan went into cold sleep. Her scheme with Miles collapsed, as the Flexible Frank prototype disappeared the same night she tricked Dan.\nDan finds Flexible Frank in use everywhere, filling many menial jobs once filled by people. It is called \"Eager Beaver\", made by a company called \"Aladdin Auto-engineering.\" Dan can see that someone has taken his prototype and developed it. He is even more baffled to find that the patent is credited to a \"D.B. Davis\".\nHis friend Chuck at Geary lets slip that he once saw time travel working, in a lab in Colorado. At that point Dan finds that Ricky has been awakened from cold sleep and left Los Angeles for Brawley, California. Dan tracks her to Yuma, Arizona, where she was apparently married. When Dan looks at the marriage register, he finds that she married \"Daniel Boone Davis\". He immediately empties his bank account and heads for Colorado.\nIn Boulder, he befriends Dr. Twitchell, a once-brilliant scientist reduced to drinking away his frustrations. Eventually, Twitchell admits to having created a time machine of sorts. With the machine powered up, Dan goads Twitchell into sending him back to 1970, some months before his confrontation with Miles and Belle. He materializes in a Denver naturist retreat in front of a couple, John and Jenny Sutton, whom he befriends. The husband, a lawyer by trade, helps Dan cash in the gold he has brought back with him. In the future gold is no longer a coinage metal and costs a fraction of its value in 1970.\nWorking rapidly, Dan creates \"Drafting Dan\", an automated drafting machine, which he then uses to design \"Protean Pete\", the first version of Eager Beaver. He sets up a new corporation with the Suttons called \"Aladdin Auto-engineering\", returns to Los Angeles, and stakes out Miles' house on the fateful night. Watching himself arrive, he lets events unfold until Pete the cat emerges, then takes his own car and uses it to remove Flexible Frank and all his engineering drawings from Miles' garage.\nDestroying the drawings and scattering machine parts across the landscape, he heads out to meet Ricky at her Girl Scout summer camp. Dan assigns his stock in Hired Girl to Ricky and suggests that she takes cold sleep when she is 21 so they can meet again. Ricky asks Dan if he will marry her after their cold sleep and Dan agrees. Dan returns to Los Angeles to use his original appointment for cold sleep, pleading that he lost the original paperwork.\nWith Pete in his arms, he sleeps for the second time until 2001. He greets Ricky, now twenty-one, when she awakes. They leave for Brawley to retrieve her possessions from storage, and then are married in Yuma. Setting himself up as an independent inventor, he uses Ricky's Hired Girl stock to make changes at Geary, settling back to watch the healthy competition with Aladdin.\nMajor themes.\nSome of Heinlein's stories, such as \"'\u2014All You Zombies\u2014'\" and \"By His Bootstraps\", feature time travel in which the protagonist re-creates himself using a time-travel paradox. This novel follows a similar theme, although the paradox is not central to the story. The idea recurs in the 1964 novel \"Farnham's Freehold\", which hurls its protagonists into the future and then returns them to their own time, where they alter their destiny.\nThe novel is also post-apocalyptic, in that it takes place after a nuclear armed conflict. The United States was the clear victor, thanks to technologies that include the \"cold sleep\", which was used to maintain a large standing army that could be revived quickly and put into the field. The \"zombie drug\" used was a by-product of interrogation techniques. In the future time, \"zombie recruiters\" are apparently active, suggesting that the drug is widely used to recruit a form of slave labor.\nIt is mentioned that Washington, D.C., was destroyed, with the capital moved to Denver, Colorado, and there were also some hits on the East Coast and in Texas. However, the book in effect makes light of it. The United States rapidly recovers, refugees from devastated areas move to unharmed places, especially California, and the nuclear war leaves no lasting trauma. The 1984 book \"Warday\" by Whitley Strieber and James Kunetka takes up a limited nuclear attack in precisely the locations mentioned in Heinlein's book and depicts how hugely destructive it could be.\nThe early Heinlein biographer and critic Alexei Panshin, in his 1968 biography \"Heinlein in Dimension\", took note of a controversial theme: \"The romantic situation in this story is a very interesting, very odd one: it is nothing less than a mutual sexual interest between an engineer of thirty and a girl of twelve ('adorable' is Heinlein's word for her), that culminates in marriage after some hop-scotching around in time to adjust their ages a bit.\"\nReception.\nThe novel \"worried and bothered\" John W. Campbell, who said \"Bob can write a better story, with one hand tied behind him, than most people in the field can do with both hands. But Jesus, I wish that son of a gun would take that other hand out of his pocket.\"\nScience fiction writer and critic James Blish, writing in 1957, shortly after publication, criticized the lack of characterization of its hero Dan Davis, saying, \"It is surely an odd novel that is at its \"best\" when the author is openly editorializing\u00a0...\"\u00a0\u2014 in this case about the \"parity system of farm price supports, which in 2000 is applied to automobiles. ...\u00a0Every other important subject of science fiction which Heinlein has examined at length has come out remade, vitalized and made the author's own property. It didn't happen here, for the first time in Heinlein's long and distinguished career\u00a0\u2014 and not because Heinlein didn't have something to say, but because he failed to embody it in a real protagonist. Evidently, Heinlein as his own hero is about played out.\" Floyd C. Gale was more positive in his 1957 review, comparing the book to \"The Sleeper Awakes\" and writing that \"Heinlein paints a detailed picture of both civilizations, so evocative that 1970 emerges clearly in the reader's mind as the old days, and pretty primitive at that\u00a0... Of course you'll like Heinlein's latest\". The critic Alexei Panshin, writing in 1968, said that \"as a whole, the story is thoroughly melodramatic but very good fun. ...\u00a0It was as though Heinlein the engineer said, 'If I had the parts available, what little gadgets would I most enjoy building?' and then went ahead and built them fictionally. A good story.\" After criticizing unrealistic science fiction, Carl Sagan in 1978 listed \"The Door Into Summer\" as among stories \"that are so tautly constructed, so rich in the accommodating details of an unfamiliar society that they sweep me along before I have even a chance to be critical\".\nIn three \"Locus\" magazine readers' polls from 1975 to 1998, it was judged the 36th, 29th, and the 43rd all-time best science-fiction novel.\nIn 2019, James Nicoll described it as \"an evergreen novel in the sense that it somehow manages to be even more problematic every time I reread it\", and noted that a major component of the plot is \"middle aged man grooming a tween\"; Nicoll did, however, concede that \"[Heinlein] gets the future wrong but does so entertainingly. Some of his robot and gadget ideas are interesting.\"\nAdaptations.\nCREDEUS Inc. adapted the novel into the feature film \"\u590f\u3078\u306e\u6249 \u30ad\u30df\u306e\u3044\u308b\u672a\u6765\u3078 (The Door into Summer)\", which was directed by Takahiro Miki and released on February 19, 2021. It closely follows the original plot, with the setting changed from the United States in 1970 and 2000 to Japan in 1995 and 2025.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1967, the American rock group The Monkees, recorded the song \"The Door into Summer\" for their album \"Pisces, Aquarius, Capricorn &amp; Jones Ltd.\" The song was written by Chip Douglas and Bill Martin and performed by Michael Nesmith (lead vocals) and Micky Dolenz (back-up vocals). In a livestream interview in 2020, Nesmith directly attributes the inspiration for the song to the story about Heinlein's cat looking for the \"Door into Summer\". The song is about longing and regret for a life based primarily on the accumulation of material things. Other than the title, the song has little to do with the story told in the novel.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60147", "revid": "8390765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60147", "title": "2041", "text": ""}
{"id": "60148", "revid": "1162102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60148", "title": "Jasper Johns", "text": "American painter (born 1930)\nJasper Johns (born May 15, 1930) is an American painter, sculptor, draftsman, and printmaker. Considered a central figure in the development of American postwar art, he has been variously associated with abstract expressionism, Neo-Dada, and pop art movements.\nJohns was born in Augusta, Georgia, and raised in South Carolina. He graduated as valedictorian from Edmunds High School in 1947 and briefly studied art at the University of South Carolina before moving to New York City and enrolling at Parsons School of Design. His education was interrupted by military service during the Korean War. After returning to New York in 1953, he worked at Marboro Books and began associations with key figures in the art world, including Robert Rauschenberg, with whom he had a romantic relationship until 1961. The two were also close collaborators, and Rauschenberg became a profound artistic influence.\nJohns's art career took a decisive turn in 1954 when he destroyed his existing artwork and began creating paintings of flags, maps, targets, letters, and numbers for which he became most recognized. These works, characterized by their incorporation of familiar symbols, marked a departure from the individualism of Abstract Expressionist style and posed questions about the nature of representation. His use of familiar imagery, such as the American flag, played on the ambiguity of symbols, and this thematic exploration continued throughout his career in various mediums, including sculpture and printmaking.\nAmong other honors, Johns received the Golden Lion at the Venice Biennale in 1988, the National Medal of Arts in 1990, and the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2011. He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1973 and the American Philosophical Society in 2007. He has supported the Merce Cunningham Dance Company and contributed significantly to the National Gallery of Art's print collection. Johns is also a co-founder of the Foundation for Contemporary Arts. He currently lives and works in Connecticut. In 2010, his 1958 painting \"Flag\" was sold for a reported $110 million in a private transaction, becoming the most expensive artwork sold by a living artist.\nLife.\nBorn in Augusta, Georgia, Jasper Johns spent his early life in Allendale, South Carolina, with his paternal grandparents after his parents divorced. He began drawing at the age of three and knew very early on that he wanted to be an artist, despite having little exposure to the arts where he grew up. His paternal grandfather's first wife, Evalina, painted landscapes that hung in the homes of several family members. These paintings were the only artworks Johns remembers seeing in his youth. Following his grandfather's death in 1939, Johns spent a year living with his mother and stepfather in Columbia, South Carolina, and then six years living with his Aunt Gladys on Lake Murray, South Carolina. He spent summer holidays with his father, Jasper Sr., and stepmother, Geraldine Sineath Johns, who encouraged his art by buying materials for him to draw and paint. He graduated as valedictorian of Edmunds High School (now Sumter High School) class of 1947 in Sumter, South Carolina, where he once again lived with his mother and her family.\nJohns studied art for a total of three semesters at the University of South Carolina at Columbia, from 1947 to 1948. Encouraged by his professors, he then moved to New York City and enrolled briefly at the Parsons School of Design in 1949. In 1951, Johns was drafted into the army during the Korean War, serving for two years, first in Fort Jackson, South Carolina, and then in Sendai, Japan.\nReturning to New York in the summer of 1953, Johns worked at Marboro Books and began to meet some of the artists who would be formative in his early career. These included Sari Dienes, Rachel Rosenthal, and Robert Rauschenberg, with the latter of whom Johns began a romantic and artistic relationship that would last until 1961. During the same period Johns was strongly influenced by the choreographer Merce Cunningham and his partner, the composer John Cage. Working together, they explored the contemporary art scene, and began sharing their ideas on art.\nIn March 1957, while visiting Rauschenberg's studio, the gallery owner Leo Castelli asked to see Johns's art. As Castelli recalled: \"So we went down. It was just the floor below. There was a fantastic display of flags and targets. You know the target with the plastic eyes, the one with the faces. The \"Green Target\" was at the Jewish Museum, but there was a big white flag, a smaller white flag, numbers, the alphabet, anything\u2014all those great masterpieces.\" Castelli immediately offered Johns an exhibition. His first solo show at the Leo Castelli Gallery, held in early 1958, was well received; all but two of the eighteen works on view sold. Alfred H. Barr Jr., the founding director of New York's Museum of Modern Art, purchased three paintings from the show, which were the first works by Johns to enter a museum collection.\nJohns has lived and worked in various homes and studios in New York City throughout his career and, from 1973 to 1987, maintained a rustic 1930s farmhouse with a glass-walled studio in Stony Point, New York. He began visiting the Caribbean island of Saint Martin in the late 1960s, buying property there in 1972, and, later, building a home and studio, for which Philip Johnson was the principal designer. Johns currently lives and works in Sharon, Connecticut.\nFollowing his death, the artist plans to transform his 170-acre property in Sharon, Connecticut, into an artists' residency. He has lived there since the 1990s. It will provide a live-work space for 18 to 24 artists at a time and will be open to visual artists, poets, musicians, dancers.\nWork.\nPainting.\nIn 1954, Johns destroyed all of his previous artwork still in his possession and began the paintings for which he is best known: depictions of flags, maps, targets, letters, and numbers. His use of such symbols differentiated his paintings from the gestural abstraction of the Abstract Expressionists, whose works were often understood as expressive of the individual personality or psychology of the artist. With well-known motifs imported into his art, his paintings could be read as both representational (a flag, a target) and as abstract (stripes, circles). Some art historians and museums characterize his choice of subjects as freeing him from decisions about composition. Johns has remarked: \"What's interesting to me is the fact that it isn't designed, but taken. It's not mine,\" or, that these motifs are \"things the mind already knows.\"\nHis early encaustic painting \"Flag\" (1954\u201355), painted after having a dream of it, marks the beginning of this new period. The motif allowed Johns to create a painting that was not completely abstract because it depicts a symbol (the American flag), yet it draws attention to the design of the symbol itself. The work evades the personal because it depicts a national symbol, and yet, it maintains a sense of the handmade in Johns's wax brushstrokes; it is neither a literal flag, nor a purely abstract painting. The work thus raises a set of complex questions with no clear answers through its combination of symbol and medium. Indeed, Alfred H. Barr could not convince the trustees of the Museum of Modern Art to directly acquire the painting from Johns's first solo show, as they were afraid its ambiguity might lead to boycott or attack by patriotic groups during the Cold War climate of the late 1950s. Barr was, however, able to arrange for the architect Philip Johnson to buy the painting and later donate it to the museum in 1973. The flag remains one of Johns's most enduring motifs; the art historian Roberta Bernstein recounts that \"between 1954 and 2002, he employed virtually his full array of materials and techniques in twenty-seven paintings, ten individual or editioned sculptures, fifty drawings, and eighteen print editions that depict the flag as the primary image.\"\nJohns is also known for including three-dimensional objects in his paintings. These objects can be either found (the ruler in \"Painting with Ruler and \"Gray,\"\" 1960) or specifically made (the plaster reliefs in \"Target with Four Faces\", 1955). This practice challenges the typical conception of painting as a two-dimensional realm. Johns's early and enduring use of the medium of encaustic also presented the opportunity to experiment with texture. An ancient technique, encaustic is a process whereby melted wax mixed with pigment is applied and \"burned into\" a support. The method allowed Johns to preserve the discrete quality of individual brushstrokes, even when layered, creating textured yet, at times, transparent surfaces. Johns's 2020 work \"Slice\" reproduces a drawing of a knee by J\u00e9an-Marc Togodgue, a Cameroonian emigre student basketball player who attended the Salisbury School near Johns's estate in Sharon. Johns's use of Togodgue's artwork without first notifying him led to a dispute that was settled amicably.\nSculpture.\nJohns made his first sculpture, \"Flashlight I\", in 1958. Many of his earliest sculptures are single, freestanding objects modeled from a material called Sculp-metal, a pliable metallic medium that could be applied and manipulated much like paint or clay. During this period, he also employed casting techniques to make objects out of plaster and bronze. Some of these objects are painted to suggest a certain sense of verisimilitude; \"https://\" (1960), for example, depicts a can painted with the Savarin Coffee label. Filled with cast paintbrushes, the work recalls an object one might find on an artist's studio table.\n\"Numbers\" (2007), which depicts his now classic pattern of stenciled numerals repeated in a grid, and is the largest single bronze Johns has made to date. Another sculpture from this period, a double-sided relief titled \"Fragment of a Letter\" (2009), incorporates part of a letter from Vincent van Gogh to his friend, the artist \u00c9mile Bernard. On one side of the relief, Johns pressed each letter of van Gogh's words into the wax model. On the other side, he spelled each letter in the American Sign Language alphabet using stamps he designed. Johns signed the wax model with impressions of his own hand, his name finger-spelled in two vertical rows.\nPrints.\nJohns began experimenting with printmaking techniques in 1960, when Tatyana Grosman, the founder of Universal Limited Art Editions, Inc. (ULAE), invited him to her printmaking studio on Long Island. Beginning with lithographs that explore the common objects and motifs for which he is best known, such as \"https://\" (1960), Johns continued to work closely with ULAE, publishing over 180 editions in a variety of printmaking techniques to investigate and develop existing compositions. Initially, lithography suited Johns and enabled him to create print versions of iconic depictions of flags, maps, and targets that filled his paintings. In 1971, Johns became the first artist at ULAE to utilize the handfed offset lithographic press, resulting in \"Decoy\" \u2014 an image realized as a lithograph before it became a drawing or painting.\nJohns has worked with other printmakers throughout his career, producing lithographs and lead reliefs at Gemini G.E.L. in Los Angeles; screenprints with Hiroshi Kawanishi at Simca Prints in New York from 1973 to 1975; and intaglios published by Petersburg Press at Atelier Crommelynck in Paris from 1975 to 1990, including a collaboration with the author Samuel Beckett that resulted in \"Foirades/Fizzles\" (1976), a book of five text fragments by Beckett in French and English and 33 intaglios by Johns. He produced \"Cup 2 Picasso\" as an offset lithograph for the June 1973 issue of the magazine \"XXe si\u00e8cle\" and, in 2000, completed an edition of 26 linocuts printed by the Grenfell Press and published by Z Press to accompany Jeff Clark's \"Sun on 6\". For the May 2014 issue of \"Art in America\", he created an unnumbered black-and-white offset lithograph depicting many of his signature motifs.\nIn 1995, Johns hired master printmaker John Lund and began to construct his own printmaking studio on his property in Sharon, Connecticut. Low Road Studio was officially founded in 1997 as Johns's own publishing imprint.\nCollaborations.\nFor decades Johns worked with others to raise both funds and attention for Merce Cunningham's Dance Company. He assisted Robert Rauschenberg in some of his 1950s designs for Cunningham's sets and costumes. In spring 1963, Johns and John Cage cofounded the Foundation for Contemporary Performance Arts (now the Foundation for Contemporary Arts), to raise funds in the performance field. Johns continued his support of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company, and served as an artistic adviser from 1967 to 1980. In 1968 Cunningham made a Duchamp-inspired theater piece, \"Walkaround Time\", for which Johns's set design replicates elements of Duchamp's work \"The Large Glass\" (1915\u201323). Earlier, Johns also wrote Neo-dada lyrics for The Druds, a short-lived avant-garde noise music art band that featured prominent members of the New York proto-conceptual art and minimal art community. The National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC, owns Chuck Close's large-scale portrait of Johns. In the late 1960s Johns' work was published in 0 to 9 magazine, an avant-garde journal which experimented with language and meaning-making.\nCommissions.\nIn 1963, the architect Philip Johnson commissioned Johns to make a work for what is now the David H. Koch Theater at Lincoln Center. \"Numbers\" (1964), a 9-by-7-foot grid of numerals, debuted in 1964 and, after presiding over the theater's lobby for 35 years, was supposed to be sold by the center for a reported $15 million in 1979. \"Numbers\" is historically important because it is the largest work of the artist's Numbers motif, and each of its Sculp-metal and collage units is on a separate canvas. Responding to widespread criticism, the board of Lincoln Center decided to drop its plans to sell the work, which was Johns's first and only public commission.\nStyle.\nJohns's work is sometimes grouped with Neo-Dada and pop art: he uses symbols in the Dada tradition of the readymades of Marcel Duchamp, but unlike many pop artists such as Andy Warhol, he does not engage with celebrity culture. Other scholars and museums position Johns and Rauschenberg as predecessors of pop art.\nValuation and awards.\nIn 1980 the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, paid $1 million for \"Three Flags\" (1958), then the highest price ever paid for the work of a living artist. In 1988, Johns's \"False Start\" (1959) was sold at auction at Sotheby's to Samuel I. Newhouse Jr. for $17.05 million, setting a record at the time as the highest price paid for a work by a living artist at auction, and the second highest price paid for an artwork at auction in the U.S. In 1998, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, bought Johns's \"White Flag\" (1955), the first painting by the artist to enter the Met's collection. While the museum would not disclose how much was paid, the \"New York Times\" reported that \"experts estimate [the painting's] value at more than $20 million.\" In 2006, Johns's \"False Start\" (1959) again made history. Private collectors Anne and Kenneth Griffin (founder of the Chicago-based hedge fund Citadel LLC) purchased the work from David Geffen for $80 million, making it the most expensive painting by a living artist. In 2010, \"Flag\" (1958), was sold privately to hedge fund billionaire Steven A. Cohen for a reported $110 million (then \u00a373 million; \u20ac81.7 million). The seller was Jean-Christophe Castelli, son of Leo Castelli, Johns's dealer, who had died in 1999. While the price was not disclosed by the parties, the \"New York Times\" reported that Cohen paid about $110 million. On November 11, 2014, a 1983 version of \"Flag\" was auctioned at Sotheby's in New York for $36 million, establishing a new auction record for Johns.\nJohns has received many awards throughout his career. The sole honorary degree he has accepted is Honorary Degree of Doctor of Humane Letters, which the University of South Carolina conferred upon him in 1969. In 1984, he was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Boston. In 1988, he received the highest honor at the 43rd Venice Biennale\u2014the Golden Lion\u2014for his exhibition in the United States pavilion. Johns was elected an Honorary Member of the Royal Academy of Arts in 1989. In 1990, he was awarded the National Medal of Arts. That year he was also elected an associate national academician of the National Academy of Design (now the National Academy Museum and School), rising to national academician in 1994. In 1993, he received the Praemium Imperiale for painting, a lifetime achievement award from the Japan Art Association. In 1994 he was awarded the Edward MacDowell Medal. He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1973 and the American Philosophical Society in 2007. On February 15, 2011, he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Barack Obama, becoming the first painter or sculptor to receive a Presidential Medal of Freedom since Alexander Calder in 1977.\nIn 2007, the National Gallery of Art acquired about 1,700 of Johns's prints. This made the gallery home to the largest number of Johns's works held by a single institution.\nSelected work.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60149", "revid": "11112747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60149", "title": "Farnham's Freehold", "text": "1964 SF novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nFarnham's Freehold is a science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. A serialized version, edited by Frederik Pohl, appeared in \"Worlds of If\" magazine (July, August, and October 1964). The complete version was published in novel form by G. P. Putnam later in 1964.\n\"Farnham's Freehold\" is a post-apocalyptic story. The setup is a direct hit by a nuclear weapon, catapulting a nuclear shelter containing Farnham, his wife, son, daughter, daughter's friend, and employee (Joseph) into the future. While writing the story, Heinlein drew on his experience of building a fallout shelter under his home in Colorado Springs, Colorado in the 1960s.\nPlot.\nHugh Farnham, a white middle-aged man, holds a bridge club party for his alcoholic wife Grace, law-graduate son Duke, college-student daughter Karen, and Karen's friend Barbara. During the bridge game, Duke berates Hugh for frightening Grace by preparing for a possible Soviet nuclear attack. When the attack actually occurs the group, along with Joe, the family's black servant, retreat to the fallout shelter beneath the house.\nAfter several distant nuclear explosions rock the shelter, Hugh and Barbara become sexually intimate, after which the largest explosion of all hits the shelter. With only minor injuries, but with their bottled oxygen running low, the group decides to ensure that they will be able to leave the shelter when necessary. After exiting through an emergency tunnel, they find themselves in a completely undamaged, semi-tropical region apparently uninhabited by humans or other sentient creatures. Several of the group speculate that the final explosion somehow forced them into an alternate dimension.\nThe group struggles to stay alive by reverting to the ways of the American pioneers, with Hugh as the leader\u2014despite friction between Hugh and Duke. Karen announces that she is pregnant and had returned home the night of the attack to tell her parents. Barbara also announces that she is pregnant, but without mentioning that her pregnancy resulted from her sexual encounter with Hugh during the attack. Karen eventually dies during her labor, due to complications, along with her infant daughter the next day.\nGrace, whose sanity has been challenged by all these events, demands that Barbara be forced from the group or she will leave. Duke convinces Hugh that he will go with Grace to ensure her safety, but before they can leave, a large aircraft appears overhead. The group is taken captive by blacks, but is spared execution when Joe intervenes by conversation with their captors' leader in French.\nThe group finds that it has not been transported to another world, but instead is in the distant future of their own world. A decadent but technologically advanced black culture keeps either uneducated or castrated white people as slaves. Sexual slavery and cannibalism are widespread and generally accepted. Adolescent girls are sexually exploited as \"bedwarmers\" by their owners. Other children are bred on ranches for consumption and slaughtered during puberty (when their flesh is considered particularly tasty) or sometimes earlier.\nEach of the characters adapts to the sudden change in black/white roles in different ways. In the end, Hugh and Barbara reject the new era of slavery; they attempt to escape, but are captured. Rather than execute them, Ponse, \"Lord Protector\" of the house to which they have been enslaved, asks them to volunteer for a time-travel experiment that will send them back to their own time.\nThey return just prior to the original nuclear attack, and flee in Barbara's car. As they drive they realize that while Barbara had driven a car with an automatic transmission, this car\u2014the same car in every other respect\u2014has a manual transmission, and Farnham deduces that the time-travel experiment worked but sent them into an alternate universe.\nThey gather supplies and flee into the hills, surviving the attack, and live out the rest of their lives.\nReception.\nWhen the novel was published in 1964, \"Kirkus Reviews\" stated that the \"characters have souls of wood pulp\" and that \"The satire on fall-out shelters, race and sex lacks inspiration.\"\nThe \"SF Site\" described \"Farnham's Freehold\" as \"a difficult book\", and stated that \"At best, [it] is an uncomfortable book with some good points mixed in with the bad, like an elderly relative [who] can give good advice and in the next breath go off on some racist or sexist rant. At worst, \"Farnham's Freehold\" is an anti-minority, anti-woman survivalist rant. It is oftentimes frustrating. It is sometimes shocking. It is never boring.\" The critical work \"The Heritage of Heinlein\" describes \"Farnham's Freehold\" as not \"an altogether successful novel\" and that the book's sexism \"may be a crucial flaw.\"\nCharles Stross has rhetorically asked whether \"\"anyone\" [has] a kind word to say for ... \"Farnham's Freehold\"\", and then described it as the result of \"a privileged white male from California, a notoriously exclusionary state, trying to understand American racism in the pre\u2013Martin Luther King era. And getting it wrong for facepalm values of wrong, so wrong he wasn't even on the right map ... but at least he wasn't ignoring it.\"\n\"The New Republic\", while conceding Heinlein's desire to \"show the evils of ethnic oppression\", states that in the process Heinlein \"resurrected some of the most horrific racial stereotypes imaginable,\" ultimately producing \"an anti-racist novel only a Klansman could love.\"\nFreeholders.\nThe name \"freeholders\" was adopted by some survivalists in the 1980s in reference to the novel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60150", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60150", "title": "2042", "text": ""}
{"id": "60151", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60151", "title": "Gary Gordon", "text": "United States Army Medal of Honor recipient (1960\u20131993)\nGary Ivan Gordon (August 30, 1960\u00a0\u2013 October 3, 1993) was a master sergeant in the United States Army and a recipient of the Medal of Honor. At the time of his death in the Battle of Mogadishu in 1993, he was a non-commissioned officer in the United States Army's premier special operations unit, the 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta (1SFOD-D), or \"Delta Force\". Together with his fellow soldier Sergeant First Class Randy Shughart, Gordon was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions during the battle.\nEarly life and career.\nGary Gordon was born August 30, 1960, in Lincoln, Maine, and graduated from Mattanawcook Academy in 1978. On December 4 of that year, at age 18, he joined the U.S. Army. Trained as a combat engineer, Gordon became a Special Forces Engineer with the 2nd Battalion of the 10th Special Forces Group. In December 1986, he volunteered and was selected to join the 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta (1SFOD-D), or Delta Force. As a Delta operator, Gordon eventually advanced to Team Sergeant.\nBefore deploying to Somalia, he married his wife Carmen and they had two children, Brittany and Ian.\nCombat and death in Somalia.\nGordon was posted to Mogadishu, Somalia, with other Delta members in the summer of 1993 as part of Task Force Ranger. On October 3, 1993, Gordon was Sniper Team Leader during the Battle of Mogadishu (1993), which began as a joint-force mission to apprehend key advisers to Somali warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid. During the assault, Super Six One, one of the Army's Black Hawk helicopters providing insertion and air support to the assault team, was shot down and crashed in the city. A combat search and rescue team was dispatched to the first crash site to secure it and a short time later a second Black Hawk, Super Six Four, was shot down as well. Ranger forces on the ground were not able to assist the downed helicopter crew of the second crash site as they were already engaged in heavy combat with Aidid's militia while making their way to the first crash site.\nGordon and his Delta Force sniper teammates Sergeant First Class Randy Shughart and Sergeant First Class Brad Halling, who were providing sniper cover from the air, wanted to be dropped at the second crash site in order to protect the four critically wounded crew, despite the fact that large numbers of armed, hostile combatants were converging on the area. Mission commanders denied Gordon's request, saying that the situation was already too dangerous for the three Delta snipers to effectively protect the Black Hawk crew from the ground. Command's position was that the snipers could be of more assistance by continuing to provide air cover. Gordon, however, concluded that there was no way the Black Hawk crew could survive on their own, and repeated his request twice until he finally received permission. Halling had assumed control of a minigun after a crew chief was injured and was not inserted with Shughart and Gordon.\nOnce on the ground, Gordon and Shughart, armed with only their personal weapons and sidearms, fought their way to the downed Black Hawk. By this time more Somali forces were arriving, intent on either capturing or killing the American servicemen. When they reached Super Six Four, Gordon and Shughart extracted the pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Michael Durant, co-pilot Ray Frank, and crew chiefs Bill Cleveland and Tommy Field from the aircraft, and established defensive positions around the crash site. Despite having inflicted heavy casualties on their attackers, the two Delta snipers were outnumbered and outgunned. Their ammunition depleted, Gordon and Shughart were killed by Somali gunfire. It is believed that Gordon was the first to be killed. Shughart retrieved Gordon's CAR-15 and gave it to Durant to use. Shortly afterwards, Shughart was killed and Durant was taken alive. Immediately after the battle, Mohammed's troops counted 25 of their own men dead with many more severely wounded. According to \"America and Iraq: Policy-making, Intervention and Regional Politics\", Gordon's \"half-naked body was dragged horrifically through the streets of Mogadishu\".\nGordon's body was eventually recovered and is buried in Lincoln Cemetery, Penobscot County, Maine.\nThere was some confusion in the aftermath of the action as to the final moments of the firefight. The official citation states that Shughart had been killed first but Mark Bowden, author of \"\", a book about the October 1993 battle, relates an account by Sergeant Paul R. Howe, another Delta commando fighting in the battle. Howe said that he heard Shughart call for help on the radio. Furthermore, Durant believed that the weapon handed to him was not the distinctive M14 used by Shughart but a CAR-15; Howe said that Gordon would never have given his own weapon to another soldier to use while he was still able to fight. In Durant's book, \"In the Company of Heroes\", he states that Gordon was on the left side of the Black Hawk, after both he and Shughart moved Durant to a safer location, and only heard Gordon say, \"Damn, I'm hit.\" Durant acknowledged that he might have been wrong in his identification but was reluctant to push for the record to be changed since he was not sure.\nAfter the terrorist attack on the United States on September 11, 2001, United States Special Forces units were inserted into Afghanistan to assist the Northern Alliance forces in overthrowing the Taliban and al-Qaeda terrorists. Following an intense mountain battle known as Operation Anaconda in March 2002, U.S. troops complex found a GPS unit and pouch labeled \"G. Gordon\". Intelligence analysts believed at first this was Gordon's GPS unit that he purchased on the private market and used in Somalia. The Gordon family was notified immediately of the find before the information was released to the public. It ultimately turned out that it was not Gordon's GPS but one belonging to a helicopter pilot lost in an earlier fight during Operation Anaconda.\nHonors and awards.\nMSG Gordon's personal decorations include:\nThe U.S. Navy officially named a roll-on/roll-off ship in a ceremony at 10:00\u00a0a.m., Thursday, July 4, 1996, at Newport News, Virginia. Congressman John Murtha of Pennsylvania, was the ceremony's principal speaker and Gordon's widow, Carmen Gordon, served as the ship's sponsor. \"Gordon\" was the second ship to undergo conversion from a commercial container vessel to a Large Medium Speed Roll On/Roll Off (LMSR) sealift ship and is operated by the U.S. Navy's Military Sealift Command, Washington, D.C.\nGordon has been honored elsewhere as well. Gordon Elementary School in Linden Oaks, Harnett County, North Carolina, which opened in January 2009, was named in his honor. The school is near Fort Bragg, where Gordon was stationed before being deployed to Somalia. In the Joint Readiness Training Center at Fort Polk, LA, the main mock city is named Shughart-Gordon.\nOn Wednesday, June 11, 2025, President Donald Trump announced the renaming of then Fort Eisenhower to Fort Gordon, this time honoring MSG Gary Gordon.\nMedal of Honor.\nOn May 23, 1994, both Gordon and Shughart posthumously received the Medal of Honor in recognition for the actions they took and the sacrifices they made to help protect the lives of the crew of Super Six Four. They were the only soldiers participating in Operation Gothic Serpent to receive the military's highest honor, and the first Medal of Honor recipients since the Vietnam War. Their medals were presented to their widows Stephanie Shughart and Carmen Gordon by Bill Clinton in a ceremony at the White House.\nMedal of Honor citation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Master Sergeant Gary Ivan Gordon, United States Army, distinguished himself by actions above and beyond the call of duty on 3 October 1993, while serving as Sniper Team Leader, United States Army Special Operations Command with Task Force Ranger in Mogadishu, Somalia. Master Sergeant Gordon's sniper team provided precision fires from the lead helicopter during an assault and at two helicopter crash sites, while subjected to intense automatic weapons and rocket propelled grenade fires. When Master Sergeant Gordon learned that ground forces were not immediately available to secure the second crash site, he and another sniper unhesitatingly volunteered to be inserted to protect the four critically wounded personnel, despite being well aware of the growing number of enemy personnel closing in on the site. After his third request to be inserted, Master Sergeant Gordon received permission to perform his volunteer mission. When debris and enemy ground fires at the site caused them to abort the first attempt, Master Sergeant Gordon was inserted one hundred meters south of the crash site. Equipped with only his sniper rifle and a pistol, Master Sergeant Gordon and his fellow sniper, while under intense small arms fire from the enemy, fought their way through a dense maze of shanties and shacks to reach the critically injured crew members. Master Sergeant Gordon immediately pulled the pilot and the other crew members from the aircraft, establishing a perimeter which placed him and his fellow sniper in the most vulnerable position. Master Sergeant Gordon used his long range rifle and side arm to kill an undetermined number of attackers until he depleted his ammunition. Master Sergeant Gordon then went back to the wreckage, recovering some of the crew's weapons and ammunition. Despite the fact that he was critically low on ammunition, he provided some of it to the dazed pilot and then radioed for help. Master Sergeant Gordon continued to travel the perimeter, protecting the downed crew. After his team member was fatally wounded and his own rifle ammunition exhausted, Master Sergeant Gordon returned to the wreckage, recovering a rifle with the last five rounds of ammunition and gave it to the pilot with the words, \"good luck.\" Then, armed only with his pistol, Master Sergeant Gordon continued to fight until he was fatally wounded. His actions saved the pilot's life. Master Sergeant Gordon's extraordinary heroism and devotion to duty were in keeping with the highest standards of military service and reflect great credit upon him, his unit and the United States Army.\nNamesakes.\nGary Ivan Gordon Elementary School in Fort Bragg.\nFort Gordon, an Army installation in Augusta, GA, was renamed after Gary Gordon in 2025.\nIn culture.\nIn the 2001 film \"Black Hawk Down\", Gordon was portrayed by Danish actor Nikolaj Coster-Waldau.\nMarko Kloos\u2019 novel, \"Lines of Departure\" (2014), centers around a space fleet containing the military freighter \"Gary I Gordon\" and Gordon's heroic actions in Somalia are referenced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60153", "revid": "48455500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60153", "title": "Randy Shughart", "text": "United States Army Medal of Honor recipient (1958\u20131993)\nRandall David Shughart (August 13, 1958\u00a0\u2013 October 3, 1993) was a United States Army Delta Force operator who was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions during the Battle of Mogadishu, during Operation Gothic Serpent in October 1993.\nEarly life.\nShughart was born August 13, 1958, in Lincoln, Nebraska. After his father, Herbert Shughart, left the Air Force, the Shugharts moved to Newville, Pennsylvania, to live and work on a dairy farm.\nMilitary career.\nShughart joined the United States Army while attending Big Spring High School in Newville, entering upon graduation in 1976. After completing basic training, he successfully completed infantry AIT (advanced individual training), Airborne School, and in 1978 was assigned to the 2nd Ranger Battalion, 75th Ranger Regiment, at Fort Lewis, Washington. Several months later, he completed a pre-ranger course (formerly known as SURT, Small Unit Ranger Tactics), was granted a slot to attend Ranger School, graduated, and earned the Ranger Tab. Shughart left active duty and went into the Army Reserve in June 1980. In December 1983, Shughart returned to active duty and the following year attended Special Forces training. Shughart was assigned to Delta Force and was transferred to Fort Bragg, North Carolina in June 1986. As a Delta Force operator, he advanced to Assistant Team Sergeant.\nShughart was deployed to Mogadishu, Somalia in 1993 as part of Task Force Ranger. On October 3, 1993, during an assault mission to apprehend advisors to the Somali warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid, a Black Hawk helicopter with the call sign \"Super Six-One\" was shot down in the city. A combat search and rescue (CSAR) team was sent in to secure the survivors. Then, a second Black Hawk helicopter, call sign \"Super Six-Four\", was shot down.\nShughart, Gary Gordon, and Sergeant First Class Brad Halling had been providing sniper cover from the air from Black Hawk \"Super Six-Two\". Gordon wanted to be inserted to secure the crash site as hostile Somalis were converging on the area.\nMission commanders denied Gordon's request twice, saying that the situation was too dangerous for the snipers to protect the crew from the ground. Command's position was that the snipers could be of more assistance by providing air cover. Gordon, however, repeated his request until he got permission. Halling stayed behind to man a door gun as one of the helicopter's gunners had been wounded.\nArmed with their sniper rifles and sidearms, Shughart and Gordon were inserted approximately from the crash site and made their way to the downed Black Hawk. Chief Warrant Officer Mike Durant was already defending the aircraft with an MP5, but was unable to move from his seat due to injuries sustained in the crash. When they reached \"Super Six-Four\", they extracted Durant and the other crew from the helicopter and defended the aircraft. It is believed that Gordon was the first of the two to be killed by the surrounding mob. Shughart retrieved Gordon's CAR-15 rifle and gave it to Durant to use. Shortly after, Shughart was killed, the site was overrun and Durant was taken hostage. According to Durant's book \"In the Company of Heroes\", the Somalis counted 25 of their militia dead after the firefight.\nThere was some confusion in the aftermath of the action as to who had been killed first. The official citation states that Shughart had been killed first but Mark Bowden, author of \"Black Hawk Down: A Story of Modern War\", relates an account by Sergeant Paul Howe who heard Shughart call for help on the radio and noted that the weapon handed to Durant was not the distinctive M14 rifle that Shughart used. Howe said that Gordon would not have given his weapon to someone while he could still fight. Durant acknowledged that he might have been wrong in his identification but was reluctant to push for the record to be changed since he was not sure. Shughart's body was eventually recovered and is buried in Westminster Cemetery, Carlisle, Pennsylvania.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 2001 film \"Black Hawk Down\", Shughart was portrayed by actor Johnny Strong.\nAwards and decorations.\nSFC Shughart's awards and decorations include:\nMedal of Honor.\nOn May 23, 1994, Shughart and Gordon were posthumously decorated with the Medal of Honor for protecting the crew of Super Six Four. They were the first Medal of Honor recipients since the Vietnam War.\nHerbert Shughart, Randall Shughart's father, attended the Medal of Honor presentation ceremony at the White House, where he refused to shake hands with U.S. President Bill Clinton. He then proceeded to openly criticize the president, telling him, \"You are not fit to be president of the United States. The blame for my son's death rests with the White House and with you. You are not fit to command.\"\nMedal of Honor citation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sergeant First Class Shughart, United States Army, distinguished himself by actions above and beyond the call of duty on 3 October 1993, while serving as a Sniper Team Member, United States Army Special Operations Command with Task Force Ranger in Mogadishu, Somalia. Sergeant First Class Shughart provided precision sniper fires from the lead helicopter during an assault on a building and at two helicopter crash sites, while subjected to intense automatic weapon fire and numerous rocket propelled grenades. While providing critical suppressive fire at the second crash site, Sergeant First Class Shughart and his team leader learned that ground forces were not immediately available to secure the site. Sergeant First Class Shughart and his team leader unhesitatingly volunteered to be inserted to protect the four critically wounded personnel, despite being well aware of the growing number of enemy personnel closing in on the site. After their third request to be inserted, Sergeant First Class Shughart and his team leader received permission to perform this volunteer mission. When debris and enemy ground fires at the site caused them to abort the first attempt, Sergeant First Class Shughart and his team leader were inserted one hundred meters south of the crash site. Equipped with only his sniper rifle and a pistol, Sergeant First Class Shughart and his team leader, while under intense fire from the enemy, fought their way through a dense maze of shanties and shacks to reach the critically injured crew members. Sergeant First Class Shughart pulled the pilot and the other crew members from the aircraft, establishing a perimeter which placed him and his fellow sniper in the most vulnerable position. Sergeant First Class Shughart used his long range rifle and side arm to kill an undetermined number of attackers while traveling the perimeter, protecting the downed crew. Sergeant First Class Shughart continued his protective fire until he depleted his ammunition and was fatally wounded. His actions saved the pilot's life. Sergeant First Class Shughart's extraordinary heroism and devotion to duty were in keeping with the highest standards of military service and reflect great credit upon him-self, his unit and the United States Army.\nUSNS \"Shughart\".\nIn 1997, the Navy named roll-on/roll-off ship in a ceremony at the National Steel and Shipbuilding Company, San Diego. The ceremony was attended by a number of officers and politicians including Shughart's commanding officer at the time of his death; John W. Douglass, Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development and Acquisition; Senator Bob Kerrey; and others. The ship was the first \"Large Medium Speed Roll On/Roll Off (LMSR) ship\" to undergo conversion from a commercial container vessel to a sealift cargo ship.\nMemorial Bridge.\nThe Pennsylvania Route 641 bridge over the Big Spring Creek (Pennsylvania) was dedicated May 30, 2024 as the SFC Randall Shughart Memorial Bridge. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60154", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60154", "title": "Mogadishu", "text": "Capital and the largest city of Somalia\nMogadishu, locally known as Xamar or Hamar, is the capital and most populous city of Somalia. The city has served as an important port connecting traders across the Indian Ocean for millennia and has an estimated urban population of 4,126,815.\nMogadishu is located in the coastal Banaadir region on the Indian Ocean, which, unlike other Somali regions, is considered a municipality rather than a (federal state).\nMogadishu has a long history, which ranges from the ancient period up until the present, serving as the capital of the Sultanate of Mogadishu in the 9th-13th century, which for many centuries controlled the Indian Ocean gold trade and eventually came under the Ajuran Sultanate in the 13th century which was an important player in the medieval Silk Road maritime trade. Mogadishu enjoyed the height of its prosperity during the 14th and 15th centuries and was during the early modern period considered the wealthiest city on the East African coast, as well as the center of a thriving textile industry. In the 17th century, Mogadishu and parts of southern Somalia fell under the Hiraab Imamate. In the 19th century, it came under the Sultanate of the Geledi's sphere of influence.\nIn 1894, the Somali chief signed a treaty of peace, friendship, and protection with Filonardi of the Commercial Company of Benadir. The onset of Italian colonial rule occurred in stages, with treaties signed in the 1880s followed by economic engagement between Somali clans and the Commercial Company of Benadir, and then direct governance by the Italian Empire after 1906, British Military Administration of Somalia after World War II and the Trust Territory of Somaliland administered by Italy in the 1950s.\nThis was followed by independence in 1960, the Somali Democratic Republic era during Siad Barre's presidency (1969\u20131991). The three-decade long Somali Civil War afterwards devastated the city. In the late 2010s and 2020s, a period of major reconstruction commenced.\nEtymology.\nThe origins of the name \"Mogadishu\" (Muqdisho) is thought to possibly be derived from a morphology of the Somali words \"Muuq\" and \"Disho,\" which mean \"sight killer\" or \"blinder\", possibly referring to the city's blinding beauty. The 16th century explorer Leo Africanus knew the city as \"Magadazo\" (alt. \"Magadoxo\") and described it as a \"beautiful, rich place\". Another theory is that the name consists of two Somali words, \"Maqal\" and \"Disho\", meaning \"the place where sheep are slaughtered\".\nThe name used by the locals is Xamar (Hamar), which may refer to the color red. This could be in reference to the reddish environment and hills, meaning a city that was built on red sand. The early neighborhood of Hamar Weyne combines two words, hamar (red) and wein(big). It is also the Somali word for tamarind.\nIn Abyssinia, the city of Mogadishu and its surrounding area were known as \"Machidas\". A powerful kingdom, with which the Abyssinians were frequently at war, once thrived there. Described as a fine city built at a short distance from the seashore, \"Machidas\" was located to the north of Zanguebar and featured a king\u2019s palace, several mosques and houses of stone painted in fresco with terraced flat roofs. The name \"Machidas\" also appears on maps from the 18th- and 19th-centuries.\nArabic sources record Mogadishu as Maqd\u012bsh\u016b (\u0645\u064e\u0642\u0652\u062f\u0650\u064a\u0634\u064f\u0648). The book \"An Azanian Trio\" suggests a link to the Hebrew \"mqdsh\" (\"holy place\u201d), possibly tied to chronicles of two rabbis in the city's early history.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nSarapion.\nThe ancient city of Sarapion is believed to have been the predecessor state of Mogadishu. It is mentioned in the \"Periplus of the Erythraean Sea\", a Greek travel document dating from the first century AD, as one of a series of commercial ports on the Somali littoral. According to the \"Periplus\", maritime trade already connected peoples in the Mogadishu area with other communities along the Indian Ocean.\nDuring ancient times Mogadishu was part of the Somali city-states that engaged in a lucrative trade network connecting Somali merchants with Phoenicia, Ptolemic Egypt, Greece, Parthian Persia, Sabaeans, Nabataea and the Roman Empire. Somali sailors used the ancient Somali maritime vessel known as the \"beden\" to transport their cargo.\nFoundation and origins.\nThe founding ethnicity of Mogadishu and its subsequent sultanate has been a topic of intrigue in Somali Studies. Ioan Lewis and Enrico Cerulli believed that the city was founded and ruled by a council of Arab and Persian families. However, the reference I.M Lewis and Cerulli received traces back to one 19th century text called the Kitab Al-Zunuj, which has been discredited by modern scholars as unreliable and unhistorical. More importantly, it contradicts oral, ancient written sources and archaeological evidence on the pre-existing civilizations and communities that flourished on the Somali coast, and to which were the forefathers of Mogadishu and other coastal cities. Thus, the Persian and Arab founding \"myths\" are regarded as an outdated false colonialist reflection on Africans ability to create their own sophisticated states. It has now been widely accepted that there were already communities on the Somali coast with ethnic Somali leadership, to whom the Arab and Persian families had to ask for permission to settle in their cities. It also seems the local Somalis retained their political and numerical superiority on the coast while the Muslim immigrants would go through an assimilation process by adopting the local language and culture.\nMogadishu along with Zeila and other Somali coastal cities was founded upon an indigenous network involving hinterland trade and that happened even before significant Arab migrations or trade with the Somali coast. That goes back approximately four thousand years and are supported by archaeological and textual evidences.\nThis is corroborated by the first century AD Greek document the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, detailing multiple prosperous port cities in ancient Somalia, as well as the identification of ancient Sarapion with the city that would later be known as Mogadishu. When Ibn Battuta visited the Sultanate in the 14th century, he identified the Sultan as being of Barbara origin, an ancient term to describe the ancestors of the Somali people. According to Ross E. Dunn neither Mogadishu, or any other city on the coast could be considered alien enclaves of Arabs or Persians, but were in-fact African towns.\nYaqut al-Hamawi, a Muslim medieval geographer in the year 1220 describes Mogadishu as the most prominent town on the coast. Yaqut also mentioned Mogadishu as being a town inhabited by Berbers, described as \"dark-skinned\" and considered ancestors of modern Somalis. By the thirteenth century, Ibn Sa'id described Mogadishu, Merca and Barawa located in the Benadir coast had become Islamic and commercial centers in the Indian Ocean. He said the local people in the Benadir coast and the interior were predominantly inhabited by Somalis with a minority of Arab, Persian and Indian merchants living in the coastal towns. Ibn al-Mujawir mentions the Banu Majid who fled the Mundhiriya region in Yemen in the year 1159 and settled in Mogadishu and also traders from the port towns of Abyan and Haram.\nMogadishu is traditionally inhabited by four clans. These are the Moorshe, Iskashato, DhabarWeyne, and the Bandawow. Moorshe is regarded the oldest group in Mogadishu and is considered to be a sub-clan of Ajuran who established one of the most powerful medieval kingdoms in Africa, the Ajuran Sultanate. The Gibil Madow (Dark Skins) faction of the Benadiri are said to hail from the Somali clan groups from inland which make up the majority of Benadiris with a small minority being Gibil Cads (Light Skins) which descend from Muslim immigrants.\nMedieval Period.\nMogadishu Sultanate.\nThe Mogadishu Sultanate was a medieval Somali sultanate centered in southern Somalia. It rose as one of the pre-eminent powers in the Horn of Africa under the rule of Fakhr ad-Din before becoming part of the expanding Ajuran Empire in the 13th century. The Mogadishu Sultanate maintained a vast trading network, dominated the regional gold trade, minted its own currency, and left an extensive architectural legacy in present-day southern Somalia. A local city-state with much influence over the hinterland neighbouring coastal towns.\nFor many years Mogadishu functioned as the pre-eminent city in the (\"Bilad al Barbar\" \u2013 \"Land of the Berbers\"), as medieval Arabic-speakers named the Somali coast. Following his visit to the city, the 12th-century Syrian historian Yaqut al-Hamawi (a former slave of Greek origin) wrote a global history of many places he visited Mogadishu and called it the richest and most powerful city in the region and was an Islamic center across the Indian Ocean.\nMedieval Mogadishu.\nDuring his travels, ibn Sa'id al-Maghribi (1213\u20131286) noted that Mogadishu city had already become the leading Islamic centre in the region. By the time of the Tangier born traveller ibn Battuta's appearance on the coastline of Somalia in 1331, the city was at the zenith of its prosperity. He described Mogadishu as \"an exceedingly large city\" with many rich merchants, which was famous for its high quality fabric that it exported to Mamluk Sultanate-ruled Egypt, among other places. He also describes the hospitality of the people of Mogadishu and how locals would put travellers up in their home to help the local economy. Battuta added that the city was ruled by a Somali sultan, Abu Bakr ibn Shaikh 'Umar, He noted that Sultan Abu Bakr had dark skin complexion and spoke in his native tongue (Somali) but was also fluent in Arabic. The Sultan also had a retinue of viziers, legal experts, commanders, royal eunuchs, and other officials at his beck and call. Ibn Khaldun (1332 to 1406) noted in his book that Mogadishu was a massive metropolis. He also claimed that the city was very populous with many wealthy merchants.\nThis period gave birth to notable figures like Abd al-Aziz of Mogadishu who was described as the governor and island chief of Maldives by ibn Battuta. After him is named the Abdul-Aziz Mosque of Mogadishu, which survived for centuries.\nThe island's appellation \"Madagascar\" is not of local origin but rather was popularized in the Middle Ages by Europeans. The name \"Madageiscar\" was first recorded in the memoirs of 13th-century Venetian explorer Marco Polo as a corrupted transliteration of the name Mogadishu, the famous port with which Polo had confused the island.\nVasco da Gama, who passed by Mogadishu in the 15th century, noted that it was a large city with houses of four or five storeys high and large palaces in its centre and many mosques with cylindrical minarets. In the 16th century, Duarte Barbosa noted that many ships from the Kingdom of Cambaya sailed to Mogadishu with cloths and spices for which they in return received gold, wax and ivory. Barbosa also highlighted the abundance of meat, wheat, barley, horses, and fruit on the coastal markets, which generated enormous wealth for the merchants. Mogadishu, the center of a thriving weaving industry known as \"toob benadir\" (specialized for the markets in Egypt and Syria), together with Merca and Barawa also served as transit stops for Swahili merchants from Mombasa and Malindi and for the gold trade from Kilwa. Jewish merchants from Ormus also brought their Indian textile and fruit to the Somali coast in exchange for grain and wood.\nDuarte Barbosa, the famous Portuguese traveller, wrote about Mogadishu (c 1517\u20131518):&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It has a king over it, and is a place of great trade in merchandise. Ships come there from the kingdom of Cambay (India) and from Aden with stuffs of all kinds, and with spices. And they carry away from there much gold, ivory, beeswax, and other things upon which they make a profit. In this town there is plenty of meat, wheat, barley, and horses, and much fruit: it is a very rich place.\nIn 1542, the Portuguese commander Jo\u00e3o de Sep\u00favelda led a small fleet on an expedition to the Somali coast. During this expedition, he briefly attacked Mogadishu, capturing an Ottoman ship and firing upon the city, which compelled the sultan of Mogadishu to sign a peace treaty with the Portuguese.\nAccording to the 16th-century explorer, Leo Africanus indicates that the native inhabitants of the Mogadishu polity were of the same origins as the denizens of the northern people of Zeila the capital of Adal Sultanate. They were generally tall with an olive skin complexion, some darker. They would wear traditional rich white silk wrapped around their bodies and have Islamic turbans, and coastal people only wore sarongs and wrote in Arabic as a lingua franca. Their weaponry consisted of traditional Somali weapons such as swords, daggers, spears, battle axe, and bow and arrows. However, they received assistance from its close ally, the Ottoman Empire, and with the import of firearms such as muskets and cannons. Most were Muslims, although a few adhered to pre-Islamic beliefs; there were also some Orthodox Tewahedo Christians further inland. Mogadishu itself was a wealthy, and well-built city-state, which maintained commercial trade with kingdoms across the world. The metropolis city was surrounded by walled stone fortifications.\nThe Ajuran Sultanate collapsed in the 17th century due to heavy taxation against their subjects, which started a rebellion. The ex-subjects became a new wave of Somali migrants, the Abgaal, moved both into the Shebelle River basin and Mogadishu. A new political elite led by Abgaal Yaquub imams, with ties to the new leaders in the interior, moved into the Shangani District of the city. Remnants of the Ajuran lived in the other key-quarters of Hamar Weyne District. Ajuran merchants began to look for new linkages and regional trade opportunities since the Abgaal had commandeered the existing trading networks.\nEarly Modern period (1700s\u20131900s).\nHiraab Imamate.\nBy the 17th century, the Hiraab Imamate was a powerful kingdom that ruled large parts of southern and central Somalia. It successfully revolted against the Ajuran Sultanate and established an independent rule for at least two centuries from the seventeen hundreds and onwards. The Hiraab Imamate also exerted a centralized authority during its existence and possessed some of the organs and trappings of a traditional integrated state: a functioning bureaucracy, a state flag, regular correspondence with neighbouring civilizations in written Arabic, taxation in the form of livestock and cash crops including a third of the Mogadishu emporium port's revenue as well as a professional army.\nBy the late 19th century, the Imamate began to decline due to internal problems, the Imamate also faced challenges from Imperialist kingdoms, the Zanzibari Sultan from the coast and Geledi Sultanate, and Hobyo Sultanate from the interior from both directions.\nGeledi Sultanate.\nThe Sultanate of Geledi and the Omani Empire vied over who would be the superior power on the Benadir Coast, with Sultan Yusuf Mahamud ultimately being the dominant force with the Omanis having a nominal presence and Said bin Sultan even paying tribute to him in order to keep Omani representatives in Mogadishu. Mogadishu under Abgaal control had been in a period of decline and disarray near the end of the Hiraab Imamate. Following a struggle between the two leading figures of each respective quarter (Shingani and Hamarweyn) Sultan Yusuf marched into the city with an 8,000 strong army and ruled in favour of the Shingani leader, with the loser fleeing the city. Yusuf would nominate a relative of the deposed chief to lead the Hamarweyn quarter ending the dispute. Sultan Yusuf is even referred to as the governor of Mogadishu in some sources, highlighting the power he exerted over the city.\nDespite the Somali political decline, trade with Geledi Sultanate flourished during Geledi Sultan Ahmed Yusuf's reign. British explorer John Kirk visited the region in 1873 and noted a variety of things. Roughly 20 large dhows were docked in both Mogadishu and Merka filled with grain produced from the farms of the Geledi in the interior. Kirk met the Imam Mahmood who reigned over Mogadishu. The Shabelle river itself was referred to as the 'Geledi river' by Kirk, perhaps in respect of the volume of produce that the Sultanate output. In Barawa there was little grain instead a large quantity of ivory and skins which had already been loaded onto ships destined for Zanzibar.\nThe Geledi Sultans were at the height of their power. They dominated the East African ivory trade, and also held sway over the Jubba and Shebelle valleys in the hinterland. The Omani Sultans' authority in Mogadishu, however, was largely nominal (existing by name only). When Imam Azzan bin Qais of Oman sought to build a fort in the city, he was thus obligated to request permission from Sultan Ahmed Yusuf the real power broker who in turn convinced the Hiraab Imam to acquiesce to the decision. Omani and later Zanzibari officials were mere representatives of the Sultan to collect customs and needed the fort for their own security rather than control of the city. The Fort of Garessa was eventually constructed in 1870. The Sultan of Zanzibar later leased and then sold the infrastructure that he had built to the Italians, but not the land itself, which was Somali owned.\nItalian Somaliland (late 1800s\u20131960).\nIn 1905, Italy made Mogadishu the capital of the newly established Italian Somaliland. The Italians subsequently spelled the name of the city as \"\". After World War I, the surrounding territory came under Italian control with some resistance.\nThousands of Italians and other people from the Italian empire began to settle in Mogadishu and founded small manufacturing companies across Somalia. They also developed some agricultural areas in the south near the capital, such as Janale and the \"Villaggio duca degli Abruzzi\" (present-day Jowhar). In the 1930s, new buildings and avenues were built. A narrow-gauge railway was laid from Mogadishu to Jowhar. An asphalt road, the \"Strada Imperiale\", was also constructed and intended to link Mogadishu to Addis Ababa.\nIn 1940, the Italo-Somali population numbered 22,000, accounting for over 44% of the city's population of 50,000 residents. Mogadishu remained the capital of Italian Somaliland throughout the latter polity's existence. In World War II it was captured by British forces in February 1941.\nAfter World War II Mogadishu was made the capital of the Trust Territory of Somaliland, an Italian administered fiduciary political entity under the UNO mandate, for ten years (1950\u20131960).\nSomali Republic (1960\u20131991).\nBritish Somaliland became independent on 26 June 1960 as the State of Somaliland, and the Trust Territory of Somalia (the former Italian Somaliland) followed suit five days later. On 1 July 1960, the two territories united to form the Somali Republic, with Mogadishu serving as the nation's capital. A government was formed by Abdullahi Issa and other members of the trusteeship and protectorate governments, with Haji Bashir Ismail Yusuf as President of the Somali National Assembly, Aden Abdullah Osman Daar as President of the Somali Republic, and Abdirashid Ali Shermarke as Prime Minister (later to become president from 1967 to 1969). On 20 July 1961 and through a popular referendum, the people of Somalia ratified a new constitution, which was first drafted in 1960. In 1967, Muhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal became Prime Minister, a position to which he was appointed by Shermarke.\nOn 15 October 1969, while paying a visit to the northern town of Las Anod, Somalia's then President Abdirashid Ali Shermarke was assassinated by one of his own bodyguards. His assassination was quickly followed by a military coup d'\u00e9tat on 21 October 1969 (the day after his funeral), in which the Somali Army seized power without encountering armed opposition, essentially a bloodless takeover. The putsch was spearheaded by Major General Mohamed Siad Barre, who at the time commanded the army.\nAlongside Barre, the Supreme Revolutionary Council (SRC) that assumed power after President Sharmarke's assassination was led by Lieutenant Colonel Salaad Gabeyre Kediye and Chief of Police Jama Ali Korshel. Kediye officially held the title of \"Father of the Revolution,\" and Barre shortly afterwards became the head of the SRC. The SRC subsequently renamed the country the Somali Democratic Republic, arrested members of the former civilian government, banned political parties, dissolved the parliament and the Supreme Court, and suspended the constitution.\nThe revolutionary army established large-scale public works programmes, including the Mogadishu Stadium. In addition to a nationalization programme of industry and land, the Mogadishu-based new regime's foreign policy placed an emphasis on Somalia's traditional and religious links with the Arab world, eventually joining the Arab League in 1974.\nAfter fallout from the unsuccessful Ogaden campaign of the late 1970s, the Barre administration began arresting government and military officials under suspicion of participation in the 1978 coup d'\u00e9tat attempt. Most of the people who had allegedly helped plot the putsch were summarily executed. However, several officials escaped abroad and started to form dissident groups dedicated to ousting Barre's regime by force.\nCivil war.\nBy the late 1980s, Barre's regime had become increasingly unpopular. The authorities became ever more totalitarian, and resistance movements, encouraged by Ethiopia's communist Derg administration, sprang up across the country. Mogadishu saw its first major outbreak of violence during the 14 July 1989 riots, during the crackdown Barres forces killed approximately 400 civilians.\"\" The July 1989 riots resulted in a large exodus of foreigners from the city and intensification of opposition towards the regime. This incident and other events over the following months led to the outbreak of the civil war in 1991, the toppling of Barre's government, and the disbandment of the Somali National Army. Many of the opposition groups began competing for influence in the power vacuum that followed the ouster of Barre's regime. Armed factions led by United Somali Congress commanders General Mohamed Farah Aidid and Ali Mahdi Mohamed, in particular, clashed as each sought to exert authority over the capital.\nDuring the United Nations Operation in Somalia II several gun battles took place in Mogadishu between Somali factions, volunteers and peacekeepers. Among these was the Battle of Mogadishu of 1993, a US apprehension of two high-ranking lieutenants of the Somali National Alliance. The UN soldiers withdrew altogether from the country on 3 March 1995, having incurred more significant casualties.\nIn 2006, the Islamic Courts Union (ICU), an Islamist organization, assumed control of much of the southern part of the country and imposed sharia law. The new Transitional Federal Government (TFG), established two years earlier, sought to establish its authority. With the assistance of Ethiopian troops, AMISOM peacekeepers and air support by the United States, it drove out the rival ICU and solidified its rule. On 8 January 2007, as the Battle of Ras Kamboni raged, TFG President and founder Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, a former colonel in the Somali Army, entered Mogadishu for the first time since being elected to office. The government then relocated to Villa Somalia in Mogadishu from its interim location in Baidoa, marking the first time since the fall of the Barre regime in 1991 that the federal government controlled most of the country.\nFollowing this defeat, the Islamic Courts Union splintered into factions. Some of the more radical elements, including a youth militia within the Courts' military wing known as al-Shabaab, regrouped to continue their insurgency against the TFG and oppose the Ethiopian military's presence in Somalia. Throughout 2007 and 2008 al-Shabaab scored military victories by seizing control of key towns and ports in both central and southern Somalia. At the end of 2008, the group had captured Baidoa but not Mogadishu. By January 2009, al-Shabaab and other militias had managed to force the Ethiopian troops to retreat and leave behind an under-equipped African Union peacekeeping force to assist the Transitional Federal Government's troops.\nBetween 31 May and 9 June 2008, representatives of Somalia's federal government and the moderate Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) group of Islamist rebels participated in peace talks in Djibouti brokered by the UN. The conference ended with a signed agreement calling for the withdrawal of Ethiopian troops in exchange for the cessation of armed conflict. Parliament was subsequently expanded to 550 seats to accommodate ARS members, which then elected a new president. With the help of a small team of African Union troops, the coalition government also began a counteroffensive in February 2009 to retake control of the southern half of the country. To solidify its control of southern Somalia, the TFG formed an alliance with the Islamic Courts Union, other members of the Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia, and Ahlu Sunna Waljama'a, a moderate Sufi militia.\nIn November 2010, a new technocratic government was elected to office, which enacted numerous reforms, especially in the security sector. By August 2011, the new administration and its AMISOM allies had managed to capture all of Mogadishu from the Al-Shabaab militants. Mogadishu has subsequently experienced a period of intense reconstruction spearheaded by the Somali diaspora, the municipal authorities, and Turkey, a historic ally of Somalia.\nIn October 2017, over 500 people were killed by a truck bombing.\nIn March 2022, al-Shabaab killed over 60 people in a series of attacks.\nIn October 2022, an al-Shabaab double car bombing killed over 120 people.\nOn 14 March, militants attacked and sieged the SYL Hotel in Mogadishu.\nIn July 2024, at least eight people were killed and twenty-one others injured in a shootout between security forces and inmates in a Mogadishu prison during an escape attempt. The prisoners who attempted to escape were members of Al-Shabaab. On 14 July, 10 people were injured in a cafe due to a car bombing done by Al-Shabaab.\nIn August 2024, 37 people were killed by an Al-Shabaab suicide bomber at Lido Beach.\nReconstruction.\nIn August 2011, militant group al Shabaab made a strategic withdrawal from Mogadishu to return to hit-and-run tactics. Mayor Mohamed Nur recognized the opportunity as critical to stabilizing and rebuilding the city. Working closely with the UN, USAID, and DRC, Nur's administration started large-scale rehabilitation of roads and general infrastructure, with residents cooperating with the civil and police authorities to tighten up on security. Nur recognized the opportunity to transform Mogadishu although resources were limited. Working with urban strategist Mitchell Sipus, the Benadir government sought to design and deploy a data-driven approach to post-war reconstruction.\nWith the passing of a new Constitution in 2012 and the subsequent election of an inaugural President in the new Federal Government, the mayorship continued to oversee Mogadishu's ongoing post-conflict reconstruction. Building off the initial pilot, the Benadir administration launched a citywide street naming, house numbering and postal codes project. Officially called the House Numbering and Post Code System, it is a joint initiative of the municipal authorities and Somali business community representatives. According to Nur, the initiative also aims to help the authorities firm up on security and resolve housing ownership disputes. As of 2016[ [update]], there are postal codes for 156 localities and sub-localities, including the Mogadishu metropolitan area.\nThe post-conflict reconstruction of Mogadishu in the 2010s and 2020s has led to a construction and housing boom, giving Somalia one of the fastest urbanisation rates in the world. According to the office of the mayor of Mogadishu, over 6,000 new buildings were constructed in the city between 2020 and 2025.\nGovernment.\nFederal.\nThe Government of Somalia has its seat in Mogadishu, the nation's capital. The Transitional Federal Government (TFG) was the internationally recognized central government of Somalia between 2004 and 2012. Based in Mogadishu, it constituted the executive branch of government.\nThe Federal Government of Somalia was established on 20 August 2012 at the end of the TFG's interim mandate. It represented the first permanent central government in the country since the start of the civil war. The Federal Parliament of Somalia serves as the government's legislative branch.\nMunicipal.\nMogadishu's municipal government is led by Omar Mohamud Mohamed (Finnish), who succeeded the late mayor Abdirahman Omar Osman (Yariisow) in August 2019 after Osman was killed in a suicide bomb attack that targeted his office.\nAmong the administration's development initiatives are a US$100 million urban renewal project, the creation of garbage disposal and incineration plants, the launch of a citywide cleanup project, the creation of asphalt and cement plants, rehabilitation of the Town Hall and parliament buildings, reconstruction of the former Defence Ministry offices, reconstruction of correctional facilities, rehabilitation and construction of health facilities, establishment of a Police Training Center and a permanent base in Jasiira for the new Somali Armed Forces, rebuilding of the Somali Postal Service headquarters, and rehabilitation of public playgrounds in several districts. In January 2014, the Benadir administration launched the House Numbering and Post Code System. It also began distributing national identity cards in March of the same year. In addition, the municipal authorities started renovating important local government centers in September 2014, including the capital's former Fisho Guverno compound. In January 2015, the Benadir administration also opened a new Health &amp; Safety Office to supervise health and safety practices in the city, and launched a municipal beautification campaign ahead of various international conferences that are slated to be held there.\nIn March 2015, the Benadir administration completed the Sustainable Employment Creation and Improved Livelihoods for Vulnerable Urban Communities (SECIL) project in conjunction with the EU and UN\u2013Habitat. The 3.5 million EUR initiative lasted three and a half years, and saw the establishment in Mogadishu of a sustainable waste collection system, a technical training centre, water quality testing laboratories, better access to clean drinking water, improved employment and livelihood opportunities in the low-cost fuel production sector, strengthened skills training and regulation in the construction sector, and laboratories for the testing of construction material quality.\nDiplomatic missions.\nA number of countries maintain foreign embassies and consulates in Mogadishu. As of January 2014, these diplomatic missions include the embassies of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Sudan, Libya, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Iran, Uganda, Nigeria, the United Kingdom, Japan, China, and Qatar. Embassies that are scheduled to reopen in the city include those of Egypt, the United Arab Emirates, Italy and South Korea.\nIn May 2015, in recognition of the sociopolitical progress made in Somalia and its return to effective governance, US Secretary of State John Kerry announced a preliminary plan to reestablish the US embassy in Mogadishu. He indicated that although there was no set timetable for the premises' relaunch, the US government had immediately begun upgrading its diplomatic representation in the country. President of Somalia Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and Prime Minister Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke also presented to Kerry the real estate deed for land reserved for the new US embassy compound. Mohamud concurrently signed an Establishment Agreement with the EU Head of Delegation in Somalia Michele Cervone d\u2019Urso, which facilitates the opening of more embassies in Mogadishu by European Union member states. The EU also announced that it had opened a new EU Delegation office in the city.\nIn February 2014, Somalia's Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation Abdirahman Duale Beyle announced that the federal government was slated to reopen the former Institute of Diplomacy in Mogadishu. The centre historically served as one of the most important national institutions for diplomacy and international relations. Beyle also pledged to reestablish the institute's diplomacy department, its information and broadcasting department, as well as its library.\nEconomy.\nMogadishu traditionally served as a commercial and financial centre. Before the importation of mass-produced cloth from Europe and America, the city's textiles were forwarded throughout the interior of the continent, as well as to the Arabian Peninsula and as far as the Persian coast.\nMogadishu's economy has grown rapidly since the city's pacification in mid-2011. The SomalFruit processing factory was reopened once again, as well as the local Coca-Cola factory, which was also refurbished. In May 2012, the First Somali Bank was established in the capital, representing the first commercial bank to open in southern Somalia since 1991. The Somali civil engineer and entrepreneur Nasra Agil opened the city's first Dollar store. The Historic Central Bank was regenerated, with the Moumin Business Centre likewise under construction.\nThe galvanization of Mogadishu's real estate sector was in part facilitated by the establishment of a local construction yard in November 2012 by the Municipality of Istanbul and the Turkish Red Crescent. 50 construction trucks and machines were imported from Turkey. The yard produces concrete, asphalt and paving stones for building projects and entrepreneurs. The Istanbul Municipality was also scheduled to bring in 100 specialists to accelerate the construction initiative which ultimately aims to modernize the capital's infrastructure.\nIn mid-2012, Mogadishu held its first ever Technology, Entertainment, Design (TEDx) conference. The event was organized by the FirstSomali Bank to showcase improvements in business, development and security to potential Somali and international investors. A second consecutive TEDx entrepreneurial conference was held the following year in the capital, highlighting new enterprises and commercial opportunities, including the establishment of the city's first dry cleaning business in several years.\nA number of large firms have their headquarters in Mogadishu. Among these is the Trans-National Industrial Electricity and Gas Company, an energy conglomerate founded in 2010 that unites five major Somali companies from the trade, finance, security and telecommunications sectors. Other firms based in the city include Hormuud Telecom, the largest telecommunications company in southern and central Somalia. Telcom is another telecommunications service provider that is centered in the capital. The local Somali Energy Company specializes in the generation, transmission and distribution of electric power to residents and businesses within its service area in Banaadir. Villa and Mansion Architects, an international architectural firm founded by the Somali-British architect Alexander Yusuf has its regional offices in Mogadishu. The International Bank of Somalia, which opened downtown in 2014, offers Islamic finance and international banking services via a swift code system. The Islamic Insurance Company (First Takaful and Re-Takaful Insurance Company) is the city's first full service insurance firm in many years. The Central Bank of Somalia, the national monetary authority, also has its headquarters in Mogadishu.\nIn June 2013, former Prime Minister Abdi Farah Shirdon signed a new foreign investment law. The draft bill was prepared by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in conjunction with government attorneys. Approved by the Cabinet, it establishes a secure legal framework for foreign investment in Mogadishu and elsewhere in the country.\nIn October 2014, Tawakal Money Express (Tawakal) began construction of the seven-storey Tawakal Plaza Mogadishu. The new high rise is slated to be completed by the end of 2015, and will feature a Tawakal Global Bank customer and financial services center, a large, 338 square meter supermarket, a 46-room luxury hotel, restaurant and coffee shop facilities, and conference and event halls. In addition, the Nabaad Supermarket provides major retail service to local shoppers. Open daily until 10 pm, the convenience chain imports most of its products from the United Arab Emirates and China. The Al Buruuj firm also launched a major real estate project in January 2015, Daru-Salam City. Financed by the Salaam Somali Bank, the new urban complex includes town houses, apartment flats, a mosque, recreational areas, playgrounds, a supermarket and roads. It is slated to be erected just outside the northern part of the capital, within a radius of the Industrial Road.\nLandmarks.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Muslim mosques.\nArba'a Rukun Mosque is one of the oldest Islamic places of worship in the capital. It was built circa 667 (1268\u20139 AD) along with the Fakr ad-Din Mosque. Arba'a Rukun's mihrab contains an inscription dated from the same year, which commemorates the masjid's late founder, Khusra ibn Mubarak al-Shirazi (Khusrau ibn Muhammed).\nThe Mosque of Islamic Solidarity was constructed in 1987 with financial support from the Saudi Fahd bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud Foundation. It is the main mosque in the city, and an iconic building in Somali society. With a capacity of up to 10,000 worshippers, it is the single largest masjid in the Horn region. In 2015, the federal authorities completed formal refurbishments on the mosque's infrastructure. The upgrades are part of a larger governmental renovation campaign aimed at all of the masjids in Mogadishu. To this end, the municipal authority is refurbishing the historic Central Mosque, situated downtown.\nThe Mogadishu Cathedral was built in 1928 by the colonial authorities in Italian Somaliland. Known as the \"Cattedrale di Mogadiscio\", it was constructed in a Norman Gothic style, based on the Cefal\u00f9 Cathedral in Cefal\u00f9, Sicily. The church served as the traditional seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Mogadiscio. It later incurred significant damage during the civil war. In April 2013, after a visit to the site to inspect its condition, the Diocese of Mogadiscio announced plans to refurbish the building.\nPalaces.\nVilla Somalia is the official residential palace and principal workplace of the President of Somalia, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. It sits on high ground that overlooks the city on the Indian Ocean, with access to both the harbour and airport.\nThe Governor's Palace of Mogadishu was the seat of the governor of Italian Somaliland, and then the administrator of the Trust Territory of Somalia.\nMuseums, libraries and theatres.\nThe National Museum of Somalia was established after independence in 1960, when the old Garesa Museum was turned into a National Museum. The National Museum was later moved in 1985, renamed to the Garesa Museum, and converted to a regional museum. After shutting down, the National Museum later reopened. As of January 2014, it holds many culturally important artefacts, including old coins, bartering tools, traditional artwork, ancient weaponry and pottery items.\nThe National Library of Somalia was established in 1975, and came under the responsibility of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education. In 1983, it held approximately 7,000 books, little in the way of historical and cultural archival material, and was open to the general public. The National Library later closed down in the 1990s. In June 2013, the Heritage Institute for Policy Studies organized a shipment of 22,000 books from the United States to Somalia as part of an initiative to restock the library. In December of the year, the Somali authorities officially launched a major project to rebuild the National Library. With Zainab Hassan serving as Director, the $1 million federal government-funded initiative will see a new library complex built in the capital within six months. In preparation for the relaunch, 60,000 additional books from other Arab League states are expected to arrive.\nThe National Theatre of Somalia opened in 1967 as an important cultural landmark in the national capital. It closed down after the start of the civil war in the early 1990s but reopened in March 2012 after reconstruction. In September 2013, the Somali federal government and its Chinese counterpart signed an official cooperation agreement in Mogadishu as part of a five-year national recovery plan in Somalia. The pact will see the Chinese authorities reconstruct the National Theatre of Somalia in addition to several other major infrastructural landmarks. A large part of Somalia's rich history remains at risk of disappearance with the lack of proper storage and archival system. At Radio Mogadishu, for example, over 200,000 tapes of records are dumped in a storeroom. If these analogue tapes are not digitized, they could be damaged to the point when it is impossible to recover them.\nMarkets.\nBakaara Market was created in late 1972 by the Barre administration. It served as an open market for the sale of goods and services, including produce and clothing. After the start of the civil war, the market was controlled by militant groups, who used it as a base for their operations. Following Mogadishu's pacification in 2011, renovations resumed at the market. Shops were rehabilitated, selling everything from fruit and garments to building materials. As in the rest of the city, Barkaara Market's real estate values have also risen considerably. As of 2013[ [update]], the local Tabaarak firm was renting out a newly constructed warehouse at the market for $2,000 per month.\nIn February 2014, the Benadir administration began renovations at the Ansaloti Market in the Hamar Jajab district. It was one of the largest markets in the city before closing down operations in the early 1990s. In September 2014, the municipal authorities reopened the Ansaloti to the public, with officials supervising all parts of the market. According to the Benadir Political Affairs Vice Chairman Mohamed Adan \"Anagel\", the facility is now open for business and will compete with other regional markets.\nInstitutes.\nThe Regional Somali Language Academy is an intergovernmental regulating body for the Somali language in the Horn region. In January 2015, President of Somalia Hassan Sheikh Mohamud announced that the institute was slated to be finalized in conjunction with the governments of Djibouti and Ethiopia. Among the scheduled projects was the construction of a new headquarters for the academy in Mogadishu, in recognition of Somalia's traditional position as the centre for the development and promotion of the Somali language. In February 2015, the foundation stone for the new Regional Somali Language Academy was officially laid at an inauguration ceremony in the city.\nHotels.\nMogadishu has a number of hotels, most of which were recently constructed. The city's many returning expatriates, investors and foreign workers are among these establishments' main customers. To meet the growing demand, hotel representatives have also begun participating in international industry conferences, such as the Africa Hotel Investment Forum.\nAmong the new hotels is the six-floor Jazeera Palace Hotel. It was built in 2010 and opened in 2012. Situated within 300m of the Aden Adde International Airport, it has a 70-room capacity with a 70% occupancy rate. The hotel expects to host over 1,000 visitors by 2015, for which it plans to construct a larger overall building and conference facilities. A new landslide hotel within the airport itself is also slated to be completed by the end of the year.\nOther hotels in the city include the Lafweyn Palace Hotel, Amira Castle Hotel, Sahafi Hotel, Hotel Nasa-Hablod, Oriental Hotel, Hotel Guuleed, Hotel Shamo, Peace Hotel, Aran Guest House, Muna Hotel, Hotel Taleex, Hotel Towfiq, Benadir Hotel, Ambassador Hotel, Kuwait Plaza Hotel, Safari Hotel Diplomat, Dayax Hotel, Safari Guesthouse and Bin Ali Hotel. The Posh Hotel was mostly destroyed by a suicide bomber in June 2017.\nGeography.\nMogadishu is situated on the Indian Ocean coast of the Horn of Africa of Northeast Africa, in the Banaadir administrative region (\"gobol\") in southeastern Somalia. The region itself is coextensive with the city and is much smaller than the historical province of Benadir. The city is administratively divided into eighteen districts of Abdiaziz, Bondhere, Daynile, Dharkenley, Hamar-Jajab, Hamar-Weyne, Heliwa, Hodan, Howl-Wadag, Karan, Shangani, Shibis, Waberi, Wadajir, Wardhigley and Yaqshid. Features of the city include the Hamarwein old town, the Bakaara Market, and Gezira Beach. The sandy beaches of Mogadishu have vibrant coral reefs, and are prime real estate for the first tourist resorts in many years.\nThe Shebelle River (\"Webiga Shabelle\") rises in central Ethiopia and comes within of the Indian Ocean near Mogadishu before turning southwestward. Usually dry during February and March, the river provides water essential for the cultivation of sugarcane, cotton, and bananas.\nClimate.\nFor a city situated so near the equator, Mogadishu has a dry climate. It is classified as hot and dry winter (winter is hotter than summer) semi-arid (K\u00f6ppen climate classification (\"BSh\"), as with much of southeastern Somalia. Summer (Jun-Aug) is the coldest and rainiest season. By contrast, towns in northern Somalia generally have a hot arid climate (K\u00f6ppen \"BWh\"). While the city is relatively dry, due to its coastal location, relative humidity is rather high, averaging 79% for the year.\nMogadishu is located in or near the tropical thorn woodland biome of the Holdridge global bioclimatic scheme. The mean temperature in the city year-round is , with an average maximum of and an average minimum of . Mean temperature readings per month vary by 3\u00a0\u00b0C (5.4\u00a0\u00b0F), corresponding with a hyperoceanic and subtype truly hyperoceanic continentality type. Precipitation per year averages . There are 47 wet days annually, which are associated with a 12% annual daily probability of rainfall. The city has an average of 3,066 hours of sunshine per year, with 8.4 hours of sunlight per day. Mean daylight hours and minutes per day are 8 hours and 24 minutes. The percentage of possible sunshine is 70%. Average sun altitude at solar noon on the 21st day of the month is 75%.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMogadishu is inhabited by All Somali clan-families, with the most dominated being the Abgaal and Murusade clans. Apart from the Somalis that have inhabited the city since the beginning, several minorities have also historically lived in the city. With the beginning of Islam, Arab and Persian migrants began to settle during the medieval period. Centuries of intermarriage between the various ethnic groups, which also include Bantus, produced a minority people called Benadiris, or \u2018Ad\u2019ad (), who mainly inhabit the oldest districts of Mogadishu. In the colonial period, European expatriates, primarily Italians, would also contribute to the city's cosmopolitan populace.\nFollowing a greatly improved security situation in the city in 2012, Somali expatriates and many of the diaspora began returning to Mogadishu for investment opportunities and to take part in the post-conflict reconstruction. Through both private efforts and public initiatives like the Somali Diaspora Corps, they have participated in the renovation of schools, hospitals, banks and other infrastructure. They have also helped to propel the local real estate market. Since 2015, Mogadishu and many parts of the north of the country have seen a rise in refugees and migrants mainly those who are returning from Yemen or are from war torn Arab countries particularly those who are Yemenis and Syrians who are fleeing conflict.\nAccording to Demographia, Mogadishu has a population of around 2,425,000 residents as of \u00a02017[ [update]]. It is the 210th largest city in the world by population size. The urban area occupies , with a population density of around . The UNFPA assisted the Ministry in the project, which is slated to be finalized ahead of the planned plebiscite and local and national elections in 2016.\nEducation.\nMogadishu is home to a number of scholastic institutions. As part of the government's urban renewal program, 100 schools across the country are scheduled to be refurbished and reopened. Compulsory education lasts 15 years, Primary and middle school is financed by the state and free of charge in public schools, between the ages of 7 and 19, and by 2015 enrollment of children in this age range was nearly 55%. Secondary or high school education is not mandatory but required in order to then progress to universities.\nThe Somali National University (SNU) was established in the 1950s, during the trusteeship period. In 1973, its programmes and facilities were expanded. The SNU developed over the next 20 years into an expansive institution of higher learning, with 13 departments, 700 staff and over 15,000 students. On 14 November 2013, the Cabinet unanimously approved a federal government plan to reopen the Somali National University, which had been closed down in the early 1990s. The refurbishing initiative cost US$3.6 million, and was completed in August 2014.\nMogadishu University (MU) is a non-governmental university that is governed by a board of trustees and a University Council. It is the brainchild of a number of professors from the Somali National University as well as other Somali intellectuals. Financed by the Islamic Development Bank in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, as well as other donor institutions, the university counts hundreds of graduates from its seven faculties, some of whom continue on to pursue Master's degrees abroad thanks to a scholarship programme. Mogadishu University has established multiple partnerships with several other academic institutions, including the University of Aalborg in Denmark, three universities in Egypt, seven universities in Sudan, the University of Djibouti, and two universities in Yemen. As of 2012[ [update]], MU also has accreditation with the Board of the Intergovernmental Organization EDU.\nIn 1999, the Somali Institute of Management and Administration (SIMAD) was co-established in Mogadishu by incumbent president of Somalia Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The institution subsequently grew into the SIMAD University, with Mohamud acting as dean until 2010. It offers a range of undergraduate courses in various fields, including economics, statistics, business, accountancy, technology, computer science, health sciences, education, law and public administration.\nBenadir University was established in 2002 with the intention of training doctors. It has since expanded into other fields. Another tertiary institution in the city is the Zamzam University of Science and Technology and Jamhuriya University of Science and Technology . The Turkish Boarding School was also established, with the Mogadishu Polytechnic Institute and Shabelle University campus likewise undergoing renovations. Additionally, a New Islamic University campus is being built. In April 2014, Prime Minister Abdiweli Sheikh Ahmed also laid the foundation stone for the reconstruction of the former meteorological school in Mogadishu. A new national Aviation Training Academy is likewise being built at the Aden Adde International Airport. This is the first of its kind.\nCity University was established in 2012 with the aim of providing instruction and research. The college is staffed by an accredited Master's-level faculty, and governed by a board of trustees consisting of academics and prominent entrepreneurs. City University's syllabus features a curriculum and foundation programs in English. Its campus includes physical and digital libraries, as well as IT and scientific laboratories. The university is a member of the Somali Research and Educational Network, and is authorized as a degree-granting institution by the national Ministry of Education Directorate of Higher Education and Culture.\nOther tertiary institutions in the capital include Zamzam University of Science and Technology. In 2012, Zamzam foundation started agricultural training school declared its purpose to be \u201crebuilding food production system of the country and accelerate its yield, while promoting income generation for low-income families\u201d. The School conducted 22 training programs during that period. in 2013 the Agricultural training school became Zamzam University of Science &amp; Technology (ZUST). the first classes for the bachelor's degree September 2014, followed by the faculty of Medicine in 2015. Currently the ZUST has six faculties and centre for graduate studies. The permanent campus of the university is located in the KM11 Weydoow Mogadishu.\nCulture.\nMogadishu is the cultural heart of Somalia, hosting numerous important national institutions, landmarks, and scholastic centers.\nLandmarks and institutions.\nThe city is home to significant historical and cultural landmarks. The Arba'a Rukun Mosque, built circa AH\u00a0667 (1268\u201369\u00a0CE), is one of the oldest Islamic places of worship in the capital. The Mosque of Islamic Solidarity, built with funds from the Saudi government, is the largest masjid in the Horn region. The Mogadishu Cathedral was built in 1928 by the colonial authorities in Italian Somaliland in a Norman Gothic style; it was severely damaged during the civil war but remains an important landmark.\nKey cultural institutions are also based in the city. The National Museum of Somalia, originally established in 1933, was rebuilt and officially reopened in 2020 after being destroyed in the civil war. The nearby National Library of Somalia has also undergone extensive renovation with the aim of preserving the nation's literary and historical records.\nSport.\nMogadishu Stadium was constructed in 1978 during the Barre administration, with the assistance of Chinese engineers. The facility was mainly used for hosting sporting activities, such as the Somalia Cup and for football matches with teams from the Somalia League. Presidential addresses and political rallies, among other events, were also held there. In September 2013, the Somali federal government and its Chinese counterpart signed an official cooperation agreement in Mogadishu as part of a five-year national recovery plan in Somalia. The pact will see the Chinese authorities reconstruct several major infrastructural landmarks, including the Mogadishu Stadium.\nThe Banadir Stadium and Konis Stadium are two other major sporting facilities in the capital. In 2013, the Somali Football Federation launched a renovation project at the Konis facility, during which artificial football turf contributed by FIFA was installed at the stadium. The Ex-Lujino basketball stadium in the Abdulaziz District also underwent a $10,000 rehabilitation, with funding provided by the local Hormuud Telecom firm. Additionally, the municipal authority oversaw the reconstruction of the Banadir Stadium.\nNational sporting bodies have their headquarters in Mogadishu. Among these are the Somali Football Federation, Somali Olympic Committee and Somali Basketball Federation. The Somali Karate and Taekwondo Federation is likewise centered in the city, and manages the national Taekwondo team.\nTransportation.\nRoad.\nRoads leading out of Mogadishu connect the city to other localities in Somalia as well as to neighbouring countries. The capital itself is cut into several grid layouts by an extensive road network. In October 2013, major construction began on the 23-kilometer road leading to the airport. Overseen by Somali and Turkish engineers, the upgrade was completed in November and included lane demarcation. The road construction initiative was part of a larger agreement signed by the Somali and Turkish governments to establish Mogadishu and Istanbul as sister cities, and in the process bring all of Mogadishu's roads up to modern standards. Following the treaty, the Turkish International Cooperation and Development Agency (TIKA) launched a citywide cleaning project in conjunction with the municipal cleaning department. The initiative saw around 100 rubbish collection vehicles and other equipment operated by TIKA clean the city's roads, with the Benadir municipality taking over operation of the cleaning project in March 2015.\nIn 2012\u20132013, Mogadishu's municipal authority in conjunction with the British and Norwegian governments began a project to install solar-powered street lights on all of the capital's major roads. With equipment imported from Norway, the initiative cost around $140,000 and lasted several months. The solar panels have helped to improve night-time visibility and enhance the city's overall aesthetic appeal.\nMinibuses are the most common type of public transportation in Mogadishu. The next most frequently used public vehicles in the city are auto rickshaws (\"bajaj\"). They number around 3,000 units and come in various designs. The auto-rickshaws represent a lower cost alternative to taxis and minibuses, typically charging half the price for the same distance, with flexible rates. Due to their affordability, capacity to negotiate narrow lanes and low fuel consumption, the three-wheeled vehicles are often appealing investment opportunities for small-scale entrepreneurs. They are generally preferred for shorter commutes. In June 2013, two new taxi companies also started offering road transportation to residents. Part of a fleet of over 100 vehicles, Mogadishu Taxi's trademark yellow cabs offer rides throughout the city at flat rates of $5. City Taxi, the firm's nearest competitor, charges the same flat rate, with plans to add new cabs to its fleet.\nIn January 2014, the Benadir administration launched a citywide street naming, house numbering and postal codes project. Officially called the House Numbering and Post Code System, it is a joint initiative of the municipal authorities and Somali business community representatives. According to former Mayor Mohamed Ahmed Nur, the initiative also aims to help the authorities firm up on security and resolve housing ownership disputes. In March 2015, the Benadir administration likewise launched a renovation project on the Hawo Asir-Fagah major road in Mogadishu. The government-public partnership aims to facilitate vehicle access in the area. According to Karaan district commissioner Ahmed Hassan Yalah'ow, the reconstruction initiative will also make the road all-weather resistant and is slated to be completed shortly.\nAir.\nDuring the post-independence period, Mogadishu International Airport offered flights to numerous global destinations. In the mid-1960s, the airport was enlarged to accommodate more international carriers, with the state-owned Somali Airlines providing regular trips to many major cities. By 1969, the airport's many landing grounds could also host small jets and DC 6B-type aircraft.\nThe facility grew considerably in size in the post-independence period after successive renovation projects. With the outbreak of the civil war in the early 1990s, Mogadishu International Airport's flight services experienced routine disruptions and its grounds and equipment were largely destroyed. In the late 2000s, the K50 Airport, situated 50 kilometers to the south, served as the capital's main airport while Mogadishu International Airport, now renamed Aden Adde International Airport, briefly shut down. However, in late 2010, the security situation in Mogadishu had significantly improved, with the federal government eventually managing to assume full control of the city by August 2011.\nIn May 2011, the Ministry of Transport announced that SKA-Somalia had been contracted to manage operations at the re-opened Aden Adde International Airport over a period of ten years. Among its first initiatives, worth an estimated $6 million, SKA invested in new airport equipment and expanded support services by hiring, training and equipping 200 local workers to meet international airport standards. The company also assisted in comprehensive infrastructure renovations, restored a dependable supply of electricity, revamped the baggage handling facilities as well as the arrival and departure lounges, put into place electronic check-in systems, and firmed up on security and work-flow. Additionally, SKA connected the grounds' Somali Civil Aviation and Meteorological Agency (SCAMA) and immigration, customs, commercial airlines and Somali Police Force officials to the internet. By January 2013, the firm had introduced shuttle buses to ferry travelers to and from the passenger terminal.\nIn December 2011, the Turkish government unveiled plans to further modernize the airport as part of Turkey's broader engagement in the local post-conflict reconstruction process. Among the scheduled renovations were new systems and infrastructure, including a modern control tower to monitor the airspace. In September 2013, the Turkish company Favori LLC began operations at the airport. The firm announced plans to renovate the aviation building and construct a new one, as well as upgrade other modern service structures. A $10 million project, it will increase the airport's existing 15 aircraft capacity to 60. In January 2015, a new, state-of-the-art terminal was opened at the airport. Featuring modern passenger facilities and a glass fa\u00e7ade, it will enable the airport to double its number of daily commercial flights to 60, with a throughput of around 1,000 passengers per hour.\nAs of January 2015, the largest airline services using Aden Adde International Airport include the Somali-owned private carriers Jubba Airways, Daallo Airlines, and African Express Airways, in addition to UN charter planes, Turkish Airlines, The airport also offers flights to other cities in Somalia, such as Galkayo, Berbera and Hargeisa, as well as to international destinations like Djibouti, Jeddah, and Istanbul.\nIn July 2012, Mohammed Osman Ali (Dhagah-tur), the General Director of the Ministry of Aviation and Transport, also announced that the Somali government had begun preparations to revive the Mogadishu-based national carrier, Somali Airlines. The first new aircraft were scheduled for delivery in December 2013.\nThere is another international airport under construction, New Mogadishu International Airport.\nSea.\nThe Port of Mogadishu, also known as the Mogadishu International Port, is the official seaport of Mogadishu. Classified as a major class port, it is the largest harbour in the country.\nAfter incurring some damage during the civil war, the federal government launched the Mogadishu Port Rehabilitation Project, an initiative to rebuild, develop and modernize the port. The renovations included the installation of Alpha Logistics technology. A joint international delegation consisting of the Director of the Port of Djibouti and Chinese officials specializing in infrastructure reconstruction visited the facility in June 2013. According to Mogadishu Port manager Abdullahi Ali Nur, the delegates along with local Somali officials received reports on the port's functions as part of the rebuilding project's planning stages.\nIn 2013, the Port of Mogadishu's management reportedly reached an agreement with representatives of the Iranian company Simatech Shipping LLC to handle vital operations at the seaport. Under the name Mogadishu Port Container Terminal, the firm is slated to handle all of the port's technical and operational functions.\nIn October 2013, the federal Cabinet endorsed an agreement with the Turkish firm Al-Bayrak to manage the Port of Mogadishu for a 20-year period. The deal was secured by the Ministry of Ports and Public Works, and also assigns Al-Bayrak responsibility for rebuilding and modernizing the seaport. In September 2014, the federal government officially delegated management of the Mogadishu Port to Al-Bayrak. The firm's modernization project will cost $80 million.\nRailway.\nThere were projects during the 1980s to reactivate the railway between Mogadishu and Jowhar, built by the Italians in 1926 but dismantled in World War II by British troops. It was originally intended that this railway would reach Addis Ababa. Only a few remaining tracks inside Mogadishu's harbour area are still used.\nMedia.\nMogadishu has historically served as a media hub. In 1975, the Somali Film Agency (SFA), the nation's film regulatory body, was established in Mogadishu. The SFA also organized the annual Mogadishu Pan-African and Arab Film Symposium (Mogpaafis), which brought together an array of filmmakers and movie experts from across the globe, including other parts of Northeast Africa and the Arab world, as well as Asia and Europe.\nIn addition, there are a number of radio news agencies based in Mogadishu. Radio Mogadishu is the federal government-run public broadcaster. Established in 1951 in Italian Somaliland, it initially aired news items in both Somali and Italian. The station was modernized with Russian assistance following independence in 1960, and began offering home service in Somali, Amharic and Oromo. After closing down operations in the early 1990s due to the civil war, the broadcaster was officially re-opened in the early 2000s by the Transitional National Government. Other radio stations headquartered in the city include Mustaqbal Radio, Radio Shabelle, Radio Bar-Kulan, Radio Kulmiye, Radio Dannan, Radio Dalsan, Radio Banadir, Radio Maanta, Gool FM, Radio Xurmo, and Radio Xamar, also known as Voice of Democracy.\nThe Mogadishu-based Somali National Television (SNTV) is the central government-owned broadcaster. On 4 April 2011, the Ministry of Information of the Transitional Federal Government officially re-launched the station as part of an initiative to develop the national telecommunications sector. SNTV broadcasts 24 hours a day, and can be viewed both within Somalia and abroad via terrestrial and satellite platforms.\nSomali popular music enjoys a large audience in Mogadishu, and was widely sold prior to the civil war. With the government managing to secure the city in mid-2011, radios once again play music. On 19 March 2012, an open concert was held in the city, which was broadcast live on local television. In April 2013, the Waayaha Cusub ensemble also organized the Reconciliation Music Festival, the first international music festival to be held in Mogadishu in two decades. Mogadiscio also includes the headquarters of \"Bilan Media\", a Somali newspaper composed exclusively of women, founded in 2020 with the support of the United Nations Development Programme.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMogadishu is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "60155", "revid": "3091149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60155", "title": "She Done Him Wrong", "text": "1933 American crime/comedy film by Lowell Sherman\nShe Done Him Wrong is a 1933 pre-Code American crime/comedy film starring Mae West and Cary Grant, directed by Lowell Sherman. The plot includes melodramatic and musical elements, with a supporting cast featuring Owen Moore, Gilbert Roland, Noah Beery Sr., Rochelle Hudson, and Louise Beavers. The film was adapted from the successful 1928 Broadway play \"Diamond Lil\" by Mae West. The film is famous for West's many double entendres and quips, including her best-known \"Why don't you come up sometime and see me?\". \"She Done Him Wrong\" was a box-office success and the film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture.\nIn 1996, \"She Done Him Wrong\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nThe story is set in New York City in the 1890s. A bawdy singer, Lady Lou, works in the Bowery barroom saloon of her boss and benefactor, Gus Jordan, who has given her many diamonds. But Lou is a lady with more men friends than anyone might imagine.\nWhat she does not know is that Gus traffics in prostitution and runs a counterfeiting ring to help finance her expensive diamonds. He also sends young women to San Francisco to be pickpockets. Gus works with two other crooked entertainer-assistants, Russian Rita and Rita's lover, the suave Sergei Stanieff. One of Gus's rivals and former \"friend\" of Lou's, named Dan Flynn, spends most of the movie dropping hints to Lou that Gus is up to no good, promising to look after her once Gus is in jail. Lou leads him on, hinting at times that she will return to him, but eventually he loses patience and implies he'll see her jailed if she doesn't submit to him.\nA city mission is located next door to the bar. Its young director, Captain Cummings, is in reality an undercover federal agent working to infiltrate and expose the illegal activities in the bar. Gus suspects nothing; he worries only that Cummings will reform his bar and scare away his customers.\nLou's former boyfriend, Chick Clark, is a vicious criminal who was convicted of robbery and sent to prison for trying to steal diamonds for her. In his absence, she becomes attracted to the handsome young psalm-singing reformer.\nWarned that Chick thinks she's betrayed him, she goes to the prison to try to reassure him. All the inmates greet her warmly and familiarly as she walks down the cellblock. Chick becomes angry and threatens to kill her if she double-crosses or two-times him before he gets out. She lies and claims she has been true to him. Gus gives counterfeit money to Rita and Sergei to spend. Chick escapes from jail, and police search for him in the bar. He comes into Lou's room and starts to strangle her, breaking off only because he still loves her and cannot harm her. Lou calms him down by promising that she will go with him when she finishes her next number.\nAfter Sergei gives Lou a diamond pin belonging to Rita, Rita starts a fight with Lou, who accidentally stabs her to death. Lou calmly combs the dead woman's long hair to hide the fact Rita is dead while the police search the room for Chick Clark. She has her bodyguard Spider, who \"would do anything for you, Lou\" dispose of Rita's body. She then tells Spider to bring Chick, who's hiding in an alley, back to her room upstairs. Then, while she sings \"Frankie and Johnny\", she silently signals to Dan Flynn that he should go to her room to wait for her, even though she knows Chick is in there with a gun. Chick shoots Dan dead and the gunfire draws a police raid. Cummings shows his badge and reveals himself as \"The Hawk\", a well-known Federal agent, as he arrests Gus and Sergei. Chick, still lurking in Lou's room, is about to kill Lou for double-crossing him, when Cummings also apprehends him.\nCummings then takes Lou away in an open horse-drawn carriage instead of the paddywagon into which all the other criminals have been loaded. He tells her she doesn't belong in jail and removes all her other rings and slips a diamond engagement ring onto her left ring finger.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nThe film was directed by Lowell Sherman and produced by William LeBaron. The script was adapted by Harvey F. Thew and John Bright. Original music was composed by Ralph Rainger, John Leipold and Stephan Pasternacki. Charles Lang was responsible for the cinematography, and the costumes were designed by Edith Head.\n\"Blonde Venus\" (with Marlene Dietrich) and \"Madame Butterfly\" (with Sylvia Sidney), both predate \"She Done Him Wrong\" but West always claimed to have discovered Grant for her film, claiming that until then Grant had only made \"some tests with starlets\".\nThe Hays Code declared the play \"Diamond Lil\" banned from the screen and repeatedly demanded changes to remove associations with or elements from the play, including suggested titles with the word \"diamond\". The adaption was finally allowed under the condition that the play not be referred to in publicity or advertising. Joseph Breen, who oversaw the more effectual enforcement of the Code beginning in 1934, blocked \"She Done Him Wrong\" from being rereleased in 1935 and again in 1949.\nRafaela Ottiano, who portrayed Russian Rita in the Broadway version, was cast on West's recommendation in the same role, which led to work with West throughout her career.\nLouise Beavers was the only African-American actress to be brought onto the film by West personally. She wanted a black woman to appear with her. When she did stage and screen work, West made it a point to act with black American actors and actresses, helping to break racial discrimination in entertainment. West's stage shows resulted in her arrest for saucy material and her having black actors on stage was extremely controversial. With this film, she and her Paramount bosses called the shots: Black stars appeared in a few of her films after this one.\nReception.\nThe film was a box-office success, grossing $2,000,000 domestically with a budget of $200,000. \"Variety\"'s \"Bige\" gave \"She Done Him Wrong\" a negative review, stating that Paramount was attempting to rush Mae West to stardom by giving her her own film and top billing, and that the film was not very good without known actors and an entertaining story, despite the presence of extremely well-known actors Noah Beery Sr. and Owen Moore, not to mention up-and-comer Cary Grant. Pauline Kael wrote: \"Mae West, the great shady lady of the screen, wiggles and sings \"Easy Rider\" and seduces virtuous young Cary Grant. A classic comedy and a classic seduction.\" Leonard Maltin gave it four of four stars: \"West repeats her stage role of Diamond Lil... in her best film.\" Leslie Halliwell gave it three of four stars: \"As near undiluted Mae West as Hollywood ever came: fast, funny, melodramatic and pretty sexy; also a very atmospheric and well-made movie.\"\n\"She Done Him Wrong\" was nominated for the Academy Award for Outstanding Production, now known as Best Picture. At 66 minutes, it is the shortest film to be so honored.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nNote.\nWest's famous line to Cary Grant is \"Why don't you come up some time and see me?\" in \"She Done Him Wrong\". She changed it to \"Come up and see me sometime\" in her next movie \"I'm No Angel\", released the same year and co-starring Grant.\n\"She Done Him Wrong\" bears some resemblances to \"The Bowery\", a film released later the same year by United Artists starring Noah Beery's brother Wallace. The two films each include a saloon owner named Chuck Conners as a main character (played by Wallace Beery) in \"The Bowery\" and a smaller role (played by Tammany Young) in \"She Done Him Wrong\".\nThe animated cartoon short \"She Done Him Right\" followed in 1933 as a parody spinoff of \"She Done Him Wrong\".\nUniversal Pictures, through its EMKA division, currently handles distribution of the film.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60156", "revid": "48053171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60156", "title": "State fair", "text": "Annual competitive and recreational gathering of a U.S. state's population\nA state fair is an annual competitive and recreational gathering of a U.S. state's population, usually held in late summer or early fall. It is a larger version of a county fair, often including only exhibits or competitors that have won in their categories at the more-local county fairs.\nState fairs began in the nineteenth century for the purpose of promoting state agriculture, through competitive exhibitions of livestock and display of farm products. As the U.S. evolved from a predominantly agrarian to an industrial society in the twentieth century, and the more service economy of the 21st century, modern state fairs have expanded to include carnival amusement rides and games, display of industrial products, automobile racing, and entertainment such as musical concerts. Large fairs can admit more than a million visitors over the course of a week or two. The oldest state fair is that of The Fredericksburg Agricultural Fair, established in 1738, and is the oldest fair in Virginia and the United States. The first U.S. state fair was the New York one, held in 1841 in Syracuse, and has been held annually since. The second state fair was in Detroit, Michigan, which ran from 1849 to 2009. The fair was revived in 2013 and has been held at the Suburban Collection Showplace in Novi, Michigan ever since.\nEvents similar to state fairs are also held annually in each state capital in Australia, known as royal shows. Australian royal shows are organized by state agricultural and horticultural societies, and are described further in the agricultural show article.\nList of state fairs.\nUnited States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nState fair police departments.\nSeveral state fairs maintain their own police departments, including:\nProvincial exhibitions in Canada.\nA few annual exhibitions in the summer in Canada are similar to state fairs in the United States:\nAwards.\nState and county fairs are famous for a variety of competitions that award \"ribbons\". Awards are generally given according to the following scale:\nAttendance.\nAs of 2019, the largest attendance at a state fair in the US is in Texas with the fair having attracted 2,514,637 visitors. Even though it is longer than an average state fair, any advantage is negated by the size of the physical state since those days would be required for the states citizens to have equal opportunity to attend.\nThe largest average per day attendance is at the Minnesota State Fair averaging just under 200,000 people per day.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60157", "revid": "3362112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60157", "title": "The Good Earth (film)", "text": "1937 film by Victor Fleming, Sidney Franklin, Gustav Machat\u00fd\nThe Good Earth is a 1937 American drama film about Chinese farmers who struggle to survive. It was adapted by Talbot Jennings, Tess Slesinger, and Claudine West from the 1932 play by Owen Davis and Donald Davis, which was in itself based on the 1931 novel of the same name by Nobel Prize-winning author Pearl S. Buck. The film was directed by Sidney Franklin, with uncredited contributions by Victor Fleming and Gustav Machaty.\nThe film stars Paul Muni as Wang Lung. For her role as his wife O-Lan, Luise Rainer won an Academy Award for Best Actress. The film also won the Academy Award for Best Cinematography for Karl Freund. It was nominated for Best Director, Best Film Editing, and Best Picture. Its world premiere was at the elegant Carthay Circle Theatre in Los Angeles.\nPlot.\nIn pre-World War I northern China, young farmer Wang Lung (Paul Muni) marries O-Lan (Luise Rainer), a slave at the Great House, the residence of the most powerful family in their village. O-Lan proves to be an excellent wife, hard working and uncomplaining. Wang Lung prospers. He buys more land, and O-Lan gives birth to two sons and a daughter. Meanwhile, the Great House begins to decline.\nAll is well until a drought and the resulting famine drive the family to the brink. O-Lan gives birth to a second daughter but kills her shortly after birth to spare her from starvation. Desperate, Wang Lung considers the advice of his pessimistic, worthless uncle (Walter Connolly) to sell his land for food, but O-Lan opposes it. Instead, they travel south to a city in search of work. The family survives by begging and stealing. When a revolutionary gives a speech to try to drum up support for the army approaching despite rain in the north, Wang Lung and O-Lan realize the drought is over. They long to return to their farm, but they have no money for an ox, seed, and food.\nThe city changes hands, and O-Lan joins a mob looting a mansion. However, she is knocked down and trampled upon. When she comes to, she finds a bag of jewels overlooked in the confusion. This windfall allows the family to go home and prosper once more. O-Lan asks only to keep two pearls for herself.\nYears pass. Wang Lung's sons grow up into educated young men, and he has grown so wealthy that he purchases the Great House. Then, Wang Lung becomes besotted with Lotus (Tilly Losch), a pretty, young dancer at the local tea house, and makes her his second wife. He begins to find fault with the worn-out O-Lan. Desperate to gain affection from Lotus, he gives O-Lan's pearls to Lotus.\nWhen Wang Lung discovers that Lotus has seduced Younger Son (Roland Lui), he orders his son to leave. Then a swarm of locusts threatens the entire village. Using a strategy devised by Elder Son (Keye Luke), everyone unites to try to save the crops. Just when all seems lost, the wind shifts direction, taking the danger away. The near-disaster brings Wang Lung back to his senses. He reconciles with Younger Son. On the latter's wedding day, Wang Lung returns the pearls to O-Lan before she dies, completely exhausted by a hard life. Without disturbing the wedding festivities, Wang Lung quietly exits the house and regards a flowering peach tree planted by O-Lan on their marriage day. Reverently he murmurs, \"O-Lan, you are the earth.\"\nProduction.\nThe film's budget was $2.8 million () and took three years to make. A farm in Porter Ranch, California, was transformed into a replica of Chinese farmland for the film.\nThe movie script was more sympathetic to China than the novel had been. Wang Lung's son was now a representative of modern China who goes to university and leads the villagers. The family is a wholesome affectionate unit, even the uncle who in the novel exploits Wang Lung, and the sexual aspect of Lotus is played down. The Hays office, which supervised each Hollywood script, demanded more than twenty rewrites to eliminate what it found offensive. Before Herbert Stothart and Edward Ward were engaged to provide the music, negotiations took place with Austrian composer Arnold Schoenberg, who is known to have made some musical sketches for the score before the plan fell through.\nPearl Buck intended the film to be cast with all Chinese or Chinese-American actors. Irving Thalberg also envisioned casting only Chinese actors, but had to concede that American audiences were not ready for such a film. According to Variety, Anna May Wong had been suggested for the role of O-Lan, but the Hays Code anti-miscegenation rules required Paul Muni's character's wife to be played by a white actress. Some confusion has resulted because the Production Code of the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America, Inc., 1930\u20131934 stated only that \"miscegenation (sex relationship between the white and black races) is forbidden\". Chinese-American actress Soo Yong, in fact, was cast as the Chinese aunt who was married to the uncle played by Caucasian actor Walter Connolly. MGM offered Wong the role of Lotus, but she refused, stating, \"You're asking me \u2013 with Chinese blood \u2013 to do the only unsympathetic role in the picture featuring an all-American cast portraying Chinese characters.\" Many of the characters were played by white actors made to look Asian through yellowface, make-up techniques developed by Jack Dawn and used for the first time in this film. Others in the supporting cast were Chinese American actors.\nWhen MGM inquired into the possibility of making the film in China, the Chinese government was divided on how to respond. Initial hostility derived from resentment of the novel, which critics charged focused only on the perceived backwardness of the country, while some government officials hoped to have control which would be gone if the film work was done outside China. Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek himself intervened, perhaps at the behest of his wife, Mme. Chiang, whose American education made her an advocate for cooperation. Permission was granted on condition that the view of China be favorable, that the Chinese government would supervise and have control of shots done in China, and the unenforced stipulation that the entire cast be Chinese. The government in Nanjing did not foresee the sympathy the film would create and when MGM decided to shoot on location in China officials took extraordinary steps to control the production, forcing the studio to hire a Nationalist general to advise them on authentic settings and costumes (most of this footage was mysteriously lost when it was shipped home and had to be re-shot in California). There were reports that MGM distributed a different version of the film in China.\nThe film's 1936 production lasted from February 28 to July 23. Thalberg died on September 14, four-and-a-half months before its Los Angeles premiere on January 29, 1937. The film credits stated that this was his \"last great achievement\". Original prints of the film were presented in sepiatone.\nReception.\nContemporary reviews were positive. Frank S. Nugent of \"The New York Times\" praised the film as \"a superb translation of a literary classic ... one of the finest things Hollywood has done this season or any other. While it has taken some liberties with the novel's text, it has taken none with its quality or spirit.\" \"Variety\" declared it \"a remarkable screen production\" and called Muni's performance \"splendid\", but questioned whether the subject matter would make for good box office. \"Film Daily\" raved, \"A 'must see' picture, possessing absorbing drama, passionate sincerity and brilliant performance.\" John Mosher of \"The New Yorker\" called it \"a vast and rich film.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" described it as \"a highly artistic piece of work,\" and while not exactly an entertaining picture, \"those who see it will undoubtedly be awed by its magnificence.\"\nWriting for \"The Spectator\" in the UK, Graham Greene gave the film a mixed good review, characterizing the first half of the film as \"simple and direct and true\", but complaining that the second half displays \"a little less than life\" and that the last hour was permeated by \"banality and ennui\". Discussing the actors, Greene praised Rainer for a \"beautiful performance\" that \"carries the film\", and criticized Muni's performance as exaggerated and \"not of the same quality\" as Rainer's.\nBox office.\nAccording to MGM records the film earned $2,002,000 in the US and Canada and $1,555,000 elsewhere but because of its high cost incurred an ultimate loss of $96,000.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60159", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60159", "title": "Phython", "text": ""}
{"id": "60160", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60160", "title": "Jaque sharaque", "text": ""}
{"id": "60161", "revid": "1316988706", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60161", "title": "The Maltese Falcon (novel)", "text": "1930 novel by Dashiell Hammett\nThe Maltese Falcon is a 1930 detective novel by American writer Dashiell Hammett, originally serialized in the magazine \"Black Mask\" beginning with the September 1929 issue. The story is told entirely in external third-person narrative; there is no description whatsoever of any character's thoughts or feelings, only what they say and do, and how they look. The novel has been adapted several times for the cinema. It is considered part of the hardboiled genre, which Hammett played a major part in popularizing.\nPlot.\nSam Spade is a private detective in San Francisco, in partnership with Miles Archer. The beautiful \"Miss Wonderley\" hires them to follow Floyd Thursby, who she claims has run off with her sister. Archer takes the first stint but is found shot dead that night. Thursby is also killed later and Spade is a suspect. The next morning, Spade coolly tells his office secretary, Effie Perine, to have the office door repainted to read simply \"Samuel Spade\".\n\"Miss Wonderley\" is soon revealed to be an acquisitive adventuress named Brigid O'Shaughnessy, who is involved in the search for a black statuette of unknown but substantial value. Others are after this falcon, including Joel Cairo, an effeminate criminal, and Casper Gutman, a fat man accompanied by a vicious young gunman, Wilmer Cook. O'Shaughnessy begs for Spade's protection while telling him as little as possible. They meet with Cairo at Spade's apartment, and Spade again presses O'Shaughnessy for details; again she stalls but kisses Spade. The next morning, she is asleep in his bed. Leaving her there, Spade slips out to search her apartment. \nEffie believes O'Shaughnessy \"is all right\" and Spade should help her. Effie agrees to hide her at her own home, but O'Shaughnessy disappears again. When Spade meets Gutman in his hotel room, neither will tell what he knows. Spade implies he is looking out for himself, not O'Shaughnessy. Red herrings abound. The police suspect Spade in the shootings: he was sleeping with Archer's wife, Iva. The District Attorney ties the shootings to Dixie Monahan, a Chicago gambler who had employed Thursby as a bodyguard in the Far East.\nAt a second meeting, Gutman tells Spade the history of the tribute of the Maltese Falcon. It was made of gold and jewels by the 16th-century Knights of Malta as a gift to the King of Spain but was captured by pirates. After passing from owner to owner, at some time it was coated with black enamel to conceal its value. Gutman traced the falcon to General Kemidov, a Russian exile in Constantinople and hired O'Shaughnessy to get it; she brought in Cairo to help. O'Shaughnessy and Thursby fled with the falcon to Hong Kong and from there to San Francisco. During this conversation, Gutman drugs Spade, who passes out on the floor.\nSpade awakens alone and returns to his office where a wounded ship's captain staggers in with a package containing the falcon and dies. O'Shaughnessy calls the office, begs for Spade's help, but sends him on a wild goose chase. When he returns, O'Shaughnessy is waiting in front of Spade's apartment building. Inside Spade's apartment they find Gutman, Wilmer, and Cairo in wait with guns drawn. Gutman presents $10,000 in cash for the falcon, but Spade argues that the police must arrest someone for the murders. During a fight, Spade knocks Wilmer out, and Gutman agrees to give Wilmer to the police.\nSpade has Effie fetch the falcon, but Gutman discovers it is a fake (a decoy made by General Kemidov, or possibly the falcon of legend was never real). During the excitement, Wilmer escapes. Gutman decides to go to Constantinople for the real falcon; Cairo joins him and they leave. Spade then calls the police and tells them the story, adding that he has Wilmer's guns and other evidence. While they are waiting, he bullies O'Shaughnessy into confessing her real role. \nArcher was shot with Thursby's gun, but by her. She has lied to him and double-crossed him. O'Shaughnessy admits all this, but pleads that she is in love with Spade. Maybe he does care for her, Spade admits, but tells her, \"I won't play the sap for you\"\u00a0\u2013 for personal reasons as well as needing justice for his dead partner; if she can get off with a long prison term, he'll wait for her, but if she hangs, he'll always remember her. When the police arrive, he turns her in, and the police tell him Wilmer has just shot Gutman dead.\nBackground.\nAlthough Hammett himself worked for a time as a private detective for the Pinkerton Detective Agency in San Francisco (and used his given name, Samuel, for the story's protagonist), Hammett asserted that \"Spade has no original. He is a dream man in the sense that he is what most of the private detectives I worked with would like to have been, and, in their cockier moments, thought they approached.\"\nHammett reportedly drew upon his years as a detective in creating many of the other characters for \"The Maltese Falcon\", which reworks elements from some of his stories published in \"Black Mask\" magazine in 1925, \"The Whosis Kid\" and \"The Gutting of Couffignal\". \nSerialized version.\nThe novel was serialized in five parts in \"Black Mask\" from September 1929 to January 1930. The serialized version of the story entered the public domain on January 1, 2025. The book underwent copy edits before being published in book form a year later in 1930 by Alfred A. Knopf. The novel will enter the public domain on January 1, 2026. \nAdaptations.\nThe novel has been adapted for film four times, twice under its original title: \nThere have been two audio adaptations of the novel:\nThere have also been American stage adaptations:\nReception.\nCritic of the time Edmund Wilson said of Hammett that he \"lacked the ability to bring the story to imaginative life.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60162", "revid": "49214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60162", "title": "Tidal locking", "text": "Situation in which an astronomical object's orbital period matches its rotational period\nTidal locking between a pair of co-orbiting astronomical bodies occurs when one of the objects reaches a state where there is no longer any net change in its rotation rate over the course of a complete orbit. In the case where a tidally locked body possesses synchronous rotation, the object takes just as long to rotate around its own axis as it does to revolve around its partner. For example, the same side of the Moon always faces Earth, although there is some variability because the Moon's orbit is not perfectly circular. Usually, only the satellite is tidally locked to the larger body. However, if both the difference in mass between the two bodies and the distance between them are relatively small, each may be tidally locked to the other; this is the case for Pluto and Charon, and for Eris and Dysnomia. Alternative names for the tidal locking process are gravitational locking, captured rotation, and spin\u2013orbit locking. \nThe effect arises between two bodies when their gravitational interaction slows a body's rotation until it becomes tidally locked. Over many millions of years, the interaction forces changes to their orbits and rotation rates as a result of energy exchange and heat dissipation. When one of the bodies reaches a state where there is no longer any net change in its rotation rate over the course of a complete orbit, it is said to be tidally locked. The object tends to stay in this state because leaving it would require adding energy back into the system. The object's orbit may migrate over time so as to undo the tidal lock, for example, if a giant planet perturbs the object.\nThere is ambiguity in the use of the terms 'tidally locked' and 'tidal locking', in that some scientific sources use it to refer exclusively to 1:1 synchronous rotation (e.g. the Moon), while others include non-synchronous orbital resonances in which there is no further transfer of angular momentum over the course of one orbit (e.g. Mercury). In Mercury's case, the planet completes three rotations for every two revolutions around the Sun, a 3:2 spin\u2013orbit resonance. In the special case where an orbit is nearly circular and the body's rotation axis is not significantly tilted, such as the Moon, tidal locking results in the same hemisphere of the revolving object constantly facing its partner.\nRegardless of which definition of tidal locking is used, the hemisphere that is visible changes slightly due to variations in the locked body's orbital velocity and the inclination of its rotation axis over time.\nMechanism.\nConsider a pair of co-orbiting objects, A and B. The change in rotation rate necessary to tidally lock body B to the larger body A is caused by the torque applied by A's gravity on bulges it has induced on B by tidal forces.\nThe gravitational force from object A upon B will vary with distance, being greatest at the nearest surface to A and least at the most distant. This creates a gravitational gradient across object B that will distort its equilibrium shape slightly. The body of object B will become elongated along the axis oriented toward A, and conversely, slightly reduced in dimension in directions orthogonal to this axis. The elongated distortions are known as tidal bulges. (For the solid Earth, these bulges can reach displacements of up to around .) When B is not yet tidally locked, the bulges travel over its surface due to orbital motions, with one of the two \"high\" tidal bulges traveling close to the point where body A is overhead. For large astronomical bodies that are nearly spherical due to self-gravitation, the tidal distortion produces a slightly prolate spheroid, i.e. an axially symmetric ellipsoid that is elongated along its major axis. Smaller bodies also experience distortion, but this distortion is less regular.\nThe material of B exerts resistance to this periodic reshaping caused by the tidal force. In effect, some time is required to reshape B to the gravitational equilibrium shape, by which time the forming bulges have already been carried some distance away from the A\u2013B axis by B's rotation. Seen from a vantage point in space, the points of maximum bulge extension are displaced from the axis oriented toward A. If B's rotation period is shorter than its orbital period, the bulges are carried forward of the axis oriented toward A in the direction of rotation, whereas if B's rotation period is longer, the bulges instead lag behind.\nBecause the bulges are now displaced from the A\u2013B axis, A's gravitational pull on the mass in them exerts a torque on B. The torque on the A-facing bulge acts to bring B's rotation in line with its orbital period, whereas the \"back\" bulge, which faces away from A, acts in the opposite sense. However, the bulge on the A-facing side is closer to A than the back bulge by a distance of approximately B's diameter, and so experiences a slightly stronger gravitational force and torque. The net resulting torque from both bulges, then, is always in the direction that acts to synchronize B's rotation with its orbital period, leading eventually to tidal locking.\nOrbital changes.\nThe angular momentum of the whole A\u2013B system is conserved in this process, so that when B slows down and loses rotational angular momentum, its \"orbital\" angular momentum is boosted by a similar amount (there are also some smaller effects on A's rotation). This results in a raising of B's orbit about A in tandem with its rotational slowdown. For the other case where B starts off rotating too slowly, tidal locking both speeds up its rotation, and \"lowers\" its orbit.\nLocking of the larger body.\nThe tidal locking effect is also experienced by the larger body A, but at a slower rate because B's gravitational effect is weaker due to B's smaller mass. For example, Earth's rotation is gradually being slowed by the Moon, by an amount that becomes noticeable over geological time as revealed in the fossil record. Current estimations are that this (together with the tidal influence of the Sun) has helped lengthen the Earth day from about 6 hours to the current 24 hours (over about 4.5 billion years). Currently, atomic clocks show that Earth's day lengthens, on average, by about 2.3 milliseconds per century. Given enough time, this would create a mutual tidal locking between Earth and the Moon. The length of Earth's day would increase and the length of a lunar month would also increase. Earth's sidereal day would eventually have the same length as the Moon's orbital period, about 47 times the length of the Earth day at present. However, Earth is not expected to become tidally locked to the Moon before the Sun becomes a red giant and engulfs both.\nFor bodies of similar size the effect may be of comparable size for both, and both may become tidally locked to each other on a much shorter timescale. An example is the dwarf planet Pluto and its satellite Charon. They have already reached a state where Charon is visible from only one hemisphere of Pluto and vice versa.\nEccentric orbits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A widely spread misapprehension is that a tidally locked body\npermanently turns one side to its host.\u2014\u200a\nFor orbits that do not have an eccentricity close to zero, the rotation rate tends to become locked with the orbital speed when the body is at periapsis, which is the point of strongest tidal interaction between the two objects. If the orbiting object has a companion, this third body can cause the rotation rate of the parent object to vary in an oscillatory manner. This interaction can also drive an increase in orbital eccentricity of the orbiting object around the primary \u2013 an effect known as eccentricity pumping.\nIn some cases where the orbit is eccentric and the tidal effect is relatively weak, the smaller body may end up in a so-called spin\u2013orbit resonance, rather than being tidally locked. Here, the ratio of the rotation period of a body to its own orbital period is some simple fraction different from 1:1. A well known case is the rotation of Mercury, which is locked to its own orbit around the Sun in a 3:2 resonance. This results in the rotation speed roughly matching the orbital speed around perihelion.\nMany exoplanets (especially the close-in ones) are expected to be in spin\u2013orbit resonances higher than 1:1. A Mercury-like terrestrial planet can, for example, become captured in a 3:2, 2:1, or 5:2 spin\u2013orbit resonance, with the probability of each being dependent on the orbital eccentricity.\nOccurrence.\nMoons.\nAll twenty known moons in the Solar System that are large enough to be round are tidally locked with their primaries, because they orbit very closely and tidal force increases rapidly (as a cubic function) with decreasing distance. On the other hand, most of the irregular outer satellites of the giant planets (e.g. Phoebe), which orbit much farther away than the large well-known moons, are not tidally locked.\nPluto and Charon are an extreme example of a tidal lock. Charon is a relatively large moon in comparison to its primary and also has a very close orbit. This results in Pluto and Charon being mutually tidally locked. Pluto's other moons are not tidally locked; Styx, Nix, Kerberos, and Hydra all rotate chaotically due to the influence of Charon. Similarly, Eris and Dysnomia are mutually tidally locked. Orcus and Vanth might also be mutually tidally locked, but the data is not conclusive.\nThe tidal locking situation for asteroid moons is largely unknown, but closely orbiting binaries are expected to be tidally locked, as well as contact binaries.\nEarth's Moon.\nEarth's Moon's rotation and orbital periods are tidally locked with each other, so no matter when the Moon is observed from Earth, the same hemisphere of the Moon is always seen. Most of the far side of the Moon was not seen until 1959, when photographs of most of the far side were transmitted from the Soviet spacecraft \"Luna 3\".\nWhen Earth is observed from the Moon, Earth does not appear to move across the sky. It remains in the same place while showing nearly all its surface as it rotates on its axis.\nDespite the Moon's rotational and orbital periods being exactly locked, about 59 percent of the Moon's total surface may be seen with repeated observations from Earth, due to the phenomena of libration and parallax. Librations are primarily caused by the Moon's varying orbital speed due to the eccentricity of its orbit: this allows up to about 6\u00b0 more along its perimeter to be seen from Earth. Parallax is a geometric effect: at the surface of Earth observers are offset from the line through the centers of Earth and Moon; this accounts for about a 1\u00b0 difference in the Moon's surface which can be seen around the sides of the Moon when comparing observations made during moonrise and moonset.\nPlanets.\nIt was thought for some time that Mercury was in synchronous rotation with the Sun. This was because whenever Mercury was best placed for observation, the same side faced inward. Radar observations in 1965 demonstrated instead that Mercury has a 3:2 spin\u2013orbit resonance, rotating three times for every two revolutions around the Sun, which results in the same positioning at those observation points. Modeling has demonstrated that Mercury was captured into the 3:2 spin\u2013orbit state very early in its history, probably within 10\u201320 million years after its formation.\nThe 583.92-day interval between successive close approaches of Venus to Earth is equal to 5.001444 Venusian solar days, making approximately the same face visible from Earth at each close approach. Whether this relationship arose by chance or is the result of some kind of tidal locking with Earth is unknown.\nThe exoplanet Proxima Centauri b discovered in 2016 which orbits around Proxima Centauri, is almost certainly tidally locked, expressing either synchronized rotation or a 3:2 spin\u2013orbit resonance like that of Mercury.\nOne form of hypothetical tidally locked exoplanets are eyeball planets, which in turn are divided into \"hot\" and \"cold\" eyeball planets.\nStars.\nClose binary stars throughout the universe are expected to be tidally locked with each other, and extrasolar planets that have been found to orbit their primaries extremely closely are also thought to be tidally locked to them. An unusual example, confirmed by MOST, may be Tau Bo\u00f6tis, a star that is probably tidally locked by its planet Tau Bo\u00f6tis b. If so, the tidal locking is almost certainly mutual.\nTimescale.\nAn estimate of the time for a body to become tidally locked can be obtained using the following formula:\nformula_1\nwhere\nformula_12 and formula_13 are generally very poorly known except for the Moon, which has formula_14. For a really rough estimate it is common to take formula_15 (perhaps conservatively, giving overestimated locking times), and\nformula_16\nwhere\nEven knowing the size and density of the satellite leaves many parameters that must be estimated (especially \"\u03c9\", \"Q\", and \"\u03bc\"), so that any calculated locking times obtained are expected to be inaccurate, even to factors of ten. Further, during the tidal locking phase the semi-major axis formula_20 may have been significantly different from that observed nowadays due to subsequent tidal acceleration, and the locking time is extremely sensitive to this value.\nBecause the uncertainty is so high, the above formulas can be simplified to give a somewhat less cumbersome one. By assuming that the satellite is spherical, formula_21, and it is sensible to guess one revolution every 12 hours in the initial non-locked state (most asteroids have rotational periods between about 2 hours and about 2 days)\nformula_22\nwith masses in kilograms, distances in meters, and formula_23 in newtons per meter squared; formula_23 can be roughly taken as 3\u00d71010\u00a0N/m2 for rocky objects and 4\u00d7109\u00a0N/m2 for icy ones.\nThere is an extremely strong dependence on semi-major axis formula_20.\nFor the locking of a primary body to its satellite as in the case of Pluto, the satellite and primary body parameters can be swapped.\nOne conclusion is that, \"other things being equal\" (such as formula_12 and formula_23), a large moon will lock faster than a smaller moon at the same orbital distance from the planet because formula_28 grows as the cube of the satellite radius formula_7. A possible example of this is in the Saturn system, where Hyperion is not tidally locked, whereas the larger Iapetus, which orbits at a greater distance, is. However, this is not clear cut because Hyperion also experiences strong driving from the nearby Titan, which forces its rotation to be chaotic.\nThe above formulae for the timescale of locking may be off by orders of magnitude, because they ignore the frequency dependence of formula_30. More importantly, they may be inapplicable to viscous binaries (double stars, or double asteroids that are rubble), because the spin\u2013orbit dynamics of such bodies is defined mainly by their viscosity, not rigidity.\nList of known tidally locked bodies.\nSolar System.\nAll the bodies below are tidally locked, and all but Mercury are moreover in synchronous rotation. (Mercury is tidally locked, but not in synchronous rotation.)\nBodies likely to be locked.\nSolar System.\nBased on comparison between the likely time needed to lock a body to its primary, and the time it has been in its present orbit (comparable with the age of the Solar System for most planetary moons), a number of moons are thought to be locked. However their rotations are not known or not known enough. These are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60163", "revid": "732868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60163", "title": "Gaslight (disambiguation)", "text": "Gaslight is the artificial light produced by burning gas.\nGaslight may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "60164", "revid": "41223743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60164", "title": "It's a Wonderful Life", "text": "1946 film by Frank Capra\nIt's a Wonderful Life is a 1946 American Christmas fantasy drama film directed and produced by Frank Capra. It is based on the short story and booklet \"The Greatest Gift\", self-published by Philip Van Doren Stern in 1943, which itself is loosely based on the 1843 Charles Dickens novella \"A Christmas Carol\".\nThe film stars James Stewart as George Bailey, a man who has given up his personal dreams to help others in his community and whose thoughts of suicide on Christmas Eve bring about the intervention of his guardian angel, Clarence Odbody. Clarence shows George all the lives he touched and what the world would be like if he had not existed.\nAlthough it was nominated for five Academy Awards, including Best Picture, \"It's a Wonderful Life\" initially received mixed reviews and was unsuccessful at the box office. Theatrically, the film's break-even point was $6.3\u00a0million, about twice the production cost, a figure it did not come close to achieving on its initial release. Because of the film's disappointing sales, Capra was seen by some studios as having lost his ability to produce popular, financially successful films. Its copyright in the U.S. expired in 1974 following a lack of renewal and it entered the public domain, allowing it to be broadcast without licensing or royalty fees, at which point it became a Christmas classic.\n\"It's a Wonderful Life\" is now considered to be one of the greatest films of all time and among the best Christmas films. It has been recognized by the American Film Institute as one of the 100 best American films ever made. It was no. 11 on the American Film Institute's 1998 greatest movie list, no. 20 on its 2007 greatest movie list, no. 8 on its list of greatest love stories, and no. 1 on its list of the most inspirational American films of all time. In 1990, \"It's a Wonderful Life\" became one of 25 films selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being deemed as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". Capra revealed that it was his favorite among the films he directed and that he screened it for his family every Christmas season. It was one of Stewart's favorite films. A modern remake of the film, written and directed by Kenya Barris, is in development at Paramount Pictures as of January 2024.\nPlot.\nOn Christmas Eve 1945, in Bedford Falls, New York, George Bailey contemplates suicide. The prayers of his family and friends reach Heaven, where guardian angel second class Clarence Odbody is assigned to save George and earn his wings. \nClarence is shown flashbacks of George's life. He watches 12-year-old George rescue his younger brother Harry from drowning in a frozen pond, leaving George with deafness in his left ear. George later saves pharmacist Mr. Gower from accidentally poisoning a customer.\nIn 1928, George plans a world tour before college. He is reintroduced to Mary Hatch, who has loved him since childhood. When his father dies from a stroke, George postpones his travel to settle the family business, Bailey Brothers Building and Loan. \nAvaricious board member Henry F. Potter, who owns most of the town, seeks to dissolve the company, but the board of directors votes to keep it open if George runs it. George works alongside his uncle Billy, giving his tuition savings to Harry with the understanding that Harry will take over the company when he graduates.\nHarry returns from college married and with a job offer from his father-in-law, and George resigns himself to running the building and loan. George and Mary rekindle their relationship and marry, but abandon their honeymoon to use their savings to keep the company solvent during a run on the bank. \nUnder George, the company establishes Bailey Park, a housing development surpassing Potter's overpriced slums. Potter entices George with a high-paying job, but George rebuffs him when he realizes that Potter's true intention is to close the building and loan.\nOn Christmas Eve, the town prepares a hero's welcome for Harry, a Navy fighter pilot awarded the Medal of Honor for preventing a \"kamikaze\" attack on a troopship. Billy goes to Potter's bank to deposit $8,000 &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;) of the building and loan's money. He taunts Potter with a newspaper headline about Harry, but absentmindedly wraps the cash in Potter's newspaper. \nPotter keeps the money, while Billy cannot recall how he misplaced it. With a bank examiner reviewing the company's records, George fruitlessly retraces Billy's steps. Frustrated and angered by Billy's blunder, which may lead to scandal and jail, George resents the sacrifices he has made and the family that has kept him trapped in Bedford Falls. He appeals to Potter for a loan, offering his meager life insurance policy as collateral. Potter scoffs that George is worth more dead than alive and phones the police.\nGeorge flees Potter's office, gets drunk at a bar, and prays for help. Contemplating suicide, he goes to a bridge. Before George can jump, Clarence dives into the river and George rescues him. When George wishes he had never been born, Clarence takes him into an alternate timeline in which he never existed. George finds that Bedford Falls is now Pottersville, an unsavory town occupied by sleazy entertainment venues and callous people. Mr. Gower was jailed for manslaughter because George did not stop him from poisoning the customer. His mother does not know him, and Uncle Billy was institutionalized after the building and loan failed. Bailey Park is a cemetery, where George discovers Harry's grave; without George to save him, Harry drowned in the frozen pond as a child; and without Harry to save them, the troops aboard the transport were killed. George finds that Mary is an \"old maid\" librarian. When he grabs her and claims to be her husband, she screams and runs away.\nGeorge races back to the bridge and begs Clarence, and then God, for his life back. His wish granted, he happily rushes home to await his arrest. Mary and Billy have rallied the townspeople, who donate more than enough to replace the missing money. Harry arrives and toasts George as \"the richest man in town\". Among the donations, George finds a copy of \"The Adventures of Tom Sawyer\", a gift from Clarence inscribed: \"Remember, no man is a failure who has friends. Thanks for the wings!\" When a bell on the Christmas tree rings, George's youngest daughter, Zuzu, explains that, \"every time a bell rings, an angel gets his wings\", while those gathered sing \"Auld Lang Syne\".\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* James Stewart as George Bailey\nUncredited cast members include:\nProduction.\nBackground.\nThe original story, \"The Greatest Gift\", was written by Philip Van Doren Stern in November 1939. After it was rejected by several publishers, he had it printed as a 24-page pamphlet and mailed to 200 family members and friends for Christmas 1943. The story came to the attention of either Cary Grant or RKO producer David Hempstead, who showed it to Grant's agent. In April 1944, RKO Pictures bought the rights to the story for $10,000, hoping to turn it into a vehicle for Grant.\nDalton Trumbo, Clifford Odets, and Marc Connelly each worked on versions of the screenplay before RKO shelved the project. In Trumbo's draft, George Bailey is an idealistic politician who grows more cynical as the story progresses, then tries to end his life after losing an election. The angel shows him Bedford Falls not as it would be if he had never been born, but if he had gone into business instead of politics. Grant went on to make another Christmas movie staple, \"The Bishop's Wife\".\nRKO studio chief Charles Koerner urged Frank Capra to read \"The Greatest Gift\". Capra's new production company, Liberty Films, had a nine-film distribution agreement with RKO. Capra immediately saw its potential, and wanted it for his first Hollywood film after making documentaries and training films during the war. RKO sold Capra the rights for $10,000 and threw in the three earlier scripts for free. (However, Capra claimed the rights and the scripts cost him $50,000.) Capra salvaged a few scenes from Odets' earlier screenplay and worked with writers Frances Goodrich and Albert Hackett, Jo Swerling, Michael Wilson, and Dorothy Parker (brought in to \"polish\" the script), on many drafts of the screenplay.\nIt was not a harmonious collaboration. Goodrich called Capra \"that horrid man\" and recalled, \"He couldn't wait to get writing it himself.\" Her husband, Albert Hackett, said, \"We told him what we were going to do, and he said 'That sounds fine.' We were trying to move the story along and work it out, and then somebody told us that [Capra] and Jo Swerling were working on it together, and that sort of took the guts out of it. Jo Swerling was a very close friend of ours, and when we heard he was doing this we felt rather bad about it. We were getting near the end and word came that Capra wanted to know how soon we'd be finished. So my wife said, 'We're finished right now.' We quickly wrote out the last scene and we never saw him again after that. He's a very arrogant son of a bitch.\"\nLater, a dispute ensued over the writing credits. The final screenplay, renamed by Capra \"It's a Wonderful Life\", was credited to Goodrich, Hackett, and Capra, with \"additional scenes\" by Jo Swerling. Capra said, \"The Screen Writers' Arbitration committee decided that Hackett and Goodrich and I should get the credit for the writing. Jo Swerling hasn't talked to me since. That was five years ago.\"\nSome in Seneca Falls, New York, believe Capra was inspired to model Bedford Falls after the town following a visit in 1945. The town has an annual \"It's a Wonderful Life Festival\" on the second weekend in December. On December 10, 2010, the \"It's a Wonderful Life\" Museum opened in Seneca Falls, with Karolyn Grimes, who played Zuzu in the movie, cutting the ribbon. However, film historian Jeanine Basinger, curator of the Frank Capra archives at Wesleyan University and author of \"The 'It's A Wonderful Life' Book\", has said no evidence exists for Seneca Falls' claim. \"I have been through every piece of paper in Frank Capra's diaries, his archives, everything. There's no evidence of any sort whatsoever to support this. That doesn't mean it isn't true, but no one is ever going to prove it.\" Basinger said that Capra always described Bedford Falls as an \"Everytown\".\nPhilip Van Doren Stern said in a 1946 interview, \"Incidentally, the movie takes place in Westchester County. Actually, the town I had in mind was Califon, N.J.\" The historic iron bridge in Califon is similar to the bridge that George Bailey considered jumping from in the movie.\nCasting.\nIn his autobiography, Capra recalled: \"Of all actors' roles I believe the most difficult is the role of a Good Sam who doesn't know that he is a Good Sam. I knew one man who could play it ... James Stewart. ... I spoke to Lew Wasserman, the MCA agent who handled Jimmy, told him I wanted to tell Jimmy the story. Wasserman said Stewart would gladly play the part without hearing the story.\" Stewart and Capra had previously collaborated on \"You Can't Take It with You\" (1938) and \"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington\" (1939).\nHenry Fonda, Stewart's best friend, was also considered. Both actors had returned from the war with no employment prospects. Fonda, however, was cast in John Ford's \"My Darling Clementine\" (1946), which was filmed at the same time that Capra shot \"It's a Wonderful Life.\" For 17 supporting roles in the film, Capra considered more than 170 established actors.\nJean Arthur, Stewart's co-star in \"You Can't Take It With You\" and \"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington,\" was first offered the role of Mary, but had recently dropped out of the Broadway show \"Born Yesterday\" from exhaustion shortly before its premiere. Capra next considered Olivia de Havilland, Martha Scott, Ann Dvorak, and Ginger Rogers before borrowing Donna Reed from MGM. Rogers turned it down because she considered it \"too bland.\" In chapter 26 of her autobiography \"Ginger: My Story,\" she questioned her decision by asking her readers: \"Foolish, you say?\"\n A long list of actors was considered for the role of Potter (originally named Herbert Potter): Edward Arnold, Charles Bickford, Edgar Buchanan, Louis Calhern, Victor Jory, Raymond Massey, Thomas Mitchell, and Vincent Price. Lionel Barrymore, who eventually was cast, was a famous Ebenezer Scrooge in radio dramatizations of \"A Christmas Carol\" at the time, and was a natural choice for the role. Barrymore had also worked with Capra and Stewart on Capra's 1938 Best Picture Oscar winner, \"You Can't Take It with You.\"\nBefore Capra decided on Ward Bond as Bert, he also considered Sam Levene, Barton MacLane, Robert Mitchum, John Alexander and Irving Bacon for the role.\nBefore Capra cast Thomas Mitchell as Uncle Billy, he also considered Walter Brennan and W. C. Fields for the role.\nH. B. Warner, who was cast as Mr. Gower, the pharmacist, had studied medicine before going into acting. He was also in some of Capra's other films, including \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town,\" \"Lost Horizon,\" \"You Can't Take It with You,\" and \"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington.\" In the silent era, he had played the role of Jesus Christ in Cecil B. DeMille's \"The King of Kings\" (1927). The name Gower came from Capra's employer Columbia Pictures, which had been located on Gower Street for many years. Also on Gower Street was a drugstore that was a favorite for the studio's employees.\nCharles Williams, who was cast as Eustace Bailey, and Mary Treen, who was cast as Matilda \"Tilly\" Bailey, were both B-list actors, having appeared in 90 films each before \"It's a Wonderful Life.\"\nJimmy the raven (Uncle Billy's pet) appeared in \"You Can't Take It with You\" and each subsequent Capra film.\nFilming.\n\"It's a Wonderful Life\" was shot at RKO Radio Pictures Studios in Culver City, California, and the 89-acre RKO movie ranch in Encino, where \"Bedford Falls\" was adapted from Oscar-winning sets originally designed by art director Max Ree for the 1931 epic film \"Cimarron.\" Covering 4 acres (1.6 ha), the town consisted of a main street stretching 300\u00a0yards (three city blocks) with 75 stores and buildings, and a residential neighborhood. Capra added a tree-lined center parkway, built a working bank set, and planted 20 full-grown oak trees. Pigeons, cats, and dogs were allowed to roam the mammoth set to give the \"town\" a lived-in feel.\nDue to the requirements of filming in an \"alternate reality,\" as well as different seasons, the exterior set was extremely adaptable. RKO studio's head of special effects, Russell Shearman, developed a new compound using water, soap flakes, foamite, and sugar to create \"chemical snow\" for the film. Before then, movie snow was usually made from untoasted cornflakes, which were so loud when stepped on that dialogue had to be redubbed afterwards.\nFilming started on April 15, 1946, and wrapped on July 27, 1946, exactly on deadline for the 90-day principal photography schedule.\nOnly two locations from the film survive. The first, the swimming pool that was unveiled during the high-school dance sequence, is located in the gymnasium at Beverly Hills High School and is still in use as of December 2023[ [update]]. The second is the \"Martini home\" in La Ca\u00f1ada Flintridge, California. RKO's movie ranch in Encino was razed in 1954.\nThe scene where young George saves his brother Harry from drowning was different in an early draft of the script. The boys play ice hockey on the river (which is on Potter's property) as Potter watches with disdain. George shoots the puck, but it goes astray and breaks the \"No Trespassing\" sign and lands in Potter's yard. Potter becomes irate and his gardener releases attack dogs, which cause the boys to flee. Harry falls in the ice and George saves him with the same results.\nIn another draft, after he unsuccessfully attempts to consult his father about Mr. Gower and the pills, George considers asking Uncle Billy, but he is on the phone with the bank examiner. Billy lights his cigar and throws his match in the wastebasket. George turns to Tilly (who, along with Eustace, are his cousins, although not Billy's kids), but she is on the phone with her friend, Martha. She says, \"Potter's here, the bank examiner's coming. It's a day of judgment.\" The wastebasket suddenly catches fire and Billy cries for help. Tilly runs in and puts the fire out with a pot of coffee. George decides to deal with the Gower situation by himself.\nAccording to Bobbie Anderson, in the confrontation between Mr. Gower and young George, H. B. Warner, who was drunk at the time of the drug store scene, slapped him for real and made his ear bleed, reducing him to tears. Warner hugged him after the scene was shot.\nComposer Dimitri Tiomkin had written \"Death Telegram\" and \"Gower's Deliverance\" for the drugstore sequence, but Capra elected to forgo music in those scenes. Tiomkin had worked on many of Capra's previous films, but those changes, and others, led to a falling out between the two men. Tiomkin felt as though his work was being seen as a mere suggestion. In his autobiography \"Please Don't Hate Me,\" he called the incident, \"an all around scissors job.\"\nIn the scene where Uncle Billy gets drunk at Harry and Ruth's welcome home/newlyweds' party and staggers away off camera, a crash is heard off screen. Mitchell, as Uncle Billy, yells, \"I'm all right! I'm all right!\", implying that Uncle Billy had knocked into some trash cans. A technician had actually knocked over some equipment; Capra left in Mitchell's impromptu ad lib and rewarded the technician with $10 (equal to $141.84 in 2021), thanking him for his 'sound improvement.'\nAccording to rare stills that have been unearthed, several sequences were filmed but subsequently cut. Alternative endings were also considered. Capra's first script had Bailey fall to his knees to recite \"The Lord's Prayer\" (the script also called for an opening scene with the townspeople in prayer). Feeling that an overly religious tone undermined the emotional impact of the family and friends rushing to George's rescue, the closing scenes were rewritten.\nCapra found the film's original cinematographer Victor Milner slow and pretentious, and when Milner became ill, Capra borrowed Joseph Walker from Columbia. Walker had lensed 19 previous Capra films. But when Rosalind Russell demanded that Walker return to Columbia Pictures to shoot her next film, Walker trained veteran camera operator Joseph Biroc to be his replacement. Although working with three cinematographers was difficult for Capra, in Walker's opinion it turned out very well because the scenes each cinematographer shot were so different that they did not have to match each other's visual styles.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nAccording to a 2006 book, \"A spate of movies appeared just after the ending of the Second World War, including \"It's a Wonderful Life\" (1946) and \"Stairway to Heaven\" (1946), perhaps tapping into so many people's experience of loss of loved ones and offering a kind of consolation.\" \"It's a Wonderful Life\" premiered at the Globe Theatre in New York City on December 20, 1946, to mixed reviews. While Capra thought the contemporary critical reviews were either universally negative, or at best dismissive, \"Time\" said, \"\"It's a Wonderful Life\" is a pretty wonderful movie. It has only one formidable rival (Goldwyn's \"The Best Years of Our Lives\") as Hollywood's best picture of the year. Director Capra's inventiveness, humor, and affection for human beings keep it glowing with life and excitement.\"\nIn his review for Variety, Bert Briller wrote, \"\"It\u2019s a Wonderful Life\" will enjoy just that at the b.o. [box office], and eminently deserves to do so.\" He added: \"Capra may not have taken here the stride forward in film-making technique he achieved in \u201c\"It Happened One Night\", but no past Capra celluloid possessed any greater or more genuine qualities of effectiveness.\" Briller praised Reed's performance, writing, \"In femme lead, Donna Reed will reach full-fledged stardom with this effort.\"\nBosley Crowther, writing for \"The New York Times\", complimented some of the actors, including Stewart and Reed, but concluded, \"the weakness of this picture, from this reviewer's point of view, is the sentimentality of it\u2014its illusory concept of life. Mr. Capra's nice people are charming, his small town is a quite beguiling place and his pattern for solving problems is most optimistic and facile. But somehow, they all resemble theatrical attitudes, rather than average realities.\"\nWriting in \"The Nation\" in 1946, critic James Agee stated, \"... Frank Capra's first film since those he made for the army, is one of the most efficient sentimental pieces since \"A Christmas Carol\". Often, in its pile-driving emotional exuberance, it outrages, insults, or at least accosts without introduction, the cooler and more responsible parts of the mind; it is nevertheless recommended... \"\nThe film, which went into general release on January 7, 1947, placed 26th ($3.3 million) in box-office revenues for 1947 (out of more than 400 features released), one place ahead of another Christmas film, \"Miracle on 34th Street\". The film was supposed to be released in January 1947, but was moved up to December 1946 to make it eligible for the 19th Academy Awards held in March 1947. This move was seen as worse for the film, as 1947 did not have quite the stiff competition as 1946. If it had entered the 1947 awards, its strongest competitor would have been \"Miracle on 34th Street\". The number-one grossing movie of 1947, \"The Best Years of Our Lives\", made $11.5 million.\nThe film recorded a loss of $525,000 at the box office for RKO.\nOn May 26, 1947, the Federal Bureau of Investigation issued a memo stating, \"With regard to the picture \"It's a Wonderful Life\", [redacted name] stated in substance that the film represented rather obvious attempts to discredit bankers by casting Lionel Barrymore as a 'scrooge-type' so that he would be the most hated man in the picture. This, according to these sources, is a common trick used by Communists. [In] addition, [redacted name] stated that, in his opinion, this picture deliberately maligned the upper class, attempting to show the people who had money were mean and despicable characters.\" Film historian Andrew Sarris observed as \"curious\" that \"the censors never noticed that the villainous Mr. Potter gets away with robbery without being caught or punished in any way\".\nIn 1990, \"It's a Wonderful Life\" was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in their National Film Registry.\nIn 2002, Channel 4 in the United Kingdom ranked \"It's a Wonderful Life\" as the seventh-greatest film ever made in its poll \"The 100 Greatest Films\". The channel airs the film to British viewers annually on Christmas Eve.\nIn June 2008, AFI revealed its \"10 Top 10\", the best 10 films in 10 \"classic\" American film genres, after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. \"It's a Wonderful Life\" was acknowledged as the third-best film in the fantasy genre.\nSomewhat more iconoclastic views of the film and its contents are occasionally expressed. In his review for \"The New Republic\" in 1947, film critic Manny Farber wrote, \"To make his points, [Capra] always takes an easy, simple-minded path that doesn't give much credit to the intelligence of the audience\", and adds that it has only a \"few unsentimental moments here and there\". Wendell Jamieson, in a 2008 article for \"The New York Times\" which was generally positive in its analysis of the film, observed that far from being simply a sweetly sentimental tale, \"It's a Wonderful Life\" \"is a terrifying, asphyxiating story about growing up and relinquishing your dreams, of seeing your father driven to the grave before his time, of living among bitter, small-minded people. It is a story of being trapped, of compromising, of watching others move ahead and away, of becoming so filled with rage that you verbally abuse your children, their teacher, and your oppressively perfect wife.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n... one of the most profoundly pessimistic tales of human existence ever to achieve a lasting popularity.\n\u2014Film historian Andrew Sarris in \"\"You Ain't Heard Nothin' Yet.\": The American Talking Film History &amp; Memory, 1927\u20131949\".\nIn a 2010 essay for \"Salon\", Richard Cohen described \"It's a Wonderful Life\" as \"the most terrifying Hollywood film ever made\". In the \"Pottersville\" sequence, he wrote, George Bailey is not seeing the world that would exist had he never been born, but rather \"the world as it does exist, in his time and also in our own\". Nine years earlier, another \"Salon\" writer, Gary Kamiya, had expressed the opposing view that \"Pottersville \"rocks!\"\", adding: \"The gauzy, Currier-and-Ives veil Capra drapes over Bedford Falls has prevented viewers from grasping what a tiresome and, frankly, toxic environment it is ... We all live in Pottersville now.\"\nThe film's elevation to the status of a beloved classic came three decades after its initial release, when it became a television staple during Christmas season in 1976. This came as a welcome surprise to Frank Capra and others involved with its production. \"It's the damnedest thing I've ever seen\", Capra told \"The Wall Street Journal\" in 1984. \"The film has a life of its own now, and I can look at it like I had nothing to do with it. I'm like a parent whose kid grows up to be President. I'm proud ... but it's the kid who did the work. I didn't even think of it as a Christmas story when I first ran across it. I just liked the idea.\" In a 1946 interview, Capra described the film's theme as \"the individual's belief in himself\" and that he made it \"to combat a modern trend toward atheism\". It ranked 283rd among critics, and 107th among directors, in the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls of the greatest films ever made.\nThe film's positive reception has continued. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 94% based on 97 reviews, with an average rating of 9.0/10. The website's critical consensus reads, \"The holiday classic to define all holiday classics, \"It's a Wonderful Life\" is one of a handful of films worth an annual viewing.\" On Metacritic, the film has a score 89 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nMany filmmakers have praised the film, including Steven Spielberg, Akira Kurosawa, Frank Darabont, David Lynch, Don Hertzfeldt, and Guillermo del Toro. Spielberg once said of the film: \"\"It\u2019s a Wonderful Life\" shows that every human being on this Earth matters \u2013 and that\u2019s a very powerful message.\" He ranked the film first on his list of 20 favorite films. Orson Welles played Mr. Potter in the made-for-television remake \"It Happened One Christmas\"; when asked by Henry Jaglom what he thought of the movie, Welles said, \"There's no way of hating that movie.\"\nAwards and honors.\nPrior to its Los Angeles release, Liberty Films mounted an extensive promotional campaign that included a daily advertisement highlighting one of the film's players, along with comments from reviewers. Jimmy Starr wrote, \"If I were an Oscar, I'd elope with \"It's a Wonderful Life\" lock, stock and barrel on the night of the Academy Awards\". The \"New York Daily Times\" published an editorial that declared the film and James Stewart's performance to be worthy of Academy Award consideration.\n\"It's a Wonderful Life\" received five Academy Award nominations:\n\"The Best Years of Our Lives\", a drama about servicemen attempting to return to their pre-World War II lives, won most of the awards that year, including four of the five for which \"It's a Wonderful Life\" was nominated. (The award for \"Best Sound Recording\" was won by \"The Jolson Story\".) \"The Best Years of Our Lives,\" directed by William Wyler, Capra's business partner along with George Stevens in Liberty Films, was also an outstanding commercial success, ultimately becoming the highest-grossing film of the decade, in contrast to the more modest initial box-office returns of \"It's a Wonderful Life\".\n\"It's a Wonderful Life\" received a Golden Globe Award for Capra as Best Motion Picture Director. He also won a \"CEC Award\" from the Cinema Writers Circle in Spain, for \"Mejor Pel\u00edcula Extranjera\" (Best Foreign Film). Jimmy Hawkins won a \"Former Child Star Lifetime Achievement Award\" from the Young Artist Awards in 1994; the award recognized his role as Tommy Bailey as igniting his career, which lasted until the mid-1960s.\nThe film was included by the Vatican in a list of important films compiled in 1995, under the category of \"Values\".\nThe February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"It's a Wonderful Life\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nRelease.\nOwnership and copyright issues.\nAfter being acquired by Paramount Pictures and becoming its subsidiary, Liberty Films closed in 1951. Four years later, Paramount sold the film rights to independent distributor M. &amp; A. Alexander.\nThe acquisition by the aforementioned distributor included key rights to the original television syndication, the original nitrate film elements, the music score, and the film rights to the story on which the film is based, \"The Greatest Gift\". National Telefilm Associates (NTA) took over the rights to the film soon thereafter.\nA clerical error at NTA prevented the copyright from being renewed properly in 1974. Despite the lapsed copyright, television stations that aired it still had to pay royalties because\u2014though the film's images had entered the public domain\u2014the film's story was still restricted as a derivative work of the published story \"The Greatest Gift\", the copyright of which Philip Van Doren Stern had renewed in 1971.\nThe film became a perennial holiday favorite in the 1980s, possibly due to its repeated showings each holiday season on hundreds of local television stations. It was mentioned during the deliberations on the Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998.\nIn 1993, Republic Pictures, which was the successor to NTA, relied on the 1990 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in \"Stewart v. Abend\" (which involved another Stewart film, \"Rear Window\") to enforce its claim to the copyright. While the film's copyright had not been renewed, Republic still owned the film rights to \"The Greatest Gift\"; thus, the plaintiffs were able to argue its status as a derivative work of a work still under copyright.\nThat year, Republic made a deal with Turner Broadcasting System, authorizing only three airings of the movie, all on cable's TNT and TBS. However, the studio's attempt to reassert control was widely ignored since there were still some existing distribution deals that Republic had to honor.\nIn 1994, the studio sold exclusive television rights to NBC. \"We're thrilled that we will have the opportunity to broadcast this picture,\" said NBC Entertainment President Warren Littlefield at the time. \"We will broadcast the original director's cut in black and white, full-length, the way Frank Capra intended this picture to be seen.\"\nNBC traditionally shows the film on Christmas Eve. It had, for a time in the late 1990s, aired the film on Thanksgiving but removed that airing due to low ratings and began airing the National Dog Show instead. Paramount (via parent company Viacom's 1998 acquisition of Republic's then-parent, Spelling Entertainment) once again has distribution rights for the first time since 1955.\nColorization.\nCapra met with Wilson Markle about having Colorization Inc. colorize \"It's a Wonderful Life\" based on an enthusiastic response to the colorization of \"Topper\" from actor Cary Grant. The company's art director, Brian Holmes, prepared 10 minutes of colorized footage from \"It's a Wonderful Life\" for Capra to view, which resulted in Capra signing a contract with Colorization Inc., and his \"enthusiastic agree[ment] to pay half the $260,000 cost of colorizing the movie and to share any profits\" and giving \"preliminary approval to making similar color versions of two of his other black-and-white films, \"Meet John Doe\" (1941) and \"Lady for a Day\" (1933)\".\nHowever, the film was believed to be in the public domain at the time, and as a result, Markle and Holmes responded by returning Capra's initial investment, eliminating his financial participation, and refusing outright to allow the director to exercise artistic control over the colorization of his films, leading Capra to join in the campaign against the process.\nThree colorized versions have been produced. The first was released by Hal Roach Studios in 1986. The second was authorized and produced by the film's permanent owner, Republic Pictures, in 1989. Both Capra and Stewart took a critical stand on the colorized editions. The Hal Roach color version was re-released in 1989 to VHS via Video Treasures. A third, computer-colorized version was produced by Legend Films in 2007 and has been released on DVD, Blu-ray, and streaming services.\nHome media.\nVHS and LaserDisc.\nThroughout the 1980s and early 1990s, when the film was still thought to be public domain, \"It's a Wonderful Life\" was released on VHS by a variety of home video companies. Among the companies that released the film on home video before Republic Pictures stepped in were Meda Video (which would later become Media Home Entertainment), Kartes Video Communications (under its Video Film Classics label), GoodTimes Home Video, and Video Treasures (now Anchor Bay Entertainment). After Republic reclaimed the rights to the film, all unofficial VHS copies of the film still in the hands of video distributors were supposed to have been destroyed. On September 17, 1996, a 50th anniversary LaserDisc was released by Republic Pictures Home Video.\nArtisan Entertainment (under license from Republic) took over home video rights in the late 1990s. Artisan was later sold to Lions Gate Entertainment, which continued to hold US home video rights until late 2005, when they reverted to Paramount, which also owns video rights throughout Region 4 (Latin America and Australia) and in France. Video rights in the rest of the world are held by different companies; for example, the UK rights were once with Universal Studios, but have since reverted to Paramount.\nTechnological first: CD-ROM.\nIn 1993, due in part to the confusion of the ownership and copyright issues, Kinesoft Development, with the support of Republic Pictures, released \"It's a Wonderful Life\" as one of the first commercial feature-length films on CD-ROM for the Windows PC (Windows 3.1). Antedating commercial DVDs by several years, it included such features as the ability to follow along with the complete shooting script as the film was playing.\nGiven the state of video playback on the PC at the time of its release, \"It's a Wonderful Life\" for Windows represented another milestone, as the longest-running video on a computer. Prior to its release, Windows could play back only about 32,000 frames of video, or about 35 minutes at 15 frames per second. Working with Microsoft, Kinesoft was able to enhance the video features of Windows to allow for the complete playback of the entire film\u2014all of this on a PC with a 486SX processor and 8\u00a0MB of RAM.\n\"Computer Gaming World\" said in April 1994, \"The picture quality still has a way to go before it reaches television standards\", but was \"a noble effort\" that would \"please fans of the film\".\nDVD and Blu-ray.\nThe film has seen multiple DVD releases since the format became available in 1996\u201397. In autumn 2001, the Brisbane-based Magna Pacific released it in Australia, followed by MRA Entertainment in 2004. Republic issued the film twice in 2002: once in August and again with different packaging in September. On October 31, 2006, Paramount released a newly remastered \"60th Anniversary Edition.\" On November 13, 2007, Paramount released a two-disc \"Special Edition\" DVD containing both the original theatrical black-and-white version and a new colorized version produced by Legend Films using advanced colorization technology. On November 3, 2009, Paramount re-released the previous DVD set as a \"Collector's Edition\" and debuted a Blu-ray edition, both including the black-and-white and colorized versions of the film.\n2017 Restoration.\nIn 2017, the film was restored in 4K resolution, available via streaming services and DCP.\nSoundtrack albums.\nOn November 18, 1997, Dimitri Tiomkin's score was released by Nick at Nite Records. This was a label for the Nick at Nite block on the Nickelodeon channel, which was owned by Viacom, the company that acquired the rights to the film the following year. For the film's 75th anniversary, the soundtrack was re-released by Paramount's own in-house label Paramount Music on December 3, 2021. This release was done in association with La-La Land Records.\nAdaptations in other media.\nThe film was twice adapted for radio in 1947, first on \"Lux Radio Theater\" (March 10) and then on \"the Screen Guild Theater\" (December 29), then again on the \"Screen Guild Theater\" broadcast of March 15, 1951. James Stewart and Donna Reed reprised their roles for all three radio productions. Stewart also starred in the May 8, 1949, radio adaptation presented on the \"Screen Directors Playhouse\".\nA musical stage adaptation of the film, titled \"A Wonderful Life\", was written by Sheldon Harnick and Joe Raposo. This version was first performed at the University of Michigan in 1986, but a planned professional production was stalled by legal wrangling with the estate of Philip Van Doren Stern. It was eventually performed in Washington, D.C., by Arena Stage in 1991, and had revivals in the 21st century, including a staged concert version in New York City in 2005 and several productions by regional theatres.\nAnother musical stage adaptation of the film, titled \"It's a Wonderful Life\u00a0\u2013 The Musical\", was written by Bruce Greer and Keith Ferguson. This version premiered at the Majestic Theatre, Dallas, Texas, in 1998. It was an annual Christmas show at the theater for five years. It has since been performed at venues all around the United States.\nIn July 2019, it was revealed that another stage musical adaptation was in development with music and lyrics by Paul McCartney (making his musical theatre debut), lyrics and book by Lee Hall and produced by Bill Kenwright. The musical was set to debut late 2020, but is still yet to premiere.\nIn 1997, PBS aired \"Merry Christmas, George Bailey\", taped from a live performance of the 1947 \"Lux Radio Theatre\" script at the Pasadena Playhouse. The presentation, which benefited the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, featured an all-star cast, including Bill Pullman as George, Nathan Lane as Clarence, Martin Landau as Mr. Potter, Penelope Ann Miller as Mary, and Sally Field as Mother Bailey.\n\"The Last Temptation of Clarence Odbody\" is a 2011 novel written by John Pierson. The novel imagines the future lives of various characters if George had not survived his jump into the river.\nA new \"cinematic audio\" adaptation by David Ossman of the Firesign Theatre was produced and directed by Ossman and his wife Judith Walcutt of Otherworld Media in December 2019 at the Whidbey Island Center for the Arts. Their version combined elements of traditional and radio theatre, with costumes, sets, makeup, and lighting effects, as well as live music, live sound effects, and over 20 microphones.\nIn 2024, Liverpool-based theatre company, Old Fruit Jar Productions, staged a production of Mary Elliott Nelson's adaptation of \"It's A Wonderful Life\", which played for two weeks at the Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool and a week's extension at St George's Hall, Liverpool. In 2025, it was announced that the show would return to the Royal Court for another limited season.\nRemakes.\n\"It Happened One Christmas\" was a 1977 television movie remake of the classic film, the screenplay of which Lionel Chetwynd based on both the original Van Doren Stern short story and the 1946 screenplay. This remake employed gender-reversal, with Marlo Thomas as the protagonist Mary Bailey, Wayne Rogers as George Hatch, and Cloris Leachman as the angel Clara Oddbody. Leachman received her tenth Emmy nomination for this role. Orson Welles was cast as Mr. Potter. Following initial positive reviews, the made-for-television film was rebroadcast twice in 1978 and 1979, but has not been shown since on national re-broadcasts or issued to home media.\n\"Merry Christmas, George Bailey\" was a 1997 PBS television movie adaptation of the film directed by Matthew Diamond and starring Bill Pullman as George Bailey, Penelope Ann Miller as Mary, Nathan Lane as Clarence and Martin Landau as Potter.\n\"The Christmas Spirit\" was a retelling of the movie starring Nicollette Sheridan as Charlotte Hart. This was a made-for-TV film aired on December 1, 2013, on the Hallmark Channel executive produced by Sheridan under her company, Wyke Lane Productions, and Brad Krevoy Television. The film was directed and written by Jack Angelo. \"Spirit\" was set in the present day, with the Hart character working to save a \"quiet New England town from a ruthless real estate developer\". The film was planned to kick off a film series about the Hart character. The film had 3.372 million viewers overall.\nParodies and references.\nA 1986 skit on \"Saturday Night Live\" features William Shatner introducing the \"lost ending\" of \"It's a Wonderful Life\" in which George Bailey (Dana Carvey) and the citizens of Bedford Falls discover that Mr. Potter (Jon Lovitz) has stolen George's money and take turns attacking him in his office.\nIn 1992, the final episode of \"Tiny Toon Adventures\" parodied \"It's A Wonderful Life\" entitled \"It's A Wonderful Tiny Toon Christmas\". In it, Buster Bunny feels sad after the failure of his play and wishes he had never become a Tiny Toon, so a guardian angel shows Buster what life would have been like without him.\nIn 2002, the television film \"It's a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie\" premiered on NBC. The film is a homage to \"It's a Wonderful Life\". In the film, Kermit the Frog wishes that he had never been born after money to save the Muppet Theater is lost.\n\"The Greatest Gift\", the 2011 \"Warehouse 13\" season 3 Christmas episode, tells a similar story after agent Pete Lattimer touches Stern's brush.\nSequel.\nIn 1990, the made-for-television film \"Clarence\" stars Robert Carradine in a new tale of the helpful angel, Clarence Odbody.\nCancelled sequel.\nA purported sequel was in development for a 2015 release, and was to be called \"It's a Wonderful Life: The Rest of the Story\". It was to be written by Bob Farnsworth and Martha Bolton and follow the angel of George Bailey's daughter Zuzu (played once again by Karolyn Grimes), as she teaches Bailey's evil grandson how different the world would have been if he had never been born. Producers were considering directors and hoped to shoot the film with a $25\u2013$35 million budget in Louisiana early in 2014.\nThe film had been announced as being produced by Star Partners and Hummingbird Productions, neither of which are affiliated with Paramount, owners of the original film (Farnsworth claimed that \"It's a Wonderful Life\" was in the public domain). Later, a Paramount spokesperson claimed that they were not granting permission to make the film; \"To date, these individuals have not obtained any of the necessary rights, and we would take all appropriate steps to protect those rights\", the spokesperson said.\nModern remake.\nOn January 19, 2024, it was announced that Kenya Barris will write and direct a modern remake of the film for Paramount, with the intention to cast a person of color in the role of George Bailey. On the announcement, Barris remarked: \"I feel like Christmas movies are amazing and I think the idea of taking something that has that long of a history and a tale behind it and putting an amazing piece of talent to tell that story ... It's a guy who\u2019s trying to help out his community and things are going to turn around on him. I think that\u2019s the perfect story to tell for a person of color \u2014 Black or brown \u2014 to get into that because our communities have some issues and someone trying to help that community out. I think that\u2019s the perfect vehicle to tell that story from.\"\n\"Sesame Street\" urban legend.\nIt is commonly believed that the characters of Bert and Ernie on \"Sesame Street\" were named after Bert the cop and Ernie the cab driver. However, in a correction for the 1999 \"Annual Xmas Quiz\" in the \"San Francisco Chronicle\", which made this claim, series writer Jerry Juhl confirmed that, per producer Jon Stone, the shared names were merely a coincidence. Despite this, the 1996 holiday special \"Elmo Saves Christmas\" references the rumor, during a scene where Bert and Ernie walk by a TV set, which is playing the movie. The pair are surprised by the line: \"Bert! Ernie! What's the matter with you two guys? You were here on my wedding night!\"\nStephan's Quintet usage.\nThe angelic figures depicted at the beginning of the film is an image of Stephan's Quintet, a group of five interacting galaxies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60165", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60165", "title": "Mean average", "text": ""}
{"id": "60166", "revid": "10845682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60166", "title": "Sample mean", "text": ""}
{"id": "60167", "revid": "8978739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60167", "title": "Average", "text": "Number taken as representative of a list of numbers\nAn average of a collection or group is a value that is most central or most common in some sense, and represents its overall position.\nIn mathematics, especially in colloquial usage, it most commonly refers to the arithmetic mean, so the \"average\" of the list of numbers [2, 3, 4, 7, 9] is generally considered to be (2+3+4+7+9)/5 = 25/5 = 5. In situations where the data is skewed or has outliers, and it is desired to focus on the main part of the group rather than the long tail, \"average\" often instead refers to the median; for example, the average personal income is usually given as the median income, so that it represents the majority of the population rather than being overly influenced by the much higher incomes of the few rich people. In certain real-world scenarios, such computing the average speed from multiple measurements taken \"over the same distance\", the average used is the harmonic mean. In situations where a histogram or probability density function is being referenced, the \"average\" could instead refer to the mode. Other statistics that can be used as an average include the mid-range and geometric mean, but they would rarely, if ever, be colloquially referred to as \"the average\".\nGeneral properties.\nAll averages of a collection are somewhere within its bounding box (and so for real numbers, between its maximum and minimum). Therefore, if a collection consists entirely of the same value, any average of it is that value.\nMost averages are monotonic, i.e. moving a member of it in one direction causes the average to move in the same direction, or equivalently, if two collections of numbers \"A\" and \"B\" have the same number of elements, and they can be arranged such that each entry in \"A\" \u2265 the corresponding entry in \"B\", then the average of \"A\" \u2265 the average of \"B\".\nAll commonly-used averages are linearly homogeneous, i.e. multiplying every value by the same scale factor multiplies the average by that same scale factor.\nMost averages remain identical when the list of items is permuted, i.e. the ordering does not matter.\nPythagorean means.\nThe arithmetic mean, the geometric mean, and the harmonic mean are known collectively as the \"Pythagorean means\".\nStatistical location.\nThe mode, the median, and the mid-range are often used in addition to the mean as estimates of central tendency in descriptive statistics. These can all be seen as minimizing variation by some measure; see .\nMode.\nThe most frequently occurring number in a list is called the mode. For example, the mode of the list (1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4) is 3. It may happen that there are two or more numbers which occur equally often and more often than any other number. In this case there is no agreed definition of mode. Some authors say they are all modes and some say there is no mode.\nMedian.\nThe median is the middle number of the group when they are ranked in order. (If there are an even number of numbers, the mean of the middle two is taken.)\nThus to find the median, order the list according to its elements' magnitude and then repeatedly remove the pair consisting of the highest and lowest values until either one or two values are left. If exactly one value is left, it is the median; if two values, the median is the arithmetic mean of these two. This method takes the list 1, 7, 3, 13 and orders it to read 1, 3, 7, 13. Then the 1 and 13 are removed to obtain the list 3, 7. Since there are two elements in this remaining list, the median is their arithmetic mean, (3 + 7)/2 = 5.\nMid-range.\nThe mid-range is the arithmetic mean of the highest and lowest values of a set.\nSummary of types.\nEven though perhaps not an average, the formula_1th quantile (another summary statistic that generalizes the median) can similarly be expressed as a solution to the optimization problem\nformula_2,\nwhich aims to minimize the total tilted absolute value loss (or \"quantile\" loss or \"pinball\" loss).\nThe table of mathematical symbols explains the symbols used below.\nMiscellaneous types.\nOther more sophisticated averages are: trimean, trimedian, and normalized mean, with their generalizations.\nOne can create one's own average metric using the generalized \"f\"-mean:\n formula_3\nwhere \"f\" is any invertible function. The harmonic mean is an example of this using \"f\"(\"x\") = 1/\"x\", and the geometric mean is another, using \"f\"(\"x\") = log\u00a0\"x\".\nHowever, this method for generating means is not general enough to capture all averages. A more general method for defining an average takes any function \"g\"(\"x\"1,\u00a0\"x\"2,\u00a0...,\u00a0\"x\"\"n\") of a list of arguments that is continuous, strictly increasing in each argument, and symmetric (invariant under permutation of the arguments). The average \"y\" is then the value that, when replacing each member of the list, results in the same function value: \"g\"(\"y\", \"y\", ..., \"y\") = \"g\"(\"x\"1, \"x\"2, ..., \"x\"\"n\"). This most general definition still captures the important property of all averages that the average of a list of identical elements is that element itself. The function \"g\"(\"x\"1, \"x\"2, ..., \"x\"\"n\") = \"x\"1+\"x\"2+ \u00b7\u00b7\u00b7 + \"x\"\"n\" provides the arithmetic mean. The function \"g\"(\"x\"1, \"x\"2, ..., \"x\"\"n\") = \"x\"1\"x\"2\u00b7\u00b7\u00b7\"x\"\"n\" (where the list elements are positive numbers) provides the geometric mean. The function \"g\"(\"x\"1, \"x\"2, ..., \"x\"\"n\") = (\"x\"1\u22121+\"x\"2\u22121+ \u00b7\u00b7\u00b7 + \"x\"\"n\"\u22121)\u22121) (where the list elements are positive numbers) provides the harmonic mean.\nAverage percentage return and CAGR.\nA type of average used in finance is the average percentage return. It is an example of a geometric mean. When the returns are annual, it is called the Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR). For example, if we are considering a period of two years, and the investment return in the first year is \u221210% and the return in the second year is +60%, then the average percentage return or CAGR, \"R\", can be obtained by solving the equation: (1 \u2212 10%) \u00d7 (1 + 60%) = (1 \u2212 0.1) \u00d7 (1 + 0.6) = (1 + \"R\") \u00d7 (1 + \"R\"). The value of \"R\" that makes this equation true is 0.2, or 20%. This means that the total return over the 2-year period is the same as if there had been 20% growth each year. The order of the years makes no difference \u2013 the average percentage returns of +60% and \u221210% is the same result as that for \u221210% and +60%.\nThis method can be generalized to examples in which the periods are not equal. For example, consider a period of a half of a year for which the return is \u221223% and a period of two and a half years for which the return is +13%. The average percentage return for the combined period is the single year return, \"R\", that is the solution of the following equation: (1 \u2212 0.23)0.5 \u00d7 (1 + 0.13)2.5 = (1 + \"R\")0.5+2.5, giving an average return \"R\" of 0.0600 or 6.00%.\nMoving average.\nGiven a time series, such as daily stock market prices or yearly temperatures, people often want to create a smoother series. This helps to show underlying trends or perhaps periodic behavior. An easy way to do this is the \"moving average\": one chooses a number \"n\" and creates a new series by taking the arithmetic mean of the first \"n\" values, then moving forward one place by dropping the oldest value and introducing a new value at the other end of the list, and so on. This is the simplest form of moving average. More complicated forms involve using a weighted average. The weighting can be used to enhance or suppress various periodic behavior and there is very extensive analysis of what weightings to use in the literature on filtering. In digital signal processing the term \"moving average\" is used even when the sum of the weights is not 1.0 (so the output series is a scaled version of the averages). The reason for this is that the analyst is usually interested only in the trend or the periodic behavior.\nHistory.\nOrigin.\nThe first recorded time that the arithmetic mean was extended from 2 to n cases for the use of estimation was in the sixteenth century. From the late sixteenth century onwards, it gradually became a common method to use for reducing errors of measurement in various areas. At the time, astronomers wanted to know a real value from noisy measurement, such as the position of a planet or the diameter of the moon. Using the mean of several measured values, scientists assumed that the errors add up to a relatively small number when compared to the total of all measured values. The method of taking the mean for reducing observation errors was indeed mainly developed in astronomy. A possible precursor to the arithmetic mean is the mid-range (the mean of the two extreme values), used for example in Arabian astronomy of the ninth to eleventh centuries, but also in metallurgy and navigation.\nHowever, there are various older vague references to the use of the arithmetic mean (which are not as clear, but might reasonably have to do with our modern definition of the mean). In a text from the 4th century, it was written that (text in square brackets is a possible missing text that might clarify the meaning):\n In the first place, we must set out in a row the sequence of numbers from the monad up to nine: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Then we must add up the amount of all of them together, and since the row contains nine terms, we must look for the ninth part of the total to see if it is already naturally present among the numbers in the row; and we will find that the property of being [one] ninth [of the sum] only belongs to the [arithmetic] mean itself...\nEven older potential references exist. There are records that from about 700 BC, merchants and shippers agreed that damage to the cargo and ship (their \"contribution\" in case of damage by the sea) should be shared equally among themselves. This might have been calculated using the average, although there seem to be no direct record of the calculation.\nEtymology.\nThe root is found in Arabic as \u0639\u0648\u0627\u0631 \"\u02bfaw\u0101r\", a defect, or anything defective or damaged, including partially spoiled merchandise; and \u0639\u0648\u0627\u0631\u064a \"\u02bfaw\u0101r\u012b\" (also \u0639\u0648\u0627\u0631\u0629 \"\u02bfaw\u0101ra\") = \"of or relating to \"\u02bfaw\u0101r\", a state of partial damage\". Within the Western languages the word's history begins in medieval sea-commerce on the Mediterranean. 12th and 13th century Genoa Latin \"avaria\" meant \"damage, loss and non-normal expenses arising in connection with a merchant sea voyage\"; and the same meaning for \"avaria\" is in Marseille in 1210, Barcelona in 1258 and Florence in the late 13th. 15th-century French \"avarie\" had the same meaning, and it begot English \"averay\" (1491) and English \"average\" (1502) with the same meaning. Today, Italian \"avaria\", Catalan \"avaria\" and French \"avarie\" still have the primary meaning of \"damage\". The huge transformation of the meaning in English began with the practice in later medieval and early modern Western merchant-marine law contracts under which if the ship met a bad storm and some of the goods had to be thrown overboard to make the ship lighter and safer, then all merchants whose goods were on the ship were to suffer proportionately (and not whoever's goods were thrown overboard); and more generally there was to be proportionate distribution of any \"avaria\". From there the word was adopted by British insurers, creditors, and merchants for talking about their losses as being spread across their whole portfolio of assets and having a mean proportion. Today's meaning developed out of that, and started in the mid-18th century, and started in English.\nMarine damage is either \"particular average\", which is borne only by the owner of the damaged property, or general average, where the owner can claim a proportional contribution from all the parties to the marine venture. The type of calculations used in adjusting general average gave rise to the use of \"average\" to mean \"arithmetic mean\".\nA second English usage, documented as early as 1674 and sometimes spelled \"averish\", is as the residue and second growth of field crops, which were considered suited to consumption by draught animals (\"avers\").\nThere is earlier (from at least the 11th century), unrelated use of the word. It appears to be an old legal term for a tenant's day labour obligation to a sheriff, probably anglicised from \"avera\" found in the English Domesday Book (1085).\nThe Oxford English Dictionary, however, says that derivations from German \"hafen\" haven, and Arabic \"\u02bfaw\u00e2r\" loss, damage, have been \"quite disposed of\" and the word has a Romance origin.\nAverages as a rhetorical tool.\nDue to the aforementioned colloquial nature of the term \"average\", the term can be used to obfuscate the true meaning of data and suggest varying answers to questions based on the averaging method (most frequently arithmetic mean, median, or mode) used. In his article \"Framed for Lying: Statistics as In/Artistic Proof\", University of Pittsburgh faculty member Daniel Libertz comments that statistical information is frequently dismissed from rhetorical arguments for this reason. However, due to their persuasive power, averages and other statistical values should not be discarded completely, but instead used and interpreted with caution. Libertz invites us to engage critically not only with statistical information such as averages, but also with the language used to describe the data and its uses, saying: \"If statistics rely on interpretation, rhetors should invite their audience to interpret rather than insist on an interpretation.\" In many cases, data and specific calculations are provided to help facilitate this audience-based interpretation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60169", "revid": "8561672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60169", "title": "The Red Shoes (1948 film)", "text": "1948 film by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger\nThe Red Shoes is a 1948 British dance drama film written, produced and directed by the duo of Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger. It follows Victoria Page (Moira Shearer), an aspiring ballerina who joins the world-renowned Ballet Lermontov, owned and operated by Boris Lermontov (Anton Walbrook), who tests her dedication to the ballet by making her choose between her career and her romance with composer Julian Craster (Marius Goring). It marked the feature film debut of Shearer, an established ballerina, and also features Robert Helpmann, L\u00e9onide Massine, and Ludmilla Tch\u00e9rina, other renowned dancers from the ballet world. The metafictional plot is based on the 1845 fairytale by Hans Christian Andersen, and features a ballet within it by the same title, also adapted from the Andersen work.\n\"The Red Shoes\" was filmmaking team Powell and Pressburger's tenth collaboration and follow-up to 1947's \"Black Narcissus\". It had been conceived by Powell and producer Alexander Korda in the 1930s, from whom the duo purchased the rights in 1946. The majority of the cast were professional dancers. Filming of \"The Red Shoes\" took place in mid-1946, primarily in France and England.\nUpon release, \"The Red Shoes\" received critical acclaim, especially in the United States, where it received a total of five Academy Award nominations, including a win for Best Original Score and Best Art Direction. It also won the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score and was named one of the Top 10 Films of the Year by the National Board of Review. Despite this, some dance critics gave the film unfavourable reviews as they felt its fantastical, impressionistic centrepiece sequence, influenced by German expressionist cinema of the 1920s, depicted ballet in an unrealistic manner. The film proved a major financial success and was the first British film in history to gross over $5 million in theatrical rentals in the United States.\nRetrospectively, \"The Red Shoes\" is regarded as one of the best films of Powell and Pressburger's partnership and one of the greatest films of all time. It was voted the ninth greatest British film of all time by the British Film Institute in 1999. The film underwent an extensive digital restoration beginning in 2006 at the UCLA Film and Television Archive to correct significant damage to the original negatives. The restored version of the film screened at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival and was subsequently issued on Blu-ray by The Criterion Collection. In 2017, a poll of 150 actors, directors, writers, producers, and critics for \"Time Out\" magazine saw it ranked the fifth best British film ever.\nPlot.\nLondon music student Julian Craster attends a performance of the ballet \"Heart of Fire\", performed by the eminent travelling ballet company Ballet Lermontov and scored by his professor. Also present are young dancer Victoria 'Vicky' Page and her aunt Lady Neston. Julian furiously walks out after recognising that the professor has plagiarised his compositions.\nLady Neston hosts an after-party in honour of the Ballet Lermontov's impresario, Boris Lermontov. After Vicky tells Boris that dancing is the most important thing in her life, Boris invites her to spend time with his ballet before it leaves for Paris. He hires Vicky full-time after watching her dance the lead in \"Swan Lake\" with Ballet Rambert at the Mercury Theatre.\nJulian angrily writes a letter to Boris exposing his professor's misconduct. He has a change of heart and visits Boris to take the letter back, but Boris has already read it and is sympathetic. Boris hires Julian as a r\u00e9p\u00e9titeur and assistant to the company's conductor. He soon grows impressed with Julian's artistic ambition.\nIn Paris, Ballet Lermontov's principal dancer Irina Boronskaya is required to leave the company upon getting married, per company policy. Although Boris's official rationale is that love distracts from artistic excellence, the film also reveals that he takes his coworkers' emotional lives (which he lacks) as a personal slight, due to his jealousy of their happiness.\nThe company proceeds to Monaco. In Irina's absence, Boris casts Vicky as the lead in a new ballet, \"The Ballet of the Red Shoes\" (based on the Andersen fairytale), and hires Julian to score it. In the ballet, a dancer acquires a pair of red ballet shoes which enable her to dance with superhuman skill, but at a price: she can never stop dancing until she dies. During rehearsals, Julian and Vicky's ambition and pride lead them to clash at first\u2014to Boris's glee. However, they develop respect for each other as artists.\n\"The Ballet of the Red Shoes\" is a resounding success. Boris revitalises the company's repertoire with Vicky as the prima ballerina and Julian as the star composer. In the meantime, Vicky and Julian fall in love. Although Boris is not romantically attracted to Vicky, he is emotionally possessive of his new star. He tries to break up the relationship by telling them that their work is getting worse, but it is implied that he is projecting his own insecurities onto the relationship, as Boris's choreographer is full of praise for Julian. Boris gives Julian an ultimatum to break up with Vicky or leave the company. Julian and Vicky move back to London together and get married. Boris breaks his no-marriage rule to rehire Irina, but cannot mentally let go of Vicky.\nIn London, Vicky and Julian's careers go in different directions. Julian writes an opera that is set to open in Covent Garden, while Vicky's ballet career stalls. Vicky goes on holiday to Cannes without Julian, who is focused on his work. Boris meets her there. He reminds Vicky that she is the one making all the sacrifices in her marriage, and persuades her to \"put on the red shoes again\".\nCoincidentally, the opening night of Julian's opera in London falls on the same date as Vicky's comeback performance in Monaco. Although Julian is supposed to conduct on opening night, he abruptly leaves for Monaco as a grand gesture for Vicky. In return, he insists that Vicky cancel her performance and leave Monaco and Boris immediately. After Julian and Boris have a heated argument about the value of art versus love, an anguished Vicky chooses to stay with Ballet Lermontov.\nAn attendant escorts Vicky to the stage. She is wearing the titular red shoes, and looks faint. She suddenly runs off and jumps in front of an oncoming train, paralleling her ill-fated character in the ballet. Julian tries to save her, but cannot. As Vicky dies, she asks Julian to remove the red shoes.\nA shaken Boris announces to the audience that \"Miss Page is unable to dance tonight\u2014nor indeed any other night\". The company performs \"The Ballet of the Red Shoes\" with a spotlight on the empty space where Vicky would have been.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Anton Walbrook as Boris Lermontov\nThemes and analysis.\n\"Art versus life\".\nA central theme to \"The Red Shoes\" is a performer's conflict between their art and personal life. Commenting on this theme, Powell himself stated that the film is \"about dying for art, that art is worth dying for.\" Film scholar Adrienne McLean, however, notes that Victoria's final leap to her death does not adequately represent this idea. Rather, McLean states that Victoria \"seems pushed by those she loves who would rather possess her than support her,\" and that the film ultimately illustrates the impact that \"ruthless personalities\" can have on \"the weaker or more demure.\"\nScholar Peter Fraser, in \"Cinema Journal\", observes of this tension between art and life that the film implodes its own \"narrative and lyrical worlds...\u00a0 from the moment of recognition, when Vicky looks down at her red shoes and knows that she is then her lyrical persona, her two worlds collapse.\" He further states that the interpenetration of the lyrical upon the narrative \"alters the meaning of the fiction\" itself. This blurring of the lyrical and the narrative is represented at the end of the film, when Vicky jumps onto the train tracks; she is wearing the red shoes which she wore while preparing in her dressing room, despite the fact that in the performance her character does not put them on until part way through the ballet. Powell and Pressburger themselves discussed this idiosyncrasy and it has been subject to significant critical analysis since. Powell decided that it was artistically \"right\" for Vicky to be wearing the red shoes at that point because if she is not wearing them, it takes away the ambiguity over why she died.\n\"The Ballet of the Red Shoes\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe have tried to make our [ballet] sequence subjective as well as objective. When the girl is dancing, she feels she is a bird, a flower, a cloud; when the spotlight hits her, she feels she is alone on a small island with waves breaking around; the figure of the conductor melts in turn into the form of the impresario, the magician, the lover, and at last into a figure made of newspapers.\n\u2013Art director Hein Heckroth on the film's stylized central ballet sequence, 1947\n\"The Red Shoes\" is famous for featuring a 17-minute ballet sequence (of a ballet entitled \"The Ballet of the Red Shoes\") as its centrepiece. The sequence uses a variety of filmic techniques to provide an \"impressionistic link\" to the Hans Christian Andersen fairytale on which it (and the ballet within the film) is based, as well as the personal struggles faced by the protagonist, Victoria Page, who is dancing the lead role. McLean notes that the ballet not only duplicates Victoria's own story, but also foreshadows her love for Julian, the composer and conductor in the ballet's orchestra, as well as the contemptuous jealousy of Lermontov, its director.\nThroughout the ballet, visual metaphors and fantastical references to Victoria's own life come alive on the screen, including a portion in which she dances with a floating newspaper that alternates in form between mere paper and the human form of Helpmann's character; this is referential to a windblown newspaper that Victoria previously stepped on the night she discovered she had acquired the lead role in the ballet.\nUnlike in conventional filmed theatrical ballet, the ballet sequence in \"The Red Shoes\" is not one continuous, static shot, but instead employs a variety of editing techniques, close-ups, and special effects. As the ballet progresses, McLean notes that the action of the sequence \"rockets from stage right to stage left, a series of swiftly performed vignettes alternating with garishly decorated set pieces. Then, as Robert Helpmann, playing the girl's lover, is borne away into the distance by a crowd, leaving the girl alone in her cursed red shoes, the action reverses...\u00a0 into and through the ballerina's subconscious mind.\" Because of its dynamic nature and excessive use of cinematic techniques, McLean contests that the ballet sequence is a \"greater, or more characteristic, film experience than a dance one.\"\nGenre classification.\nThe question of genre in relationship of \"The Red Shoes\" has been a recurrent preoccupation of both critics and scholars, as it does not neatly fit within the confines of a single genre. While the film's extended ballet sequences led some to characterise the film as a musical, McLean notes that the \"conventional signals that had allowed fantasy elements to occur in other [musical] films are missing in \"The Red Shoes\".\" Fraser contests that the film is not emblematic of the standard musical as it has a tragic and violent resolution, and that it is best understood as a \"prototype of a generic variation\" emerging from the musical film tradition.\nThe 21st-century critic Peter Bradshaw identifies elements of horror cinema in the film, particularly in its central, surreal ballet sequence, which he likens to \"the surface of Lewis Carroll's looking-glass, through which the viewer is transported into a new world of amazement and occult horror.\"\nProduction.\nScreenplay.\nProducer Alexander Korda had conceived a ballet-themed film in 1934, which he intended to be a biopic about Vaslav Nijinsky. The project never came to fruition, but in 1937, Korda found himself again inspired to write a ballet-themed film as a vehicle for Merle Oberon, his future wife. Korda, along with filmmaker Michael Powell, fashioned a film based on Oberon's looks, but, because she was not a skilled dancer, Korda knew he would need to use a double for any dance sequences. Korda eventually abandoned the project, instead shifting his focus to \"The Thief of Bagdad\" (1940).\nIn 1946, Powell and his filmmaking partner Emeric Pressburger bought the rights to the screenplay Powell had co-written with Korda for \u00a39,000. According to Powell, the original screenplay contained significantly more dialogue and less story.\nThe character of Boris Lermontov was inspired in part by Sergei Diaghilev, the impresario who founded the Ballets Russes, although there are also aspects about him drawn from the personalities of producer J. Arthur Rank and even director Powell himself. The particular episode in Diaghilev's life that is said to have inspired the characterisation is his seeing the 14-year-old Diana Gould partnering Frederick Ashton in the premi\u00e8re of his first ballet, \"Leda and the Swan\". On the basis of this, Diaghilev invited her to join his company, but he died before that plan could come about.\nBasis.\nThe Hans Christian Andersen story tells how the orphan Karen's colour blind guardian buys her an inappropriate pair of red shoes for her church confirmation ceremony, but, when the mistake is discovered, forbids her to wear them. She disobeys. A crippled \"old soldier\" at the church door tells Karen they are dancing shoes. Later, she wears them to a ball, and cannot stop dancing. She dances day and night until an executioner, at her request, amputates her feet; the shoes dance away with them. She lives with a parson's family after that, and she dies with a vision of finally being able to join the Sunday congregation. In this story, the shoes represent \"her sin\", the vanity and worldly pleasures which distracted her from a life of generosity, piety, and community.\nThe ballet has three characters: the Girl, the Boy and the Shoemaker. The Boy, danced by Robert Helpmann, is at first the girl's boyfriend; as she dances, he turns into a sketch on transparent cellophane. Later he appears as the living counterpart of the Press, with \"Le Jour\" written on his forehead (\"The Daily\") and an alter ego made of folded newspapers, then as the prince in a triumphant Pas de deux/six. Finally, the Boy appears as the village parson; when he unties the red shoes, the girl dies in his arms. The Shoemaker, danced by L\u00e9onide Massine, is a diabolical figure far beyond the scope of the \"old soldier\". Always dancing, he tempts the girl with the shoes, installs them by \"movie magic\" on her feet, partners her briefly, and generally gloats over her confusion and despair. At one point he leads a mob of \"primitive\" monsters who surround her, but they elevate her high in a triumphant ballerina pose. At the end, the shoemaker picks up the discarded shoes and offers them to the audience. In the context of the movie, the shoes represent the choice offered by Lermontov to become a great dancer, at the expense of normal human relationships.\nCasting.\nPowell and Pressburger decided early on that they had to use dancers who could act rather than actors who could dance. To create a realistic feeling of a ballet company at work, and to be able to include a fifteen-minute ballet as the high point of the film, they created their own ballet company using many dancers from The Royal Ballet.\nIn casting the lead role of Victoria Page, Powell and Pressburger sought an experienced dancer who could also act. Scottish ballerina Moira Shearer was recommended by Robert Helpmann, who had been cast in the film as Ivan Boleslawsky, and was also appointed the choreographer of the central ballet sequence; Helpmann had worked with Shearer prior in a production of his ballet \"Miracle in the Gorbals\". At the time, Shearer was beginning to ascend in her career with the Sadler's Wells Dance Company, dancing under Ninette de Valois. Upon reading the screenplay, Shearer declined the offer, as she felt taking a film role would negatively impact her dancing career. She also felt that the screenplay presented a ballet company that was unrealistic, \"utterly unlike any ballet company that there had ever been anywhere.\" She recalled: \"\"Red Shoes\" was the last thing I wanted to do. I fought for a year to get away from that film, and I couldn't shake the director off.\"\nAfter Shearer's refusal of the role, American ballerinas Nana Gollner and Edwina Seaver tested for the part, but their acting abilities proved unsatisfactory to Powell and Pressburger. Non-dancers Hazel Court and Ann Todd were briefly considered before Shearer changed her mind, and decided to accept the role with de Valois's blessing. Shearer claimed that de Valois, exasperated by the ordeal, finally advised her to take the role. Powell alternatively recounted that de Valois was \"more manipulative\" in the process, and would vacillate in regard to whether or not Shearer would have a place in the company to return to once filming was completed, accounting for Shearer's alleged protracted contemplation of whether to take the part.\nFor the role of Julian Craster, the musician with whom Victoria falls in love, Marius Goring was cast. While Goring\u2014at the time in his mid-30s\u2014was slightly too old to play the role, Powell and Pressburger were impressed by his \"tact and unselfish approach to his craft.\" They cast Anton Walbrook in the part of Victoria's domineering ballet director, Boris Lermontov, for similar reasons, as they felt he was a \"well-mannered and sensitive actor\" who could support Shearer through their emotional scenes together.\nThe other principal dancers cast in the film included L\u00e9onide Massine (who also served as a choreographer for his role as the shoemaker in \"The Ballet of the Red Shoes\"), portraying dancer Grischa Ljubov, and Ludmilla Tch\u00e9rina as dancer Irina Boronskaya; the latter was cast by Powell, who was captivated by her unconventional beauty.\nFilming.\nFilming of \"The Red Shoes\" took place primarily in Paris, with principal photography beginning in June 1947. Jack Cardiff, who had shot Powell and Pressburger's \"Black Narcissus\", served as cinematographer. The shooting schedule ran for approximately fifteen weeks, on a budget of \u00a3. Filming also occurred on location in London, Monte Carlo, and the C\u00f4te d'Azur. Some sequences were filmed at Pinewood Studios, including the stage and orchestra pit sequences, which were sets constructed specifically for the film.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt is the way the film is shot and edited, the number of close-ups, a particular handling of the tools of cinematic technique, that creates the drama; there is more revealed by method than anything inherent in the dramatic context of the scenes.\nCritic Adrienne McLean on the film's technical feats\nAccording to biographer Mark Connelly, the shoot was largely copacetic, with the cast and crew having a \"happy time\" on set. On the first day of the shoot, Powell addressed the cast and crew: \"We'll be doing things that haven't been done before, we'll have to work very hard\u2014but I know it's going to be worth it.\" The shooting of the film's central \"The Ballet of Red Shoes\" sequence took approximately six weeks, according to Shearer, who recalled that it was completed in the middle of the production. Powell disputed this, instead claiming that it was the last portion of the film to be shot. Filming the ballet proved difficult for experienced dancers, who were used to performing live ballet, as the filming process required them to spend hours preparing to shoot moments that lasted sometimes only a few seconds. Shearer recalled that the ballet sequence was \"so cinematically worked out that we were lucky if we ever danced for as long as one minute.\"\nThe shoot overran significantly, totalling twenty-four weeks rather than the planned fifteen, and the final budget ballooned to over \u00a3500,000. John Davis, the chief accountant of The Rank Organisation, forced a \u00a310,000 cut to Powell and Pressburger's salaries due to the film going over budget. Because the shoot was extended so far beyond schedule, Powell and Pressburger promised the cast and crew a fortnight's holiday in September.\nChoreography and score.\nAustralian ballet star Robert Helpmann choreographed the ballet, played the role of the lead dancer of the Ballet Lermontov and danced the part of the boyfriend. L\u00e9onide Massine created his own choreography for his role as the Shoemaker. Brian Easdale composed the original music for the film, including the full ballet of \"The Red Shoes\". Easdale conducted most of the music in the film, except for the \"Ballet of the Red Shoes\", where Sir Thomas Beecham conducted the score and received prominent screen credit. Beecham's Royal Philharmonic Orchestra was the featured orchestra for the film. Hilda Gaunt, the long-term Sadler's Wells and Royal Ballet pianist, is also credited as accompanist, but does not appear.\nThe score for \"The Red Shoes\" was written to \"fit the cinematic design,\" and completed in an unorthodox manner: Easdale composed the score for the film's central ballet sequence based on cartoon drawings and storyboards approved by Helpmann, which were assembled in the correct sequence. A total of 120 drawings were provided to help guide Easdale in writing an appropriate musical accompaniment. As filming of the ballet sequence progressed, the hand drawings were replaced by the corresponding completed shots. Easdale received the 1948 Academy Award for Best Original Score, the first British film composer so honoured.\nRelease.\n\"The Red Shoes\" had its world premiere in London on 22 July 1948, with a general United Kingdom release following on 6 September 1948. Upon its initial release in the United Kingdom the film was a low-earning picture, as the Rank Organisation could not afford to spend much on promotion due to severe financial problems exacerbated by the expense of \"Caesar and Cleopatra\" (1945). Also, according to Powell, the Rank Organisation did not understand the artistic merits of the film, and this strain in the relationship between The Archers and Rank led to the end of the partnership between them, with The Archers moving to work for Alexander Korda.\nUnder distribution by Eagle-Lion Films, the film had its United States premiere at the National Theatre in Washington, D.C. on 15 October 1948, marking the first ever motion picture to be exhibited at the venue in its 113-year history. It opened the following week at New York City's Bijou Theatre on 21 October 1948. Due to its popularity, the film screened at the Bijou Theatre continuously for over two years, with tickets available on a reserved-seat, advance-price basis. The film had its west coast premiere at the Fine Arts Theatre in Beverly Hills on 28 December 1948.\nHome media and restoration.\nThe American home media company The Criterion Collection released \"The Red Shoes\" on laserdisc in 1994, and on DVD in 1999.\nEfforts to restore \"The Red Shoes\" began in the early 2000s. With fundraising spearheaded by Martin Scorsese and his longtime editor (and Powell's widow), Thelma Schoonmaker, Robert Gitt and Barbara Whitehead formally began the restoration in the fall of 2006 at the UCLA Film and Television Archive, along with the help of the United States Film Foundation. Gitt, the chief preservation officer of the UCLA Archive, supervised the restoration, assisting Whitehead in reviewing each individual frame of the film\u2014192,960 in the print, 578,880 in the tripartite negative. The original negatives had suffered extensive harm, including shrinkage and mould damage. Because the damage to the negatives was so significant, digital restoration was the only viable method of rehabilitating the film. The 4K digital restoration was completed with the help of the Prasad Corporation and Warner Bros. Motion Picture Imaging to remove dirt, scratches, and other flaws. Digital methods were also used to remove pops, crackles and background hiss from the film's original optical soundtrack.\nThe newly restored version of \"The Red Shoes\" had its world premiere at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival. Several months later, in October 2009, ITV Films released the restored version on Blu-ray in the United Kingdom. On 20 July 2010, The Criterion Collection again reissued the film in its restored state on DVD and Blu-ray. Reviewing the Criterion Blu-ray, which includes an illustrative demonstration of the film's restoration, Stuart Galbraith of DVD Talk referred to the \"before and after\" comparisons as \"shocking and heartening at once.\"\nOn 14 December 2021, The Criterion Collection released the 2009 restoration of \"The Red Shoes\" in 4K, as part of their first six-film slate of 4K UHD disc releases.\nReception.\nBox office.\nDespite a lack of advertising, \"The Red Shoes\" went on to become the sixth most popular film at the British box office in 1948. According to \"Kinematograph Weekly\" the 'biggest winner' at the box office in 1948 Britain was \"The Best Years of Our Lives\" with \"Spring in Park Lane\" being the best British film and \"runners up\" being \"It Always Rains on Sunday\", \"My Brother Jonathan\", \"Road to Rio\", \"Miranda\", \"An Ideal Husband\", \"The Naked City\", \"The Red Shoes\", \"Green Dolphin Street\", \"Forever Amber\", \"Life with Father\", \"The Weaker Sex\", \"Oliver Twist\", \"The Fallen Idol\" and \"The Winslow Boy\".\nIn the United States, the film had earned $ in US rentals by the end of 1948. It ended its run at New York City's Bijou Theatre on 13 November 1950, having played for a total of 107 weeks. The success of this run convinced Universal Pictures that \"The Red Shoes\" was a worthwhile film and they took over the US distribution in 1951. \"The Red Shoes\" went on to become one of the highest-earning British films of all time, with a record-breaking gross of over $5 million.\nAccording to one account, producer's receipts were \u00a3179,900 in the UK and \u00a31,111,400 overseas. It made a reported profit of \u00a3785,700.\nCritical response.\nFilm scholar Mark Connelly notes that interpreting the contemporaneous critical response to \"The Red Shoes\" is a \"complicated task, as there are no simple divisions between those who liked the film and those who did not.\" Connelly concludes that the reaction was notably \"complex and mixed.\" Adrienne McLean similarly states that the film received \"only mixed\" reviews from both cinema and ballet critics. Upon its release in the United Kingdom, the film received some criticism from the national press, particularly aimed at Powell and Pressburger for the perception that the feature was \"undisciplined and downright un-British.\" Film historian Jerry Vermilye summarised the film's reception in its home country as \"indifferent\".\nWhile the film had its detractors in Britain, it was lauded by some national critics, such as Dilys Powell, who deemed it an \"extreme pleasure\" and \"brilliantly experimental.\" Writing for \"The Monthly Film Bulletin\", Marion Eames praised the performances of Shearer and Goring, as well as the score. \"The Daily Film Renter\" published a divisive review, noting that Powell and Pressburger \"have fumbled over a fine idea, and their opulent work trembles between the heights and the depths\". Despite this, it was voted the third-best film of the year in a readers' poll by the \"Daily Mail\", behind \"Spring in Park Lane\" and \"Oliver Twist\".\nInitial reception proved more favourable in the United States, where the film went on to garner mainstream attention after it began screening in the US arthouse circuit. The film was also well-received in Japan. Philip K. Scheuer of the \"Los Angeles Times\" lauded the film, writing that Powell and Pressburger take a \"skeletal frame and clothe it in glowing flesh; then accouter this in shining garments. When they have finished one sees much more than the figure of a ballerina; one is gazing upon the whole milieu, an unfolding world of the ballet\u2014onstage, offstage, backstage\". Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" praised the performances of Shearer, Helpmann, and Massine, and summarized: \"There has never been a picture in which the ballet and its special, magic world have been so beautifully and dreamily presented\". Herbert L. Larson of \"The Oregonian\" praised the film's accessibility to audiences unfamiliar with the art and technical aspects of ballet, writing that the filmmakers and performers \"have woven much of human nature into this brilliant film\".\nA main point of contention amongst both British and American critics was a perceived lack of realism concerning the ballet sequences. The focus of this criticism was the film's central 17-minute ballet performance of \"The Ballet of the Red Shoes\": Many dance critics felt the sequence's impressionistic touches\u2014which include abstract hallucinations and visual manifestations of Vicky's mental state\u2014detracted from the physical aspects of the ballet. British ballet critic Kathrine Sorley Walker also dismissed the sequence, commenting that it marked \"a departure from the illusion of stage ballet to the limitless and lush spaces reflecting the ballerina's thought.\" Eames made similar criticism, condemning the subjective elements of the sequence as \"corrupting the integrity of the ballet,\" as well as the choreography. Philip K. Scheuer of the \"Los Angeles Times\", however, praised the presentation of ballet in the film, deeming it \"the most ambitious\u2014and probably the most dazzlingly successful\u2014use of traditional-type ballet in any motion picture to date.\"\nWorks inspired by the film.\nThe 1952 film \"The Firebird\", directed by Hasse Ekman, is largely an homage to \"The Red Shoes\".\nIn the 1975 Broadway musical \"A Chorus Line\" and its 1985 film adaptation, several of the characters speak of \"The Red Shoes\" inspiring their decision to become dancers.\nKate Bush's 1993 album \"The Red Shoes\" and its title track were inspired by the film. The music was subsequently used in \"The Line, the Cross and the Curve\" (1993) a film referencing \"The Red Shoes\" written and directed by Bush. It stars Miranda Richardson and Lindsay Kemp.\nThe film was adapted by Jule Styne (music) and Marsha Norman (book and lyrics) into a Broadway musical, which was directed by Stanley Donen. \"The Red Shoes\" opened on 16 December 1993 at the Gershwin Theatre, with Steve Barton playing Boris Lermontov, Margaret Illmann playing Victoria Page, and Hugh Panaro playing Julian Craster. The choreography by Lar Lubovitch received the TDF's Astaire Award, but the musical closed after 51 previews and only five performances.\nIn 1996, St Martin's Press published \"The Red Shoes\", a novel written by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger.\nIn 2005, Ballet Ireland produced \"Diaghilev and the Red Shoes\", a tribute to Sergei Diaghilev, the ballet impresario who founded Ballets Russes. consisting of excerpts from works made famous by that seminal company. An excerpt from \"The Red Shoes\" ballet was included, since Diaghilev was one inspiration for the character of Lermontov.\nIn 2013, Korean singer-songwriter IU released the album \"Modern Times\", which featured the lead single \"The Red Shoes\", whose lyrics were inspired by the fairy tale, and whose music video was adapted from the film.\nThe film was adapted as a ballet choreographed by Matthew Bourne and premiered in December 2016 in London. The production used music adapted from film scores by Bernard Herrmann, including themes from \"The Ghost and Mrs. Muir\" (1947) and \"Vertigo\" (1958), in place of Brian Easdale's Oscar-winning score from the 1948 film.\nIn 2022, the award-winning short film \"\u00d2ran na h-Eala\" vividly explored Moira Shearer's heart and mind just before and after she agreed to star in \"The Red Shoes\", a decision that would change her life forever. The film unfolds as a string of dreamlike sequences while Moira sits at a dressing room mirror, reflecting on her career choices.\nLegacy.\nRetrospectively, it is regarded as one of the best films of Powell and Pressburger's partnership, and in 1999, it was voted the ninth greatest British film of all time by the British Film Institute. In the intervening years, it has garnered status as a cult film and an archetypal dance film. In 2017, a poll of 150 actors, directors, writers, producers and critics for \"Time Out\" magazine saw it ranked the fifth best British film ever. Filmmakers such as Brian De Palma, Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola, and Steven Spielberg have named it one of their all-time favourite films, and Roger Ebert included it in his list of \"Great Movies\". The February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"The Red Shoes\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nThe film is particularly known for its cinematography and especially the use of Technicolor. In the introduction for The Criterion Collection DVD of Jean Renoir's \"The River\", Scorsese considers \"The Red Shoes\" and \"The River\" to be the two most beautiful colour films.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60171", "revid": "36347239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60171", "title": "The Treasure of the Sierra Madre", "text": "1927 adventure novel by B. Traven\nThe Treasure of the Sierra Madre () is a 1927 adventure novel by German author B. Traven, whose identity remains unknown. In the book, two destitute American men in Mexico of the 1920s join an older American prospector in a search for gold. John Huston adapted the book as a 1948 film of the same name.\nHistorical setting.\nThe novel is set in the decade following the global upheavals of the First World War and social revolutions in Russia and Mexico. The United States is an emerging economic and political power. European and US corporations are aggressively seeking foreign markets, natural resources and cheap labor. Elements within the Catholic Church are struggling to retain their religious freedom as anticlerical Mexican administrations institute social reforms, including an 8-hour day, literacy programs and health care. This is the context of the story.\nPlot.\nThe author employs a third person-omniscient in a dramatic-progressive structure, where Howard is the focal character. Three stories within a story provide historical and social significance for the outer narrative.\nSummary.\nThe story opens in the oil boomtown of Tampico, Mexico in the early 1920s. Dobbs, an expatriate who hails from \u201can industrial American city\u201d is unemployed, penniless and reduced to bumming spare change from American tourists. Loitering on Tampico's main plaza, he collects a number of generous handouts from well-to-do men who wear white suits. To Dobbs\u2019 dismay, he discovers that he has been accosting the same individual repeatedly. The irate tourist at last upbraids the panhandler, dismissing him with a half-peso tip.\nAt the \"Hotel Oso Negro\" (the Black Bear Hotel), a vermin-infested flophouse, Dobbs pays for a cot and a cold shower at 50 centavos per night. The hotel clientele comprises both employed and unemployed international workers, as well as a number of gamblers, thieves and tramps. The \"Oso Negro\", nevertheless, is operated efficiently by its sharp-eyed front desk clerks. The guests themselves collectively provide a degree of good order and security.\nIn a caf\u00e9, a young Mexican lottery vendor exhorts Dobbs to purchase a ticket. Dobbs insults the boy, but finally consents to risk his last 20 centavos on the drawing.\nDobbs lands a gig unloading agricultural machinery at four pesos per day. Desperate for better wages, he joins a rigging crew as a roughneck, run by American contractor Pat McCormick. A shrewd bidder on lucrative drilling projects, McCormick has a reputation for fast-paced operations and high productivity. He postures as an anti-capitalist and comrade to revolutionaries so as to win the loyalty of his newly arrived European laborers, who are sympathetic to Bolshevism. Americans are wise to his phony appeals to worker solidarity and McCormick avoids hiring them. The pay is $8 a day, less $1.80 for meals. The crews work 18-hour shifts, seven days a week for the duration of the project and no overtime pay. Mexican labor is never hired due to their national eight-hour day provision. When the rigging job is completed, the crew is sent back to Tampico to await payment. McCormick advances a few employees 5% of their pay. Dobbs argues for and gets 30% of his earning in cash.\nWeeks pass while Dobbs, along with Californian co-worker named Curtin seek the evasive contractor. The men spot McCormick in the central plaza, promenading with his meretricious mistress. When they confront him, he invites the resentful Dobbs and Curtin into a \"cantina\" for a drink. Plying the men with liquor, McCormick pleads that he has not yet been reimbursed by the oil company. Curtin curses his lie, while Dobbs thrusts him against the bar, demanding their wages. McCormick, himself a brawler, and capable of beating up the men one-on-one, mentally calculates his losses if he ends up in a hospital after a desperate bar fight against both determined workers. He pulls out the cash he owes Dobbs and Curtin and throws it on the bar top. Vowing to never hire them again, he strides out of the \"cantina\".\nWhen Dobbs returns to the \"Oso Negro\", he encounters the greying Howard, an old-timer who has travelled the world in search of gold. The loquacious old man is holding forth with his bunkmates on the perils of striking it rich. Discovered in quantity, he avers, gold distorts a man's estimate of vice and virtue. Invariably he succumbs to greed, and no amount of gold will satisfy him. Overhearing this, Dobbs becomes agitated, swearing that he is immune to the sinister forces of gold, that he would be happy with a $20,000 fortune, no more. Howard quietly takes the measure of Dobbs with a long look, then returns to his sermon. He assures them that, though no longer in his prime, he is ready to share expenses on a gold-prospecting expedition. Dobbs and the others feel the powerful lure of the precious metal.\nStory within a story: The Legend of \"La Mina Agua Verde\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Howard tells the story of \"La Mina Agua de Verde\" (the Green Water Mine), as told to him by a Harry Tilton, former mentor and fellow-prospector. Tilton was one of a 15-man expedition to the legendary mine, and the only one who survived to carry away a sizeable fortune. The historic diggings are said to be located on today's border between the American state of Arizona and the Mexican state of Sonora.\nTilton\u2019s narrative sets forth the early history of the mine and carries an indictment of the imperial powers and profit systems that exploited its unbelievably rich and apparently inexhaustible deposits of gold. The social history associated with the mine presents a litany of horrors, beginning with the Aztecs and proceeding to the forced labor of indigenous people by the Spanish conquerors. The complicity of the Catholic Church in maintaining order among the Indian workers is detailed, including their authorization of torture. A malediction is placed on the mine.\nIn 1762 local inhabitants launch a revolt, exterminating the Spanish officials presiding over the slave laborers. Spain\u2019s military retaliates with a program of terror, burning villages and hanging women and children attempting to flee the oppression. A pattern of retaliatory killings escalates, until the Indian insurgents obliterate the mine and utterly transform the landscape to conceal any evidence of its existence. Attempts by Spanish authorities to relocate the diggings fail.\nThe legend of the cursed \"La Mina Agua Verde\" persists nonetheless in subsequent decades, revived when the United States takes possession of northern Mexico in the 1840s. The fate of those who seek the fabled mine ends in madness or death.\nDuring the 1870s, three American students from a distant college are on vacation in Arizona. As guests of a local priest, they secretly copy a map of \"La Mina Agua Verde\" \u2013 the Green Water Mine \u2013 found in the cleric's library. The boys enter into a partnership with a number of seasoned prospectors, among them Harry Tilton, who finance the 15-man party to rediscover the lost mine.\nThe map leads them to the vicinity of the mine. After weeks of relentless excavation, a three-man crew unearths some rich gold-laden ore. They attempt to conceal their discovery from their fellow prospectors, but the deception is exposed. Their vengeful comrades murder them. The mine proves to contain immense quantities of gold. Harry Tilton, satisfied with his $28,000 of gold, departs from the dig early. He settles down on a farm in his native Kansas. Unbeknownst to him, the remaining 11 men are massacred by bands of Indians, and the mine sinks back into legend.\nNear the turn of the century, gold fever grips the world with the great gold rushes in the Alaska, Australia and South Africa. Tilton is coerced, against his better judgment, to lead an expedition to relocate the legendary Green Water Mine. The members of the prospecting party include the much younger Howard.\nTilton fails to relocate the historic diggings. Disappointed members of his party become furious and try to extract the location from him by torture. They consider murdering Tilton, but he survives and returns to Kansas, only to find that his farm has been burned down in retaliation. Howard reports that Tilton fled the state, never to be heard of again. This ends Howard\u2019s cautionary tale.\nDobbs shares the legend of the Green Water Mine with Curtin, and has a premonition that he may be subject to a gold curse. Curtin discounts any \u201ccurse\u201d associated with gold and holds that a person's character determines its effects; it may be used for bad or good.\nWith many oil fields beginning to shut down operation in Mexico and relocate to other countries, the two men are impelled to partner with Howard to seek gold. Curtin is skeptical as to the old man's fitness, but Dobbs assures him that Howard is indispensable to the success of their venture, wondering if the old timer will even entertain shouldering two greenhorn prospectors. Howard gladly consents, and offers to invest the bulk of his savings, $200, towards the endeavor. Dobbs discovers that his lottery ticket has netted 100 pesos, and Curtin, in turn, collects an outstanding loan repayment with interest to the amount of $200. With about $600 in pooled funds, the trio depart immediately by train for the city of Durango, in the Mexican interior.\nIn Durango, Howard selects a promising region in the remote Sierra Madre Mountains to search for gold. Purchasing supplies and pack animals in local villages they begin their ascent. Dobbs and Curtin are staggered by the hardships they experience in wilderness travel. Several promising sites are tested, but show only traces of gold. The two inexperienced men begin to despair and consider quitting.\nHoward suddenly begins to berate his companions, disparaging their pessimism and ignorance. The old man's outburst is such that Dobbs and Curtin suspect he has gone mad. Listening to him, they begin to grasp what he is saying: the keen-eyed miner recognizes that the terrain is laden with placer gold.\nAn excavation site is selected and the base camp is situated over a mile away for security. The men intend to pose as professional game hunters seeking commercial hides. The approach to the diggings are carefully camouflaged with boulders and trunks. The local people take little interest in their activities and do not molest them. They establish a placer gold operation, using a sluice box, with the water hauled to the apparatus by burros from a nearby creek. Driven by entrepreneurial self-interest, Dobbs and Curtin work to the limits of their endurance. The gold accumulates slowly but surely.\nAs the fortune piles up, the prospectors' class identity shifts. With property to defend, they adopt a bourgeois outlook, suspicious of the have-nots. They cease to be proletarians. Even as the men share the same hardships, they do not forge friendships, merely alliances for profit. Their willingness to rescue a partner in distress is self-serving: the loss of one man to death or injury could cripple the profitable enterprise.\nMonths of hard labor and privations in the wilderness begins to show on the men. They are sick of the grub, the monotony of the work regimen and, especially, of one another. Howard has constantly to intervene to defuse fights between the younger men. In a number of violent confrontations, they pull their pistols and come close to shooting each other over trifles.\nThe miners begin to anticipate the end of the operation and a return to civil society. Curtin raises the question as to how much each gold share will bring in cash. Howard calculates this to be about $15,000 apiece. The claim is beginning to show signs of depletion and the men set a date of departure of 6\u20138 weeks. They collaborate in planning the safe transportation and conversion of their riches to currency. For the first time in months, they begin to think of their personal futures.\nCurtin makes a final resupply trip to the local village. He takes a few hides as usual to sell at the dry goods store; this, to keep up the pretense he is a hunter. Curtin is accosted by a friendly American newcomer visiting the store. The man insinuates that there is much gold in the nearby mountains; Curtin emphatically denies it. The stranger guesses the significance of Curtin's aloofness and trails him into the mountain wilderness.\nWithout warning, the intruder steps silently into their fire circle. The prospectors are momentarily taken off guard by his arrival. Dobbs recovers, and emphatically tells the man to clear out, but the stranger stands his ground. The miners cunningly ignore the unwelcome guest, and pretend to discuss \u201chunting\u201d strategies. The stranger bluntly informs them the area is unfit for commercial hunting \u2013 rather, they are sitting on a gold field. The prospectors return to their tent intensely suspicious of the man's purpose. They permit him to stay the night. The stranger introduces himself as Robert W. Lacaud of Phoenix, Arizona, \u201cTech, Pasadena\u201d.\nWhen Howard goes to check the burros, he spots mounted men in the distance approaching the encampment. They are not Mexican soldiers or police. Lacaud warns the miners that the horsemen are dangerous bandits, led by the notorious Gold Hat. Tipped off by locals, they are searching for the \u201chunter\u201d (Curtin) to seize his guns and ammunition. Lacaud assures his companions that their lives are in imminent danger. As they anxiously watch the bandits slowly ascend the trail, Lacaud relates to them the story of Gold Hat, conveyed to him by a local nobleman, don Genaro Montereal, while visiting his estate the previous week.\nStory within a story: Lacaud\u2019s narrative of an incident in the \"Viva Nuestro Rey Cristo\" Uprising.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In a remote region of western Mexico, a passenger train stops to pick up mail at a small station. At nightfall, twenty mestizos, dressed in peasant garb, silently board the train with prepaid tickets.\nThe second-class carriages are crowded with working class families with children; the first-class Pullman cars carry tourists, officials and merchants. A small detachment of federal troopers occupies another car. The mestizos, wrapped in ponchos, take up positions in the standing room only cars. When the train reaches full speed, someone cries \u201cViva Nuestro Rey Cristo! (Long live our King Jesus!). At this signal, the mestizos withdraw concealed firearms and begin shooting at the occupants: men, women and children are indiscriminately slaughtered. The soldiers, caught by surprise, are shot down before they can retrieve their rifles. With the passengers subdued, the looting begins.\nDespair and madness prevail among the survivors, as they are stripped of their possessions. Stopping the train, the bandits and their 200 confederates waiting along the tracks, carry away the loot before setting all the carriages on fire. The trains\u2019 engineer, though mortally wounded, escapes with the locomotive to the nearby depot. A rescue train is sent and the outlaws are driven away.\nThe federal military forces in the adjoining states are mobilized to pursue the perpetrators. Two Catholic priests are apprehended and admit to directing the attack on the train. The bandits, or rebels, as the case may be, are poor and politically ignorant agrarians who perform these deeds in struggle between the Catholic Church and the government of Mexico.\nThe federal troopers who comprise the rural military units are 80% \"Indios\" and 20% rest Mestizos. Led by junior officers, the detachments are deployed to track down and liquidate the 200 or more participants in the train assault.\nThe military \"modus operandi\" consists of making sweeps through remote villages for transient peasants. The luckless men are detained and questioned as to their residence and their clothing is searched. If contraband is found that does not match their social status or gender, they are assumed to be bandits. (In the post-Mexican Revolution period of the 1920s, possession of a firearm is not grounds for suspicion, as the peasant soldiers in the conflict retained their rifles after the fighting.) The detainees are automatically assumed to be desperados, guilt of capital crimes. They are immediately put to death by the soldiers, after digging their own graves.\nLacaud concludes his report, informing his cohorts that the approaching bandits, led by Gold Hat, are the last surviving members of the outlaws that had joined in the deadly train assault. The men prepare themselves for a desperate struggle.\nThe prospectors take up positions in a trench-like ravine with a view of the campsite, fortifying it like a military bunker. Howard assumes command with the consent of the others and holds a war council.\nGold Hat and his men dismount and enter the campsite on foot, expecting to encounter only a lone hunter. Failing to find him, they quarrel and consider returning to the village. The prospectors silently observe these developments from their hidden defenses. As the 20-man bandit group prepare to spend the night, one member explores the vicinity and discovers Curtin in the trench. Curtin warns him away, and the bandit alerts his companions.\nGold Hat approaches Curtin and identifies his cohorts as \"policia montada\" (mounted police), searching for outlaws who robbed a train. Curtin in turn demands that they show their police badges. Gold Hat, affronted, threatens Curtin with arrest for hunting without a license and possessing unregistered firearms. Curtin brandishes his rifle and the bandits determine to lay siege to his foxhole; they prefer to take him alive so as to torture him to death for entertainment. The methods they will use matches the iconography of Catholic Church and the practice of torture by the Inquisition. The bandits wear the icons of the Virgin Mary and Saint Joseph, believing they will protect them in their endeavors.\nGold Hat tries to lure Curtin from his foxhole with promises of a gold watch. Rebutted, the outlaws construct movable barriers to assault the trench. Before they can deploy them, a company of genuine mounted police, alerted by villagers, appear and pursue Gold Hat and his gang as they flee the encampment.\nWith the ordeal over, Howard, Dobbs and Curtin express a desire to terminate operations and return immediately to civilization, Howard confides to Dobbs and Curtin that Lacaud is an eccentric \u201ceternal\u201d \u2013 a prospector who becomes obsessed over a coveted diggings and will not abandoned even after decades of failure. They leave him to his fate. Howard directs the dismantling of their mine so as to leave no trace of its existence. Howard warns his cohorts that the next phase \u2013 transferring the gold dust back to civilization \u2013 may be the riskiest phase and they become preoccupied with its challenges. Howard illustrates these dangers in his tale of the Dona Maria Mine.\nStory within a Story: Legend of Dona Catalina Maria de Rodriguez and the \u201cDona Maria\u201d Mine..\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The story is set in the late 18th Century in Chihuahuan Desert region of Northern Mexico.\nA Chiricahuan chieftain named \"Aguila Bravo\" (Brave Eagle) lives a contented life. The chieftains\u2019 only son, approaching adulthood, is handsome and intelligent, but has been born blind. This is his father\u2019s sole regret. A parasitic monk, who live off the hospitality of the local villagers, promises to provide the chieftain with the method by which to restore his son\u2019s vision, for a fee. The secret, he tells father, is to appeal to the heavenly \"Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe\" (Our Lady of Guadalupe), on behalf of the Catholic Church.\nThe chief, as instructed, makes a 1400-mile pilgrimage on foot to Mexico City in company with his wife and son, carrying all his money and jewelry as an offering to the Saint. The family travels the final three miles on their knees to the holy site of Cerrito de Tepeyac (Hill of Tepeyac), saying Ave Marias as they go. For three days, the chief and his dependents pray before the icons, without food or water. Nothing happens. Aguila Bravo, hoping to appease the Saint, offers his cattle and next year\u2019s crops so as to induce a miracle. After seven more days, encouraged by the clergy, the chief offers to transfer his entire estate to the church to obtain eyesight for his son. No miracle takes place. The boy\u2019s health begins to fail due to the privations they\u2019ve endured, and the father fears for his life. Exasperated, he renounces his faith in the Virgin. The priests accuse him of blasphemy and warn that he may be tortured by a court of the holy Inquisition. The fathers of the church explain that the Virgin has withheld her intervention because the chief has failed to perform the requisite number of Ave Marias, or perhaps took a sip of water in violation of the fast. He admits as much, and departs in disgust.\nIn Mexico City, he consults a doctor \u2013 a quack \u2013 named Don Manuel, who agrees to restore the boy\u2019s eyesight, for a price, payable in gold. The two men strike a quid pro quo: if the doctor provides his son with sight, the chief will reveal the location of a rich gold and silver mine. A caveat allows the doctor to reverse the effects of the operation if the mine turns out to be a hoax.\nSpurred by the promise of great riches, Don Manuel fully succeeds in giving the boy sight. Aguila Bravo is good for his word. The location of the mine, long concealed by his ancestors despite cruel torture by Spanish invaders, is provided to Don Manuel for his personal enrichment. The mine proves to be rich in silver, less so in gold. Cunningly, Don Manuel transfers only small shipments to Mexico City to purchase food and provisions. He is fearful that church leaders might spread rumors that he doubted the miracle of Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe, torture him and confiscate his property. The staggering wealth of the mine is thus concealed; the bulk of the treasure is buried at the diggings.\nDon Manuel abuses his Indian laborers, and in time, they rebel. His wife, Dona Maria, escapes, but her husband is killed in the uprising. The Indians take no further interest in the mine and return to their homes. The widow Dona Maria goes to bury her deceased spouse. She finds the hidden stockpiles of silver untouched.\nDespite possessing this fortune, she determines to amass enough to become the richest woman on Earth. A daughter of impoverished city dwellers, she dreams of marrying into Spanish nobility of the highest rank. She reopens the mine, and makes generous donations to the Church so as to insure they do not molest the operations. The mine, meanwhile, continues to disgorge huge amounts of rich ore. At the remote diggings, she endures privations better than her husband, and handles her poorly paid employee adroitly. She adopts the manners of a hard-drinking wench, but impresses the visiting monks with her devoutness to the church.\nRevolutionary movements in the late 18th century in Europe destabilize the social relations in the Americas, as Spain begins to lose its grip on its colonial holdings. Egalitarian political and economics are taking hold. Dona Maria\u2019s mine is perpetually threatened with attack by desperados. She cleverly poses as a madwoman who seeks atonement through hard work, rather than a besieged member of the discredited elites. Before long, she becomes discontented with her primitive lifestyle and yearns for a more cultured existence. Her wealth is such that she can now realize her dream to marry into the Spanish nobility.\nThe silver and gold, smelted into bars, must be carried across 1400 miles across the Sierra Madre mountains and the Tierra Caliente to reach Mexico City. Dona Maria enlists two ex-soldiers from Spanish army to oversee the convoy, placing them in command of a detachment of armed Mestizos and a dozen Indian teamsters and 130 mules.\nOne of the soldier mutinies with the Mestizos, and he demands that Dona Maria marry him and make him master of the fortune. If she refuses, he threatens to rape her and divide the bullion with the mutineers. Unfazed, she spars with him verbally, then takes hold of a horsewhip, and brutally beats him until he collapses. She assaults the bewildered mutineers, and they submit to her authority. She orders the disloyal soldier hanged. Dona Maria bribes the loyal soldier, makes common cause with the Indian muleskinners, and thus maintains control of the convoy. She sustains her spirits by imagining a personal audience with the Pope.\nDona Maria arrives in Mexico City and instantly becomes a celebrity. The rich and powerful court her. With the silver and gold safely ensconced in the vaults of the King\u2019s treasury, her wealth is secured \u2013 by the nobility. Dona Maria mysteriously disappears, never to be heard of again. Here, Howard ends his cautionary tale.\nCurtin inquires as to whether the mine still holds riches, and if it could possibly be rediscovered. Howard disabuses the younger man: the mine is owned by an American outfit \u2013 the Dona Maria Mine Company. The operation yields ten times the ore extracted under Dona Catalina Maria de Rodriguez. Employees of the mine earn $40 a week.\nHoward, Curtin, and Dobbs take leave of Lacaud and head for Durango. The threesome avoid populated areas and refrain from acting suspicious so as not to draw attention from locals. Passing through a tiny village, they are detained by Mexican officials. Expecting the worst \u2013 that they will be fined for operating an unregistered mine \u2013 the officials turn out to be medical technicians for the Health Commission vaccinating the residents for smallpox. The prospectors gladly submit to be inoculated and go their way.\nSetting up camp, they are intercepted by a delegation of mounted \"indios\". The farmers request that the American accompany them to their village: the son of one of the men has been pulled from a swimming hole unconscious and cannot be revived. Howard consents to accompany them to their village and examine the boy. There, he applies basic First Aid to the child and he recovers. The villagers regard Howard's powers as those of a medicine-man or magician.\nHoward rejoins Dobbs and Curtin and they resume their journey, but they are shortly overtaken by the father of the boy he saved. The man and his companions insist that Howard return to the village so they can pay back the debt \u2013 a matter of etiquette and honor. The prospectors recognize that the \"indios\" are in earnest, and Howard relents. He relinquishes his possessions \u2013 including his share of gold \u2013 to the care of Dobbs and Curtin. They promise to rendezvous with him in Durango. Howard is welcome as a hero by the villagers upon his return.\nDobbs and Curtin, struggling to cross the high Sierra Madre, begin to quarrel in the absence of Howard's steadying influence. Dobbs, regretting having agreed to transport Howard's gear, lashes out at Curtin. Curtin maintains his composure and shoulders most of the work. Despite this, the unstable Dobbs descends into a homicidal rage, which Curtin, though anxious, is slow to grasp. When Dobbs proposes that they abscond with Howard's share, Curtin flatly vetoes the notion. Dobbs reacts to his comrade's defense of Howard as a symptom of Bolshevism. Curtin does not deny being a socialist, but emphatically refuses to betray the old man. Though not above some unscrupulousness himself, his actions are directed toward those who have power and wealth, not against his companions. When Dobbs pulls his pistol, Curtin is thunderstruck; he realizes that Dobbs is a homicidal maniac. Curtin manages to disarm Dobbs, but cannot, on principle, bring himself to kill an unarmed man. Dobbs\u2019 hatred and contempt for Curtin deepens when he interprets this restraint as \u201cBolshevik\u201d in character.\nThe unarmed Dobbs bides his time in the ensuing days, taunting his bewildered companion. Curtin is forced to remain awake at night to fend off an assault by Dobbs. Exhausted, he finally slips into sleep. Dobbs instantly seizes his pistol and marches Curtin into the underbrush where he shoots him point blank. Returning minutes later to make sure the man is dead, he shoots into the prostrate body a second time.\nIn an attempt to rationalize his crime, Dobbs recalls that, while serving in the US military in Europe, he had killed German soldiers in combat. His conscience troubles him, but he finally falls into a deep sleep. He awakes and searches for Curtin's body, but cannot find it. He begins to hallucinate as his alienation and guilt take hold of him.\nHe departs camp and makes good progress towards Durango, in possession of all the gold. When he spots a locomotive in the distant valley, his anxiety fades and he contemplates a trip to the British Isles, the home of his ancestors. His only concern is that his crime will be discovered before he can cash in and escape. In sight of Durango, he is reassured that the law and order that protects property in civilized areas will assert itself. Dobbs gloats over his presumed killing of Curtin and his double-dealing of Howard.\nOn the outskirts of Durango, Dobbs and his pack train stumble onto three Mestizo desperados \u2013 Miguel, Nacho, and Pablo \u2013 at a secluded site off the main road. Dobbs senses his life is in danger. The Mestizos begin to ransack the packs. Dobbs pulls his pistol, only to find it is unloaded. After one of the Mestizos knocks Dobbs to the ground with a rock to the head, Miguel, the leader of the gang, decapitates the stunned Dobbs with a machete. The men don his boots and pants but leave his bloody shirt behind, and escape with the pack train.\nThe outlaws, upon examining the contents of the pack, find only what appears to be sand in burlap bags. They guess that this is ballast placed in the packs to inflate the value by weight of commercial hides, or perhaps samples taken by a mining company engineer. They cannot fathom that it could be a fortune in placer gold. Frustrated at the paucity of loot, they slash the bags and contents pour out, swept away by the wind.\nThe desperados travel to a tiny village in the high Sierra Madre and offer the stolen burros for sale. The village elders casually examine the animals and the men's outfits. The brands on the burros are recognized as those sold to three prospectors months before. The village mayor is sent for; he engages the three Mestizos in an unassuming, yet probing interrogation regarding their acquisition of the burros and packs. The thieves are equivocal. The mayor quietly assembles the men of the village. After further cross-examination and more inconsistences in the scenario, a posse is sent to locate Dobbs and discover his decapitated remains. The local military garrison is notified, and a captain arrives with a platoon of troopers to take the Mestizos into custody. While being marched back to the garrison, the accused murderers are shot to death while trying to \u201cescape\u201d. Their corpses are buried where they fell, with a cynical display of decorum.\nCurtin, wounded and barely alive, is found crawling through the underbrush by a local woodsman. He takes Curtin to his home, and Howard is notified that a gringo needs medical care. When Howard arrives, Curtin relates his ordeal with Dobbs, and swears revenge. Howard, reflecting on the incident, and without exonerating Dobbs, does not consider him a natural killer. The old timer points to the temptation of $50,000 in gold, and declares that any person might be tempted to murder for it. The two men agree to pursue Dobbs and retrieve their fortunes \u2013 not yet knowing Dobbs\u2019 fate.\nWhile Curtin convalesces, Howard embarks for Durango, but he is intercepted by the mayor who presided over the interrogation of Dobbs\u2019 murderers and tells him the story. Howard is informed that the gold has been lost. He returns to his village with the pack and relates the tragic news to Curtin. Grasping the enormity of the disaster, Howard roars with Homeric laughter. Curtin is at first offended, distraught at the loss of the fortune, but finally joins the old prospector in his ironic mirth. They then take a second look through the pack and find two small bags of gold after all, and briefly consider opening a store in the port town.\nHoward decides he is content to remain in the village as a medicine-man and offers Curtin to accompany him as an apprentice doctor.\nHoward remains enthusiastic about a life as an honored member of the Indio community. Curtin bids Howard farewell, and promises to visit his old comrade when he fully recovers. The fate of Lacaud is never mentioned.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60172", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60172", "title": "Most wanted", "text": ""}
{"id": "60173", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60173", "title": "State Fair (1933 film)", "text": "1933 film by Henry King\nState Fair is a 1933 American pre-Code comedy-drama film directed by Henry King and starring Janet Gaynor, Will Rogers, and Lew Ayres. The film tells the story of a farm family's multi-day visit to the Iowa State Fair, where the parents seek to win prizes in agricultural and cooking competitions, and their teenage daughter and son each find unexpected romance.\nBased on the bestselling 1932 novel by Phil Stong, this was the first of three film adaptations of the novel; the others were \"State Fair\" (1945) starring Jeanne Crain and Dana Andrews, and \"State Fair\" (1962) starring Ann-Margret and Pat Boone. The 1933 film was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Picture and Best Adapted Screenplay, losing to \"Cavalcade\" and \"Little Women\" respectively.\nPlot.\nIn the fictional town of Brunswick, Iowa, farmer Abel Frake prepares to transport his Hampshire pig, Blue Boy, to compete at the hog contest at the Iowa State Fair. Confident he will win the first-place prize, and nothing bad will happen, Abel bets five dollars against his neighbor Fred Cramer. Abel's wife Melissa, is preparing pickles and mincemeat for the food competition. Against his wife's insistence, Abel secretly adds apple brandy. Unsure about her chances of winning, Melissa adds the remaining brandy. Meanwhile, Abel's daughter Margy reconnects with childhood friend Harry Ware. He is unable to attend the fair because he is preoccupied with his dairy farm. Margy's brother, Wayne, arrives home from college to attend the fair.\nAfter the Frakes arrive at the fair, Abel notices Blue Boy appears ill. At a carnival hoop toss game, Wayne throws the rings perfectly and meets Emily Joyce, a trapeze artist. Later that night, Wayne and Margy venture out to the circus fair. Wayne separates from his sister, and sees Emily perform a trapeze stunt. Meanwhile, Margy rides the roller coaster ride, seated next to Pat Gilbert, a newspaper reporter. When the roller coaster descends rapidly, Gilbert holds her tightly. After their ride together, the two bond over their connection to Brunswick, and have lemonade.\nThe next morning, Melissa notices how emotionally elevated her two children are. Abel inspects Blue Boy, in which the hog appears to be healthy again. Back at the circus, Pat reconnects with Margy, in which they decide to be friends rather than romantic lovers. They plan to meet again at Melissa's competition, which Pat is covering for his newspaper. At the food competition, Melissa wins the first-place prize for both her pickles and mincemeat. Having fallen in love, Pat and Margy then watch a harness horse race and walk through the woods later that night.\nBack at Emily's place, she and Wayne share drinks. Emily changes into her nightgown, and the two sleep together. The next morning, Abel tries to wake up Blue Boy for the hog contest, succeeding at the last minute. The hog judges inspect Blue Boy and award Abel first prize. Later that night, Wayne apologizes to his father for missing the hog contest. Wayne and Margy both leave for their final night at the fair. Alone with Melissa, Abel reads in the newspaper that one of the food judges is sick from delirium after eating Melissa's brandy-spiked mincemeat.\nDespite their love, Emily decides not to marry Wayne. On their final night, Margy tells Pat about her feeling for Harry back home. Meanwhile, Abel and Melissa enjoy the amusement rides together. As the Frakes leave the state fair, Melissa notices her children's despondent demeanor. Back home, Melissa confesses putting apple brandy in her mincemeat. Abel collects his five-dollar bet from Fred. Margy, still depressed, receives a phone call from Pat and runs out into a rainstorm to reunite with him.\nProduction.\nThough the adaptation deleted a storyline about a sexual relationship between the daughter and a journalist, it retained a similar storyline about the seduction of the son (Norman Foster) by a trapeze artist (Sally Eilers). This caused trouble with the Hays Commission when Fox re-released the film in 1935. The censors insisted on the deletion of a scene where Foster and Eilers are heard talking off screen while the camera shows a rumpled bed and a discarded negligee. The cut scene has never been restored.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60174", "revid": "50268682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60174", "title": "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers", "text": "1954 film by Stanley Donen\nSeven Brides for Seven Brothers is a 1954 American musical film, directed by Stanley Donen, with music by Gene de Paul, lyrics by Johnny Mercer, and choreography by Michael Kidd. The screenplay, by Albert Hackett, Frances Goodrich, and Dorothy Kingsley, is based on the short story \"The Sobbin' Women\" by Stephen Vincent Ben\u00e9t, which was based in turn on the ancient Roman legend of the Rape of the Sabine women. \"Seven Brides for Seven Brothers\", which is set in Oregon in 1850, is particularly known for Kidd's unusual choreography, which makes dance numbers out of such mundane frontier pursuits as chopping wood and raising a barn. Film critic Stephanie Zacharek has called the barn-raising sequence in \"Seven Brides\" \"one of the most rousing dance numbers ever put on screen.\" The film was photographed in Ansco Color in the CinemaScope format.\n\"Seven Brides for Seven Brothers\" won the Academy Award for Best Scoring of a Musical Picture and was nominated for four additional awards, including Best Picture. In 2006, American Film Institute named \"Seven Brides for Seven Brothers\" as one of the best American musical films ever made. In late 2004, the same year Howard Keel died, \"Seven Brides for Seven Brothers\" was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry of the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nIn 1850 Oregon Territory, backwoodsman Adam Pontipee goes to town for supplies and to find a bride. He meets Milly, the pretty young cook at the town bar. Seeing her strength, hardworking attitude, and culinary skills, he proposes. She accepts and they immediately marry, but upon arriving at the Pontipee mountain homestead, Milly discovers that Adam has six younger brothers \u2013 Benjamin, Caleb, Daniel, Ephraim, Frank, and Gideon \u2013 who are uncouth and expect Milly to clean and cook for them. Milly angrily ruins dinner and retreats to the bedroom, where she bans Adam from their bed. Adam, at first, crawls out the window to sleep in a nearby tree; eventually, Milly and Adam reconcile, with Milly regretting her high hopes concerning marriage.\nMilly begins teaching Adam's brothers hygiene and manners; eventually, this extends to advice on romance and courtship. At a town barn-raising event, the Pontipees display their newly acquired social graces as they meet Dorcas, Ruth, Martha, Liza, Sarah, and Alice, who are immediately attracted to the brothers. The girls' initial suitors, overcome with jealousy, attack the Pontipees during the barn-raising. In the ensuing brawl, the barn is destroyed.\nWinter sets in. The brothers pine for their loves back in town. To console them, Adam reads from Milly's copy of Plutarch's \"Parallel Lives\" about the Sabine women, whom the ancient Romans kidnapped to be their wives. Adam then claims his brothers should do the same to get their prospective brides.\nThe Pontipees sneak into town at night and kidnap the girls. As they race back to the homestead, the men trigger an avalanche that blocks the mountain pass, stopping their pursuers. However, the Pontipees realize they neglected to procure a parson to conduct the wedding ceremonies and are snowed in until spring. Milly is furious with Adam and the brothers and exiles them to the barn while the girls stay in the house. Humiliated and angry by Milly's rebuke, Adam leaves for the Pontipees' trapping cabin to spend the winter alone.\nOver the winter, the girls vent their anger by pranking the brothers, but their feelings gradually soften towards them. Meanwhile, Milly reveals she is expecting a baby. By springtime, the girls and the Pontipees have happily paired off. When Milly has a baby girl, Gideon goes to tell Adam. He refuses to return. Gideon chastises Adam over his selfishness and behavior toward Milly. Adam returns after the snow melts and meets his daughter. He and Milly reconcile. Adam admits that being a father, he now understands how families feel about their daughters and tells his brothers they must return the girls. The heartbroken brothers agree to take them home. However, the girls hide and refuse to go back. As the brothers search, the girls' angry families reach the Pontipees' homestead.\nAs the townsmen sneak up to the farm, Alice's father, Reverend Elcott, hears a baby crying. Fearing the worst, he asks the girls whose baby it is. They immediately conspire together and simultaneously answer \"mine!\" The fathers begrudgingly allow their daughters to marry the brothers in a collective shotgun wedding.\nCast.\nThe Brothers and their Brides:\nBrothers.\nTo perform the dance numbers and action sequences, choreographer Michael Kidd wanted dancers to portray all six of Adam Pontipee's brothers. Kidd said that he \"had to find a way to have these backwoods men dance without looking ridiculous. I had to base it all around activities you would accept from such people\u00a0\u2013 it couldn't look like ballet. And it could only have been done by superbly trained dancers.\" However, he was able to integrate into the cast two non-dancer MGM contract players who were assigned to the film, Jeff Richards, who performed just the simpler dance numbers, and Russ Tamblyn, using him in the dance numbers by exploiting his talents as a gymnast and tumbler.\nThe other four brothers were portrayed by professional dancers\u00a0\u2013 Matt Mattox, Marc Platt, Tommy Rall, and Jacques d'Amboise. All four balanced on a beam together during their barn-raising dance.\nThe wood-chopping scene in \"Lonesome Polecat\" was filmed in a single take.\nBrides.\nProfessional dancers played all seven of the brides.\nThe four girls whom Adam sees in the Bixby store when he first goes into town are Dorcas, Ruth, Liza and Sarah.\nProduction.\nAccording to Dore Schary, Joseph Losey recommended the Stephen Vincent Benet story \u201cThe Sobbin\u2019 Women\u201d as the basis for a musical film to Schary when the latter was head of production at RKO. Schary tried to get the rights but Joshua Logan had it under option for a stage production. When Logan dropped the option, Schary arranged for MGM to purchase the rights. Schary later said \"everything worked\" on the film.\nDorothy Kingsley was brought on to the film to replace Frances Goodrich, as well as Albert Hackett, who she said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"...didn't get along with Stanley Donen. They were lovely people, darling . . . but the script just wasn't coming out right, they were unhappy, and he was unhappy. They wanted to bow out. Stanley Donen called me in and I looked at the script and said, 'The big trouble in the original short story is that the Howard Keel character is the one that tries to get all of these boys married off, and that's not right. The girl has nothing to do, and she's got to be the one to engineer all this stuff.' That was changed around and seemed to please everyone, and we went from there.\"\nChoreographer Michael Kidd originally turned down the film, recalling in 1997: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Here are these slobs living off in the woods. They have no schooling, they are uncouth, there's manure on the floor, the cows come in and out\u00a0\u2013 and they're gonna get up and dance? We'd be laughed out of the house.\"\nLyricist Johnny Mercer said that the musical numbers were written at Kidd's behest, as an example \"of how a songwriter sometimes has to take his cue from his collaborators.\" For example, Kidd explained to Mercer and dePaul both his conception of the \"Lonesome Polecat\" number and the lament of the brothers for the women, and the two then worked out the music and lyrics.\nIn his introduction to a showing on Turner Classic Movies on January 17, 2009, host Robert Osborne, as well as Jane Powell in her autobiography, \"The Girl Next Door\", both say MGM was much less interested in \"Seven Brides\" than it was in \"Brigadoon\", which was also filming at the time, even cutting its budget and transferring the money to the Lerner and Loewe vehicle.\nMost of the movie was shot on the MGM sound stages. One exterior sequence not filmed at the studio was shot on location at Corral Creek Canyon in Sun Valley, Idaho. It was here that the escape following the brothers' kidnapping their future brides and the avalanche that closed the pass was filmed.\nOn the 2004 DVD commentary, Stanley Donen states that the film was originally shot in two versions, one in CinemaScope and another in normal ratio, because MGM was concerned that not all theaters had the capability to screen it. Despite the fact that it cost more than the widescreen version to make, he says, the other version was never used. However, both versions are available on the 1999 LaserDisc and 2004 DVD releases.\nThe dresses worn by the female cast were made from old quilts that costume designer Walter Plunkett found at the Salvation Army.\nHoward Keel wrote in his memoirs: \"Donen did a good job directing \"Seven Brides\", but the real hero and brains behind it was Jack Cummings.\"\nDonen later said making the film was \"a nightmare because it was a terrible struggle from the beginning of the picture until the end.\"\nSongs and music.\nThe \"Main Title\" is a medley of the songs \"Sobbin' Women\", \"Bless Your Beautiful Hide\" and \"Wonderful, Wonderful Day\".\nIn the film, Matt Mattox's voice is dubbed in by Bill Lee on \"Lonesome Polecat\". Mattox can be heard singing the song on the soundtrack album.\nReception.\nCritical.\nContemporary reviews from critics were positive. When it premiered at the Radio City Music Hall, A. H. Weiler of \"The New York Times\" called the film \"a wholly engaging, bouncy, tuneful and panchromatic package ... Although the powers at M-G-M are deviating from the normal song-and-dance extravaganza in 'Seven Brides for Seven Brothers,' it is a gamble that is paying rich rewards.\"\n\"Variety\" wrote: \"This is a happy, hand-clapping, foot-stomping, country type of musical with all the slickness of a Broadway show. It offers songs, dances and romancing in such a delightful package that word-of-mouth could talk it into solid business at the boxoffice.\" Richard L. Coe of \"The Washington Post\" declared: \"Dandy dancing, singable songs and the ozone of originality make 'Seven Brides for Seven Brothers' the niftiest musical I've seen in months.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" called it \"A thoroughly delightful blend of songs, dances and romantic comedy\" with \"exceptionally good musical numbers.\" \"The Monthly Film Bulletin\" wrote that the dances \"give the picture its remarkably spirited and exhilarating quality ... A minor weakness is the playing of Jane Powell, whose Milly is a somewhat colourless figure; Howard Keel, the brides and the brothers, however, are all admirable.\"\nJohn McCarten of \"The New Yorker\" posted a dissenting negative review, writing that the film \"got on my nerves\" and \"struck me as desperately contrived and often witless\", though he did concede that there were \"some fine dances\" in it.\nPauline Kael writes that the backgrounds seem to have been painted to fool the audience. In proving that it can \"make things look real,\" Hollywood comes full circle in catering to mass audiences that prefer things that look like reality rather than illusion.\nBox office.\n\"Seven Brides for Seven Brothers\" was the 5th most popular film at the British box office in 1955. According to MGM records it made $5,526,000 in the US and Canada and $3,877,000 elsewhere resulting in a profit of $3,198,000.\nLegacy.\nThe film came in third in a BBC Radio 2 listener poll of the UK's \"Number One Essential Musicals\" and was listed as number eight in the \"Top 10 MGM musicals\" in the book \"Top 10 of Film\" by Russell Ash. In 2004, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\" In 2006, it was ranked #21 on the American Film Institute's list of best musicals. In 2008, the film was ranked number 464 in \"Empire\"'s list of the 500 greatest films of all time.\nReview aggregator Rotten Tomatoes awards \"Seven Brides for Seven Brothers\" an 89% \"Fresh\" rating based on 28 reviews, with an average rating of 7.8/10. The critics' consensus states: \"Buoyed by crowd-pleasing tunes and charming performances, \"Seven Brides for Seven Brothers\" makes a successful transition from Broadway to screen that's sure to please the whole family.\"\nAwards and nominations.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60175", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60175", "title": "Most wanted list", "text": "List of criminals\nA most wanted list is a list of criminals and alleged criminals who are believed to be at large and are identified as a law enforcement agency's highest priority for capture. The list can alert the public to be watchful, and generates publicity for the agency.\nHistory.\nThe Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) was the first agency to create a most wanted list. The FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list was inaugurated on March 14, 1950, at the direction of FBI director J. Edgar Hoover. The idea for the list came from a question asked by a reporter for the International News Service. The reporter asked the FBI to provide names and descriptions of the \"toughest guys\" that the agency wanted to capture. After observing the high level of public interest generated by the resulting news story, Hoover decided to publish a formal list.\nContext.\nCollective.\nIn the years following the creation of the American initial lists, other law enforcement agencies around the world, representing all jurisdictional levels, have issued their own lists of most wanted fugitives. \nAlthough lists often contain lone suspects, they sometimes contain individuals who form part of a larger network. Sometimes this can constitute a closely knit network as a gang, but can also constitute a loose-connected or a person within an umbrella agglomeration whose association to one another is negligible and may even have an international scope. \nIn such collective scenarios, there is a common assumption that making it onto a fugitive-like list necessitates rendering such an individual as a leading figure within one's field of turpitude. However ofttimes such an individual's upturn in notability may largely stem from notoriety caused by mainstream media sensationalism or in international situations, due to a shared nationality between the suspect and the jurisdiction of the law enforcement agency. \nList members generally are not ranked by priority. Historically, a higher proportion of suspected persons on such lists were often listed in accordance with deeds pertaining to betrayal, such as double agents, or purveyors of treason.\nIndividuals.\nThere is no official worldwide list of most wanted fugitives. Interpol publishes a list of \"red notices\" identifying and describing fugitive persons who are wanted by a national jurisdiction and are being sought internationally for capture and extradition. This is, however, an inclusive list rather than a \"most wanted\" list. In 2008, \"Forbes\" magazine published an informal list of the World's 10 Most Wanted Fugitives, assembled after consulting with law enforcement agencies around the world. Candidates for the \"Forbes\" list were fugitives thought to be dangerous who had \"a long history of committing serious crimes\", who had been indicted or charged with a crime in a national jurisdiction or by an international tribunal, and who were involved with a type of criminal activity \"with which legal institutions in diverse jurisdictions are grappling\". The \"Forbes\" list has been updated and republished in subsequent years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "60176", "revid": "43311764", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60176", "title": "Sond file format", "text": ""}
{"id": "60177", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60177", "title": "Sound file format", "text": ""}
{"id": "60178", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60178", "title": "Music file format", "text": ""}
{"id": "60179", "revid": "44134938", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60179", "title": "Mobius Strip", "text": ""}
{"id": "60180", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60180", "title": "Codes and ciphers", "text": ""}
{"id": "60181", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60181", "title": "US State", "text": ""}
{"id": "60182", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60182", "title": "US state", "text": ""}
{"id": "60183", "revid": "301395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60183", "title": "U. S. state", "text": ""}
{"id": "60184", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60184", "title": "U. S. State", "text": ""}
{"id": "60186", "revid": "35331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60186", "title": "Wilson disease", "text": ""}
{"id": "60188", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60188", "title": "Psycosis", "text": ""}
{"id": "60191", "revid": "59205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60191", "title": "Szechuan Pepper", "text": ""}
