{"id": "63881", "revid": "246091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63881", "title": "Languages of the United States", "text": "The most commonly used language in the United States is English (specifically American English), which is the national language. While the U.S. Congress has never passed a law to make English the country's official language, a March 2025 executive order declared it to be. In addition, 32 U.S. states out of 50 and all five U.S. territories have laws that recognize English as an official language, with three states and most territories having adopted English plus one or more other official languages. Overall, 430 languages are spoken or signed by the population, of which 177 are indigenous to the U.S. or its territories, and accommodations for non-English-language speakers are sometimes made under various federal, state, and local laws.\nThe majority of the U.S. population (77%) speaks only English at home as of 2024, according to the American Community Survey (ACS) of the U.S. Census Bureau. The second most common language by far is Spanish, spoken by 13.9% of the population, followed by Chinese, spoken by around 1% of the population. Other languages spoken by over a million residents are Tagalog, Vietnamese, Arabic, French, Korean, and Russian. Only 8.4% of U.S. residents report that they speak English less than \"very well\".\nMany residents of the U.S. unincorporated territories speak their own native languages or a local language, such as Spanish in Puerto Rico and English in the U.S. Virgin Islands. Over the course of U.S. history, many languages have been brought into what became the United States from Europe, Africa, Asia, other parts of the Americas, and Oceania. Some of these languages have developed into dialects and dialect families (examples include African-American English, Pennsylvania Dutch, and Gullah), creole languages (such as Louisiana Creole), and pidgin languages. American Sign Language (ASL) and Interlingua, an international auxiliary language, were created in the United States.\nMost common languages.\nBased on annual data from the American Community Survey (ACS), the U.S. Census Bureau regularly publishes information on the most common languages spoken at home. It also reports on the English-speaking ability of people who speak a language other than English at home. In 2023, Spanish speakers made up about three-fifths of all speakers of languages other than English in the United States. In 2017, the U.S. Census Bureau published information on the number of speakers of some 350 languages as surveyed by the ACS from 2009 to 2013, but it does not regularly tabulate and report data for that many languages.\nThe most spoken languages at home in the United States in 2020:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe ACS is not a full census but an annual sample-based survey conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. The language statistics are based on responses to a three-part question asked about all members of a target U.S. household who are at least five years old. The first part asks if they \"speak a language other than English at home.\" If so, the head of the household or main respondent is asked to report which language each member speaks in the home, and how well each individual speaks English. It does not ask how well individuals speak any other language of the household. Thus, some respondents might have only limited speaking ability in those languages. In addition, it is difficult to make historical comparisons of the numbers of speakers because language questions used by the U.S. Census changed numerous times before 1980.\nThe ACS does not tabulate the number of people who report the use of American Sign Language at home, so such data must come from other sources. While modern estimates indicate that American Sign Language was signed by as many as 500,000 Americans in 1972 (the last official survey of sign language), estimates as recently as 2011 were closer to 100,000. Various cultural factors, such as the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act, have resulted in far greater educational opportunities for hearing-impaired children, which could double or triple the number of current users of American Sign Language.\nEnglish is the most common language spoken in U.S. homes, with approximately 247 million speakers as well as numerous bilingual speakers. Spanish is spoken by approximately 42 million people. The United States has the world's fourth largest Spanish-speaking population, outnumbered only by Mexico, Colombia, and Argentina; other estimates put the United States at over 50\u00a0million, second only to Mexico. Throughout the Southwestern United States and Puerto Rico, long-established Spanish-speaking communities coexist with large numbers of more recent Hispanophone immigrants. Although many new Latin American immigrants are less than fluent in English, nearly all second-generation Hispanic and Latino Americans speak English fluently, while only about half still speak Spanish.\nAccording to the 2000 U.S. census, people of German ancestry made up the largest single ethnic group in the United States, but German language was the fourth most-spoken language in the country. Italian, Polish, and French are still widely spoken among populations descending from immigrants from those countries in the early 20th century, but the use of these languages is dwindling as the older generations die. Russian is also spoken by immigrant populations.\nTagalog and Vietnamese have over one million speakers each in the United States, almost entirely within recent immigrant populations. Both languages, along with the varieties of Chinese (mostly Cantonese, Taishanese, and Standard Mandarin), Japanese, and Korean, are now used in elections in Alaska, California, Hawaii, Illinois, New York, Texas, and Washington.\nNative American languages are spoken in smaller pockets of the country, but these populations are decreasing, and the languages are seldom widely used outside of reservations. Besides English, Spanish, French, German, Navajo and other Native American languages, all other languages are usually learned from immigrant ancestors that came after the time of independence or learned through some form of education.\nAmerican Sign Language is the most common sign language in the United States, although there are unrelated sign languages that have also been developed in the States and territories\u2014mostly in the Pacific. No concrete numbers exist for signers but something upwards of 250,000 is common.\nThe most widely taught foreign languages in the United States, in terms of enrollment numbers from kindergarten through university undergraduate education, are Spanish, French, and German. Other commonly taught languages include Latin, Japanese, American Sign Language, Italian, and Chinese.\nOfficial languages.\nEnglish is typically used by the federal government and is considered the national language. In 2025, Donald Trump issued Executive Order 14224, declaring English the official language of the United States, and federal agencies recognize English as official under the order. However, the U.S. has never had an official language \"de jure\", as Congress has never passed legislation to designate one at the federal level. \nOutside of Puerto Rico, English is the primary language used for legislation, regulations, executive orders, treaties, federal court rulings, and all other official pronouncements. Nonetheless, laws require some documents, such as ballots, to be printed in both English and one or more other languages if there are large numbers of non-English speakers in an area. Proceedings of the United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico are required by federal law to be in English, despite the predominantly Spanish-speaking population and the status of Spanish as an official language of the territorial government.\nThirty-two of the 50 states have adopted legislation granting official or co-official status to English, in some cases as part of what has been called the English-only movement. Typically only \"English\" is specified, not a particular variety like American English. (From 1923 to 1969, the state of Illinois recognized its official language as \"American\".) English is typically used in states that do not have an official language.\nHawaiian and English are the official languages of Hawaii, reflecting the Hawaiian Kingdom's history of trade and diplomacy with Britain in the decades prior to its annexation by the United States in 1898. Alaska has made some 20 native languages official, along with English; for example, Alaska provides voting information in I\u00f1upiaq, Central Yup'ik, Gwich'in, Siberian Yupik, and Koyukon among others. On July 1, 2019, a law went into effect making Lakota, Dakota, and Nakota\u00a0the official indigenous languages of South Dakota. \nFrench is a \"de facto\", but unofficial, language in Maine and Louisiana, and since 1848 New Mexico law has granted Spanish speakers in the state the right to receive many services in Spanish. The government of Louisiana offers services and most documents in both English and French, and New Mexico does so in English and Spanish.\nEnglish is at least one of the official languages in all five permanently inhabited U.S. territories. In Puerto Rico, both English and Spanish are official, although Spanish has been declared the principal official language. The school system and the government operate almost entirely in Spanish, but federal law requires the United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico to use English, like the rest of the federal court system.\nGuam recognizes English and Chamorro. In the U.S. Virgin Islands, English is the only official language. In American Samoa, both English and Samoan are officially recognized; English is common but Samoan is also seen in some official communications. In the Northern Mariana Islands, English, Chamorro, and Carolinian are official.\nIn New Mexico, although the state constitution does not specify an official language, laws are published in English and Spanish, and government materials and services are legally required (by Act) to be made accessible to speakers of both languages as well as Navajo and various Pueblo languages. New Mexico also has its own dialect of Spanish, which differs from Spanish spoken in Latin America.\nAlgonquian, Cherokee, and Sioux are among many other Native American languages which are official or co-official on many U.S. Indian reservations and pueblos. In Oklahoma before statehood in 1907, territory officials debated whether or not to have Cherokee, Choctaw, and Muscogee languages as co-official, but the idea never gained ground. Cherokee is officially recognized by the Cherokee Nation within the Cherokee tribal jurisdiction area in eastern Oklahoma.\nAfter New Amsterdam (formerly a Dutch colony) was transferred to English administration (becoming the Province of New York) in the late 17th century, English supplanted Dutch as the official language. However, \"Dutch remained the primary language for many civil and ecclesiastical functions and most private affairs for the next century.\" The Jersey Dutch dialect is now extinct.\nCalifornia has agreed to allow the publication of state documents in other languages to represent minority groups and immigrant communities. Languages such as Spanish, Chinese, Korean, Tagalog, Persian, Russian, Vietnamese, and Thai appear in official state documents, and the Department of Motor Vehicles publishes in nine languages.\nThe issue of multilingualism also applies in the states of Arizona and Texas. While the constitution of Texas has no official language policy, Arizona passed a proposition in 2006 declaring English as the official language. Nonetheless, Arizona law requires the distribution of voting ballots in Spanish, as well as indigenous languages such as Navajo, O'odham and Hopi, in counties where they are spoken.\nA popular urban legend called the Muhlenberg legend claims that German was almost made an official language of the United States but lost by one vote. In reality, it was a request by a group of German immigrants to have an official translation of laws into German. House speaker Frederick Muhlenberg has since become associated with the legend.\nEducation.\nBilingual education in the United States, often a different concept from language immersion or dual-language school programs, is an area of political controversy. In standard bilingual classes, the non-English language (typically Spanish or Chinese) is utilized over a period of time when students' English-language proficiency is lacking. Otherwise the medium of instruction at almost all U.S. schools, at all levels, is English. The exceptions are in language classes such as French or German, or in general education in the territory of Puerto Rico, where Spanish is standard. English is the language of instruction in the territory of American Samoa, despite most students speaking Samoan as their native language.\nThere are also hundreds of language immersion and dual-language schools across the United States that teach in a variety of languages, including Spanish, Hawaiian, Chamorro, French, and Mandarin Chinese (for example, the Mandarin Immersion Magnet School in Houston, Texas). However, English is a mandatory class in all these schools.\nHistoric languages.\nSome of the first European languages to be spoken in the U.S. were English, Dutch, French, Spanish, and Swedish.\nFrom the mid-19th century, the nation had large numbers of immigrants who spoke little or no English. The laws, constitutions, and legislative proceedings of some states and territories appeared in the languages of politically important immigrant groups. There have been bilingual schools and local newspapers in such languages as German, Ukrainian, Hungarian, Irish, Italian, Norwegian, Greek, Polish, Swedish, Romanian, Czech, Japanese, Yiddish, Hebrew, Lithuanian, Welsh, Cantonese, Bulgarian, Dutch, Portuguese, Persian, Arabic and others. These flourished despite English-only laws in some jurisdictions prohibiting church services, telephone conversations, and even conversations in the street or on railway platforms in a language other than English, up until the first of these laws was ruled unconstitutional in 1923 (\"Meyer v. Nebraska\").\nTypically, immigrant languages tend to be lost through assimilation within two or three generations.\nSeveral states and territories have native populations who spoke their own language prior to joining the United States, and have maintained their original languages for centuries. The languages include Alaskan Russian, Louisiana French, New Mexican Spanish, Pennsylvania Dutch, and Puerto Rican Spanish.\nEnglish (245.69 million speakers).\nEnglish was inherited from British colonization, and it is spoken by the majority of the population. English has become increasingly common; when the United States was founded, just 40% of Americans spoke English.. In 2002, 87% of Americans spoke English as their first language. It serves as the de facto national language, the language in which government business is carried out. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 80% spoke only English at home and all but approximately 13,600,000 U.S. residents age 5 and over speak English \"well\" or \"very well\".\nAmerican English is different from British English in terms of spelling (one example being the dropped \"u\" in words such as color/colour), grammar, vocabulary, pronunciation, and slang usage. The differences are not usually a barrier to effective communication between an American English and a British English speaker.\nSome states, like California, have amended their constitutions to make English the only official language, but in practice, this only means that official government documents must \"at least\" be in English, and \"does not\" mean that they should be exclusively available only in English. For example, the standard California Class C driver's license examination is available in 32 different languages.\nSpanish (42.03 million speakers).\nSpanish was also inherited from colonization and is sanctioned as official in the commonwealth of Puerto Rico, where it is the general language of instruction in schools and universities. In the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and all territories except Puerto Rico, Spanish is taught as a foreign or second language. It is spoken at home in areas with large Hispanic populations: the Southwestern United States along the border with Mexico, as well as in Florida, parts of California, the District of Columbia, Illinois, New Jersey, and New York. In Hispanic communities across the country, bilingual signs in both Spanish and English may be quite common. Furthermore, numerous neighborhoods exist (such as Washington Heights in New York City or Little Havana in Miami) in which entire city blocks will have only Spanish-language signs and Spanish-speaking people.\nYounger generations of non-Hispanics in the United States choose to study Spanish as a foreign or second language in far greater numbers than other second-language options. This might be due in part to the growing Hispanic population and the increasing popularity of Latin American movies and music performed in the Spanish language. A 2009 American Community Survey (ACS) conducted by the United States Census Bureau, showed that Spanish was spoken at home by over 35 million people aged 5 or older, making the United States the world's fifth-largest Spanish-speaking community, outnumbered only by Mexico, Colombia, Spain, and Argentina. Since then, the number of persons reported on the ACS to speak Spanish at home has increased (see table).\nNew Mexican Spanish.\nIn northern New Mexico and southern Colorado, Spanish speakers have been isolated for centuries in the southern Rockies, and developed a distinct dialect of Spanish spoken nowhere else: New Mexican Spanish. The dialect features a mix of Castilian, Galician and, more recently, Mexican Spanish, as well as Pueblo loan words. New Mexican Spanish also contains a large proportion of English loan words, particularly for technological words (e.g. \"bos\", \"troca\", and \"telef\u00f3n\").\nSpeakers of New Mexican Spanish are mainly descendants of Spanish colonists who arrived in New Mexico in the sixteenth through the eighteenth centuries. During this time, contact with the rest of Spanish America was limited, and New Mexican Spanish developed on its own course. In the meantime, Spanish colonists coexisted with and intermarried with Puebloan peoples and Navajos. After the Mexican\u2013American War, New Mexico and all its inhabitants came under the governance of the English-speaking United States, and for the next hundred years, English-speakers increased in number.\nPuerto Rican Spanish.\nPuerto Rican Spanish is the main language and dialect of the people of Puerto Rico, as well as many people descended from Puerto Ricans elsewhere throughout the United States.\nSpanglish.\nSpanglish is a code-switching variant of Spanish and English and is spoken in areas with large bilingual populations of Spanish and English speakers, such as along the Mexico\u2013United States border (California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas), Florida, and New York City.\nChinese (3.4 million speakers).\nThe population of Chinese speakers in the United States was increasing rapidly in the 20th century because the number of Chinese immigrants has increased at a rate of more than 50% since 1940. Some 2.8 million Americans speak some variety of Chinese, which combined are counted by the federal census as the third most-spoken language in the country. Until the late 20th century, Yue dialects, including Cantonese and Taishanese, were the most common dialects among immigrants and the descendants of immigrants, especially in California. Since the opening of the People's Republic of China, Mandarin, the official language in the PRC and Republic of China (Taiwan), has become increasingly prevalent. Many Americans of all ethnic backgrounds are also learning Mandarin and, to a far lesser extent, Cantonese.\nIn New York City in 2002, Mandarin was spoken as a native language among only 10% of Chinese speakers but was predicted to replace Cantonese as the lingua franca among Chinese speakers.\nChinese-Americans in the California Gold Rush and their descendants spoke a variety of the Cantonese language influenced by American English and American societal concepts foreign to Cantonese speakers in Modern China, either through direct English translations such as \"Alpine\" borrowed from (Alpine County, California), or neologisms such as \"Yellow Eagle\" (Gold dollar), \"Emancipated Woman\" (Feminist), and \"Telephone\". It also maintains older Qing Dynasty Cantonese vocabulary that has fallen out of use in Cantonese spoken in Modern China.\nFrench (1.18 million speakers; 2.07 million including Haitian Creole).\nFrench is the seventh most spoken language in the United States according to the 2020 ACS. It is the fourth most common if Haitian Creole (a French-based dialect that is not mutually intelligible with standard French) is combined and counted as French. The ACS lists Haitian Creole separately from French, which encompasses standard French, Louisiana Creole, and Louisiana Cajun varieties. In the United States, French is spoken mainly by the Louisiana Creole, native French, Cajun, and French-Canadian populations, along with more recent immigrants from Haiti. It is widely spoken in Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, and in Louisiana, with notable Francophone enclaves in St. Clair County, Michigan, many rural areas of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan and the northern San Francisco Bay area. Because of its legacy in Louisiana, that state is served by the Council for the Development of French in Louisiana (CODOFIL), the only state agency in the United States whose mission is to serve a linguistic population. In October 2018, Louisiana became the first U.S. state to join the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie.\nThree varieties of French developed within what is now the United States in colonial times including Louisiana French, Missouri French, and New England French (essentially a variant of Canadian French). French is the second-most-spoken language in the states of Louisiana and Maine. The largest French-speaking communities in the United States reside in Northeast Maine; Hollywood and Miami, Florida; New York City; certain areas of rural Louisiana; and small minorities in Vermont and New Hampshire. Many of the New England communities are connected to the dialect found across the border in Quebec or New Brunswick. More than 13 million Americans possess primary French heritage, but only 2 million speak French, or any regional creoles and variations language at home. The largest concentration of French speakers in the country is in Louisiana.\nLouisiana French.\nLouisiana French (; ) is an umbrella term for the dialects and varieties of the French language spoken traditionally in colonial Lower Louisiana. As of today Louisiana French is primarily used in the U.S. state of Louisiana, specifically in the southern parishes.\nFrench is spoken across ethnic and racial lines by Louisiana French people who may identify as Cajuns or Creoles as well as Chitimacha, Houma, Biloxi, Tunica, Choctaw, Acadians, and French Indian among others. For these reasons, as well as the relatively small influence Acadian French has had on the region, the label Louisiana French or Louisiana Regional French () is generally regarded as more accurate and inclusive than \"Cajun French\" and is the preferred term by linguists and anthropologists. However, \"Cajun French\" is commonly used in lay discourse by speakers of the language and other inhabitants of Louisiana.\nGerman (857,000 speakers; 1.29 million including Yiddish and Pennsylvania German dialects).\nGerman was the 13th most common language spoken at home, according to the 2020 ACS survey. If German-related dialects such as Yiddish and varieties such as Pennsylvania German (Amish) are included, German ranks among the top ten languages spoken in U.S. homes. (The ACS lists both Yiddish and Pennsylvania German separately from German.) By the 18th century, German was a widely spoken language in some American colonies, especially Pennsylvania, where a number of German-speaking Protestants and other religious minorities settled to escape persecution in Europe. Another wave of settlement occurred when Germans fleeing the failure of 19th-century German revolutions immigrated to the United States. Throughout the century, a large number of these immigrants settled in urban areas, where entire neighborhoods were German-speaking and numerous local German-language newspapers and periodicals were established. Germans also took up farming around the country, including the Texas Hill Country, at this time. The language was widely spoken until the United States entered World War I.\nIn the early 20th century, German was the most widely studied foreign language in the United States, and prior to World War I, more than 6% of American schoolchildren received their primary education exclusively in German, though some of these Germans came from areas outside Germany. Currently, more than 49 million Americans claim German ancestry, the largest self-described ethnic group in the U.S., but less than 4% of them speak a language other than English at home, according to recent American Community Surveys. The Amish, concentrated in the State of Pennsylvania, speak a dialect of German known as Pennsylvania Dutch; it is widely spoken in Amish communities today.\nWaves of colonial Palatines from the Rhenish Palatinate, one of the Holy Roman states, settled in the Province of New York and the Province of Pennsylvania. The first Palatines arrived in the late 1600s but the majority came throughout the 1700s; they were known collectively as the Palatine Dutch. The Pennsylvania Dutch settled other states, including Indiana and Ohio. For many years, the term \"Palatine\" meant German American.\nThere is a myth (known as the Muhlenberg legend) that German was to be the official language of the U.S., but this is inaccurate and based on a failed early attempt to have government documents translated into German. The myth also extends to German being the second official language of Pennsylvania; however, Pennsylvania has no official language. Although more than 41 million Americans claim to have German ancestors, only 857,000 Americans spoke German at home in 2020. \nPennsylvania Dutch.\nPennsylvania Dutch or Pennsylvania German is a dialect of Palatine German that is traditionally spoken by the Pennsylvania Dutch, and has settled the Midwest, in places such as Ohio, Indiana, Iowa and other states, where many of the speakers live today. It evolved from the German dialect of the Palatinate brought over to America by Palatines from the Holy Roman Empire in the 1600s. They settled on land sold to them by William Penn. Germantown included not only Mennonites, but also Quakers. The Pennsylvania Dutch speak Pennsylvania Dutch, and adhere to different Christian denominations: Lutherans, German Reformed, Mennonites, Amish, German Baptist Brethren, Roman Catholics; today Pennsylvania Dutch is mainly spoken by Old Order Amish and Old Order Mennonites.\nTexas German.\nTexas German is a group of High German dialects spoken by Texas Germans, descendants of German immigrants who settled in Texas in the mid-19th century.\nYiddish.\nYiddish, a West Germanic language historically spoken by Ashkenazi Jews in Central and eastern Europe, has a much longer history in the United States than Hebrew. It has been present since at least the late 19th century and continues to have roughly 148,000 speakers as of the 2009 American Community Survey. Though they came from varying geographic backgrounds and nuanced approaches to worship, immigrant Jews of Central Europe, Germany and Russia were often united under a common understanding of the Yiddish language once they settled in America. By the early 20th century, dozens of publications in the language were available in most East Coast cities. Though the use of Yiddish has declined by quite a bit since the end of World War II, it has by no means disappeared. Many Israeli immigrants and expatriates have at least some understanding of the language in addition to Hebrew, and many of the descendants of the great migration of Ashkenazi Jews of the past century pepper their English vocabulary with Yiddish loan words. Yiddish remains the lingua franca among American Haredi Jews (particularly Hasidic Jewry), whose communities are concentrated in Los Angeles, Miami, New York City, and the suburbs of New York. A significant diffusion of Yiddish loan words into the non-Jewish population continues to be a distinguishing feature of New York City English. Some of these words include \"glitch, chutzpah, mensch, kvetch, klutz\", etc.\nRussian (1.04 million speakers).\nIn the United States, the Russian language is spoken mostly in urban areas of the states of New York, California, Washington, New Jersey, Illinois, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania. It is also spoken in isolated areas of Alaska originally settled in the 18th and 19th centuries by Russian \"promyshlenniki\"; these were largely Siberian fur hunters, river merchants, and mercenaries who later worked as sailors, carpenters, artisans, and craftsmen. In the 21st century, Russian is especially spoken in immigrant neighborhoods of larger U.S. cities: New York City, Boston, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Chicago, Seattle, Sacramento, Spokane, Miami, Portland, Oregon, and two Portland suburbs, Vancouver, Washington and Woodburn, Oregon.\nFrom 1799 until 1867, the Russian-American Company owned most all of what became Alaska Territory. This changed with the formal sale of Alaska to the United States on March 30, 1867, after the final resolution of the Crimean War. The presence of Russian speakers in the United States has always been limited in numbers, and even more so after the assassination of the Romanov dynasty of tsars. However, beginning in the late 1970s and continuing until the mid-1990s, many Russian-speaking Jews from the Soviet Union (and later from its independent constituent republics of Russia, Moldova, Ukraine, Belarus, and Uzbekistan) have immigrated to the United States, increasing the use of Russian in the country.\nThe largest Russian-speaking neighborhoods in the United States are found in New York City (specifically the Brighton Beach area of Brooklyn, Forest Hills and Rego Park in Queens, and parts of Staten Island), Los Angeles (especially West Los Angeles and West Hollywood), neighborhoods of Philadelphia (notably the Far Northeast), and parts of Miami (Sunny Isles Beach).\nThe Russian-language media group Slavic Voice of America, based in Dallas, Texas, serves Russian-speaking Americans.\nAlaskan Russian.\nAlaskan Russian, known locally as Old Russian, is a dialect of Russian influenced by the Alutiiq language spoken by Alaskan Creoles. Most of its speakers live on Kodiak Island and in the Ninilchik (Kenai Peninsula). It has been isolated from other varieties of Russian for over a century.\nKodiak Russian was natively spoken along the Afognak Strait until the Great Alaskan earthquake and tsunami of 1964. It has become moribund, spoken by only a handful of elderly people, and is virtually undocumented.\nNinilchik Russian has been better studied and is more vibrant. It developed from the Russian colonial settlement of the village of Ninilchik in 1847.\nNinilchik Russian vocabulary is clearly Russian, with a few borrowings from English and Alaskan native languages.\nIn Nikolaevsk, Alaska, 66.57% of the population still spoke Russian at home as late as 2017.\nDutch (142,000 speakers).\nIn a 1990 demographic consensus, 3% of surveyed citizens claimed to be of Dutch descent. Modern estimates place the Dutch American population (with total or partial Dutch heritage) at 3.1\u00a0million, or 0.93%, lagging just a bit behind Norwegian Americans and Swedish Americans, while 885,000\u00a0Americans claimed total Dutch heritage.\nAn estimated 141,580 people, or 0.0486%, in the United States still speak the Dutch language, \nincluding its Flemish variant, at home as of 2013. This is in addition to the 23,010 and 510 speakers, respectively, of the Afrikaans and West-Frisian languages, both closely related to Dutch. Dutch speakers in the U.S. are concentrated mainly in California (23,500), Florida (10,900), Pennsylvania (9,900), Ohio (9,600), New York (8,700) and Michigan (6,600, residing almost entirely in the city of Holland). In 2021, 95.3% of the total Dutch-American population aged 5 years and over spoke only English at home.\nLow Dutch.\nThere has been a Dutch presence in North America since establishment of 17th-century colony of New Netherland (parts of New York, New Jersey and Delaware), where Dutch was spoken by the New Netherlander, the original settlers, and their descendants. It was still spoken in the region at the time of the American Revolution and thereafter. For example, Alexander Hamilton's wife, Eliza Hamilton, attended a Dutch-language church during their marriage. African-American abolitionist and women's rights activist Sojourner Truth (born \"Isabella Baumfree\") was a native speaker of Dutch. Martin Van Buren, the first president born in the United States following its independence from Great Britain, spoke Dutch as his native language. He is the only U.S. president whose first language was not English.\nVernacular dialects of Dutch were spoken in northeastern New Jersey (Bergen, Hudson, Passaic county) and the Capital District of New York until they gradually declined throughout the 20th century.\nIndigenous languages.\nNative American languages.\nNative American languages predate European settlement of the New World. In a few parts of the U.S. (mostly on Indian reservations), they continue to be spoken fluently. Most of these languages are endangered, although there are efforts to revive them. Normally the fewer the speakers of a language the greater the degree of endangerment, but there are many small Native American language communities in the Southwest (Arizona and New Mexico) which continue to thrive despite their small size.\nIn 1929, speaking of indigenous Native American languages, linguist Edward Sapir observed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Few people realize that within the confines of the United States there is spoken today a far greater variety of languages ... than in the whole of Europe. We may go further. We may say, quite literally and safely, that in the state of California alone there are greater and more numerous linguistic extremes than can be illustrated in all the length and breadth of Europe.\nNavajo.\nAccording to the 2000 census and other language surveys, the largest Native American language-speaking community by far is the Navajo. Navajo is an Athabaskan language of the Na-Den\u00e9 family, with 178,000 speakers, primarily in the states of Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah. Altogether, Navajo speakers make up more than 50% of all Native American language speakers in the United States. Western Apache, with 12,500 speakers, also mostly in Arizona, is closely related to Navajo but not mutually intelligible with it. Navajo and other Athabaskan languages in the Southwest are relative outliers; most other Athabascan languages are spoken in the Pacific Northwest and Alaska. Navajo has struggled to keep a healthy speaker base, although this problem has been alleviated to some extent by extensive education programs on the Navajo Nation, including a Navajo language immersion school in Fort Defiance, Arizona.\nCherokee.\nCherokee is the Iroquoian language spoken by the Cherokee people, and the official language of the Cherokee Nation. Significant numbers of Cherokee speakers of all ages still populate the Qualla Boundary in Cherokee, North Carolina and several counties within the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, significantly Cherokee, Sequoyah, Mayes, Adair, and Delaware. Increasing numbers of Cherokee youth are renewing interest in the traditions, history, and language of their ancestors. Cherokee-speaking communities stand at the forefront of language preservation, and at local schools, all lessons are taught in Cherokee and thus it serves as the medium of instruction from pre-school on up. Also, church services and traditional ceremonial stomp dances are held in the language in Oklahoma and on the Qualla Boundary in North Carolina.\nCherokee is one of the few, or perhaps the only, Native American language with an increasing population of speakers, and along with Navajo it is the only indigenous American language with more than 50,000 speakers, a figure most likely achieved through the tribe's 10-year long language preservation plan involving growing new speakers through immersion schools for children, developing new words for modern phrases, teaching the language to non-Cherokees in schools and universities, fostering the language among young adults so their children can use that language at home, developing iPhone and iPad apps for language education, the development of Cherokee language radio stations including Cherokee Voices, Cherokee Sounds, and promoting the writing system through public signage, products like the Apple iPhone, internet use through Google including Gmail, and others so the language remains relevant in the 21st century.\nOther Native American languages.\nDakota is a Siouan language with 18,000 speakers in the US alone (22,000 including speakers in Canada), not counting 6,000 speakers of the closely related Lakota. Most speakers live in the states of North Dakota and South Dakota. Other Siouan languages include the closely related Winnebago, and the more distant Crow, among others.\nCentral Alaskan Yup'ik is an Eskimo\u2013Aleut language with 16,000 speakers, most of whom live in Alaska. The term \"Yupik\" is applied to its relatives, which are not necessarily mutually intelligible with Central Alaskan, including Naukan and Central Siberian, among others.\nThe O'odham language, spoken by the Pima and the Tohono O'odham, is a Uto-Aztecan language with more than 12,000 speakers, most of whom live in central and southern Arizona and northern Sonora. Other Uto-Aztecan languages include Hopi, Shoshone, and the Pai-Ute languages.\nChoctaw has 11,000 speakers. Choctaw is part of the Muskogean family, like Seminole and Alabama.\nThe Algonquian language family includes languages like Ojibwe (Chippewa), Cheyenne, and Cree.\nKeres has 11,000 speakers in New Mexico and is a language isolate. The Keres pueblo people are the largest of the Pueblo nations. The Keres pueblo of Acoma is the oldest continually inhabited community in the United States. Zuni, another isolate, has around 10,000 speakers, most of whom reside within the Zuni pueblo.\nBecause of immigration from Mexico, there are Mexican native American languages speakers in the US. There are thousands of Nahuatl, Mixtec, Zapotec and Trique speakers in communities established mainly in the southern states.\nAlthough the languages of the Americas have a history stretching back about 17,000 to 12,000 years, current knowledge of them is limited. There are doubtlessly a number of undocumented languages that were once spoken in the United States that are missing from historical record.\nList of Native American languages.\nBelow is an estimate of Native American languages \"spoken at home\" in the United States (American Community Survey 2006\u20132008). This is not an exhaustive list of Native American languages in the US. Because the distinction between dialect and language is not always clear, multiple dialects of varying mutual intelligibility may be classified as a single language, while a group of effectively identical dialects may be classified separately for historical or cultural reasons. Languages included here may be classified as \"extinct\" (having no living native speakers), but many extinct or moribund Native American languages are the subjects of ongoing language revitalization efforts; other extinct languages undergoing revitalization might not be listed here.\nNative American sign languages.\nA sign-language trade pidgin, known as Plains Indian Sign Language, Plains Standard or Plains Sign Talk, arose among the Native Americans of the plains. Each signing nation had a separate signed version of their oral language, that was used by the hearing, and these were not mutually intelligible. Plains Standard was used to communicate between these nations. It seems to have started in Texas and then spread north, through the Great Plains, as far as British Columbia. There are still a few users today, especially among the Crow, Cheyenne, and Arapaho. Unlike other sign languages developed by hearing people, it shares the spatial grammar of deaf sign languages. Through intergenerational transmission, Plains Sign Talk became a working language still in use today in some Deaf First Nations or Native American communities.\nAs Plains Sign Talk was so widespread and was a spectrum of dialects and accents, it probably hosted several languages under its umbrella. One is potentially Navajo Sign Language which is in use by a sole Navajo clan.\nAdditionally, Plateau Sign Language existed alongside Plains Sign Talk as either a trade pidgin or another language around the Columbia Plateau and surrounding regions.\nAustronesian languages.\nHawaiian.\nHawaiian is an official state language of Hawaii, as prescribed in the Constitution of Hawaii. Hawaiian has an estimated 1,000 native speakers. Although it is critically endangered, the Hawaiian language is showing signs of revitalization, particularly following the Hawaiian Renaissance. Growing public interest can also be attributed to language immersion programs available through the Hawaii State Department of Education and the University of Hawaii, as well as to efforts by the Hawaii State Legislature, Kamehameha Schools, county governments, and community organizations to preserve local place-based knowledge. In 1993, about 8,000 could speak and understand Hawaiian; today, since the intervention of the state government and that of private groups promoting the language, estimates range up to 27,000.\nSamoan.\nSamoan is an official territorial language of American Samoa. Samoans make up 90% of the population, and most people are bilingual.\nChamorro.\nChamorro is co-official in the Mariana Islands, both in the territory of Guam and in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. In Guam, the indigenous Chamorro people make up about 60% of the population.\nCarolinian.\nCarolinian is also co-official in the Northern Marianas, where only 14% of people speak English at home.\nCreole languages.\nSeveral distinct natural languages and pidgins have developed on American soil, including full languages like creole and sign languages.\nAngloromani.\nAngloromani is an English creole or mixed language spoken by Romani Americans.\nChinuk Wawa or Chinook Jargon.\nA pidgin of 700\u2013800 words of French, English, Cree and other Native origins is the old trade language of the Pacific Northwest. It was used extensively among both European and Native peoples of the Oregon Territory, even used instead of English at home by many pioneer families. It is estimated that around 100,000 people spoke it at its peak, between 1858 and 1900, and it was last widely used in Seattle just before World War II.\nGullah.\nAn English creole language with African influence spoken on the Sea Islands of South Carolina and Georgia retains strong influences of West African languages. The language is sometimes referred to as \"Geechee\".\nHawaiian Pidgin.\nHawaiian Pidgin is an English-based creole language used widely among locals in Hawaii.\nLouisiana Creole French.\nA French Creole language spoken by the Louisiana Creole people of the state of Louisiana, close to Haitian Creole, Colonial French, and Cajun French (language of Acadians deported from New France after 1755 and the Grand D\u00e9rangement).\nFrench Creole languages are spoken by millions of people worldwide, mainly in the United States, Caribbean, and Indian Ocean areas.\nU.S. Virgin Islands Creole Dutch (extinct).\nNegerhollands ('Negro-Dutch') was a Dutch-based creole language that was spoken in the Danish West Indies, now known as the U.S. Virgin Islands. Dutch was its superstrate language with Danish, English, French, Spanish, and African elements incorporated. Notwithstanding its name, Negerhollands drew primarily from the Zeelandic rather than the Hollandic dialect of Dutch.\nSign languages.\nAlongside the numerous and varied oral languages, the United States also boasts several sign languages. Historically, the US was home to some six or more sign languages (that number rising with the probability that Plains Sign Talk is actually a language family with several languages under its umbrella) which has fallen with the death of several of these.\nAs with all sign languages around the world that developed organically, these are full languages distinct from any oral language. American Sign Language (unlike Signed English) is not a derivation of English. Some languages present here were trade pidgins which were used first as a system of communication across national and linguistic boundaries of the Native Americans, however, they have since developed into mature languages as children learned them as a first language.\nAmerican Sign Language.\nAmerican Sign Language (ASL) is the native language of a number of deaf and hearing people in America (roughly 100,000 to 500,000). While some sources have stated that ASL is the third most frequently used language in the United States, after English and Spanish, recent scholarship has pointed out that most of these estimates are based on numbers conflating deafness with ASL use, and that the last actual study of this (in 1972) seems to indicate an upper bound of 500,000 ASL speakers at the time.\nHawai\u02bbi Sign Language.\nHawai\u02bbi Sign Language is moribund with only a handful of speakers on O\u02bbahu, L\u0101na\u02bbi, Kaua\u02bbi and possibly Ni\u02bbihau. Some of these speakers may actually be speaking a creolized version of HSL and ASL, however; research is slow-going. The language was once called Hawai\u02bbi Pidgin Sign Language, as many people thought it was a derivative of ASL, but it was discovered to be a separate language altogether.\nPlains Sign Talk.\nOnce a trade pidgin and the most far-reaching sign language in North America, Plains Sign Talk or Plains Sign Language is now critically endangered with an unknown number of speakers.\nMartha's Vineyard Sign Language.\nMartha's Vineyard Sign Language is now extinct. Along with French Sign Language, it was one of several main contributors to American Sign Language.\nHenniker Sign Language.\nHenniker Sign Language is now extinct but was once found around the Henniker region of New Hampshire and formed a basis for American Sign Language.\nSandy River Valley Sign Language.\nSandy River Valley Sign Language is now extinct but once could be found around the Sandy River Valley in Maine. It was one of several main contributors to American Sign Language.\nImmigrant languages.\nArabic.\nThe Arabic language is spoken by immigrants from the Middle East as well as many Muslim Americans. The highest concentrations of native Arabic speakers reside in heavily urban areas like Chicago, New York City, and Los Angeles. Detroit and the surrounding areas of Michigan boast a significant Arabic-speaking population including many Arab Christians of Lebanese, Syrian, Iraqi, Egyptian and Palestinian descent.\nArabic is used for religious purposes by Muslim Americans and by some Arab Christians (notably Catholics of the Melkite and Maronite Churches as well as Rum Orthodox, i.e. Antiochian Orthodox Christians and Coptic churches.). A significant number of educated Arab professionals who immigrate often already know English quite well, as it is widely used in the Middle East. Lebanese immigrants also have a broader understanding of French as do many Arabic-speaking immigrants from North Africa.\nCzech.\nTexas Czech.\n12,805 Texans can speak the Czech language.\nDrawing on Boas's model for interviewing speakers of the language and digitally cataloging the dialects, John Tomecek founded and Lida Cope of East Carolina University developed the Texas Czech Legacy Project at the University of Texas at Austin to document and preserve the dwindling language.\nBecause the majority of Texas immigrants came from Moravia, the Czech spoken in Texas is largely characterized by Moravian dialects (Lachian and Moravian Wallachian) which vary to some extent from the Bohemian dialects spoken by most Czech-Americans. Czech-language journalism has been very active in the state over the years. Thirty-three newspapers and periodicals have been published. As of 1993 one weekly newspaper, \"Na\u0161inec\", published at Granger, and one monthly, \"Hospod\u00e1\u0159\", published at West, were still being published entirely in Czech. Other periodicals such as \"V\u011bstn\u00edk\" and the \"Brethren Journal\" contained sections printed in Czech.\nFinnish.\nThe first Finnish settlers in America were amongst the settlers who came from Sweden and Finland to the New Sweden colony. Most colonists were Finnish. However, the Finnish language was not preserved as well among subsequent generations as Swedish.\nBetween the 1890s and the outbreak of the first World War, an estimated quarter million Finnish citizens immigrated to the United States, mainly in rural areas of the Midwest and more specifically in the mining regions of Northeastern Minnesota, Northern Wisconsin and Michigan's Upper Peninsula. Hancock, Michigan, as of 2005, still incorporates bi-lingual street signs written in both English and Finnish. Americans of Finnish origin yield at 800,000 individuals, though only 26,000 speak the language at home. There is a distinctive dialect of English to be found in the Upper Peninsula, known as Yooper. Yooper often has a Finnish cadence and uses Finnish sentence structure with modified English, German, Swedish, Norwegian, and Finnish vocabulary.\nNotable Finnish Americans include U.S. Communist Party leader Gus Hall, film director Renny Harlin, and the Canadian-born actress Pamela Anderson.\nNorthern Clark County, Washington (encompassing Yacolt, Amboy, Battle Ground and Chelatchie) contains a large exclave of Old Apostolic Lutherans who originally immigrated from Finland. Many families in this portion of the county speak fluent Finnish at home before learning English. Another noteworthy Finnish community in the United States is found in Lake Worth Beach, Florida, north of Miami.\nHebrew.\nModern Hebrew is spoken by Israeli immigrants. Liturgical Hebrew is used as a religious or liturgical language by many of the United States' approximately 7 million Jews.\nGaelic Languages.\nAbout 40 million Americans have Irish ancestry, many of whose ancestors would have spoken Irish Gaelic. In 2013, around 20,600 Americans spoke Irish at home and as of 2008 it was the 76th most spoken language in the United States. An additional 1,600 spoke Scottish Gaelic.\nItalian, Sicilian and Neapolitan.\nThe Italian language and other Italo-Dalmatian languages have been widely spoken in the United States for more than one hundred years, primarily due to large-scale immigration from the late 19th century to the mid 20th century.\nIn addition to Italian learned by most people today, there has been a strong representation of the languages of Southern Italy amongst the immigrant population (Sicilian and Neapolitan in particular). As of 2009, though 15,638,348 American citizens report themselves as Italian-Americans, only 753,992 of these report speaking the Italian language at home (0.3264% of the US population).\nKhmer (Cambodian).\nBetween 1981 and 1985 about 150,000 Cambodians resettled in the United States. Before 1975 very few Cambodians came to the United States. Those who did were children of upper-class families sent abroad to attend school. After the fall of Phnom Penh to the communist Khmer Rouge in 1975, some Cambodians managed to escape. In 2007 the American Community Survey reported that there were approximately 200,000 Cambodians living in the United States, making up about 2% percent of the Asian population. This population is, however, heavily concentrated in two areas: the Los Angeles metropolitan area in California, especially the city of Long Beach; and Greater Boston in New England, especially Lowell, Massachusetts. These two areas hold a majority of the Cambodians living in the US.\nKorean.\nIn 2011 over 1.1 million Americans spoke Korean at home. This number increased greatly at the end of the 20th century, increasing 327% from the 300,000 speakers in 1980. The greatest concentration of these speakers was in the Los Angeles, New York, and Washington D.C. metro areas. Most notably, speakers of Korean are found in the so-called Koreatowns.\nPolish and Silesian.\nAs of 2013, around 580,000 Americans spoke Polish at home. The Polish language is very common in the Chicago metropolitan area. Chicago's third largest white ethnic groups are those of Polish descent, after German and Irish. The Polish people and the Polish language in Chicago were very prevalent in the early years of the city, and today the 650,000 Poles in Chicago make up one of the largest ethnically Polish populations in the world, comparable to the city of Wroc\u0142aw, the fourth largest city in Poland. That makes it one of the most important centers of Polonia and the Polish language in the United States, a fact that the city celebrates every Labor Day weekend at the Taste of Polonia Festival in Jefferson Park.\nTexas Silesian.\nTexas Silesian, a dialect of the Silesian language (itself controversially considered a branch of Polish by some linguists), has been used by Texas Silesians in American settlements from 1852 to the present.\nPortuguese.\nThe first Portuguese speakers in America were Portuguese Jews who had fled the Portuguese Inquisition. They spoke Judeo-Portuguese and founded the earliest Jewish communities in the Thirteen Colonies, two of which still exist: Congregation Shearith Israel in New York and Congregation Mikveh Israel in Philadelphia. However, by the end of the 18th century, their use of Portuguese had been replaced by English.\nIn the late 19th century, many Portuguese, mainly Azoreans, Madeirans and Cape Verdeans (who prior to independence in 1975 were Portuguese citizens), immigrated to the United States, settling in cities like Providence, Rhode Island, New Bedford, Massachusetts, and Santa Cruz, California. There was also substantial Portuguese immigration to Hawaii to supplement plantation labor.\nIn the mid-late 20th century there was another wave of Portuguese immigration to the US, mainly the Northeast (New Jersey, New York, Connecticut, Massachusetts), and for a time Portuguese became a major language in Newark, New Jersey. Many Portuguese Americans may include descendants of Portuguese settlers born in Portuguese Africa (known as Portuguese Africans, or, in Portugal, as \"retornados\") and Asia (mostly Macau). There were around 1 million Portuguese Americans in the United States by 2000. Portuguese (European Portuguese) has been spoken in the United States by small communities of immigrants, mainly in the metropolitan New York City area, like Newark, New Jersey.\nThe Portuguese language is also spoken widely by Brazilian Americans, concentrated in Miami, New York City, and Boston.\nSwedish.\nThere has been a Swedish presence in America since the New Sweden colony came into existence in March 1638.\nWidespread diaspora of Swedish immigration did not occur until the latter half of the 19th century, bringing in a total of a million Swedes. No other country had a higher percentage of its people leave for the United States except Ireland and Norway. At the beginning of the 20th century, Minnesota had the highest ethnic Swedish population in the world after the city of Stockholm.\n3.7% of US residents claim descent from Scandinavian ancestors, amounting to roughly 11\u201312 million people. According to SIL's Ethnologue, over half a million ethnic Swedes still speak the language, though according to the 2007 American Community Survey only 56,715 speak it at home. Cultural assimilation has contributed to the gradual and steady decline of the language in the US. After the independence of the US from the Kingdom of Great Britain, the government encouraged colonists to adopt the English language as a common medium of communication, and in some cases, imposed it upon them. Subsequent generations of Swedish Americans received education in English and spoke it as their first language. Lutheran churches scattered across the Midwest started abandoning Swedish in favor of English as their language of worship. Swedish newspapers and publications alike slowly faded away.\nThere are sizable Swedish communities in Minnesota, Ohio, Maryland, Philadelphia, and Delaware, along with small isolated pockets in Pennsylvania, San Francisco, Fort Lauderdale, and New York. Chicago once contained a large Swedish enclave called Andersonville on the city's north side.\nJohn Morton, the person who cast the decisive vote leading to Pennsylvania's support for the United States Declaration of Independence, was of Finnish descent. Finland was part of the Kingdom of Sweden in the 18th century.\nWalloon.\nWisconsin Walloon.\nWisconsin Walloon is a dialect of the Walloon language brought to Wisconsin from Wallonia, Belgium's largely French-speaking region. It is spoken in the Door Peninsula of Wisconsin, United States.\nThe speakers of Wisconsin Walloon are descendants of Belgian immigrants from a wave of immigration lasting from 1853 to 1857. It includes around 2,000 Belgians who immigrated to Wisconsin. Walloon is sometimes referred to by its speakers as \"Belgian\". The descendants of native Walloon speakers have since switched to English, and as of 2021, Walloon has fewer than 50 speakers in the United States.\nWelsh.\nUp to two million Americans are thought to have Welsh ancestry. However, there is very little Welsh being used commonly in the United States. According to the 2007 American Community Survey, 2,285 people speak Welsh at home; primarily spoken in California (415), Florida (225), New York (204), Ohio (135), and New Jersey (130). Some place names, such as Bryn Mawr in Chicago and Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania () are Welsh. Several towns in Pennsylvania, mostly in the Welsh Tract, have Welsh namesakes, including Uwchlan, Bala Cynwyd, Gwynedd, and Tredyffrin.\nTagalog.\nTagalog speakers were already present in the United States as early as the late sixteenth century as sailors contracted by the Spanish colonial government. In the eighteenth century, they established settlements in Louisiana, such as Saint Malo. After the American annexation of the Philippines, the number of Tagalog speakers steadily increased, as Filipinos began to migrate to the U.S. as students or contract laborers. Their numbers, however, decreased upon Philippine independence, as some Filipinos were repatriated.\nToday, Tagalog, together with its standardized form Filipino, is spoken by over a million and a half Filipino Americans and is promoted by Filipino American civic organizations and Philippine consulates. As Filipinos are the second largest Asian ethnic group in the United States, Tagalog is the second most spoken Asian language in the country, after Chinese. Taglish, a form of code-switching between Tagalog and English, is also spoken by a number of Filipino Americans.\nTagalog is also taught at some universities where a significant number of Filipinos exist. As it is the national and most spoken language of the Philippines, most Filipinos in the United States are proficient in Tagalog in addition to their local regional language.\nVietnamese.\nAccording to the 2010 census, there are over 1.5 million Americans who identify themselves as Vietnamese in origin, ranking fourth among the Asian American groups and forming the largest Overseas Vietnamese population.\nOrange County, California, is home to the largest concentration of ethnic Vietnamese outside Vietnam, especially in its Little Saigon area. Other significant Vietnamese communities are found in the metropolitan areas of San Jose, Houston, Dallas-Fort Worth, Seattle, Northern Virginia, and New Orleans. Similarly to other overseas Vietnamese communities in Western countries (except France), the Vietnamese population in the United States was established following the Fall of Saigon in 1975 and communist takeover of South Vietnam following the Vietnam War.\nSouth Asian languages.\nThere are many South Asians in the United States. These include Indians, Pakistanis, and Bangladeshis, who speak various South Asian languages. Major South Asian languages spoken in the US include Telugu (see \"Telugu\" below), Malayalam, Kannada, Tamil (see \"Tamil\" below), Gujarati, Hindi and Urdu (see \"Hindi-Urdu\" below), Bengali, Punjabi, Sinhala, Nepali (see \"Nepali\" below), and Marathi.\nHindi and Urdu.\nHindi and Urdu are the two standard registers of the Hindustani language, an Indo-Aryan language native to North India, Central India, and Pakistan. While the formal registers draw vocabulary from Sanskrit and Arabic &amp; Persian respectively, the colloquial forms are indistinguishable. Hindi and Urdu are widely spoken among the Indian and Pakistani communities in the United States as a first or second language. Speakers are concentrated in states with large South Asian populations, including California, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Texas, and Virginia.\nAdditionally, Hindi-Urdu (Hindustani) is a cultural language for many South Asians who have different mother tongues and dialects. Bollywood in particular, as well as film music, is an important cultural product that influences many South Asian youth. Some South Indians, Bangladeshis, and Indian Bengalis learn the language or its dialects through films.\nNepali.\nThe first Nepalese to enter the United States were classified as \"other Asian\". Immigration records show that between 1881 and 1890, 1,910 \"other Asians\" were admitted to the United States. However, Nepal did not open its borders until 1950, and most Nepalis who left the country during that time went primarily to India to study. Nepalese Americans were first classified as a separate ethnic group in 1974 when 56 Nepalese immigrated to the United States. New York City, Boston, Dallas-Fort Worth, Columbus, Los Angeles, Cincinnati, Erie, Harrisburg, Chicago, Denver, Gainesville, Portland, and Saint Paul have the largest number of Nepalese. There are some Nepalese community or cultural events in every American state, including Dashain, Tihar, Holi, Teej Special, and Nepali New Year.\nTamil.\nThe Tamil community in the United States is largely bilingual. Tamil is taught in weekly classes in many Hindu temples and by associations such as the American Tamil Academy in South Brunswick, Tamil Jersey School in Jersey City, New Jersey,\nThe written form of the language is highly formal and quite distinct from the spoken form. A few universities, such as the University of Chicago and the University of California Berkeley, have graduate programs in the language.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, Tamils from India migrated as skilled professionals to the United States, Canada, Europe, and Southeast Asia. The Tamil American population numbers over 195,685 individuals, and the Federation of Tamil Sangams of North America functions as an umbrella organization for the growing community.\nThe New York City and Los Angeles metropolitan areas are home to the largest concentrations of Tamil-speaking Sri Lankan Americans. New York City's Staten Island alone is estimated to be home to more than 5,000 Sri Lankan Americans, one of the largest Sri Lankan populations outside Sri Lanka itself, and a significant proportion of whom speak Tamil.\nCentral New Jersey is home to the largest population concentration of Tamils. New Jersey houses its own Tamil Sangam. Sizeable populations of Indian American Tamils have also settled in the New York City and Washington metropolitan areas, as well as on the West Coast in Silicon Valley, where there are Tamil associations such as the Bay Area Tamil Mandram.\nTelugu.\nThere were speakers of Telugu in 2006\u20132008.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, Telugu people from India (especially from Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu) migrated as professionals to the United States. Central New Jersey is home to the largest population concentration of Telugu people. Telugu people have also settled in New York City and the DC metropolitan area, as well as on the West Coast in Silicon Valley. The New York City and Los Angeles metropolitan areas are home to the largest concentrations of Telugu-speakers.\nSee also.\nGeneral:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63884", "revid": "1303373528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63884", "title": "List of counties in California", "text": "The U.S. state of California is divided into 58 counties. The state was first divided into 27 counties on February 18, 1850. These were further sub-divided to form sixteen additional counties by 1860. Another fourteen counties were formed through further subdivision from 1861 to 1893. The most recent county to form was Imperial County, in 1907. California is home to San Bernardino County, the largest county in the contiguous United States, as well as Los Angeles County, the most populous county in the United States.\nThe counties of California are local arms of the State of California, described by the Supreme Court of California as agents (\"the county is merely a political subdivision of state government, exercising only the powers of the state, granted by the state\u2026'\") and the property they hold is held on behalf of all the people of the state. As such, the State Legislature may delegate any of the functions of the State to the counties but likewise can reassume any delegated duties.\nCalifornia counties are general law counties by default. Still, they may be chartered as provided in Article XI, Section 3 of the California Constitution. A charter county is granted limited home rule powers. Of the 58 counties in California, 14 are governed under a charter. They are Alameda, Butte, El Dorado, Fresno, Los Angeles, Orange, Placer, Sacramento, San Bernardino, San Diego, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, and Tehama.\nNine counties in California are named for saints, tied with Louisiana for the largest number. This count omits Santa Cruz (\"Holy Cross\") County, not named for a saint; Merced County and Los Angeles County, both of whose names refer to Saint Mary (Our Lady of Mercy (Merced) and Our Lady Queen of The Angels (Los Angeles)); and Ventura County, whose name is a shortening of the name of St. Bonaventure, the namesake of the local mission.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63885", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63885", "title": "Peltier cooler", "text": ""}
{"id": "63886", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63886", "title": "Traditional Siamese", "text": ""}
{"id": "63887", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63887", "title": "Applehead Siamese", "text": ""}
{"id": "63888", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63888", "title": "Spotted Mist cat", "text": ""}
{"id": "63889", "revid": "46807820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63889", "title": "Australian Mist", "text": "The Australian Mist (formerly known as Spotted Mist) is a breed of cat developed in Australia. It is a cross between the Abyssinian cat, the Burmese cat, and the Australian Tabby cat. The Australian Mist has a distinct and unique coat pattern hence the name.\nHistory.\nThis breed was developed in Australia in 1977 by Dr. Truda Straede with a gene-pool of approximately 30 foundation cats. Dr. Straede submitted a plan to the Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales Cat Club (RASCC) for a breed with blue, brown, chocolate, and lilac colourings by using Burmese; and for a spotted tabby pattern by using the ticking gene of Abyssinian to go with a spotted tabby coat. The first generation of the breed was accepted into the RASCC experimental category in May 1980 and in April of 1986 the fourth generation was accepted as the 'Spotted Mist'. In June 1997 the marbled variety of the breed was accepted by the RASCC and Waratah State Cat Alliance. Due to the newly accepted marbled variety it was decided by the Co-ordinating Cat Council of Australia and the Australian Cat Fancy to rename the breed \u2014 in a unanimous decision the name 'Australian Mist' was chosen.\nBreed recognition.\nOn 1 January 1999 the breed received championship status with the New Zealand Cat Fancy. The breed was accepted for championship status by the World Cat Federation in August 2004. The first Australian Mists were imported into the United Kingdom in 2007. The breed was given preliminary recognition by the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy in October 2011. It was accepted at championship status in The International Cat Association on 1 May 2014. It gained championship status with the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy in February 2017. The breed is not yet recognised by the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale F\u00e9line.\nAppearance.\nThe Australian Mist is a medium-sized short-haired cat, with a round and medium-sized head, a broad nose, and large green eyes. Eye colour can range from chartreuse to aquamarine. Ears are moderately large with a rounded tip to them. The coat is short to medium in length and feels smooth and silky. \nCoat.\nCoat patterns.\nThe coat pattern has three aspects: the ground colour, which is paler than the pattern; the pattern; and the appearance of wearing a misted veil, caused by random ticking in solid colour areas. The legs and tail are ringed or barred, and the face and neck also have lines of colour.\nThere are two types of coat patterns in the Australian Mist: the original spotted coat which has distinctive spots that are symmetrical and the marbled coat which has swirled patches and streaks on the coat. Both varieties should have the tabby M-shaped marking on the forehead and a ringed tail with a dark tip.\nCoat colours.\nAustralian Mists have a paler coat on the under-parts of the body which give it the distinctive mist appearance. Colour may not fully develop until the adult is at least two years old. Australian Mists do not have a solid colour as the agouti ground gives them their distinctive look but the base colours in the cat include blue, brown, caramel, chocolate, cinnamon (gold), fawn (peach), and lilac.\nDistribution.\nDue to the novel status of the breed outside Australia most Australian Mist catteries are located in Australia; however, there are a few in the UK and USA. Breeding cats have also been sent to Norway.\nHealth.\nConditions commonly screened for in breeding Australian Mist cats include pyruvate kinase deficiency, feline hypokalaemic polymyopathy, neonatal isoerythrolysis, and progressive retinal atrophy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63890", "revid": "35107032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63890", "title": "Doric dialect (Scotland)", "text": "Northeastern dialect of the Scots language\nDoric, the popular name for Mid Northern Scots or Northeast Scots, refers to the Scots as spoken in the northeast of Scotland. There is an extensive body of literature, mostly poetry, ballads, and songs, written in Doric. In some literary works, Doric is used as the language of conversation while the rest of the work is in Lallans Scots or Scottish English. A number of 20th and 21st century poets have written poetry in the Doric dialect.\nNomenclature.\nThe term \"Doric\" was formerly used to refer to all dialects of Scots, but during the twentieth century it became increasingly associated with Mid Northern Scots.\nThe name possibly originated as a jocular reference to the Doric Greek dialect of the Ancient Greek language. Greek Dorians lived in Laconia, including Sparta, and other more rural areas, and were alleged by the ancient Greeks to have spoken laconically and in a language thought harsher in tone and more phonetically conservative than the Attic spoken in Athens. Doric Greek was used for some of the verses spoken by the chorus in Greek tragedy.\nAccording to \"The Oxford Companion to English Literature\":\nSince the Dorians were regarded as uncivilised by the Athenians, \"Doric\" came to mean \"rustic\" in English, and was applied particularly to \"the language of Northumbria and the Scottish Lowlands\" and also to the simplest of the three orders in architecture.\n18th-century Scots writers such as Allan Ramsay justified their use of Scots (instead of English) by comparing it to the use of Ancient Greek Doric by Theocritus. English became associated with Attic.\nPhonology.\nMost consonants are usually pronounced much as in other Modern Scots dialects but:\nSome vowel realisations differ markedly from those of Central Scots dialects. The vowel numbers are from Aitken. See also Cardinal vowels.\nLiterature.\nNorth East Scots has an extensive body of literature, mostly poetry, ballads and songs. During the Middle Scots period writing from the North East of Scotland adhered to the literary conventions of the time; indications of particular \"Doric\" pronunciations were very rare. The 18th-century literary revival also brought forth writers from the North East but, again, local dialect features were rare, the extant literary Scots conventions being preferred. In later times, a more deliberately regional literature began to emerge.\nIn contemporary prose writing, Doric occurs usually as quoted speech, although this is less and less often the case. As is usually the case with marginalised languages, local loyalties prevail in the written form, showing how the variety \"deviates\" from standard (\"British\") English as opposed to a general literary Scots \"norm\". This shows itself in the local media presentation of the language, e.g., Grampian Television &amp; The Aberdeen Press and Journal. These local loyalties, waning knowledge of the older literary tradition and relative distance from the Central Lowlands ensure that the Doric scene has a degree of semi-autonomy.\nDoric dialogue was used in a lot of so-called Kailyard literature, a genre that paints a sentimental, melodramatic picture of the old rural life, and is currently unfashionable. This negative association still plagues Doric literature to a degree, as well as Scottish literature in general.\nPoets who wrote in the Doric dialect include John M. Caie of Banffshire (1879\u20131949), Helen B. Cruickshank of Angus (1886\u20131975), Alexander Fenton (1929\u20132012), Flora Garry (1900\u20132000), Sir Alexander Gray (1882\u20131968), Violet Jacob of Angus (1863\u20131946), Charles Murray (1864\u20131941) and J. C. Milne (1897\u20131962).\nGeorge MacDonald from Huntly used Doric in his novels. A friend of Mark Twain, he is commonly considered one of the fathers of the fantasy genre and an influence on C. S. Lewis and J. R. R. Tolkien.\nLewis Grassic Gibbon's \"Scots Quair\" trilogy is set in the Mearns and has been the basis of a successful play and television series. It is very popular throughout Scotland and tells the story of Chris, an independent-minded woman, mainly in a form of English strongly influenced by the rhythms of local speech.\nA version of Aesop's Fables has been published in Doric, as well as some sections of the Bible.\nThe North East has been claimed as the \"real home of the ballad\" and, according to Les Wheeler, \"91 out of a grand total of (Child's) 305 ballads came from the North East \u2013 in fact from Aberdeenshire\", which makes the usual name of \"Border Ballad\" a misnomer put about by Sir Walter Scott.\nContemporary writers in Doric include Sheena Blackhall, a poet who writes in Doric, and Mo Simpson, who writes in the \"Aberdeen Evening Express\" and peppers her humour column with \"Doricisms\" and Doric words. Doric has also featured in stage, radio and television, notably in the sketches and songs of the Aberdeen-based comedy groups Scotland the What? and the Flying Pigs.\nSample text.\n\"Gin I was God\" by Charles Murray (1864\u20131941) \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRecent developments.\nIn 2006 an Aberdeen hotel decided to use a Doric voice for their lift. Phrases said by the lift include \"Gyaun Up\" (Going up), \"Gyaun Doun\" (Going down), \"atween fleers een an fower\" (between floors one and four).&lt;ref name=\"urlBBC NEWS | UK | Scotland | North East/N Isles | Hotel lands uplifting Doric voice\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nAlso in 2006, Maureen Watt of the SNP took her Scottish Parliamentary oath in Doric. She said \"I want to advance the cause of Doric and show there's a strong and important culture in the North East.\" She was required to take an oath in English beforehand. There was some debate as to whether the oath was \"gweed Doric\" () or not, and notably it is, to a certain extent, written phonetically and contains certain anglicised forms such as \"I\" rather than \"A\", and \"and\" instead of \"an\":\n\"I depone aat I wull be leal and bear ae full alleadgance tae her majesty Queen Elizabeth her airs an ony fa come aifter her anent the law. Sae help me God.\"\nIn Disney/Pixar's \"Brave\", the character Young MacGuffin speaks the Doric dialect, and a running joke involves no one else understanding him. This was a choice by the voice actor, Kevin McKidd, a native of Elgin.\nIn autumn 2020, the University of Aberdeen launched a term-long Doric course, offering it to all its undergraduate students.\nIn August 2012, Gordon Hay, an Aberdeenshire author, successfully completed what is believed to be the first translation of the New Testament into Doric. The project took him six years. He subsequently completed the Old Testament in 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63892", "revid": "3129585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63892", "title": "Scots language", "text": "West Germanic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nScots is a West Germanic language variety descended from Early Middle English. As a result, Modern Scots is a sister language of Modern English. Scots is classified as an official language of Scotland, a regional or minority language of Europe, and a vulnerable language by UNESCO. In a Scottish census from 2022, over 1.5\u00a0million people in Scotland (of its total population of 5.4 million people) reported being able to speak Scots. \nMost commonly spoken in the Scottish Lowlands, the Northern Isles of Scotland, and northern Ulster in Ireland (where the local dialect is known as Ulster Scots), it is sometimes called Lowland Scots, to distinguish it from Scottish Gaelic, the Celtic language that was historically restricted to most of the Scottish Highlands, the Hebrides, and Galloway after the sixteenth century; or Broad Scots, to distinguish it from Scottish Standard English. Many Scottish people's speech exists on a dialect continuum ranging between Broad Scots and Standard English.\nGiven that there are no universally accepted criteria for distinguishing a language from a dialect, scholars and other interested parties often disagree about whether Scots is a dialect of English or a separate language.\nNomenclature.\nNative speakers sometimes refer to their vernacular as (or \"broad Scots\" in English) or use a dialect name such as the \"Doric\" or the \"\". The old-fashioned \"Scotch\", an English loan, occurs occasionally, especially in Ulster. The term \"Lallans\", a variant of the Modern Scots word , is also used, though this is more often taken to mean the Lallans literary form. Scots in Ireland is known in official circles as Ulster-Scots ( in revivalist Ulster-Scots) or \"Ullans\", a recent neologism merging Ulster and Lallans.\nEtymology.\n\"Scots\" is a contraction of , the Older Scots and northern version of late (modern English \"Scottish\"), which replaced the earlier i-mutated version . Before the end of the fifteenth century, English speech in Scotland was known as \"English\" (written or at the time), whereas \"Scottish\" () referred to Gaelic. By the beginning of the fifteenth century, the English language used in Scotland had arguably become a distinct language, albeit one lacking a name which clearly distinguished it from all the other English variants and dialects spoken in Britain. From 1495, the term was increasingly used to refer to the Lowland vernacular894 and , meaning \"Irish\", was used as a name for Gaelic. For example, towards the end of the fifteenth century, William Dunbar was using to refer to Gaelic and, in the early sixteenth century, Gavin Douglas was using as a name for the Lowland vernacular. The Gaelic of Scotland is now usually called Scottish Gaelic.\nHistory.\nNorthumbrian Old English had been established in what is now southeastern Scotland as far as the River Forth by the seventh century, as the region was part of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Northumbria. Some historians have traditionally argued that the regions later known as Lothian and the Scottish Borders became attached to the Kingdom of Scotland in the tenth and early eleventh centuries, but this is no longer accepted and the takeover that does take place is not fully evident until the twelfth century and probably incomplete until at least the thirteenth century. The common use of English remained largely confined to Lothian and the Borders until the thirteenth century, where the local varieties were reshaped in response to migration from the Scandinavian-influenced North and Midlands of England that came with the foundation of the first burghs in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The Scots language scholar Robert McColl Millar framed Early Scots as a \"koine\" of the varieties of English spoken in Bernicia and the Danelaw that had been brought to the new burghs.\nLater influences on the development of Scots came from the Romance languages via ecclesiastical and legal Latin, Norman French,lxiii\u2013lxv and later Parisian French, due to the Auld Alliance. Additionally, there were Dutch and Middle Low German influences due to trade with and immigration from the Low Countries.lxiii Scots also includes loan words in the legal and administrative fields resulting from contact with Middle Irish, and reflected in early medieval legal documents.lxi Contemporary Scottish Gaelic loans are mainly for geographical and cultural features, such as \"c\u00e8ilidh\", \"loch\", \"whisky\", \"glen\" and \"clan\". Cumbric and Pictish, the medieval Brittonic languages of Northern England and Scotland, are the suspected source of a small number of Scots words, such as \"lum\" (derived from Cumbric) meaning \"chimney\". From the thirteenth century, the Early Scots language spread further into Scotland via the burghs, which were proto-urban institutions first established by King David I. In fourteenth-century Scotland, the growth in prestige of Early Scots and the complementary decline of French made Scots the prestige dialect of most of eastern Scotland. By the sixteenth century, Middle Scots had established orthographic and literary norms largely independent of those developing in England.\nFrom 1610 to the 1690s during the Plantation of Ulster, some 200,000 Scots-speaking Lowlanders settled as colonists in Ulster in Ireland. In the core areas of Scots settlement, Scots outnumbered English settlers by five or six to one.\nThe name Modern Scots is used to describe the Scots language after 1700.\nA seminal study of Scots was undertaken by JAH Murray and published as \"Dialect of the Southern Counties of Scotland\". Murray's results were given further publicity by being included in Alexander John Ellis's book On Early English Pronunciation, Part V alongside results from Orkney and Shetland, as well as the whole of England. Murray and Ellis differed slightly on the border between English and Scots dialects.\nScots was studied alongside English and Scots Gaelic in the \"Linguistic Survey of Scotland\" at the University of Edinburgh, which began in 1949 and began to publish results in the 1970s. Also beginning in the 1970s, the \"Atlas Linguarum Europae\" studied the Scots language used at 15 sites in Scotland, each with its own dialect. As of November 2022, Scots is represented on the Scientific Committee of the Atlas Linguarum Europae by David Clement of the University of Glasgow.\nLanguage shift.\nFrom the mid-sixteenth century, written Scots was increasingly influenced by the developing Standard English of Southern England due to developments in royal and political interactions with England.10 When William Flower, an English herald, spoke with Mary of Guise and her councillors in 1560, they first used the . As he found this hard to understand, they switched into her native French. King James VI, who in 1603 became James I of England, observed in his work \"Some Reulis and Cautelis to Be Observit and Eschewit in Scottis Poesie\" that (\"For though several have written of \"(the subject)\" in English, which is the language most similar to ours...\"). However, with the increasing influence and availability of books printed in England, most writing in Scotland came to be done in the English fashion.11 In his first speech to the English Parliament in March 1603, King James VI and I declared, . Following James VI's move to London, the Protestant Church of Scotland adopted the 1611 Authorized King James Version of the Bible; subsequently, the Acts of Union 1707 led to Scotland joining England to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, having a single Parliament of Great Britain based in London. After the Union and the shift of political power to England, the use of Scots was discouraged by many in authority and education, as was the notion of \"Scottishness\" itself. Many leading Scots of the period, such as David Hume, defined themselves as Northern British rather than Scottish.2 They attempted to rid themselves of their Scots in a bid to establish standard English as the official language of the newly formed union. Nevertheless, Scots was still spoken across a wide range of domains until the end of the eighteenth century.11 Frederick Pottle, the twentieth-century biographer of James Boswell (1740\u20131795), described James's view of the use of Scots by his father Alexander Boswell (1706\u20131782) in the eighteenth century while serving as a judge of the Supreme Courts of Scotland:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He scorned modern literature, spoke broad Scots from the bench, and even in writing took no pains to avoid the Scotticisms which most of his colleagues were coming to regard as vulgar.\nHowever, others did scorn Scots, such as Scottish Enlightenment intellectuals David Hume and Adam Smith, who went to great lengths to get rid of every Scotticism from their writings. Following such examples, many well-off Scots took to learning English through the activities of those such as Thomas Sheridan, who in 1761 gave a series of lectures on English elocution. Charging a guinea at a time (about \u00a3 in today's money), they were attended by over 300 men, and he was made a freeman of the City of Edinburgh. Following this, some of the city's intellectuals formed the Select Society for Promoting the Reading and Speaking of the English Language in Scotland. These eighteenth-century activities would lead to the creation of Scottish Standard English.13 Scots remained the vernacular of many rural communities and the growing number of urban working-class Scots.14\nIn the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the use of Scots as a literary language was revived by several prominent Scotsmen such as Robert Burns. Such writers established a new cross-dialect literary norm.\nScots terms were included in the English Dialect Dictionary, edited by Joseph Wright. Wright had great difficulty in recruiting volunteers from Scotland, as many refused to cooperate with a venture that regarded Scots as a dialect of English, and he obtained enough help only through the assistance from a Professor Shearer in Scotland. Wright himself rejected the argument that Scots was a separate language, saying that this was a \"quite modern mistake\".\nDuring the first half of the twentieth century, knowledge of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century literary norms waned, and as of 2006[ [update]], there is no institutionalised standard literary form. By the 1940s, the Scottish Education Department's language policy was that Scots had no value: \"it is not the language of 'educated' people anywhere, and could not be described as a suitable medium of education or culture\". Students reverted to Scots outside the classroom, but the reversion was not complete. What occurred, and has been occurring ever since, is a process of language attrition, whereby successive generations have adopted more and more features from Standard English. This process has accelerated rapidly since widespread access to mass media in English and increased population mobility became available after the Second World War.15 It has recently taken on the nature of wholesale language shift, sometimes also termed language change, convergence or merger. By the end of the twentieth century, Scots was at an advanced stage of language death over much of Lowland Scotland. Residual features of Scots are often regarded as slang. A 2010 Scottish Government study of \"public attitudes towards the Scots language\" found that 64% of respondents (around 1,000 individuals in a representative sample of Scotland's adult population) \"don't really think of Scots as a language\", also finding \"the most frequent speakers are least likely to agree that it is not a language (58%) and those never speaking Scots most likely to do so (72%)\".\nDecline in status.\nBefore the Treaty of Union 1707, when Scotland and England joined to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, there is ample evidence that Scots was widely held to be an independent sister language forming a pluricentric diasystem with English.\nGerman linguist considered Modern Scots a ('half language') in terms of an and languages framework, although today in Scotland most people's speech is somewhere on a continuum ranging from traditional broad Scots to Scottish Standard English. Many speakers are diglossic and may be able to code-switch along the continuum depending on the situation. Where on this continuum English-influenced Scots becomes Scots-influenced English is difficult to determine. Because standard English now generally has the role of a ('roofing language'), disputes often arise as to whether the varieties of Scots are dialects of Scottish English or constitute a separate language in their own right.\nThe UK government now accepts Scots as a regional language and has recognised it as such under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Notwithstanding the UK government's and the Scottish Executive's obligations under part II of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, the Scottish Executive recognises and respects Scots (in all its forms) as a distinct language, and does not consider the use of Scots to be an indication of poor competence in English.\nEvidence for its existence as a separate language lies in the extensive body of Scots literature, its independent \u2013 if somewhat fluid \u2013 orthographic conventions, and in its former use as the language of the original Parliament of Scotland. Because Scotland retained distinct political, legal, and religious systems after the Union, many Scots terms passed into Scottish English.\nLanguage revitalisation.\nDuring the 2010s, increased interest was expressed in the language.\nEducation.\nThe status of the language was raised in Scottish schools, with Scots being included in the new national school curriculum. Previously in Scotland's schools there had been little education taking place through the medium of Scots, although it may have been covered superficially in English lessons, which could entail reading some Scots literature and observing the local dialect. Much of the material used was often Standard English disguised as Scots, which caused upset among proponents of Standard English and proponents of Scots alike. One example of the educational establishment's approach to Scots is, \"Write a poem in Scots. (It is important not to be worried about spelling in this \u2013 write as you hear the sounds in your head.)\", whereas guidelines for English require teaching pupils to be \"writing fluently and legibly with accurate spelling and punctuation\".\nA course in Scots language and culture delivered through the medium of Standard English and produced by the Open University (OU) in Scotland, the Open University's School of Languages and Applied Linguistics as well as Education Scotland became available online for the first time in December 2019.\nGovernment.\nIn the 2011 Scottish census, a question on Scots language ability was featured. In the 2022 census conducted by the Scottish Government, a question in relation to the Scots language was also featured. It was found that 1,508,540 people reported that they could speak Scots, with 2,444,659 reporting that they could speak, read, write or understand Scots, approximately 45% of Scotland's 2022 population. The Scottish Government set its first Scots Language Policy in 2015, in which it pledged to support its preservation and encourage respect, recognition and use of Scots. The Scottish Parliament website also offers some information on the language in Scots.\nIn September 2024, experts of the Council of Europe called on the UK Government to \"boost support for regional and minority languages\", including the Scots Language.\nIn June 2025 the Scottish Parliament passed the Scottish Languages Act 2025 that made Scots an official language of Scotland, along with Scots Gaelic and introduced educational standards for the language.\nMedia.\nThe serious use of the Scots language for news, encyclopaediae, documentaries, etc., remains rare. It is reportedly reserved for niches where it is deemed acceptable, e.g. comedy, Burns Night or traditions' representations.\nSince 2016, the newspaper \"The National\" has regularly published articles in the language. The 2010s also saw an increasing number of English books translated in Scots and becoming widely available, particularly those in popular children's fiction series such as \"The Gruffalo\", \"Harry Potter\", \"Diary of a Wimpy Kid\", and several by Roald Dahl and David Walliams. In 2021, the music streaming service Spotify created a Scots language listing.\nThe Ferret, a UK-based fact-checking service, wrote an exploratory article in December 2022 to address misconceptions about the Scots language to improve public awareness of its endangered status.\nGeographic distribution.\nIn Scotland, Scots is spoken in the Scottish Lowlands, the Northern Isles, Caithness, Arran and Campbeltown. In Ulster, the northern province in Ireland, its area is usually defined through the works of Robert John Gregg to include the counties of Down, Antrim, Londonderry and Donegal (especially in East Donegal and Inishowen). More recently, the Fintona-born linguist Warren Maguire has argued that some of the criteria that Gregg used as distinctive of Ulster-Scots are common in south-west Tyrone and were found in other sites across Northern Ireland investigated by the Linguistic Survey of Scotland. Dialects of Scots include Insular Scots, Northern Scots, Central Scots, Southern Scots and Ulster Scots.\nIt has been difficult to determine the number of speakers of Scots via census, because many respondents might interpret the question \"Do you speak Scots?\" in different ways. Campaigners for Scots pressed for this question to be included in the 2001 UK National Census. The results from a 1996 trial before the Census, by the General Register Office for Scotland (GRO), suggested that there were around 1.5\u00a0million speakers of Scots, with 30% of Scots responding \"Yes\" to the question \"Can you speak the Scots language?\", but only 17% responding \"Aye\" to the question \"Can you speak Scots?\". It was also found that older, working-class people were more likely to answer in the affirmative. The University of Aberdeen Scots Leid Quorum performed its own research in 1995, cautiously suggesting that there were 2.7\u00a0million speakers, though with clarification as to why these figures required context.\nThe GRO questions, as freely acknowledged by those who set them, were not as detailed and systematic as those of the University of Aberdeen, and only included reared speakers (people raised speaking Scots), not those who had learned the language. Part of the difference resulted from the central question posed by surveys: \"Do you speak Scots?\". In the Aberdeen University study, the question was augmented with the further clause \"...\u00a0or a dialect of Scots such as Border etc.\", which resulted in greater recognition from respondents. The GRO concluded that there simply was not enough linguistic self-awareness amongst the Scottish populace, with people still thinking of themselves as speaking badly pronounced, grammatically inferior English rather than Scots, for an accurate census to be taken. The GRO research concluded that \"[a] more precise estimate of genuine Scots language ability would require a more in-depth interview survey and may involve asking various questions about the language used in different situations. Such an approach would be inappropriate for a Census.\" Thus, although it was acknowledged that the \"inclusion of such a Census question would undoubtedly raise the profile of Scots\", no question about Scots was, in the end, included in the 2001 Census. The Scottish Government's \"Pupils in Scotland Census 2008\" found that 306 pupils spoke Scots as their main home language. A Scottish Government study in 2010 found that 85% of around 1000 respondents (being a representative sample of Scotland's adult population) claim to speak Scots to varying degrees.\nThe 2011 UK census was the first to ask residents of Scotland about Scots. A campaign called \"Aye Can\" was set up to help individuals answer the question. The specific wording used was \"Which of these can you do? Tick all that apply\" with options for \"Understand\", \"Speak\", \"Read\" and \"Write\" in three columns: English, Scottish Gaelic and Scots. Of approximately 5.1\u00a0million respondents, about 1.2\u00a0million (24%) could speak, read and write Scots, 3.2\u00a0million (62%) had no skills in Scots and the remainder had some degree of skill, such as understanding Scots (0.27\u00a0million, 5.2%) or being able to speak it but not read or write it (0.18\u00a0million, 3.5%). There were also small numbers of Scots speakers recorded in England and Wales on the 2011 Census, with the largest numbers being either in bordering areas (e.g. Carlisle) or in areas that had recruited large numbers of Scottish workers in the past (e.g. Corby or the former mining areas of Kent). In the 2022 census conducted by the Scottish Government, it was found that 1,508,540 people reported that they could speak Scots, with 2,444,659 reporting that they could speak, read, write or understand Scots, approximately 45% of Scotland's 2022 population.\nLiterature.\nAmong the earliest Scots literature is John Barbour's \"Brus\" (fourteenth century), Wyntoun's \"Cronykil\" and Blind Harry's \"The Wallace\" (fifteenth century). From the fifteenth century, much literature based on the Royal Court in Edinburgh and the University of St Andrews was produced by writers such as Robert Henryson, William Dunbar, Gavin Douglas and David Lyndsay. \"The Complaynt of Scotland\" was an early printed work in Scots. The \"Eneados\" is a Middle Scots translation of Virgil's \"Aeneid\", completed by Gavin Douglas in 1513.\nAfter the seventeenth century, anglicisation increased. At the time, many of the oral ballads from the borders and the North East were written down. Writers of the period were Robert Sempill, Robert Sempill the younger, Francis Sempill, Lady Wardlaw and Lady Grizel Baillie.\nIn the eighteenth century, writers such as Allan Ramsay, Robert Burns, James Orr, Robert Fergusson and Walter Scott continued to use Scots \u2013 Burns's \"Auld Lang Syne\" is in Scots, for example. Scott introduced vernacular dialogue to his novels. Other well-known authors like Robert Louis Stevenson, William Alexander, George MacDonald, J. M. Barrie and other members of the Kailyard school like Ian Maclaren also wrote in Scots or used it in dialogue.\nIn the Victorian era popular Scottish newspapers regularly included articles and commentary in the vernacular, often of unprecedented proportions.\nIn the early twentieth century, a renaissance in the use of Scots occurred, its most vocal figure being Hugh MacDiarmid whose benchmark poem \"A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle\" (1926) did much to demonstrate the power of Scots as a modern idiom. Other contemporaries were Douglas Young, John Buchan, Sydney Goodsir Smith, Robert Garioch, Edith Anne Robertson and Robert McLellan. The revival extended to verse and other literature.\nIn 1955, three Ayrshire men \u2013 Sandy MacMillan, an English teacher at Ayr Academy; Thomas Limond, noted town chamberlain of Ayr; and A. L. \"Ross\" Taylor, rector of Cumnock Academy\u00a0\u2013 collaborated to write (\"Child Songs\"), a collection of children's nursery rhymes and poems in Scots. The book contains a five-page glossary of contemporary Scots words and their pronunciations.\nAlexander Gray's translations into Scots constitute the greater part of his work, and are the main basis for his reputation.\nIn 1983, William Laughton Lorimer's translation of the New Testament from the original Greek was published.\nScots is sometimes used in contemporary fiction, such as the Edinburgh dialect of Scots in \"Trainspotting\" by Irvine Welsh (later made into a motion picture of the same name).\n\"But'n'Ben A-Go-Go\" by Matthew Fitt is a cyberpunk novel written entirely in what (\"Our Own Language\") calls \"General Scots\". Like all cyberpunk work, it contains imaginative neologisms.\nThe \"Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam\" was translated into Scots by Rab Wilson and published in 2004. Alexander Hutchison has translated the poetry of Catullus into Scots, and in the 1980s, Liz Lochhead produced a Scots translation of \"Tartuffe\" by Moli\u00e8re. J. K. Annand translated poetry and fiction from German and Medieval Latin into Scots.\nThe strip cartoons \"Oor Wullie\" and \"The Broons\" in the \"Sunday Post\" use some Scots. In 2013, Susan Rennie translated the first of a series of Tintin adventures into Scots as \"The Derk Isle\", and in 2018, \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stane\", a Scots translation of the first Harry Potter book, \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\", was published by Matthew Fitt.\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nThe vowel system of Modern Scots:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVowel length is usually conditioned by the Scottish vowel length rule.\nConsonants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrthography.\nThe orthography of Early Scots had become more or less standardised by the middle to late sixteenth century. After the Union of the Crowns in 1603, the Standard English of England came to have an increasing influence on the spelling of Scots through the increasing influence and availability of books printed in England. After the Acts of Union in 1707 the emerging Scottish form of Standard English replaced Scots for most formal writing in Scotland.11\nThe eighteenth-century Scots revival saw the introduction of a new literary language descended from the old court Scots, but with an orthography that had abandoned some of the more distinctive old Scots spellings and adopted many standard English spellings. Despite the updated spelling, however, the rhymes make it clear that a Scots pronunciation was intended. These writings also introduced what came to be known as the apologetic apostrophe,xiv generally occurring where a consonant exists in the Standard English cognate. This Written Scots drew not only on the vernacular, but also on the King James Bible, and was heavily influenced by the norms and conventions of Augustan English poetry.168 Consequently, this written Scots looked very similar to contemporary Standard English, suggesting a somewhat modified version of that, rather than a distinct speech form with a phonological system which had been developing independently for many centuries. This modern literary dialect, \"Scots of the book\" or Standard Scots, once again gave Scots an orthography of its own, lacking neither \"authority nor author\". This literary language used throughout Lowland Scotland and Ulster, embodied by writers such as Allan Ramsay, Robert Fergusson, Robert Burns, Sir Walter Scott, Charles Murray, David Herbison, James Orr, James Hogg and William Laidlaw among others, is well described in the 1921 \"Manual of Modern Scots\".\nOther authors developed dialect writing, preferring to represent their own speech in a more phonological manner rather than following the pan-dialect conventions of modern literary Scots, especially for the northern and insular dialects of Scots.\nDuring the twentieth century, a number of proposals for spelling reform were presented. Commenting on this, John Corbett (2003: 260) writes that \"devising a normative orthography for Scots has been one of the greatest linguistic hobbies of the past century\". Most proposals entailed regularising the use of established eighteenth- and nineteenth-century conventions, in particular, the avoidance of the apologetic apostrophe, which represented letters that were perceived to be missing when compared to the corresponding English cognates but were never actually present in the Scots word. For example, in the fourteenth century, Barbour spelt the Scots cognate of \"taken\" as . It is argued that, because there has been no \"k\" in the word for over 700 years, representing its omission with an apostrophe is of little value. The current spelling is usually .\nThrough the twentieth century, with the decline of spoken Scots and knowledge of the literary tradition, phonetic (often humorous) representations became more common.\nGrammar.\nModern Scots follows the subject\u2013verb\u2013object sentence structure like Standard English. However, the word order (\"Give us it\") vs. \"Give it to me\" may be preferred.897\nThe indefinite article \"a\" may be used before both consonants and vowels. The definite article \"the\" is used before the names of seasons, days of the week, many nouns, diseases, trades and occupations, sciences and academic subjects.78 It is also often used in place of the indefinite article and instead of a possessive pronoun.77\nScots includes some irregular plurals such as (\"eye/eyes\"), (\"calf/calves\"), (\"horse/horses\"), (\"cow/cows\") and (\"shoe/shoes\") that survived from Old English into Modern Scots, but have become regularised plurals in Standard Modern English \u2013 \"ox\"/\"oxen\" and \"child\"/\"children\" being exceptions.79896 Nouns of measure and quantity remain unchanged in the plural.89680\nThe relative pronoun is \"that\" for all persons and numbers, but may be elided.896102 Modern Scots also has a third adjective/adverb \"this\"-\"that\"-\"yon\"/\"yonder\" () indicating something at some distance.896 and are the plurals of \"this\" and \"that\" respectively.\nThe present tense of verbs adheres to the Northern subject rule whereby verbs end in -\"s\" in all persons and numbers except when a single personal pronoun is next to the verb.896112 Certain verbs are often used progressively896 and verbs of motion may be dropped before an adverb or adverbial phrase of motion.897\nMany verbs have strong or irregular forms which are distinctive from Standard English.896126\nThe regular past form of the weak or regular verbs is \"-it\", \"-t\" or \"-ed\", according to the preceding consonant or vowel.896113\nThe present participle and gerund \"in\" are now usually but may still be differentiated and in Southern Scots, and and in Northern Scots.\nThe negative particle is , sometimes spelled , e.g. (\"can't\"), (\"daren't\"), (\"mightn't\").115\nAdverbs usually take the same form as the verb root or adjective, especially after verbs. Examples include (\"Having a really good day\") and (\"She's awfully tired\").\nSample text of Modern Scots.\nFrom \"The Four Gospels in Braid Scots\" (William Wye Smith):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nFrom \"The New Testament in Scots\" (William Laughton Lorimer, 1885\u20131967)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nRelationship to English.\nGiven that there are no universally accepted criteria for distinguishing a language from a dialect, scholars and other interested parties often disagree about the linguistic, historical and social status of Scots, particularly its relationship to English. Although a number of paradigms for distinguishing between languages and dialects exist, they often render contradictory results. Broad Scots is at one end of a bipolar linguistic continuum, with Scottish Standard English at the other. Scots is sometimes regarded as a variety of English, though it has its own distinct dialects;894 other scholars treat Scots as a distinct Germanic language, in the way that Norwegian is closely linked to but distinct from Danish.894\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63893", "revid": "46807820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63893", "title": "Maltese cat", "text": "Cat coat colour\nA Maltese cat is any whose fur is completely or primarily grey (often called \"blue\" by cat fanciers) and regardless of breed. \"Maltese\" is a coat-colour term, not a breed name.\nDescription.\nThere is some evidence of a historical breed with such colouration that existed in Malta, which may have given rise to the use of the adjective in this context.\nThere are several cat breeds that always produce \"blue\" or grey fur, of whom the adjective may be used. These are the Russian Blue, the Chartreux and the Korat, none of which are associated with Malta. There are several other breeds that often produce blues such as the British Shorthair whose blue variant is called the \"British Blue\".\nRegardless of breed, any cat with solid grey colouration has two pairs of double-recessive genes for the non-agouti and colour-dilution traits, and so an exclusive mating between two solid grey cats should always produce solid grey kittens.\nCultural references.\nIn literature, \"The Maltese Cat\" is the title of a 1895 short story (in the collection \"The Day's Work\") by Rudyard Kipling. The story is about a polo match set in British colonial India, told from the point of view of one of the ponies, a grey named the Maltese Cat.\nPatrick Leigh Fermor alludes to this usage in 1986's \"Between the Woods and the Water\" where, after a game of bicycle polo at a country house on the Great Hungarian Plain, he refers to the bicycles as \"Maltese Cats\": \"The other side won but we scored four goals, and when the iron Maltese Cats were back in their stands, we limped back to the steps, where Countess Denise and\u00a0... had been leaning on the balustrade like ladies gazing down into the lists.\"\nO. Henry alludes to a Maltese cat in his 1908 story A Lickpenny Lover as being \"secretive and wary\" when he compares the protagonist - an 18 year old girl Masie - to it.\nA Maltese cat comes into the kitchen where main character Jim Burden is taking a bath on his first day at his grandparents' Nebraska farm in Willa Cather's 1918 novel \"My \u00c1ntonia\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63895", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63895", "title": "York Chocolate", "text": "Breed of cat \nThe York Chocolate (or simply York) is an uncommon American breed of show cat, with a long, fluffy coat and a tapered tail and most of them were mostly or entirely chocolate-brown or the dilute form of brown, known as lavender. The breed was named after New York state, where it was established in 1983. This breed was created by color-selecting domestic long-haired cats of mixed ancestry. The breed is not widely recognized by cat registries. It is not recognized by the major organizations such as The International Cat Association (TICA), the Cat Fanciers' Association (CFA \u2013 North America) or F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale F\u00e9line (FIFe - Europe). \nAs \"Il Gatto Cioccolato\" it found favour in Italy and the International York Chocolate Federation (IYCF) was founded there in 2003. The IYCF claimed affiliation with the German Feline Federation Europe (FFE)/Bavarian Cat Fanciers' Association (BCFA), which published a standard (minus colour information) in 2004. It also claimed affiliation with the Russian World Felinological Federation (WFF), although the latter does not recognize the York Chocolate as breed.\nHistory.\nThe breed was created by Janet Chiefari in 1983. The father was a black longhaired cat and the mother was a longhaired black and white cat. Their Siamese ancestors created the brown coloring in one kitten: Brownie. Brownie had a litter that subsequent summer with a black longhaired tom. There were two kittens in the litter: a chocolate male and a white and chocolate female. Upon noticing similarities in coat and body types, Chiefari began her own breeding program.\nThe breed is recognized, under the shorter name York, by the recently founded World Cat Federation based in Germany, and with some differences from previously published standards, most of which seem to be lost. The breed is not recognized by any major, long-established international cat fancier organizations, such as The International Cat Association (TICA), the Cat Fanciers' Association (CFA) or F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale F\u00e9line (FIFe), nor even US national groups such as the American Cat Fanciers Association (ACFA). In March 1990, the Cat Fanciers' Federation of the New England area of the US recognized York Chocolates as an \"experimental\" cat breed, and allegedly gave it championship status within the group in March 1992, but publishes no breed standard or any other information about the breed today. It was supposedly granted champion status by the Canadian Cat Association in March 1995, as well, but while the CCA published a breed standard in 1995, as of March 2013[ [update]], the organization no longer advertises it, and it includes outdated wording.\nA small breed club, the International York Chocolate Federation (IYCF) was founded in Italy, but seems to have been dormant since 2004. It claims affiliation with Feline Federation Europe (FFE), which since 2004 publishes a York Chocolate standard (missing the color information) and the World Felinological Federation (WFF), a Russian group, which does not recognize this breed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63896", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63896", "title": "Bicolor cat", "text": "Cat having fur of two colors\nA bicolor cat (or bicolour cat in Commonwealth English) is a cat with white fur combined with fur of some other color, for example, solid black, tabby, or colorpointed. There are various patterns of a bicolor cat. Bicolor coats are found in many cat breeds and are in domestic longhair and domestic shorthair cats.\nTuxedo cats have a low-to-medium grade white spotting limited to the face, paws, throat, and chest of an otherwise black cat. Van-patterned cats have high-grade bicolor, which is typical for the Turkish Van breed. There are many patterns, such as \"cap-and-saddle\", \"mask-and-mantle\" and \"harlequin\" (also known as \"magpie\").\nSolid-color bicolor cats occur because there is a white spotting gene present with a recessive allele of the agouti gene. The agouti gene evens out the striped pattern within coat colors. In contrast, \"tabby\" cats have an agouti gene that produces striping of the coat. The Abyssinian has agouti (ticked tabby) fur, giving the appearance of even color with color-banded hairs.\nBicolor patterns.\nBicoloration in cats is graded from one to ten; with one being completely colored, and ten being completely white. There are also several patterns with their own names.\nVan.\nVan-patterned cats are bicolor cats, they are mostly white (generally more than 75% white). They have color around their ears and tail, separated by white coloring. They may have small (roughly coin sized) colored spots on and around their spine. The term \"Van pattern\" comes from the Turkish Van (named after Lake Van), which is a Van-patterned bicolor breed. The Van pattern is known to animal geneticists as the Seychelles (Seychellois) pattern and is classified into three variants:\nThis pattern type has high-grade white spotting. The coat pattern ranges from seven to nine on the Bicolor grade chart.\nHarlequin.\nAnother type of color-and-white cat is the harlequin patterned bicolor cat. This coat pattern is sometimes referred to as a \"cow cat\", \"moo cat\", \"magpie\" or \"panda cat\" and includes the cap-and-saddle and mask-and-mantle patterns. The harlequin patterned coat is predominantly white (generally 50%-75% white) combined with colored markings on the cat's body, including its head and tail. The coat does not have the solid colored \"jacket\" like the tuxedo coat. Harlequin patterns have multiple, conjoined, or larger spots on the body or an extended head spot that reaches the face. Harlequin coats have large colored patches over a white body, with a colored mask over the head.\nTrue bicolor.\nThe cat labeled \"bicolor\" or \"true bicolor\" is the preferred pattern in show-quality bicolor purebred cats. Bicolor patterned cats have medium grade white spotting (generally approximately 50%-25% white). The cat registry F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale F\u00e9line (FIFe) states that for a \"standard\" bicolor coat to compete in shows, \"The colour patches must be clearly separated from each other, even in colour and harmoniously distributed.\" They also state \"at least &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 should be colored, but not more than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444; the rest is white.\" The World Cat Federation (WFC) allows an amount of color between &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 up to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 for bicolor patterned cats. The Cat Fanciers' Association (CFA) states, \"Cats with no more than a locket and/or button [patch on chest] do not qualify for this color class.\"\nTuxedo.\nA tuxedo cat, Felix cat or Julius cat is a bicolor cat with low-grade white spotting (generally close to 25% white) in the coat. The term \"tuxedo cats\" is typically used for black-and-white colored cats, but tuxedo patterned cats come in all cat colors. They are called tuxedo cats due to the resemblance to the black-tie formal wear of the same name; however, the origins of the term \"tuxedo cat\" are murky at best, with linguist Cecily Raysor Hancock having been only able to track the term back to the early 1980s in America.\nTo be considered a true tuxedo cat, the feline's coloring should consist of a colored coat, with white fur limited to the paws, belly, chest, throat, often the chin, and sometimes the tail. Tuxedo cats can appear to have goatees due to the white coloration of their nose or chin. Most tuxedo cats are also \"black-mask cats\" with a complete white blaze, a common name for felines who, due to their facial coloration, look as if they are wearing a black mask over their eyes, and often over their entire head. The ideal color distribution is symmetric, and the white areas are of modest size and limited to the desirable areas.\nIn most cat registries, the tuxedo pattern is not an official term used to categorize white spotting patterns in show cats. The standard or code used to indicate the white markings in the Snowshoe cat breed is equal to the white spotting pattern known as \"tuxedo\" among tuxedo cat enthusiasts.\nGenetics of coat patterns.\nThe basic colors and patterns of cat fur are defined by fewer than ten genes. Cats with white color in their coats are thought to have a mutant \"white-spotting\" gene that prevents the formation of coat color in patches over the cat's body. This gene has been investigated in several species, particularly mice, and is co-dominant to normal coat color as it prevents the migration of melanocytes into the developing hair follicles. The genetics of this pattern are not as well understood in cats but at least some of the genes involved in melanocyte migration and survival may play a role similar as in other animals.\nThree genotypes possible with the \"S\" (white spotting) gene, with capital \"S\" standing for a wild-type copy and lower-case \"s\" standing for the mutant.\nThe lack of tabby striping in bicolor cats is controlled by the agouti protein, which inhibits the production of melanin and thus prevents the formation of dark hair colors. In agouti cats the gene is turned on and off as the hair grows, producing hairs with alternating stripes yellow and black. In domestic cats, inactivation of the agouti gene by a deletion mutation causes all-black coat color.\nBicolored cat breeds.\nThe bicolor coat coloration is not restricted to a specific breed of cat, as it can be found in many different types of pure-breed as well as mixed-breed domestic cats. However, some breeds have bicolor coats in their breed standards. These include the Ragdoll, American Shorthair, Manx, British Shorthair, and Turkish Angora. The Turkish Van and Snowshoe cat breed are restricted to cats with bicolored coats.\nIn contrast, other common breeds of cat have specific coat patterns specified in their breed standards. Cats with such specific coat patterns include the Russian Blue, which has a coat of one solid color.\nPossible bicolor colorations.\nWhite spotting is not limited to solid color-and-white combinations, and can also occur with any of the tabby patterns, resulting in tabby-and-white bicolor coats. Colorpoint cats can have bicolor points (colorpoint-and-white), although this variation is not recognized for showing in some cat breeds. An example of a bicolor colorpoint cat breed is the tuxedo patterned colorpoint-and-white Snowshoe cat. The body markings of bicolor colorpoints become clearer with age, as the body fur of colorpoint cats darkens as the cats grow older and the white patches become more distinctively visible.\nWhite spotting can also occur in combination with tortoiseshell coats, these are known as tricolor cats, tortoiseshell-and-white cats, or calico cats (US English). Tortoiseshell-and-white cats can also be found in combination with a tabby or colorpoint pattern.\nBicolor cats that are black and white are sometimes called \"magpies\".\nSkin coloration.\nBicolor may also appear in the skin color. Paw pad coloration may be black, pink, or a mixture of both. Paw pad coloration may match the pattern of a cat's coat that is nearby the paw.\nIn popular culture.\n\"Jellicle cat\" is a tuxedo cat in the fictional tribe of nocturnal black and white cats described by T. S. Eliot in \"Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats\", which was first published in 1939. In the musical \"Cats\", the character Mr. Mistoffelees is a tuxedo cat. Mr. Mistoffelees is a stage magician wearing a lacy ruff and bow tie. The character Bustopher Jones outfit consists of a tuxedo and spats. The musical differed from the book in that the characters included cats with many different coat colors, rather than just bicolor cats, but it retains the repeated assertion that \"Jellicle cats are black and white.\" Cats with these markings also played a starring role in the drawings illustrating \"The Unadulterated Cat\", a book written by Terry Pratchett, with cartoons by Gray Jolliffe.\nOther cartoon bicolor cats include Sylvester the Cat, Felix the Cat, Tom Cat from \"Tom and Jerry\", Oggy from \"Oggy and the Cockroaches\", Blackie the Cat from \"The Cat that Hated People\", \"Ventriloquist Cat\", Krazy Kat, Jess from \"Postman Pat\", Kitty Softpaws from the \"Shrek\" spin-off \"Puss in Boots\" and , Disney's Figaro, the Cat in the Hat from the Dr. Seuss book of the same name, Beans from Looney Tunes, Penelope Pussycat, Sebastian the cat from \"Josie and the Pussycats\", and Chao from Osamu Tezuka's Unico series. A bicolor cat named Mittens is one of the main characters in the 2008 Disney animated film \"Bolt\".\nA tuxedo cat is also the protagonist of the popular children's book \"Tip-Top Cat\", and another is the giant Kat Kong in the children's book of the same name. Bo, a character from the TV series \"Abby Hatcher\", is a \"Fuzzly\" who resembles a tuxedo cat. Tuxedos are one of the ten breeds of cats in the video game \"Minecraft\". Morgana, a playable character in the JRPG \"Persona 5\", is a bicolor cat. Klonoa, the main character of the titular \"Klonoa\" games, closely resembles a tuxedo cat. Cait Sith, a playable character from the video game \"Final Fantasy VII\" is a tuxedo cat.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63897", "revid": "329764", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63897", "title": "Tuxedo cat", "text": ""}
{"id": "63898", "revid": "86247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63898", "title": "Jellicle cat", "text": ""}
{"id": "63899", "revid": "42134605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63899", "title": "Ayatollah", "text": "High-ranking title given to Usuli Twelver Sh\u012b'a Muslim clerics\nAyatollah (, ; ; ) is a title for high-ranking Twelver Shia clergy. It came into widespread usage in the 20th century.\nOriginally used as a title bestowed by popular/clerical acclaim for a small number of the most distinguished \"marja' at-taqlid\" \"mujtahid\", it suffered from \"inflation\" following the 1979 Iranian Revolution when it came to be used for \"any established mujtahid\". By 2015, it was further expanded to include any student who had passed their Mujtahid final exam, leading to \"thousands\" of Ayatollahs.\nThe title is not used by the Sunni community of Iran.\nIn the Western world \u2013 especially after the Iranian Revolution \u2013 it was associated with Ruhollah Khomeini, who was so well known as to often be referred to as \"The Ayatollah\".\nEtymology.\nThe title is originally derived from the Arabic word post-modified with the word \"Allah\", making (). The combination has been translated to English as 'Sign of God', 'Divine Sign' or 'Reflection of God'. It is a frequently used term in the Quran, but its usage in this context is presumably a particular reference to the verse https:// \"We shall show them Our signs on the horizons and in their own selves\", while it has been also used to refer to The Twelve Imams by Shias.\nVariants used are (), (, dual form) or (, plural form) and ().\nQualifications.\nThough no formal hierarchical structure exists among Shia clerics, a \"hierarchy of difference\" can be elaborated to describe the situation. Traditionally, the title Ayatollah was awarded by popular usage only to the very few highest ranking, prominent \"Mujtahid\". Qualifications included \nConsequently, by the 1960s a cleric addressed as an Ayatollah was expected to be a \"Marja\"'.\nDevaluation trend.\nThe title of Ayatollah (and other Iranian Shi'i titles) has been \"cheapened\" since then.\nRoy Mottahedeh describes how the title of ayatollah was determined in the mid to late 20th century.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Only the titles 'jurisconsult' (\"faqih\") and 'model for imitation' (\"marja' al-taqlid\") had fixed meaning. Otherwise titles ... really expressed the informal consensus of mullahs as to the degree of deference they wished to show one another. A teacher in madreseh might be greatly offended if a letter from a layman failed to call him 'ayatollah', but he would vigorously reject the title if addressed as an ayatollah in public - vigorously, that is, until he sensed that other mullahs of his level would tolerate hearing him so addressed, at which point he would quietly let his students impose the title on him.\nAccording to Michael M. J. Fischer, the Iranian Revolution led to \"rapid inflation of religious titles\", so that almost every senior cleric began to be called an Ayatollah. raising the number of individuals who call themselves an Ayatollah dramatically.&lt;ref name=\"Momen205/206\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nAn unwritten rule of addressing for Shia clerics has been developed after the 1980s as a result of Iranian Revolution, despite the fact no official institutional way of conferring titles is available. At first the title that had been reserved for a Marja', was gradually applied to an established Mujtahid. With the post-revolutionary bureaucratization of Shia seminaries under the Islamic Republic, four levels of studies were introduced and those clerics who end the fourth level, also known as \"Dars-e-Kharej\" (lit.\u2009'beyond the text') and pass the final exam, were called Ayatollahs. Moojan Momen wrote in 2015 that every cleric who finished his training calls himself an Ayatollah and this trend has led to emergence of \"thousands of Ayatollahs\".\nThis inflation led to invention of a new title, \"Ayatollah al-Uzma\" (lit.\u2009'Great Sign of God'). Originally, about half a dozen people were addressed as al-Uzma, but as of 2015, the number of people who claimed that title was reportedly over 50.\nPolitical connotations.\nAnother post-revolutionary change in what makes an ayatollah has been the falling away (at least in many important situations), of purely religious credentials and informal acclamation, and its replacement by political criteria.\nAli Khamenei\u2014who was addressed with mid-level title of \"Hujjat al-Islam\" when he was in office as President of Iran\u2014was bestowed the title Ayatollah immediately after he was elected Supreme Leader of Iran in 1989, without meeting regular unwritten criteria (such as authoring a \"Risalah\"). Since the 2010s, sources under government control tend to give him more distinguished titles like \"Grand Ayatollah\" and \"Imam\".\nCertain clerics, such as Mohammad Kazem Shariatmadari and Hussein-Ali Montazeri, who had fallen out of favor with the rulers were downgraded by not being addressed as an Ayatollah.\nUsage.\nOrigins, early 20th century.\nThe earliest known address of this title is for Ibn Mutahhar Al-Hilli (died 1374), however it was not in use as a title for those qualifying until the 20th century. Glass\u00e9 states that following domination of Twelver branch by followers of school and demise of school, the title was popularized by s as an attempt to promote their status. Mirza Ali Aqa Tabrizi was the first one to use the term for the sources of emulation in Najaf, especially Akhund Khurasani (1839\u20131911), to distinguish them from the clerics of lower rank in Tehran, during the 1905-1911 Persian Constitutional Revolution. (Mirza Sayyed Mohammad Tabatabai and Seyyed Abdollah Behbahani were also given that honorific by constitutionalists according to \"Loghatnameh Dehkhoda\".)\nHamid Algar maintains that this title entered general usage possibly because it was an \"indirect result of the reform and strengthening of the religious institution in Qom\". Abdul-Karim Haeri Yazdi (1859\u20131937) who founded Qom Seminary, may be the first to bear the title according to Algar.\nWhile the title Ayatollah was sporadically used during the 1930s, it became widespread in the 1940s.\nGrand Ayatollah.\nOnly a few of the most important ayatollahs are accorded the rank of Grand Ayatollah (\"Ayatollah Uzma\", \"Great Sign of God\"). When an ayatollah gains a significant following and they are recognized for religiously correct views, he is considered a \"Marja'-e-Taqlid\", which in common parlance is \"grand ayatollah\". Usually as a prelude to such status, a \"mujtahid\" is asked to publish a juristic treatise in which he answers questions about the application of Islam to present-time daily affairs. \"Risalah\" is the word for treatise, and such a juristic work is called a \"risalah-yi'amaliyyah\" or \"practical law treatise\". A Grand Ayatollah is often seen as a spiritual guide and mentor to millions of Shia Muslims. His influence extends beyond the mosque and into the social and political arenas. Unlike many religious leaders of other religions, a grand ayatollah is often involved in state affairs, especially in countries with large Shia populations such as Iran, Iraq, and Lebanon.\nUse of the term as a pejorative.\nIn the West, particularly the United States, the term \"Ayatollah\" may be used as a pejorative to describe religious fundamentalism. Sam Miller of \"London Review of Books\" states that following the Iranian Revolution, \"ayatollah\" became common use; Miller described the pejorative version of the term as \"[evoking] an old, turbaned, bearded man, sitting in judgment, looking like a crow and ordering the execution of the impure\".\nHowever, the term is generally used to describe any kind of fundamentalism, not just Islamism. For example, in the choice of title for the 1987 English translation of Raphael Mergui and Philippe Simonnot's book \"Israel's Ayatollahs: Meir Kahane and the Far Right in Israel\", or in the United States, where former jurist and lawyer Roy Moore has been called the \"Ayatollah of Alabama\" by his critics due to espousing Christian nationalism, opposition to secularism, and far-right politics.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63900", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63900", "title": "Norman G. Finkelstein", "text": ""}
{"id": "63903", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63903", "title": "Martin Strel", "text": "Slovenian swimmer\nMartin Strel (; born 1 October 1954), is a Slovenian long-distance swimmer, one of the most elite endurance athletes best known for swimming the entire length of various rivers. Strel holds successive Guinness World Records for swimming the Danube river, the Mississippi River, the Yangtze River, and the Amazon River. His motto is \"swimming for peace, friendship and clean waters.\"\nSwimming history.\nStrel was born in the town of Mokronog, in the Slovenian region of Lower Carniola, then part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. \nStrel's first two river swims were the Krka river (105\u00a0kilometres) in his homeland, in 28 hours in 1992, and the boundary Kolpa river (), in 16 hours in 1993. In 2000, he swam the Danube River () and achieved the world long distance swimming record () in 58 days. In July 2001, he achieved one more world record \u2014 of non-stop swimming in Danube within 84 hours and 10 minutes. He lost 40 pounds of weight.\nIn 2002, he swam the entire Mississippi River () in 68 days. In 2003, he swam the Argentine Paran\u00e1 River (). On 10 June 2004, Martin started swimming down the Yangtze River (, the longest river in Asia, the third longest in the world) in China. He reached Shanghai in 40 days on 30 July 2004, one day before planned.\nStrel swam the Amazon River, commencing on 1 February 2007, finishing 66 days later on 7 April 2007. This was a record-breaking distance of , longer than the width of the Atlantic Ocean. He had escort boats that were prepared to pour blood into the river to distract meat-eating fish such as piranhas.\nIn 2007, the Nile had been proposed as his next river, but Strel said, \"I am not going to do the Nile. It's long but not challenging enough, it is just a small creek. The Amazon is much more mighty.\"\nHe plans to swim across Lake Arenal on 29 September 2010 as part of his visit to an environmentalist international film festival in Costa Rica. He plans to swim about 6 kilometres from shore and then back to his starting point.\nIn June 2011 Strel completed his Colorado River Swim challenge for the documentary \"Stan Lee's Superhumans\" More about the swim can be found at: http://.\nAchievements by year:\n\"Big River Man\".\nStrel was the subject and star of a feature documentary entitled \"Big River Man\" directed by the acclaimed art-house director John Maringouin. The film, which won the \"World Cinema Cinematography Award: Documentary\" at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival, was critically praised for its blend of comedy and drama. The film chronicled Strel's 3,300 mile historic swim of the Amazon River.\n\"Strel Swimming Adventures\".\nIn 2010, Martin Strel and his son Borut Strel founded a company that offers https:// in the Mediterranean and at Lake Powell, Arizona. They currently offer swimming adventure holiday tours at Lake Powell, Arizona, in Slovenia (Lake Bled, Lake Bohinj, and the So\u010da River), on Croatia's Dalmatian coast swimming from island to island, in Montenegro exploring Adriatic fjords and coves, and cruising Mediterranean Turkey. Strel takes part in some trips.\nGlobal Center for Advanced Studies.\nIn 2013, Martin Strel joined the faculty of The Global Center for Advanced Studies in its newly formed Institute of Adventure Studies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63904", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63904", "title": "Match", "text": "Device for lighting fires\nA match is a tool for starting a fire. Typically, matches are made of small wooden sticks or stiff paper. One end is coated with a material that can be ignited by friction generated by striking the match against a suitable surface. Wooden matches are packaged in matchboxes, and paper matches are partially cut into rows and stapled into matchbooks. The coated end of a match, known as the match \"head\", consists of a bead of active ingredients and binder, often colored for easier inspection. There are two main types of matches: safety matches, which can be struck only against a specially prepared surface, and strike-anywhere matches, for which any suitably frictional surface can be used.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"match\" derives from Old French \"m\u00e8che\", referring to the wick of a candle.\nHistorically, the term \"match\" referred to lengths of cord (later cambric) impregnated with chemicals, and allowed to burn continuously. These were used to light fires and fire guns (see matchlock) and cannons (see linstock) and to detonate explosive devices such as dynamite sticks. Such matches were characterized by their burning speed i.e. \"quick match\" and \"slow match\". Depending on its formulation, a slow match burns at a rate of around 30 cm (1 ft) per hour and a quick match at per minute for unconfined to even per second for confined.\nThe modern equivalent of a match (in the sense of a burnable cord) is the simple fuse such as a visco fuse, still used in pyrotechnics to obtain a controlled time delay before ignition. The original meaning of the word still persists in some pyrotechnics terms, such as \"black match\" (a black-powder-impregnated fuse) and \"Bengal match\" (a firework akin to sparklers producing a relatively long-burning, colored flame). However, when friction matches became commonplace, the term \"match\" came to refer mainly to these.\nHistory.\nEarly matches.\nA note in the text \"Cho Keng Lu\", written in 1366, describes a sulfur match, small sticks of pinewood impregnated with sulfur, used in China by \"impoverished court ladies\" in 577 during the conquest of Northern Qi. During the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms (907\u2013960), a book called the \"Records of the Unworldly and the Strange\" written by Chinese author Tao Gu in about 950 stated:\nIf there occurs an emergency at night it may take some time to make a light to light a lamp. But an ingenious man devised the system of impregnating little sticks of pinewood with sulfur and storing them ready for use. At the slightest touch of fire, they burst into flame. One gets a little flame like an ear of corn. This marvelous thing was formerly called a \"light-bringing slave\", but afterward when it became an article of commerce its name was changed to 'fire inch-stick'.\nAnother text, \"Wu Lin Chiu Shih\", dated from 1270, lists sulfur matches as something that was sold in the markets of Hangzhou, around the time of Marco Polo's visit. The matches were known as \"fa chu\" or \"tshui erh\".\nChemical matches.\nBefore the use of matches, fires were sometimes lit using a burning glass (a lens) to focus the sun on tinder, a method that could only work on sunny days. Another more common method was igniting tinder with sparks produced by striking flint and steel, or by sharply increasing air pressure in a fire piston. Early work had been done by alchemist Hennig Brand, who discovered the flammable nature of phosphorus in 1669. Others, including Robert Boyle and his assistant, Ambrose Godfrey, continued these experiments in the 1680s with phosphorus and sulfur, but their efforts did not produce practical and inexpensive methods for generating fires.\nA number of different ways were employed in order to light smoking tobacco: One was the use of a spill \u2013 a thin object something like a thin candle, a rolled paper or a straw, which would be lit from a nearby, already existing flame and then used to light the cigar or pipe \u2013 most often kept near the fireplace in a spill vase. Another method saw the use of a striker, a tool that looked like scissors, but with flint on one \"blade\" and steel on the other. These would then be rubbed together, ultimately producing sparks. If neither of these two was available, one could also use ember tongs to pick up a coal from a fire and light the tobacco directly.\nThe first modern, self-igniting match was invented in 1805 by Jean Chancel, assistant to Professor Louis Jacques Th\u00e9nard of Paris. The head of the match consisted of a mixture of potassium chlorate, sulfur, gum arabic and sugar. The match was ignited by dipping its tip in a small asbestos bottle filled with sulfuric acid. This kind of match was quite expensive, however, and its use was also relatively dangerous, so Chancel's matches was never widely adopted for commonplace use.\nThis approach to match making was further refined in the following decades, culminating with the 'Promethean match' that was patented by Samuel Jones of London in 1828. His match consisted of a small glass capsule containing a chemical composition of sulfuric acid colored with indigo and coated on the exterior with potassium chlorate, all of which was wrapped up in rolls of paper. The immediate ignition of this particular form of a match was achieved by crushing the capsule with a pair of pliers, mixing and releasing the ingredients in order for it to become alight.\nIn London, similar matches meant for lighting cigars were introduced in 1849 by Heurtner who had a shop called the Lighthouse in the Strand. One version that he sold was called \"Euperion\" (sometimes \"Empyrion\") which was popular for kitchen use and nicknamed as \"Hugh Perry\", while another meant for outdoor use was called a \"Vesuvian\" or \"flamer\". The head was large and contained niter, charcoal and wood dust, and had a phosphorus tip. The handle was large and made of hardwood so as to burn vigorously and last for a while. Some even had glass stems. Both Vesuvians and Prometheans had a bulb of sulfuric acid at the tip which had to be broken to start the reaction.\nSamuel Jones introduced fuzees for lighting cigars and pipes in 1832. A similar invention was patented in 1839 by John Hucks Stevens in America.\nIn 1832, William Newton patented the \"wax vesta\" in England. It consisted of a wax stem that embedded cotton threads and had a tip of phosphorus. Variants known as \"candle matches\" were made by Savaresse and Merckel in 1836. John Hucks Stevens also patented a safety version of the friction match in 1839.\nFriction matches.\nChemical matches were unable to make the leap into mass production, due to the expense, their cumbersome nature, and the inherent danger of using them. An alternative method was to produce the ignition through friction produced by rubbing two rough surfaces together. An early example was made by Fran\u00e7ois Derosne in 1816. His crude match was called a \"briquet phosphorique\" and it used a sulfur-tipped match to scrape inside a tube coated internally with phosphorus. It was both inconvenient and unsafe.\nThe first successful friction match was invented in 1826 by John Walker, an English chemist and druggist from Stockton-on-Tees, County Durham. He developed a keen interest in trying to find a means of obtaining fire easily. Several chemical mixtures were already known that would ignite by a sudden explosion, but it had not been found possible to transmit the flame to a slow-burning substance like wood. While Walker was preparing a lighting mixture on one occasion, a match that had been dipped in it took fire by an accidental friction upon the hearth. He at once appreciated the practical value of the discovery, and started making friction matches. They consisted of wooden splints or sticks of cardboard coated with sulfur and tipped with a mixture of sulfide of antimony, chlorate of potash, and gum. The treatment with sulfur helped the splints to catch fire, and the odor was improved by the addition of camphor. The price of a box of 50 matches was one shilling. With each box was supplied a piece of sandpaper, folded double, through which the match had to be drawn to ignite it. Walker did not name the matches \"Congreves\" in honour of the inventor and rocket pioneer Sir William Congreve, as it is sometimes stated. The \"congreves\" were the invention of Charles Sauria, a French chemistry student at the time. Walker did not divulge the exact composition of his matches. Between 1827 and 1829, Walker made about 168 sales of his matches. It was, however, dangerous and flaming balls sometimes fell to the floor, burning carpets and dresses, leading to their ban in France and Germany. Walker either refused or neglected to patent his invention.\nIn 1829, Scots inventor Sir Isaac Holden invented an improved version of Walker's match and demonstrated it to his class at Castle Academy in Reading, Berkshire. Holden did not patent his invention and claimed that one of his pupils wrote to his father Samuel Jones, a chemist in London who commercialised his process. A version of Holden's match was patented by Samuel Jones, and these were sold as \"lucifer matches\". These early matches had a number of problems\u00a0\u2013 an initial violent reaction, an unsteady flame, and unpleasant odor and fumes. Lucifers could ignite explosively, sometimes throwing sparks a considerable distance. Lucifers were manufactured in the United States by Ezekial Byam. \nThe term \"lucifer\" persisted as slang for a match into the 20th century. For example, the song \"Pack Up Your Troubles\" includes the line \"while you\u2019ve a lucifer to light your fag\". Matches are still called \"lucifers\" in Dutch.\nLucifers were quickly replaced after 1830 by matches made according to the process devised by Frenchman Charles Sauria, who substituted white phosphorus for the antimony sulfide. These new phosphorus matches had to be kept in airtight metal boxes but became popular and went by the name of \"loco foco\" (\"crazy fire\") in the United States, from which was derived the name of a political party. The earliest American patent for the phosphorus friction match was granted in 1836 to Alonzo Dwight Phillips of Springfield, Massachusetts. But, the first production of friction matches in America was by Jacob Weller, B.S. (1775-1846), in 1825. He made the matches in Thurmont, Maryland.\nFrom 1830 to 1890, the composition of these matches remained largely unchanged, although some improvements were made. In 1843 William Ashgard replaced the sulfur with beeswax, reducing the pungency of the fumes. This was replaced by paraffin in 1862 by Charles W. Smith, resulting in what were called \"parlor matches\". From 1870 the end of the splint was fireproofed by impregnation with fire-retardant chemicals such as alum, sodium silicate, and other salts resulting in what was commonly called a \"drunkard's match\" that prevented the accidental burning of the user's fingers. Other advances were made for the mass manufacture of matches. Early matches were made from blocks of wood with cuts separating the splints but leaving their bases attached. Later versions were made in the form of thin combs. The splints would be broken away from the comb when required.\nA noiseless match was invented in 1836 by the Hungarian J\u00e1nos Irinyi, who was a student of chemistry. An unsuccessful experiment by his professor, Meissner, gave Irinyi the idea to replace potassium chlorate with lead dioxide in the head of the phosphorus match. He liquefied phosphorus in warm water and shook it in a glass vial, until the two liquids emulsified. He mixed the phosphorus with lead dioxide and gum arabic, poured the paste-like mass into a jar, and dipped the pine sticks into the mixture and let them dry. When he tried them that evening, all of them lit evenly. He sold the invention and production rights for these \"noiseless matches\" to Istv\u00e1n R\u00f3mer, a Hungarian pharmacist living in Vienna, for 60 florins (about 22.5 oz t of silver). As a match manufacturer, R\u00f3mer became rich, and Irinyi went on to publish articles and a textbook on chemistry, and founded several match factories.\nReplacement of white phosphorus.\nThose involved in the manufacture of the new phosphorus matches were afflicted with \"phossy jaw\" and other bone disorders, and there was enough white phosphorus in one pack to kill a person. Deaths and suicides from eating the heads of matches became frequent. The earliest report of phosphorus necrosis was made in 1845 by Lorinser in Vienna, and a New York surgeon published a pamphlet with notes on nine cases.\nThe conditions of working-class women at the Bryant &amp; May factories led to the London matchgirls strike of 1888. The strike was focused on the severe health complications of working with white phosphorus, such as phossy jaw. Social activist Annie Besant published an article in her halfpenny weekly paper \"The Link\" on 23 June 1888. A strike fund was set up and some newspapers collected donations from readers. The women and girls also solicited contributions. Members of the Fabian Society, including George Bernard Shaw, Sidney Webb, and Graham Wallas, were involved in the distribution of the cash collected. The strike and negative publicity led to changes being made to limit the health effects of the inhalation of white phosphorus.\nAttempts were made to reduce the ill-effects on workers through the introduction of inspections and regulations. Anton Schr\u00f6tter von Kristelli discovered in 1850 that heating white phosphorus at 250 \u00b0C in an inert atmosphere produced a red allotropic form, which did not fume in contact with air. It was suggested that this would make a suitable substitute in match manufacture although it was slightly more expensive. Two French chemists, Henri Savene and Emile David Cahen, proved in 1898 that the addition of phosphorus sesquisulfide meant that the substance was not poisonous, that it could be used in a \"strike-anywhere\" match, and that the match heads were not explosive. British company Albright and Wilson was the first company to produce phosphorus sesquisulfide matches commercially. The company developed a safe means of making commercial quantities of phosphorus sesquisulfide in 1899 and started selling it to match manufacturers.\nRegulation of white phosphorus.\nThe serious effects of white phosphorus led many countries to ban its use. Finland prohibited the use of white phosphorus in 1872, followed by Denmark in 1874, France in 1897, Switzerland in 1898, and the Netherlands in 1901. An agreement, the \"Berne Convention,\" was reached at Bern, Switzerland, in September 1906, which banned the use of white phosphorus in matches. This required each country to pass laws prohibiting the use of white phosphorus in matches.\nThe United Kingdom passed the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;White Phosphorus Matches Prohibition Act 1908 (8 Edw. 7. c. 42) prohibiting its use in matches after 31 December 1910. The United States did not pass a law, but instead placed a \"punitive tax\" in 1913 on white phosphorus\u2013based matches, one so high as to render their manufacture financially impractical, and Canada banned them in 1914. India and Japan banned them in 1919; China followed, banning them in 1925.\nIn 1901 Albright and Wilson started making phosphorus sesquisulfide at their Niagara Falls, New York plant for the US market, but American manufacturers continued to use white phosphorus matches. The Niagara Falls plant made them until 1910, when the United States Congress forbade the shipment of white phosphorus matches in interstate commerce.\nSafety matches.\nThe dangers of white phosphorus in the manufacture of matches led to the development of the \"hygienic\" or \"safety match\". The major innovation in its development was the use of red phosphorus, not on the head of the match but instead on a specially designed striking surface.\nArthur Albright developed the industrial process for large-scale manufacture of red phosphorus after Schr\u00f6tter's discoveries became known. By 1851, his company was producing the substance by heating white phosphorus in a sealed pot at a specific temperature. He exhibited his red phosphorus in 1851, at The Great Exhibition held at The Crystal Palace in London.\nThe idea of creating a specially designed striking surface was developed in 1844 by the Swede Gustaf Erik Pasch. Pasch patented the use of red phosphorus in the striking surface. He found that this could ignite heads that did not need to contain white phosphorus. Johan Edvard Lundstr\u00f6m and his younger brother Carl Frans Lundstr\u00f6m (1823\u20131917) started a large-scale match industry in J\u00f6nk\u00f6ping, Sweden around 1847, but the improved safety match was not introduced until around 1850\u201355. The Lundstr\u00f6m brothers had obtained a sample of red phosphorus matches from Albright at The Great Exhibition, but had misplaced it and therefore they did not try the matches until just before the Paris Exhibition of 1855 when they found that the matches were still usable. In 1858 their company produced around 12 million matchboxes.\nThe safety of \"true\" \"safety matches\" is derived from the separation of the reactive ingredients between a match head on the end of a paraffin-impregnated splint and the special striking surface (in addition to the safety aspect of replacing the white phosphorus with red phosphorus). The idea for separating the chemicals had been introduced in 1859 in the form of two-headed matches known in France as \"Allumettes Androgynes\". These were sticks with one end made of potassium chlorate and the other of red phosphorus. They had to be broken and the heads rubbed together. There was, however, a risk of the heads rubbing each other accidentally in their box. Such dangers were removed when the striking surface was moved to the outside of the box. The development of a specialized matchbook with both matches and a striking surface occurred in the 1890s with the American Joshua Pusey, who sold his patent to the Diamond Match Company.\nThe Swedes long held a virtual worldwide monopoly on safety matches, with the industry mainly situated in J\u00f6nk\u00f6ping, by 1903 called \"J\u00f6nk\u00f6pings &amp; Vulcans T\u00e4ndsticksfabriks AB\" today Swedish Match\".\" In France, they sold the rights to their safety match patent to Coigent P\u00e8re &amp; Fils of Lyon, but Coigent contested the payment in the French courts, on the basis that the invention was known in Vienna before the Lundstr\u00f6m brothers patented it. The British match manufacturer Bryant and May visited J\u00f6nk\u00f6ping in 1858 to try to obtain a supply of safety matches, but was unsuccessful. In 1862 it established its own factory and bought the rights for the British safety match patent from the Lundstr\u00f6m brothers.\nModern matches.\nThe striking surface on modern matchboxes is typically composed of 25% powdered glass or other abrasive material, 50% red phosphorus, 5% neutralizer, 4% carbon black, and 16% binder; and the match head is typically composed of 45\u201355% potassium chlorate, with a little sulfur and starch, a neutralizer (ZnO or CaCO3), 20\u201340% of siliceous filler, diatomite, and glue. Safety matches ignite due to the extreme reactivity of phosphorus with the potassium chlorate in the match head. When the match is struck, the phosphorus and chlorate mix in a small amount and form something akin to the explosive Armstrong's mixture, which ignites due to the friction. The red color of the match head is due to addition of red dyes, not the red phosphorus content.\nFriction matches made with white phosphorus as well as those made from phosphorus sesquisulfide can be struck on any suitable surface. They have remained particularly popular in the United States, even when safety matches had become common in Europe, and are still widely used today around the world, including in many developing countries, for such uses as camping, outdoor activities, emergency/survival situations, and stocking homemade survival kits. However, strike-anywhere matches are banned on all kinds of aircraft under the \"dangerous goods\" classification \"U.N. 1331, Matches, strike-anywhere\".\nSafety matches are classified as dangerous goods, \"U.N. 1944, Matches, safety\". They are not universally forbidden on aircraft; however, they must be declared as dangerous goods and individual airlines or countries may impose tighter restrictions.\nStorm matches.\nStorm matches, also known as lifeboat matches or flare matches, are often included in survival kits. They have a strikeable tip similar to a normal match, but the combustible compound \u2013 including an oxidiser \u2013 continues down the length of the stick, coating half or more of the entire matchstick. The match also has a waterproof coating (which often makes the match more difficult to light), and often storm matches are longer than standard matches. As a result of the combustible coating, storm matches burn strongly even in strong winds, and can even spontaneously re-ignite after being briefly immersed in water.\nHobbyist collection.\nThe hobby of collecting match-related items, such as matchcovers and matchbox labels, is known as \"phillumeny\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; The dictionary definition of \"Match\" at Wiktionary"}
{"id": "63907", "revid": "11526809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63907", "title": "Lady Arwen", "text": ""}
{"id": "63908", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63908", "title": "You Can't Take it with You", "text": ""}
{"id": "63909", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63909", "title": "Palermo Technical Scale", "text": ""}
{"id": "63912", "revid": "486612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63912", "title": "Pareto", "text": "Pareto may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63914", "revid": "1693369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63914", "title": "Chaim Potok", "text": "American author and rabbi (1929\u20132002)\nChaim Potok (February 17, 1929\u00a0\u2013 July 23, 2002) was an American author, novelist, playwright, editor and rabbi. Among the more than a dozen books he authored, his first novel \"The Chosen\" (1967) was listed on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list for 39 weeks and sold more than 3.4 million copies, and was adapted into a well-received 1981 feature film by the same title.\nBiography.\nHerman Harold Potok was born in the Bronx, New York City, to Benjamin Max Potok (died 1958) and Mollie (n\u00e9e\u00a0Friedman; died 1985), Jewish immigrants from Poland. He was the oldest of four children, all of whom either became or married rabbis. His Hebrew name was Chaim Tzvi (\u05d7\u05d9\u05d9\u05dd \u05e6\u05d1\u05d9). He received an Orthodox Jewish education. After reading Evelyn Waugh's novel \"Brideshead Revisited\" (1945) as a teenager, Potok decided to become a writer (he often said that \"Brideshead Revisited\" was what inspired his work and writing). He started writing fiction at the age of 16. At age 17, he made his first submission to the magazine \"The Atlantic Monthly\". Although it was not published, he received a note from the editor complimenting his work. He attended high school at Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy, Yeshiva University's boys high school.\nIn 1949, at the age of twenty, Potok's stories were published in the literary magazine of Yeshiva University, which he also helped edit. In 1950, he graduated \"summa cum laude\" with a BA in English Literature.\nAfter four years of study at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, Potok was ordained as a Conservative rabbi. He was appointed director of the Leaders Training Fellowship (LTF), a youth organization affiliated with Conservative Judaism.\nAfter receiving a master's degree in English literature, Potok enlisted with the U.S. Army as a chaplain. He served in South Korea from 1955 to 1957. He described his time in South Korea as a transformative experience. Brought up to believe that the Jewish people were central to history and God's plans, he experienced a region where there were almost no Jews and no anti-Semitism, yet whose religious believers prayed with the same fervor that he saw in Orthodox synagogues at home.\nUpon his return to the U.S., he joined the faculty of the University of Judaism in Los Angeles. Potok met Adena Sara Mosevitzsky, a psychiatric social worker, at Camp Ramah in Ojai, California, where he served as camp director from 1957 to 1959. They were married on June 8, 1958. In 1959, he began his graduate studies at the University of Pennsylvania and was appointed scholar-in-residence at Har Zion Temple in Philadelphia. In 1963, the Potoks were instructors at Camp Ramah in Nyack. Also in 1963, he began a year in Israel, where he wrote his doctoral dissertation on Solomon Maimon and began to write a novel.\nIn 1964, the Potoks moved to Brooklyn, where Chaim became the managing editor of the magazine \"Conservative Judaism\" and joined the faculty of the Teachers\u2019 Institute of the Jewish Theological Seminary. The following year, he was appointed editor-in-chief of the Jewish Publication Society in Philadelphia and later, chairman of the publication committee. During this time, Potok received a doctorate in philosophy from the University of Pennsylvania. In 1970, the Potoks relocated to Jerusalem and then returned to Philadelphia in 1977.\nPotok was a member of the Writers and Artists for Peace in the Middle East, a pro-Israel group.\nAfter the publication of \"Old Men at Midnight\" (2001), Potok was diagnosed with brain cancer. He died at his home in Merion, Pennsylvania on July 23, 2002, aged 73.\nLiterary career.\nIn 1967, Potok published \"The Chosen\", which won the Edward Lewis Wallant Award and was nominated for the National Book Award. Potok wrote a sequel to \"The Chosen\" in 1969, entitled \"The Promise\", which details the issues of the value and identity between Orthodox and Hasidic Jews. This book won the Athenaeum Literary Award the same year of its publication. Not long afterward the Jewish Publication Society appointed him as its special projects editor. In 1972, he published \"My Name is Asher Lev\", the story of a boy struggling with his relationship with his parents, religion and his desire to be an artist. In 1975, he published \"In the Beginning\". From 1974 until his death, Potok served as a special projects editor for the Jewish Publication Society. During this time, Potok began translating the Hebrew Bible into English. In 1978, he published his non-fiction work, \"Wanderings: Chaim Potok\u2019s Story of the Jews\", a historical account of the Jews. Between 1978 and 1989, Potok contributed articles to \"Moment Magazine\". Potok described his 1981 novel \"The Book of Lights\" as based on his experiences as a chaplain in Korea during the war. He said \u201cit reshaped the neat, coherent model of myself and my place in the world.\u201d\nHis novel \"The Chosen\" was made into a film released in 1981, which won the most prestigious award at the World Film Festival, Montreal. Potok had a cameo role as a professor. The film featured Rod Steiger, Barry Miller, Maximilian Schell and Robby Benson. It also became an Off-Broadway musical and was adapted as a stage play by Aaron Posner in collaboration with Potok, which premiered at the Arden Theatre Company in Philadelphia in 1999.\nPotok's 1985 book \"Davita's Harp\" is his only novel featuring a female protagonist; Davita returned in his \"Old Men at Midnight\" (2001). In 1990, he published a sequel to \"My Name is Asher Lev\" titled \"The Gift of Asher Lev\". It won the National Jewish Book Award for Fiction. Potok wrote many plays, among them \"Sins of the Father\" and \"Out of the Depths\". In 1992, Potok completed another novel, \"I Am the Clay\", about the courageous struggle of a war-ravaged Korean family. His 1993 illustrated children's book \"The Tree of Here\" was followed by \"The Sky of Now\" (1995), both illustrated by Tony Auth, and a short story collection for young adults, \"Zebra and Other Stories\" (1998).\nLiterary influences.\nPotok's parents discouraged his writing and reading of non-Jewish subjects. Nevertheless, he spent many hours in the public library reading secular novels. Potok cited James Joyce, Thomas Mann, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Ernest Hemingway, and S. Y. Agnon as his chief literary influences. Many of his novels are set in the urban environments in New York in which he himself grew up. While not Hasidic, Potok was raised in an Orthodox home. In the book \"My Name is Asher Lev\", Asher Lev wants to be a painter, which causes much conflict with his father who wants him to do something else, much as Potok did during his childhood. Asher decides to become a painter, which upsets his family. Potok went into writing and painted in his free time. Potok said he related to Asher Lev more than any of his other characters.\nLegacy.\nPotok has had a considerable influence on Jewish American authors. His work was significant for discussing the conflict between traditional Jewish thought and culture and modernity. He taught a highly regarded graduate seminar on Postmodernism at the University of Pennsylvania from 1993 through 2001.\nHe bequeathed his papers to the University of Pennsylvania. The university houses a collection of Potok correspondence, writings, lectures, sermons, article clippings, memorabilia and fan mail. One of his admirers was Elie Wiesel, who wrote to Potok saying he had read all his books \"with fervor and friendship\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63915", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63915", "title": "Static random-access memory", "text": "Type of computer memory\nStatic random-access memory (static RAM or SRAM) is a type of random-access memory (RAM) that uses latching circuitry (flip-flop) to store each bit. SRAM is volatile memory; data is lost when power is removed.\nThe \"static\" qualifier differentiates SRAM from \"dynamic\" random-access memory (DRAM):\nHistory.\nSemiconductor bipolar SRAM was invented in 1963 by Robert Norman at Fairchild Semiconductor. Metal\u2013oxide\u2013semiconductor SRAM (MOS-SRAM) was invented in 1964 by John Schmidt at Fairchild Semiconductor. The first device was a 64-bit MOS p-channel SRAM.\nSRAM was the main driver behind any new CMOS-based technology fabrication process since the 1960s, when CMOS was invented.\nIn 1964, Arnold Farber and Eugene Schlig, working for IBM, created a hard-wired memory cell, using a transistor gate and tunnel diode latch. They replaced the latch with two transistors and two resistors, a configuration that became known as the Farber-Schlig cell. That year they submitted an invention disclosure, but it was initially rejected. In 1965, Benjamin Agusta and his team at IBM created a 16-bit silicon memory chip based on the Farber-Schlig cell, with 84 transistors, 64 resistors, and 4 diodes.\nIn April 1969, Intel Inc. introduced its first product, Intel 3101, a SRAM memory chip intended to replace bulky magnetic-core memory modules; Its capacity was 64 bits and was based on bipolar junction transistors. It was designed by using rubylith.\nCharacteristics.\nThough it can be characterized as volatile memory, SRAM exhibits data remanence.\nSRAM offers a simple data access model and does not require a refresh circuit. Performance and reliability are good and power consumption is low when idle. Since SRAM requires more transistors per bit to implement, it is less dense and more expensive than DRAM and also has a higher power consumption during read or write access. The power consumption of SRAM varies widely depending on how frequently it is accessed.\nApplications.\nEmbedded use.\nMany categories of industrial and scientific subsystems, automotive electronics, and similar embedded systems, contain SRAM which, in this context, may be referred to as \"embedded SRAM\" (ESRAM). Some amount is also embedded in practically all modern appliances, toys, etc. that implement an electronic user interface.\nSRAM in its dual-ported form is sometimes used for real-time digital signal processing circuits.\nIn computers.\nSRAM is used in personal computers, workstations and peripheral equipment: CPU register files, internal CPU caches and GPU caches, hard disk buffers, etc. LCD screens also may employ SRAM to hold the image displayed. SRAM was used for the main memory of many early personal computers such as the ZX80, TRS-80 Model 100, and VIC-20.\nSome early memory cards in the late 1980s to early 1990s used SRAM as a storage medium, which required a lithium battery to retain the contents of the SRAM.\nIntegrated on chip.\nSRAM may be integrated on chip for:\nHobbyists.\nHobbyists, specifically home-built processor enthusiasts, often prefer SRAM due to the ease of interfacing. It is much easier to work with than DRAM as there are no refresh cycles and the address and data buses are often directly accessible. In addition to buses and power connections, SRAM usually requires only three controls: Chip Enable (CE), Write Enable (WE) and Output Enable (OE). In synchronous SRAM, Clock (CLK) is also included.\nTypes of SRAM.\nNon-volatile SRAM.\nNon-volatile SRAM (nvSRAM) has standard SRAM functionality, but retains data when power is lost. nvSRAMs are used in networking, aerospace, and medical, among other applications,where the preservation of data is critical and where batteries are impractical.\nPseudostatic RAM.\nPseudostatic RAM (PSRAM) is DRAM combined with a self-refresh circuit. It appears externally as slower SRAM, albeit with a density and cost advantage over true SRAM, and without the access complexity of DRAM.\nBy function.\nIn the 1990s, asynchronous SRAM was employed for fast access time. Asynchronous SRAM was used as main memory for small cache-less embedded processors used in everything from industrial electronics and measurement systems to hard disks and networking equipment. Synchronous SRAM (e.g. DDR SRAM) is preferred similarly to how synchronous DRAM\u00a0\u2013 DDR SDRAM memory is now preferred over asynchronous DRAM. The pipeline architecture employed by Synchronous memory allows higher throughput. Furthermore, as DRAM is much cheaper than SRAM, SRAM is often replaced by DRAM, especially in cases where a large memory capacity is required. SRAM memory is, however, much faster for random, as opposed to block or burst access. Therefore, SRAM memory is mainly used for CPU cache, small on-chip memory, FIFOs or other small buffers.\nDesign.\nA typical SRAM cell is made up of six MOSFETs, and is often called a 6T SRAM cell. Each bit in the cell is stored on four transistors (M1, M2, M3, M4) that form two cross-coupled inverters. This storage cell has two stable states which are used to denote 0 and 1. Two additional \"access\" transistors serve to control the access to a storage cell during read and write operations. 6T SRAM is the most common kind of SRAM. In addition to 6T SRAM, other kinds of SRAM use 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 (4T, 5T, 7T 8T, 9T, 10T SRAM), or more transistors per bit. Four-transistor SRAM is quite common in stand-alone SRAM devices (as opposed to SRAM used for CPU caches), implemented in special processes with an extra layer of polysilicon, allowing for very high-resistance pull-up resistors. The principal drawback of using 4T SRAM is increased due to the constant current flow through one of the pull-down transistors (M1 or M2).\nThis is sometimes used to implement more than one (read and/or write) port, which may be useful in certain types of video memory and register files implemented with multi-ported SRAM circuitry.\nGenerally, the fewer transistors needed per cell, the smaller each cell can be. Since the cost of processing a silicon wafer is relatively fixed, using smaller cells and so packing more bits on one wafer reduces the cost per bit of memory.\nMemory cells that use fewer than four transistors are possible; however, such 3T or 1T cells are DRAM, not SRAM (even the so-called 1T-SRAM).\nAccess to the cell is enabled by the word line (WL in figure) which controls the two \"access\" transistors M5 and M6 in 6T SRAM figure (or M3 and M4 in 4T SRAM figure) which, in turn, control whether the cell should be connected to the bit lines: BL and BL. They are used to transfer data for both read and write operations. Although it is not strictly necessary to have two bit lines, both the signal and its inverse are typically provided in order to improve noise margins and speed.\nDuring read accesses, the bit lines are actively driven high and low by the inverters in the SRAM cell. This improves SRAM bandwidth compared to DRAMs\u00a0\u2013 in a DRAM, the bit line is connected to storage capacitors and charge sharing causes the bit line to swing upwards or downwards. The symmetric structure of SRAMs also allows for differential signaling, which makes small voltage swings more easily detectable. Another difference with DRAM that contributes to making SRAM faster is that commercial chips accept all address bits at a time. By comparison, commodity DRAMs have the address multiplexed in two halves, i.e. higher bits followed by lower bits, over the same package pins in order to keep their size and cost down.\nThe size of an SRAM with m address lines and n data lines is 2\"m\" words, or 2\"m\"\u00a0\u00d7 \"n\" bits. The most common word size is 8 bits, meaning that a single byte can be read or written to each of 2\"m\" different words within the SRAM chip. Several common SRAM chips have 11 address lines (thus a capacity of 211 \n 2,048 \n 2k words) and an 8-bit word, so they are referred to as \"2k\u00a0\u00d7 8 SRAM\".\nThe dimensions of an SRAM cell on an IC is determined by the minimum feature size of the process used to make the IC.\nSRAM operation.\nAn SRAM cell has three states:\nSRAM operating in read and write modes should have \"readability\" and \"write stability\", respectively. The three different states work as follows:\nStandby.\nIf the word line is not asserted, the \"access\" transistors M5 and M6 disconnect the cell from the bit lines. The two cross-coupled inverters formed by M1\u00a0\u2013 M4 will continue to reinforce each other as long as they are connected to the supply.\nReading.\nIn theory, reading only requires asserting the word line WL and reading the SRAM cell state by a single access transistor and bit line, e.g. M6, BL. However, bit lines are relatively long and have large parasitic capacitance. To speed up reading, a more complex process is used in practice: The read cycle is started by precharging both bit lines BL and BL, to high (logic 1) voltage. Then asserting the word line WL enables both the access transistors M5 and M6, which causes one bit line BL voltage to slightly drop. Then the BL and BL lines will have a small voltage difference between them. A sense amplifier will sense which line has the higher voltage and thus determine whether there was 1 or 0 stored. The higher the sensitivity of the sense amplifier, the faster the read operation. As the NMOS is more powerful, the pull-down is easier. Therefore, bit lines are traditionally precharged to high voltage. Many researchers are also trying to precharge at a slightly low voltage to reduce the power consumption.\nWriting.\nThe write cycle begins by applying the value to be written to the bit lines. To write a 0, a 0 is applied to the bit lines, such as setting BL to 1 and BL to 0. This is similar to applying a reset pulse to an SR-latch, which causes the flip flop to change state. A 1 is written by inverting the values of the bit lines. WL is then asserted and the value that is to be stored is latched in. This works because the bit line input-drivers are designed to be much stronger than the relatively weak transistors in the cell itself so they can easily override the previous state of the cross-coupled inverters. In practice, access NMOS transistors M5 and M6 have to be stronger than either bottom NMOS (M1, M3) or top PMOS (M2, M4) transistors. This is easily obtained as PMOS transistors are much weaker than NMOS when same sized. Consequently, when one transistor pair (e.g. M3 and M4) is only slightly overridden by the write process, the opposite transistors pair (M1 and M2) gate voltage is also changed. This means that the M1 and M2 transistors can be easier overridden, and so on. Thus, cross-coupled inverters magnify the writing process.\nBus behavior.\nRAM with an access time of 70\u00a0ns will output valid data within 70\u00a0ns from the time that the address lines are valid. Some SRAM cells have a \"page mode\", where words of a page (256, 512, or 1024 words) can be read sequentially with a significantly shorter access time (typically approximately 30\u00a0ns). The page is selected by setting the upper address lines and then words are sequentially read by stepping through the lower address lines.\nProduction challenges.\nOver 30 years (from 1987 to 2017), with a steadily decreasing transistor size (node size), the footprint-shrinking of the SRAM cell topology itself slowed down, making it harder to pack the cells more densely. One of the reasons is that scaling down transistor size leads to SRAM reliability issues. Careful cells designs are necessary to achieve SRAM cells that do not suffer from stability problems especially when they are being read. With the introduction of the FinFET transistor implementation of SRAM cells, they started to suffer from increasing inefficiencies in cell sizes.\nBesides issues with size a significant challenge of modern SRAM cells is a static current leakage. The current, that flows from positive supply (Vdd), through the cell, and to the ground, increases exponentially when the cell's temperature rises. The cell power drain occurs in both active and idle states, thus wasting useful energy without any useful work done. Even though in the last 20 years the issue was partially addressed by the Data Retention Voltage technique (DRV) with reduction rates ranging from 5 to 10, the decrease in node size caused reduction rates to fall to about 2.\nWith these two issues it became more challenging to develop energy-efficient and dense SRAM memories, prompting semiconductor industry to look for alternatives such as STT-MRAM and F-RAM.\nResearch.\nIn 2019 a French institute reported on a research of an IoT-purposed 28nm fabricated IC. It was based on fully depleted silicon on insulator-transistors (FD-SOI), had two-ported SRAM memory rail for synchronous/asynchronous accesses, and selective virtual ground (SVGND). The study claimed reaching an ultra-low SVGND current in a \"sleep\" and read modes by finely tuning its voltage.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63916", "revid": "214427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63916", "title": "Library linking", "text": ""}
{"id": "63919", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63919", "title": "Bled", "text": "Bled (; , in older sources also \"Feldes\") is a town on Lake Bled in the Upper Carniolan region of northwestern Slovenia. It is one of Slovenia's most visited tourist destinations. The town is the administrative seat of the Municipality of Bled.\nName.\nThe town was first attested in written sources as \"Ueldes\" in 1004 (and as \"Veldes\" in 1011). The etymology of the name is unknown and it is believed to be of pre-Slavic origin. The German name of the town, \"Veldes\", was either borrowed from Old Slovene \"*Beld\u044a\" before AD 800 or is derived from the same pre-Slavic source as the Slovene name.\nGeography.\nBled is located on the southern foot of the Karawanks mountain range near the border with Austria, about northwest of the national capital of Ljubljana. South of Lake Bled are the densely forested Pokljuka and Jelovica plateaus and the easternmost parts of the Julian Alps, where the Sava Bohinjka river and the parallel Bohinj Railway lead to the Bohinj basin, Lake Bohinj, and the Triglav massif.\nA number of rises (Grad 599 m, Stra\u017ea 646 m, Kozarca 558 m, Osojnica 756 m, and Ravnica 729 m) separate the localities of Bled around the lake, the former villages of Grad, Mlino, Re\u010dica, Zagorice, and \u017dele\u010de.\nThe lake is long and wide. In summer, the surface water reaches and retains a temperature up to until autumn. As such, it is suitable for swimming. During colder winters, the entire lake freezes and can be used for ice skating; the island can then be reached on foot.\nThere is a thermal spring () near the lake, next to the Bled Fault. Its water is used in indoor pools in two hotels.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistory.\nEarly medieval history.\nA settlement area since Mesolithic times, the present-day locality probably arose about 600 during the Slavic settlement of the Eastern Alps. After the Slavic principality of Carantania was conquered by Frankish forces in 788, the area came under Bavarian influence.\nFeudal estate.\nGerman King Henry II ceded ownership of the area in 1004 to Albuin, Bishop of Brixen as a sign of gratitude for the assistance the Church was giving to the king in his attempt to strengthen imperial rule in that part of northern Italy. In 1011, Henry II signed another deed of donation that added the castle and an area of land the size of thirty king's farms. That area, between the Sava Bohinjka and the Sava Dolinka, became known as the Lordship of Veldes (German: \"Herrschaft Veldes\"). These donations marked a turning point in the history of Bled and, for the following 800 years, the area remained under the sovereignty of the prince-bishops of Brixen.\nThe bishops very seldom visited their remote possession 300\u00a0km away. Initially, the lordship was administered by \"ministeriales\" (bonded knights), castellans, and castle staff in accordance with feudal practices, but in the middle of the 14th century the prince-bishops decided instead to lease the estate. Under one of the 16th-century lessees, Bled Castle became a Protestant stronghold for a time. When the leasehold era came to an end, the prince-bishops began to appoint governors to manage their distant lordship. Until the middle of the 18th century, those administrators were exclusively aristocratic, but later they included non-nobles.\nIn 1803, Brixen's rule came to an end when the prince-bishopric was secularized in the course of the German Mediatization. Bled then came under Austrian sovereignty but in 1808, along with Carniola, it was included in the Napoleonic Illyrian Provinces. It returned under Austrian sovereignty in 1813, and in 1838 the Austrian Emperor returned Bled to the bishops of Brixen as a private estate. With the abolition of the feudal system in 1848, Bled ceased to have the characteristics of a feudal economy and from then on it experienced several changes in ownership, including industrialists and a bank.\nAfter the dissolution of Austria-Hungary in 1918, Bled and the rest of Carniola came under the rule of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and became a summer domicile of the ruling House of Kara\u0111or\u0111evi\u0107, a tradition that Yugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito continued when he built his residence here in 1947.\nModern settlement.\nToday's town began to form in the mid-19th century from the villages of Grad, Mlino, Re\u010dica, Zagorice, and \u017dele\u010de, which encircled the lake. At that time, farmers started to sell the land along the eastern lakeshore to wealthy individuals for their villas, and the villages of Grad, Zagorice, and \u017dele\u010de began to merge. Bled was officially made a town in 1960.\nTourism.\nBled is known for the glacial Lake Bled, which makes it a major tourist attraction. Perched on a rock overlooking the lake is the iconic Bled Castle. The town is also known in Slovenia for its vanilla and cream pastry ().\nNaturopath Arnold Rikli (1823\u20131906) from Switzerland contributed significantly to the development of Bled as a health resort in the second half of the 19th century. Due to its mild climate, Bled has been visited by aristocratic guests from all across the world. Today it is an important convention centre and tourist resort, offering a wide range of sports activities (golf, fishing, and horseback riding). It is a starting point for mountain treks and hikes, especially within nearby Triglav National Park.\nA small island in the middle of the lake is home to the Assumption of Mary Pilgrimage Church; visitors frequently ring its bell, due to an old legend claiming it provides good luck.\nHuman traces from prehistory have been found on the island. Before the church was built, there was a temple consecrated to \u017diva, the Slavic goddess of love and fertility. One can get to the island on a traditional flat-bottomed wooden boat (), part of a fixed fleet of 23 boats to protect the lake's cleanliness, run by a family-owned business since the 18th century. The island on Lake Bled has 99 steps. A local tradition at weddings is for the husband to carry his new bride up these steps, during which the bride must remain silent.\nTransport.\nThe town is served by two railway stations: Lesce-Bled (located in nearby Lesce) on the main line between Ljubljana and Villach Hauptbahnhof, and Bled Jezero (located above the western shore of Lake Bled) on the Bohinj Railway. Slovenia's main international airport, Ljubljana Jo\u017ee Pu\u010dnik Airport, is 34 km away by road; Lesce-Bled Airport caters to general aviation.\nEvents.\nBled has hosted the World Rowing Championships four times, in 1966, 1979, 1989, and most recently in 2011.\nIn 1961 the Grand Hotel Toplice in Bled was the site of one of the most important international tournaments in chess history. In 2002, the 35th Chess Olympiad was held in the city.\nBled hosts one of the largest Lindy Hop events, known as \"Swing Bled\".\nIn 1959 the first 14 rounds of the 4th Chess Candidates Tournament were held in this city, the rest were played in Zagreb and in Belgrade.\nNotable people.\nNotable people that were born or lived in Bled include:\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns / sister cities.\nBled is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63920", "revid": "802693624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63920", "title": "Phase transitions", "text": ""}
{"id": "63923", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63923", "title": "Palestinian state", "text": ""}
{"id": "63924", "revid": "21327649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63924", "title": "British mandate of Palestine", "text": ""}
{"id": "63927", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63927", "title": "Cartagena, Colombia", "text": "City in coastal northern Colombia\nCartagena ( ), known since the colonial era as Cartagena de Indias (), is a city and one of the major ports on the northern coast of Colombia in the Caribbean Coast Region, along the Caribbean Sea. Cartagena's past role as a link in the route to the West Indies provides it with important historical value for world exploration and preservation of heritage from the great commercial maritime routes. As a former Spanish colony, it was a key port for the export of Bolivian silver to Spain and for the import of enslaved Africans under the asiento system. It was defensible against pirate attacks in the Caribbean. The city's strategic location between the Magdalena and Sin\u00fa rivers also gave it easy access to the interior of New Granada and made it a main port for trade between Spain and its overseas empire, establishing its importance by the early 1540s.\nModern Cartagena is the capital of the Bol\u00edvar Department, and had a population of 876,885 according to the 2018 census, making it the second-largest city in the Caribbean region, after Barranquilla, and the fifth-largest city in Colombia. The metropolitan area of Cartagena is the sixth-largest urban area in the country, after metropolitan area of Bucaramanga. Economic activities include the maritime and petrochemical industries, as well as tourism.\nThe present city\u2014named after Cartagena, Spain and by extension, the historic city of Carthage\u2014was founded on 1 June 1533, making it one of South America's oldest colonial cities; but settlement by various indigenous people in the region around Cartagena Bay dates from 4000 BC. During the Spanish colonial period Cartagena had a key role in administration and expansion of the Spanish Empire. It was a center of political, ecclesiastical, and economic activity. In 1984, Cartagena's colonial walled city and fortress were designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nIt was also the site of the Battle of Cartagena de Indias in 1741 during the War of Jenkins' Ear between Spain and Britain.\nHistory.\nPre-Columbian era: 4000 BC \u2013 AD 1500.\nThe Puerto Hormiga Culture, founded in the Arjona Municipality of the Bol\u00edvar Department in the Caribbean coast region, particularly in the area from the Sin\u00fa River Delta to the Cartagena Bay, appears to be the first documented human community in what is now Colombia. Archeologists estimate that around 4000 BC, the formative culture was located near the boundary between the current departments of Bol\u00edvar and Sucre. In this area, archeologists have found the most ancient ceramic objects of the Americas, dating from around 4000 BC. The primary reason for the proliferation of primitive societies in this area is thought to have been the relatively mild climate and the abundance of wildlife, which allowed the hunting inhabitants a comfortable life.\nArcheological investigations date the decline of the Puerto Hormiga culture and its related settlements to be ~3000 BC. The rise of a much more developed culture, the Mons\u00fa, who lived at the end of the Dique Canal near today's Cartagena neighborhoods Pasacaballos and Ci\u00e9naga Honda at the northernmost part of Bar\u00fa Island, has been hypothesized. The Mons\u00fa culture appears to have inherited the Puerto Hormiga culture's use of the art of pottery and also to have developed a mixed economy of agriculture and basic manufacture. The Mons\u00fa people's diet was based mostly on shellfish and fresh and salt-water fish.\nThe development of the Sin\u00fa society in what is today the departments of C\u00f3rdoba and Sucre, eclipsed these first developments around the Cartagena Bay area. Until the Spanish colonization, many cultures derived from the Karib, Malibu and Arawak language families lived along the Colombian Caribbean coast. In the late pre-Columbian era, the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta was home to the Tayrona people, whose language was closely related to the Chibcha language family.\nAround AD 1500, the area was inhabited by different tribes of the Carib language family, more precisely the Mocanae sub-family.\nMocana villages of the Carib people around the Bay of Cartagena included:\n*on a sandy island facing the ocean in what is present-day downtown: Kalamar\u00ed (Calamari)\n*on the island of Tierrabomba: Carex\n*on Isla Bar\u00fa, then a peninsula: Bahaire\n*on present-day Mamonal, the eastern coast of the exterior bay: Cospique\n*in the suburban area of Turbaco: Yurbaco Tribe\nHeredia found these settlements \"...largely surrounded with the heads of dead men placed on stakes.\"\nSome subsidiary tribes of the Kalamari lived in today's neighborhood of Pie de la Popa, and other subsidiaries from the Cospique lived in the Membrillal and Pasacaballos areas. Among these, according to the earliest documents available, the Kalamari had preeminence. These tribes, though physically and administratively separated, shared a common architecture, such as hut structures consisting of circular rooms with tall roofs, which were surrounded by defensive wooden palisades.\nFirst sightings by Europeans: 1500\u20131533.\nRodrigo de Bastidas traveled to the Pearl Coast and the Gulf of Uraba in 1500\u201301. On 14 February 1504, Ferdinand V contracted Juan de la Cosa's voyage to Uraba. However, Juan de la Cosa died in 1510 along with 300 of Alonso de Ojeda's men, after an armed confrontation with indigenous people, and before Juan de la Cosa could get possession of the Gulf of Urab\u00e1 area. Similar contracts were signed in 1508 with Diego de Nicuesa for the settlement of Veragua and with Alonso de Ojeda for the settlement of Uraba, \"where gold had already been obtained on earlier voyages,\" according to Floyd.\nAfter the failed effort to found Antigua del Dari\u00e9n in 1506 by Alonso de Ojeda and the subsequent unsuccessful founding of San Sebasti\u00e1n de Urab\u00e1 in 1510 by Diego de Nicuesa, the southern Caribbean coast became unattractive to colonizers. They preferred the better known Hispaniola and Cuba.\nAlthough the royal control point for trade, the Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n gave permission to Rodrigo de Bastidas (1460\u20131527) to again conduct an expedition as adelantado to this area, Bastidas explored the coast and sighted the Magdalena River Delta in his first journey from Guajira to the south in 1527, a trip that ended in the Gulf of Urab\u00e1, the location of the failed first settlements. De Nicuesa and De Ojeda noted the existence of a big bay on the way from Santo Domingo to Urab\u00e1 and the Panama isthmus, and that encouraged Bastidas to investigate.\nColonial era: 1533\u20131717.\nUnder contract to Queen Joanna of Castile, Pedro de Heredia entered the Bay of Cartagena with three ships, a lighter, 150 men, and 22 horses, on 14 January 1533. He soon found the village of Calamari abandoned. Proceeding onwards to Turbaco, where Juan de la Cosa had been mortally wounded 13 years earlier, Heredia fought an all-day battle before claiming victory. Using India Catalina as a guide, Heredia embarked on a three-month exploration expedition. He returned to Calamari in April 1533 with gold pieces, including a solid gold porcupine weighing 132 pounds. In later expeditions, Heredia raided the Sin\u00fa tombs and temples of gold. His rule as governor of Cartagena lasted 22 years, before perishing on his return to Spain in 1544.\nCartagena was founded on 1 June 1533 by the Spanish commander, Pedro de Heredia, in the former location of the indigenous Caribbean Calamar\u00ed village. The town was named after the port city of Cartagena, in Murcia in southeast Spain, where most of Heredia's sailors had resided. King Philip II gave Cartagena the title of \"city\" (\"ciudad\") in 1574, adding \"most noble and loyal\" in 1575.\nThe city's increasing importance as a port for the export of Bolivian silver from Potos\u00ed to Spain, made it an obvious target for pirates and corsairs, encouraged by France, England, and Holland. In 1544, the city was pillaged by 5 ships and 1,000 men under the command of the French pirate Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Roberval, who took advantage of the city still without walls. Heredia was forced to retreat to Turbaco until a ransom was paid. A defensive tower, \"San Felipe del Boqueron\", was built in 1566 by Governor Anton Davalos. It was supposed to protect the anchorage and the Bahia de las Animas, a water lane into Plaza de lar Mar (current day Plaze de la Aduana), but the fort's battery had limited range. Then the French pirate Martin Cote struck in 1569 with 1,000 men, ransacking the city.\nA few months after the disaster of the invasion of Cote, a fire destroyed the city and forced the creation of a firefighting squad, the first in the Americas.\nIn 1568, Sir John Hawkins tried to persuade Governor Mart\u00edn de las Alas to open a trade fair in the city which would allow his men to sell foreign goods. This was a violation of Spanish law, which forbade trade with foreigners. Many in the settlement suspected this would have allowed Hawkins to sack the port afterwards; and as such the governor declined. Hawkins bombarded the city for 8 days, but failed to make any significant impacts and withdrew. Then Francis Drake attacked in April 1586 with 23 ships and 3,000 men. Drake burned 200 houses and the cathedral, departing only after a ransom was paid a month later.\nSpain then commissioned Bautista Antonelli in 1586 to design a master scheme for defending its Caribbean ports. This included a second visit to Cartagena in 1594 when he drew up plans for a walled city.\nIn 1610, the Holy Office of the Inquisition was established in Cartagena and The Palace of Inquisition was completed in 1770. Sentences were pronounced in the main city plaza, today's Plaza de Bolivar, during the \"Autos de Fe\" ceremonies. Crimes under its jurisdiction included those of heresy, blasphemy, bigamy and witchcraft. A total of 767 people were punished, which ranged from fines, wearing a Sanbenito, life imprisonment, or even the death of five. The Inquisition was abolished with independence in 1811.\nThe first slaves were brought by Pedro de Heredia to work as \"macheteros\", clearing the underbrush. By the 17th century, Cartagena had become an important slave market in the New World, centered around the Plaza de los Coches. European slave traders began to bring enslaved peoples from Africa during this period. Spain was the only European power that did not establish factories in Africa to purchase slaves and therefore the Spanish Empire relied on the asiento system, awarding merchants from other European nations the license to trade enslaved people to their overseas territories.\nGov. Francisco de Murga made the Inner Bay an \"impregnable lagoon\", according to Segovia, which included the forts \"El Boquer\u00f3n\", \"Castillo Grande\", \"Manzanillo\", and \"Manga\". Besides the walls built to defend the historic district of Calamari, Francisco de Murga enclosed Getsemani with protective walls starting in 1631. This included the battery of Media Luna of San Antonio, located between the bastions of Santa Teresa and Santa Barbara, which protected the only gate and causeway to the mainland.\nThe practice of \"Situado\" is exemplified in the magnitude of the city's subsidy between 1751 and 1810, when the city received the sum of 20,912,677 Spanish reales.\nThe Raid on Cartagena, in April 1697 during the Nine Years' War, by Sir Bernard Desjean, Baron de Pointis and Jean Baptiste Ducasse was a severe blow to Cartagena. The Baron's forces included 22 large ships, 500 cannon, and 4,000 troops, while Ducasse's forces consisted of 7 ships and 1,200 buccaneers. They quickly overwhelmed Sancho Jimeno de Orozco's force of 30 men in the \"San Luis de Bocachica\" fortification. Then, \"San Felipe de Barajas\" also fell and the city came under bombardment. When the Half Moon Gate was breached and Getsemani island occupied, Governor Diego de los Rios capitulated. The Baron left after a month of plunder (roughly 2\u00a0million livres) and Ducasse followed a week later.\nWhen King Philip II employed the Italian engineer Juan Bautista Antonelli to design a master plan of fortifications for Cartagena, construction would actually continue for the next two hundred years. On 17 March 1640, three Portuguese ships under the command of Rodrigo Lobo da Silva, ran aground in the Bocagrande Channel. This accelerated the formation of a sand bar, which soon connected the Bocagrande Peninsula to the island of Tierrabomba. The defense of the bay then shifted to two forts on either side of Bocachica, \"San Jose\" and \"San Luis de Bocachica\". \"San Luis\" was replaced by \"San Fernando\" after the 1741 English raid. The next narrow passage was formed by the Island of Manzanillo, where \"San Juan del Manzanillo\" was constructed and \"Santa Cruz O Castillo Grande\" opposite on Cruz Grande at Punta Judio, both connected by a floating chain. Finally, there was \"San Felipe del Boquer\u00f3n\", later \"San Sebasti\u00e1n del Pastelillo\". The city itself was circled with a ring of bastions connected by curtains. The island of Getsemani was also fortified. Protecting the city on the landward side, atop San L\u00e1zaro hill, was the Castillo San Felipe de Barajas named in honor of Spain's King Philip IV and Governor Pedro Zapata de Mendoza, Marquis of Barajas' father, the Count of Barajas. Completed in 1654, the fort was expanded in the 18th century, and included underground corridors and galleries.\nViceregal era: 1717\u20131811.\nThe 18th century began poorly for the city economically, as the Bourbon dynasty discontinued the \"Carrera de Indias\" convoys. However, with the establishment of the Viceroyalty of New Granada and the constant Anglo-Spanish conflicts, Cartagena took on the stronghold as the \"gateway to the Indies of Peru\". By 1777, the city included 13,700 inhabitants with a garrison of 1300. The population reached 17,600 in 1809.\nIn 1731, Juan de Herrera y Sotomayor founded the Military Academy of Mathematics and Practice of Fortifications in Cartagena. He is also known for designing the Puerta del Reloj starting in 1704.\n1741 attack.\nStarting in mid-April 1741, the city endured a siege by a large British armada under the command of Admiral Edward Vernon. The engagement, known as Battle of Cartagena de Indias, was part of the larger War of Jenkins' Ear. The British armada included 50 warships, 130 transport ships, and 25,600 men, including 2,000 North American colonial infantry. The Spanish defense was under the command of Sebasti\u00e1n de Eslava and Don Blas de Lezo. The British were able to take the Castillo de San Luis at Bocachica and land marines on the island of Tierrabomba and Manzanillo. The North Americans then took La Popa hill.\nFollowing a failed attack on San Felipe Barajas on 20 April 1741, which left 800 British dead and another 1,000 taken prisoner, Vernon lifted the siege. By that time he had many sick men from tropical diseases. An interesting footnote to the battle was the inclusion of George Washington's half brother, Lawrence Washington, among the North American colonial troops. Lawrence later named his Mount Vernon estate in honor of his commander.\nDuring this era, Jos\u00e9 Ignacio de Pombo thrived as merchant.\nSilver Age (1750\u20131808).\nIn 1762, Antonio de Arebalo published his Defense Plan, the Report on the estate of defense on the avenues of Cartagena de Indias. This engineer continued the work to make Cartagena impregnable, including the construction from 1771 to 1778, of a 3400 yards long underwater jetty across the Bocagrande called the \"Escollera\". Arebalo had earlier completed \"San Fernando\", and the fort-battery of \"San Jose\" in 1759, then added \"El Angel San Rafael\" on El Horno hill as added protection across the Bocachica.\nAmong the censuses of the 18th century was the special census of 1778, imposed by the governor of the time, D. Juan de Torrezar Diaz Pimienta \u2013 later Viceroy of New Granada \u2013 by order of the Marquis of Ensenada, Minister of Finance \u2013 so that he would be provided numbers for his Catastro tax project, which imposed a universal property tax he believed would contribute to the economy while at the same time increasing royal revenues dramatically. The census of 1778, besides having significance for economic history, required each house to be described in detail and its occupants enumerated, making the census an important tool The census revealed what Ensenada had hoped. However, his enemies in the court convinced King Charles III to oppose the tax plan. \n1811 to the 21st century.\nFor more than 275 years, Cartagena was under Spanish rule. With Napoleon's imprisonment of Charles IV and Ferdinand VII, and the start of the Peninsular War, the Latin American wars of independence soon followed. In Cartagena, on 4 June 1810, Royal Commissioner Antonio Villavicencio and the Cartagena City Council banished the Spanish Governor Francisco de Montes on suspicions of sympathy for the French emperor and the French occupation forces which overthrew the king. A Supreme Junta was formed, along with two political parties, one led by Jose Maria Garcia de Toledo representing the aristocrats, and a second led by Gabriel and German Pi\u00f1eres representing the common people of Getsemani. Finally, on 11 November, a Declaration of Independence was signed proclaiming \"a free state, sovereign and independent of all domination and servitude to any power on Earth\". The support for a declaration of independence by working class leader and artisan Pedro Romero was key in pushing the Junta to adopting it.\nSpain's reaction was to send a \"pacifying expedition\" under the command of Pablo Morillo, The Pacifier, and Pascual de Enrile, which included 59 ships, and 10,612 men. The city was placed under siege on 22 August 1815. The city was defended by 3000 men, 360 cannons, and 8 ships plus ancillary small watercraft, under the command of Manuel del Castillo y Rada and Juan N. Enslava. However, by that time, the city was under the rule of the Garcia de Toledo Party, having exiled German and Gabriel Pi\u00f1eres, and Simon Bolivar. By 5 December, about 300 people per day died from hunger or disease, forcing 2000 to flee on vessels provided by the French mercenary Louis Aury. By that time, 6000 had died. Morillo, in retaliation after entering the city, shot nine of the rebel leaders on 24 February 1816, at what is now known as the Camellon de los Martires. These included Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Garc\u00eda de Toledo and Manuel del Castillo y Rada.\nFinally, a patriot army led by General Mariano Montilla, supported by Admiral Jos\u00e9 Prudencio Padilla, laid siege to the city from August 1820 until October 1821. A key engagement was the destruction of almost all of the royalist ships anchored on Getsemani Island on 24 June 1821. After Governor surrendered, Simon Bolivar the Liberator, bestowed the title \"Heroic City\" onto Cartagena. The Liberator spent 18 days in the city from 20 to 28 July 1827, staying in the Government Palace in Proclamation Square and the guest of a banquet hosted by Jose Padilla at his residence on Calle Larga.\nUnfortunately, the toll of war, in particular from Morillo's siege long affected the city. With the loss of the funds it had received as the main colonial military outpost, and the loss of population, the city deteriorated. It suffered a long decline in the aftermath of independence, and was largely neglected by the central government in Bogot\u00e1. In fact, its population did not reach pre-1811 numbers until the start of the 20th century.\nThese declines were also due to disease, including a devastating cholera epidemic in 1849. The Canal del Dique that connected it to the Magdalena River also filled with silt, leading to a drastic reduction in the amount of international trade. The rise of the port of Barranquilla only compounded the decline in trade. During the presidency of Rafael Nu\u00f1ez, who was a Cartagena native, the central government finally invested in a railroad and other infrastructure improvements and modernization that helped the city to recover.\nCartagena is the capital of the Bol\u00edvar department.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nCartagena is located to the north of Colombia, at 10\u00b025'N 75\u00b032'W.\nIt faces the Caribbean Sea to the west. To the south is the Cartagena Bay, which has two entrances: Bocachica (Small Mouth) in the south, and Bocagrande (Big Mouth) in the north. Its coastal line is characterized morphologically by dissipative beaches.\nCartagena bay is an estuary with an area of approximately 84\u00a0km2.\nNeighborhoods.\nNorthern area.\nIn this area is the Rafael N\u00fa\u00f1ez International Airport, located in the neighborhood of Crespo, ten minutes' drive from downtown or the old part of the city and fifteen minutes away from the modern area. Zona Norte, the area located immediately north of the airport, contains hotels, the urban development office of Barcelona de Indias, and several educational institutions. The old city walls, which enclose the \"centro\" or downtown area and the neighborhood of San Diego, are located to the southwest of Crespo. On the Caribbean shore between Crespo and the old city lie the neighborhoods of Marbella and El Cabrero.\nDowntown.\nThe Downtown area of Cartagena has varied architecture, mainly a colonial style, but republican and Italian style buildings, such as the cathedral's bell tower, can be seen.\nThe main entrance to downtown is the \"Puerta del Reloj\" (Clock Gate), which exits onto the \"Plaza de los Coches\" (Square of the Carriages). A few steps farther is the \"Plaza de la Aduana\" (Customs Square), next to the mayor's office. Nearby is San Pedro Claver Square and the church also named for Saint Peter Claver, where the body of the Jesuit saint ('Saint of the African slaves') is kept in a casket, as well as the Museum of Modern Art.\nNearby is the Plaza de Bol\u00edvar (Bol\u00edvar's Square) and the Palace of Inquisition. Plaza de Bol\u00edvar (formerly known as Plaza de La Inquisicion) is essentially a small park with a statue of Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar in the center. This plaza is surrounded by balconied colonial buildings. Shaded outdoor cafes line the street.\nThe Office of Historical Archives devoted to Cartagena's history is not far away. Next to the archives is the Government Palace, the office building of the Governor of the Department of Bolivar. Across from the palace is the Cathedral of Cartagena, which dates back to the 16th century.\nAnother religious building of significance is the Iglesia de Santo Domingo in front of Plaza Santo Domingo (Santo Domingo Square). In the square is the sculpture \"Mujer Reclinada\" (\"Reclining Woman\"), a gift from the notable Colombian artist Fernando Botero. Nearby is the Tcherassi Hotel, a 250-year-old colonial mansion renovated by designer Silvia Tcherassi.\nIn the city is the Augustinian Fathers Convent and the University of Cartagena. This university is a center of higher education opened to the public in the late 19th century. The \"Claustro de Santa Teresa\" (Saint Theresa Cloister), which has been remodeled and has become a hotel operated by Charleston Hotels. It has its own square, protected by the San Francisco Bastion.\nA 20-minute walk from downtown is the Castillo de San Felipe de Barajas, located in el Pie de la Popa (another neighborhood), one of the greatest fortresses built by the Spaniards in their colonies. The tunnels were all constructed in such a way as to make it possible to hear footsteps of an approaching enemy. Some of the tunnels are open for viewing today.\nCartagena's walled Old City is known in part for its lush plazas, and sherbet-hued Spanish colonial buildings.\nSan Diego.\nSan Diego was named after the local San Diego Convent, now known as the Beaux Arts University Building. In front of it is the Convent of the Nuns of the Order of Saint Clare, now the Hotel Santa Clara. In the surrounding area is Santo Toribio Church, the last church built in the Walled City. Next to it is Fern\u00e1ndez de Madrid Square, honoring Cartagena's hero, Jos\u00e9 Fern\u00e1ndez de Madrid, whose statue can be seen nearby.\nInside the Old City is found Las B\u00f3vedas (The Vaults), a construction attached to the walls of the Santa Catalina Fortress. From the top of this construction the Caribbean Sea is visible.\nGetseman\u00ed.\nOnce a district characterized by crime, Getseman\u00ed, just south of the ancient walled fortress, has become \"Cartagena's hippest neighborhood and one of Latin America's newest hotspots\", with plazas that were once the scene of drug dealing being reclaimed and old buildings being turned into boutique hotels.\nGetseman\u00ed has become a \"Ciudad Mural\" to rescue the values, customs, traditions and anecdotes of the people.https://\nBocagrande.\nThe Bocagrande (Big Mouth) is an area known for its skyscrapers. The area contains the bulk of the city's tourist facilities, such as hotels, shops, restaurants, nightclubs and art galleries. It is located between Cartagena Bay to the east and the Caribbean Sea to the west, and includes the two neighborhoods of El Laguito (The Little Lake) and Castillogrande (Big Castle). Bocagrande has long beaches and much commercial activity is found along Avenida San Mart\u00edn (Saint Martin Avenue).\nThe beaches of Bocagrande, lying along the northern shore, are made of volcanic sand, which is slightly grayish in color. This makes the water appear muddy, though it is not. There are breakwaters about every .\nOn the bay side of the peninsula of Bocagrande is a seawalk. In the center of the bay is a statue of the Virgin Mary. The Naval Base is also located in Bocagrande, looking at the Bay.\nClimate.\nCartagena features a tropical wet and dry climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Aw\"). Humidity averages around 80%, with the rainy season typically lasting in May\u2013November. The climate tends to be hot and windy.\nThe Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is one of the coastal ocean factors having a bearing on the regional climate.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEthnic composition.\nAccording to the figures presented by DANE from the 2005 census, the ethnographic composition of the city is:\nEconomy.\nThe main economic activities in Cartagena are industry, tourism, and commerce. The port of Cartagena is one of the largest of South America.\nIndustry.\nOther prominent companies include Cementos Argos, Miss Colombia, Kola Rom\u00e1n, Indufrial, Amazon Pepper, Vikings SA, Distribuidora Ltda Refrigeration, Central Ingenio Colombia, Perfumery Lemaitre, Cartagena Refinery Cellux Colombiana SA, Flour Three Castles, Polyban International SA, SABMiller, Dow Chemical, Cemex, Dole, and Abocol..\nMiss Colombia.\nIn 1934, Miss Colombia was founded in Cartagena de Indias. Known as \"Concurso Nacional de Belleza de Colombia\" (National Beauty Contest of Colombia), it is a national beauty pageant in Colombia. The winner, \"Se\u00f1orita Colombia\", is sent to Miss Supranational and the first runner-up, \"Se\u00f1orita Colombia Internacional\" or \"Virreina\", to Miss International.\nThere is also a local beauty contest held with many of the city's neighbourhoods nominating young women to be named Miss Independence.\nFree zones.\nFree zones are areas within the local territory which enjoy special customs and tax rules. They are intended to promote the industrialization of goods and provision of services aimed primarily at foreign markets and also the domestic market.\nTourism.\nTourism is a mainstay of the economy. The following are tourist sites that are within the walled city of Cartagena:\nThe city has a budding hotel industry with small boutique hotels being primarily concentrated in the Walled City and larger hotels in the beach front neighborhood of Bocagrande. The area of Getseman\u00ed just outside the wall is also a popular place for small hotels and hostels.\nThe following are tourist sites that are outside the city of Cartagena:\nInfrastructure.\nIn terms of both passenger and freight transport, at domestic and international level, combining air and water transport, Cartagena of Indias is globally-known as the Hub of the Caribbean due to its strategic geographical position in the Americas, linked to its major economical importance (mainly tourism services and shipyard industry).\nTransport.\nAs the commercial and touristic hub of the country, the city has many transportation facilities, particularly in the seaport, air, and fluvial areas.\nBuses.\nIn 2003, the city started building Transcaribe, a mass transit system. In 2015 the system began operating in the city. Taxis are also a prevalent form of public transportation and there is a bus terminal connecting the city to other cities along the coast and in Colombia.\nCartagena has problems of traffic congestion.\nRail.\nA commuter train connecting Cartagena de Indias with other cities in the Colombian Caribbean coast is under planning, plus an Atlantic-Pacific inter-oceanic rail connection as an alternative to the Panama Channel.\nRoads.\nThe city is linked to the northern part of the Caribbean Region through roads 90 and 90A, more commonly called Central Caribbean Road. This road passes through Barranquilla, Santa Marta and Riohacha ending in Paraguach\u00f3n, Venezuela and continues with Venezuelan numeration all the way to Caracas. Taxis in the city perimeter do not have fare meters.\nThe following roads are in the southeast portion of the city:\nRoad 25: Going through Turbaco and Arjona, and through the Montes de Mar\u00eda when a fork divides it continuing to Sincelejo as National 25 and finally ending in Medell\u00edn, and to the east to Valledupar as number 80.\nRoad 25 A: Going also to Sincelejo, but avoiding the mountains, connects with Road 25 in the forementioned city.\nAir.\nThe Rafael N\u00fa\u00f1ez International Airport is the busiest airport in Colombia's Caribbean region and the fourth in passenger traffic in the country. The code of the airport is CTG, having flights to almost all airports in Colombia including Bogota's El Dorado International Airport. Excessive operational costs and easier connection travel and better prices had led to the shifting of the Rafael N\u00fa\u00f1ez's international connection passengers away from Bogota to the nearer Tocumen International Airport in Panama and Queen Beatrix International Airport in Aruba. Also, more companies prefer to serve the Colombian market from Cartagena, due to better geographical and atmospheric conditions.\nSea.\nCartagena is the most important port of Colombia in the Caribbean.\nThe open ports of the city are:\nPrivate ports of the city:\nRiver.\nSince the 17th century the bay has been connected to the Magdalena River by the Dique Canal, built by Governor Pedro Zapata de Mendoza. After Colombian independence, the canal was abandoned. Increasing centralization left the city without resources to maintain it. The last important maintenance work was done in the 1950s during Laureano G\u00f3mez's administration. Some improvements were made by local authorities in the 1980s. This was discontinued because of legal objections from the central government that decreed that the \"maintenance\" of the canal did not fall under the jurisdiction of the local government. From then on, maintenance of the canal has been delayed, though it is still functional.\nCartagenian political leaders have argued that this state of affairs might change with a return to pre-independence funding and tax system. Under such systems the canal would be maintained properly and even expanded, benefiting the national economy.\nWaste disposal.\nCartagena is one of the few cities in the world with a marine outfall, inaugurated in 2013, whose -long underwater section is the third longest in the world.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nInternational schools include:\nLibraries.\nThe city has many public and private libraries:\nDivided in buildings across the city being assigned to the Faculties it serves accordingly each area. The main building is in C. de la Universidad 64 and the second biggest section is located in Av. Jose Vicente Mogoll\u00f3n 2839.\nCulture.\nTheaters and concert halls.\nThe first carnivals and western theaters that served in New Granada operated on, what is today, Calle del Coliseo. This was an activity patronized by the Viceroy Manuel de Guirior and Antonio Caballero y G\u00f3ngora, who, like their predecessors, spent most of the time of their mandates ruling in Cartagena.\nSport.\nBaseball is the most popular sport in Cartagena, Tigres de Cartagena represent the city in the Colombian Professional Baseball League, playing at Estadio Once de Noviembre. Other historical baseball teams that once represented Cartagena include Indios, \u00c1guilas, and Torices.\nThe main football club in the city is Real Cartagena.\nIn August 2024, Cartagena co-hosted the 2024 U-15 Baseball World Cup with Barranquilla.\nWorld Heritage site.\nThe port, the fortresses and the group of monuments of Cartagena were selected in 1984 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) as significant to the heritage of the world, having the most extensive fortifications in South America. They are significant, too, for being located in a bay that is part of the Caribbean Sea. A system of zones divides the city into three neighborhoods: San Sebastian and Santa Catalina with the cathedral and many palaces where the wealthy lived and the main government buildings functioned; San Diego or Santo Toribio, where merchants and the middle class lived; and Getsemani, the suburban popular quarters.\nMedia appearances.\nMusic.\nChampeta is a musical genre whose main variants are rooted in Cartagena and Barranquilla.\nExternal links.\n |wikt=no |commonscat=Cartagena, Colombia |n=no |q=no |s=no |author=no |b=no |v=no\n |voy=Cartagena_(Colombia)\n | Center = \"Cartagena\"\n | North = Caribbean Sea, Bocacanoa\n | Northeast = Bayunca, Clemencia\n | East = Villanueva, Bol\u00edvar, San Estanislao\n | Southeast = Turbaco, Arjona\n | South = Tierra Bomba Island, Portonao.\n | Southwest = Caribbean Sea\n | West = Caribbean Sea\n | Northwest = Caribbean Sea"}
{"id": "63928", "revid": "24382878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63928", "title": "Mohicans", "text": "Eastern Algonquian Native American tribe\nThe Mohicans or Mahicans ( or ) are an Eastern Algonquian Native American tribe that historically spoke an Algonquian language. As part of the Eastern Algonquian family of tribes, they are related to the neighboring Lenape, whose indigenous territory was to the south as far as the Atlantic coast. The Mohicans lived in the upper tidal Hudson River Valley, including the confluence of the Mohawk River (where present-day Albany, New York, developed) and into western New England centered on the upper Housatonic River watershed. After 1680, due to conflicts with the powerful Mohawk to the west during the Beaver Wars, many were driven southeastward across the present-day Massachusetts western border and the Taconic Mountains to Berkshire County around Stockbridge, Massachusetts.\nThey combined with Lenape Native Americans (a branch known as the Munsee) in Stockbridge, MA, and later the people moved west away from pressure of European invasion. They settled in what became Shawano County, Wisconsin. Most eastern Native American populations were forced to reservations in Indian Territory during the 1830s, and other reservations in the American West later. Decades later the United States government organized the Stockbridge-Munsee Community with registered members of the Munsee people and a reservation, which was originally the land of the Menominee Nation.\nFollowing the disruption of the American Revolutionary War, most of the Mohican descendants first migrated westward to join the Iroquois Oneida on their reservation in central New York. The Oneida gave them about 22,000 acres for their use. After more than two decades, in the 1820s and 1830s, the Oneida and the Stockbridge moved again, pressured to sell their lands and relocate to northeastern Wisconsin under the federal Indian Removal Act. A group of Mohican also migrated to Ontario, Canada to live with the predominately Iroquois Six Nations of the Grand River reserve.\nThe tribe identified by the place where they lived: (or \"people of the continually flowing waters\"). According to Daniel G. Brinton and James Hammond Trumbull \"two well-known authorities on Mohican history\", the word refers to a body of water that flows in both directions, being tidal to most of its Mohican range, so they named the Hudson River , or the river with waters that are never still. Therefore, they, along with other tribes living along the Hudson River, such as the \"Munsee\" to their west, known by the dialect of Lenape that they spoke, and \"Wappinger\" to the south, were called \"the River Indians\" by the Dutch and English. \nThe Dutch heard and transliterated the term for the people of the area in their own language, variously as: \"Mahigan\", \"Mahinganak\", \"Maikan\", among other variants, which the English later expressed as \"Mohican\", in a transliteration to their own spelling system. The French, adopting names used by their Indian allies in Canada, knew the Mohican as the (or wolves). They referred to the Iroquois Confederacy as the \"Snake People\" (as they were called by some competitors, or \"Five Nations\", representing their original tribes). Like the Munsee and Wappinger peoples, the Mohican were Algonquian-speaking, part of a large language family related also to the Lenape people, who occupied coastal areas from western Long Island to the Delaware River valley to the south.\nIn the late twentieth century, the Mohican joined other former New York tribes, including the Oneida and some other Iroquois nations, in filing land claims against New York for what were considered unconstitutional purchases of their lands after the Revolutionary War. Only the federal government had constitutional authority to deal with the Indian nations. In 2010, outgoing governor David Paterson announced a land exchange with the Stockbridge-Munsee that would enable them to build a large casino on in Sullivan County in the Catskills, as a settlement in exchange for dropping their larger claim in Madison County. The deal had many opponents.\nTerritory.\nIn their own language, the Mohican identified collectively as the , \"people of the waters that are never still\".\nAt the time of their first contact with Europeans traders along the river in the 1590s, the Mohican were living in and around the Hudson River (or ). After 1609, at the time of the Dutch settlement of New Netherland, they also ranged along the eastern Mohawk River and the Hoosic River, and south along the Hudson to the Roeliff Jansen Kill, where they bordered on the Wappinger people. This nation inhabited the river area and its interior southward to today's New York City.\nMost of the Mohican communities lay along the upper tidal reaches of the Hudson River and along the watersheds of Kinderhook-Claverack-Taghkanic Creek, the Roeliff Jansen Kill, Catskil Creek, and adjacent areas of the Housatonic watershed. Mohican territory reached along Hudson River watersheds northeastward to Wood Creek just south of Lake Champlain.\nCulture.\nThe Mohican villages were governed by hereditary sachems advised by a council of clan elders. They had a matrilineal kinship system, with property and inheritance (including such hereditary offices) passed through the maternal line. Moravian missionary John Heckewelder and early anthropologist Lewis H. Morgan both learned from Mohican informants that their matrilineal society was divided into three phratries (Turkey, Turtle, and Wolf). These were divided into clans or subclans, including a potentially prominent Bear Clan. This finding is supported by the evidence of Mohican signatures on treaties and land deeds (see the works of Shirley Dunn).\nA general council of sachems met regularly at Scodac (east of present-day Albany) to decide important matters affecting the entire confederacy. In his history of the Indians of the Hudson River, Edward Manning Ruttenber described the clans of the Mohican as the Bear, the Turkey, the Turtle, and the Wolf. Each had a role in the lives of the people, and the Wolf served as warriors in the north to defend against the Mohawk, the easternmost of the Five Nations of the Iroquois.\nLike the Munsee-speaking communities to their south, Mohican villages followed a dispersed settlement pattern, with each community likely dominated by a single lineage or clan. The villages usually consisted of a small cluster of small and mid-sized longhouses, and were located along floodplains. During times of war, they built fortifications in defensive locations (such as along ridges) as places of retreat. Their cornfields were located near their communities; the women also cultivated varieties of squash, beans, sunflowers, and other crops from the Eastern Agricultural Complex. Horticulture and the gathering and processing of nuts (hickory, butternuts, black walnuts and acorns), fruits (blueberries, raspberries, juneberries among many others), and roots (groundnuts, wood lilies, arrowroot among others) provided much of their diet. This was supplemented by the men hunting game (turkeys, deer, elk, bears, and moose in the Taconics) and fishing (sturgeon, alewives, shad, eels, lamprey and striped bass).\nLanguage.\nThe formally extinct Mohican language belonged to the Eastern Algonquian branch of the Algonquian language family.\nHistory.\nMohican Confederacy.\nThe Mohican were a confederacy of five tribes and as many as forty villages.\nConflict with the Mohawk.\nThe Algonquians (Mohican) and Iroquois (Mohawk) were traditional competitors and enemies. Iroquois oral tradition, as recorded in the \"Jesuit Relations\", speaks of a war between the Mohawks and an alliance of the Susquehannock and Algonquin (sometime between 1580 and 1600). This was perhaps in response to the formation of the League of the Iroquois.\nIn September 1609 Henry Hudson encountered Mohican villages just below present day Albany, with whom he traded goods for furs. Hudson returned to Holland with a cargo of valuable furs which immediately attracted Dutch merchants to the area. The first Dutch fur traders arrived on the Hudson River the following year to trade with the Mohicans. Besides exposing them to European epidemics, the fur trade destabilized the region.\nIn 1614, the Dutch decided to establish a permanent trading post on Castle Island, on the site of a previous French post that had been long abandoned; but first they had to arrange a truce to end fighting which had broken out between the Mohicans and Mohawks. Fighting broke out again between the Mohicans and Mohawks in 1617, and with Fort Nassau badly damaged by a freshet, the Dutch abandoned the fort. In 1618, having once again negotiated a truce, the Dutch rebuilt Fort Nassau on higher ground. Late that year, Fort Nassau was destroyed by flooding and abandoned for good. In 1624, Captain Cornelius Jacobsen May sailed the upriver and landed eighteen families of Walloons on a plain opposite Castle Island. They commenced to construct Fort Orange.\nThe Mohicans invited the Algonquin and Montagnais to bring their furs to Fort Orange as an alternative to French traders in Quebec. Seeing the Mohicans extend their control over the fur trade, the Mohawk attacked, with initial success. In 1625 or 1626 the Mohicans destroyed the easternmost Iroquois \"castle\". The Mohawks then re-located south of the Mohawk River, closer to Fort Orange. In July 1626 many of the settlers moved to New Amsterdam because of the conflict. The Mohicans requested help from the Dutch and Commander Daniel Van Krieckebeek set out from the fort with six soldiers. Van Krieckebeek, three soldiers, and twenty-four Mohicans were killed when their party was ambushed by the Mohawk about a mile from the fort. The Mohawks withdrew with some body parts of those slain for later consumption as a demonstration of supremacy.\nWar continued to rage between the Mohicans and Mohawks throughout the area from Skahn\u00e9htati (Schenectady) to Kinderhoek (Kinderhook). By 1629, the Mohawks had taken over territories on the west bank of the Hudson River that were formerly held by the Mohicans. The conflict caused most of the Mohicans to migrate eastward across the Hudson River into western Massachusetts and Connecticut. The Mohawks gained a near-monopoly in the fur trade with the Dutch by prohibiting the nearby Algonquian-speaking tribes to the north or east from trading.\nStockbridge.\nMany Mohicans settled in the town of Stockbridge, Massachusetts, where they gradually became known as the \"Stockbridge Indians\". , one of their chiefs, accompanied three Mohawk chiefs on a state visit to Queen Anne and her government in England in 1710. They were popularly referred to as the Four Mohawk Kings.\nThe Stockbridge Indians allowed Protestant missionaries, including Jonathan Edwards, to live among them. In the 18th century, many converted to Christianity, while keeping certain traditions of their own. They fought on the side of the British colonists in the French and Indian War (also known as the Seven Years' War). During the American Revolution, they sided with the colonists.\nIn the eighteenth century, some of the Mohicans developed strong ties with missionaries of the Moravian Church from Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, who founded a mission at their village of in Dutchess County, New York. Henry Rauch reached out to two Mohican leaders, , also known as ; and , who took him back to Shekomeko. They named him the new religious teacher. Over time, Rauch won listeners, as the Mohicans had suffered much from disease and warfare, which had disrupted their society. Early in 1742, Shabash and two other Mohicans accompanied Rauch to Bethlehem, where he was to be ordained as a deacon. The three Mohicans were baptized on 11 February 1742 in John de Turk's barn nearby at Oley, Pennsylvania. Shabash was the first Mohican of Shekomeko to adopt the Christian religion. The Moravians built a chapel for the Mohican people in 1743. They defended the Mohican against European colonists' exploitation, trying to protect them against land encroachment and abuses of liquor.\nOn a 1738 visit to New York, the Mohicans spoke to Governor Lewis Morris concerning the sale of their land near Shekomeko. The Governor promised they would be paid as soon as the lands were surveyed. He suggested that for their own security, they should mark off their square mile of land they wished to keep, which the Mohicans never did. In September 1743, still under the Acting-Governor George Clarke the land was finally surveyed by New York Assembly agents and divided into lots, a row of which ran through the Indians' reserved land. With some help from the missionaries, on 17 October 1743 and already under the new Royal Governor George Clinton, Shabash put together a petition of names of people who could attest that the land in which one of the lots was running through was theirs. Despite Shabash's appeals, his persistence, and the missionaries' help, the Mohicans lost the case. The lots were eventually bought up by European-American colonists and the Mohicans were forced out of Shekomeko. Some who opposed the missionaries' work accused them of being secret Catholic Jesuits (who had been outlawed from the colony in 1700) and of working with the Mohicans on the side of the French. The missionaries were summoned more than once before colonial government, but also had supporters. In the late 1740s the colonial government at Poughkeepsie expelled the missionaries from New York, in part because of their advocacy of Mohican rights. European colonists soon took over the Mohican land.\nRevolutionary War.\nIn August 1775, the Six Nations staged a council fire near Albany, after news of Bunker Hill had made war seem imminent. After much debate, they decided that such a war was a private affair between the British and the colonists (known as Rebels, Revolutionaries, Congress-Men, American Whigs, or Patriots), and that they should stay out of it. Mohawk Chief Joseph Brant feared that the Indians would lose their lands if the Colonists achieved independence. Sir William Johnson, his son John Johnson and son-in-law Guy Johnson and Brant used all their influence to engage the Iroquois to fight for the British cause. The Mohawk, Onondaga, Cayuga, and Seneca ultimately became allies and provided warriors for the battles in the New York area. The Oneida and Tuscarora sided with the Colonists. The Mohicans, who as Algonquians were not part of the Iroquois Confederacy, sided with the Patriots, serving at the Siege of Boston, and the battles of Saratoga and Monmouth.\nIn 1778 they lost forty warriors of their Stockbridge Militia, around half \"Stockbridge Indians\" who were remnants of both Mohican and Wappinger tribes, in a British attack on the land of the van Cortlandt family. (In 1888, the property became Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx, New York.) The Battle of Kingsbridge decimated the troop's ranks. It received a commendation from George Washington, was paid $1,000 and dismissed.\nMove to Oneida, New York.\nAfter the Revolution the citizens of the new United States forced many Native Americans off their land and westward. In the 1780s, groups of Stockbridge Indians, today regarded as Stockbridge Munsee, moved from Massachusetts to a new location among the Oneida people in central New York, who had been granted a reservation for their service to the Patriots, out of their former territory of . They called their settlement New Stockbridge. Some individuals and families, mostly people who were old or those with special ties to the area, remained behind at Stockbridge.\nThe central figures of Mohican society, including the chief sachem, Joseph Quanaukaunt, and his counselors and relatives, were part of the move to New Stockbridge. At the new town, the Stockbridge emigrants controlled their own affairs and combined traditional ways with the new as they chose. After learning from the Christian missionaries, the Stockbridge Indians were experienced in English ways. At New Stockbridge they replicated their former town. While continuing as Christians, they retained their language and Mohican cultural traditions. In general, their evolving Mohican identity was still rooted in traditions of the past.\nRemoval to Wisconsin.\nIn the 1820s and 1830s, most of the Stockbridge Indians moved to Shawano County, Wisconsin, where they were promised land by the US government under the policy of Indian removal. In Wisconsin, they settled on reservations with the Lenape (called Munsee after one of their major dialects), who were also speakers of one of the Algonquian languages. Together, the two formed a band and are federally recognized as the Stockbridge-Munsee Community.\nTheir 22,000-acre reservation is known as that of the Stockbridge-Munsee Band of Mohican Indians and is located near the town of Bowler. Since the late twentieth century, they have developed the North Star Mohican Resort and Casino on their reservation, which has successfully generated funds for tribal welfare and economic development.\nLand claims.\nIn the late twentieth century, the Stockbridge-Munsee were among tribes filing land claims against New York, which had been ruled to have unconstitutionally acquired land from Indians without Senate ratification. The Stockbridge-Munsee filed a land claim against New York state for in Madison County, the location of its former property. In 2011, outgoing governor David Paterson announced having reached a deal with the tribe. They would be given nearly in Madison County and give up their larger claim in exchange for the state's giving them 330 acres of land in Sullivan County in the Catskill Mountains, where the government was trying to encourage economic development. The federal government had agreed to take the land in trust, making it eligible for development as a gaming casino, and the state would allow gaming, an increasingly important source of revenue for American Indians. Race track and casinos, private interests and other tribes opposed the deal.\nIn 2011, the Stockbridge-Munsee Community Band of the Mohican Indians regained ownership 156 acres along the Hudson River, a tract known as Papscanee Island Nature Preserve near East Greenbush and Schodack. The land was donated to descendants of its indigenous inhabitants by the Open Space Initiative. Prior to colonization, the island was used for ceremonies by the Mohicans before it was acquired by Dutch merchant Kiliaen Van Rensselaer in 1637. The property is managed by Rensselaer County and the Rensselaer Land Trust for public access and protection, while owned by the Mohicans.\nRepresentation in media.\nJames Fenimore Cooper based his novel, \"The Last of the Mohicans\", on the Mohican tribe. His description includes some cultural aspects of the Mohegan, a different Algonquian tribe that lived in eastern Connecticut. Cooper set his novel in the Hudson Valley, Mohican land, but used some Mohegan names for his characters, such as Uncas.\nThe novel has been adapted for the cinema more than a dozen times, the first time in 1920. Michael Mann directed a 1992 adaptation, which starred Daniel Day-Lewis as a White man adopted and raised by the Mohican.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63940", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63940", "title": "Hudsons Bay Company", "text": ""}
{"id": "63941", "revid": "49151221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63941", "title": "Session key", "text": "A session key is a single-use symmetric key used for encrypting all messages in one communication session. A closely related term is content encryption key (CEK), traffic encryption key (TEK), or multicast key which refers to any key used for encrypting messages, contrary to other uses like encrypting other keys (key encryption key (KEK) or key encryption has been made public key).\nSession keys can introduce complications into a system, yet they solve some real problems. There are two primary reasons to use session keys:\nLike all cryptographic keys, session keys must be chosen so that they cannot be predicted by an attacker, usually requiring them to be chosen randomly. Failure to choose session keys (or any key) properly is a major (and too common in actual practice) design flaw in any crypto system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63942", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63942", "title": "Biosafety level", "text": "Set of biocontainment precautions\nA biosafety level (BSL), or pathogen/protection level, is a set of biocontainment precautions required to isolate dangerous biological agents in an enclosed laboratory facility. The levels of containment range from the lowest biosafety level 1 (BSL-1) to the highest at level 4 (BSL-4). In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have specified these levels in a publication referred to as \"Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories\" (BMBL). In the European Union (EU), the same biosafety levels are defined in a directive. In Canada the four levels are known as Containment Levels. Facilities with these designations are also sometimes given as P1 through P4 (for pathogen or protection level), as in the term \"P3 laboratory\".\nAt the lowest level of biosafety, precautions may consist of regular hand-washing and minimal protective equipment. At higher biosafety levels, precautions may include airflow systems, multiple containment rooms, sealed containers, positive pressure personnel suits, established protocols for all procedures, extensive personnel training, and high levels of security to control access to the facility. Health Canada reports that world-wide until 1999 there were recorded over 5,000 cases of accidental laboratory infections and 190 deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe first prototype Class III (maximum containment) biosafety cabinet was fashioned in 1943 by Hubert Kaempf Jr., then a U.S. Army soldier, under the direction of Arnold G. Wedum, Director (1944\u20131969) of Industrial Health and Safety at the United States Army Biological Warfare Laboratories, Camp Detrick, Maryland. Kaempf was tired of his MP duties at Detrick and was able to transfer to the sheet metal department working with the contractor, the H.K. Ferguson Co.\nOn 18 April 1955, fourteen representatives met at Camp Detrick in Frederick, Maryland. The meeting was to share knowledge and experiences regarding biosafety, chemical, radiological, and industrial safety issues that were common to the operations at the three principal biological warfare (BW) laboratories of the U.S. Army. Because of the potential implication of the work conducted at biological warfare laboratories, the conferences were restricted to top level security clearances. Beginning in 1957, these conferences were planned to include non-classified sessions as well as classified sessions to enable broader sharing of biological safety information. It was not until 1964, however, that conferences were held in a government installation not associated with a biological warfare program.\nOver the next ten years, the biological safety conferences grew to include representatives from all federal agencies that sponsored or conducted research with pathogenic microorganisms. By 1966, it began to include representatives from universities, private laboratories, hospitals, and industrial complexes. Throughout the 1970s, participation in the conferences continued to expand and by 1983 discussions began regarding the creation of a formal organization. The American Biological Safety Association (ABSA) was officially established in 1984 and a constitution and bylaws were drafted the same year. As of 2008, ABSA includes some 1,600 members in its professional association.\nIn 1977, Jim Peacock of the Australian Academy of Science asked Bill Snowdon, then chief of the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory (AAHL) if he could have the newly released United States' National Institutes of Health and the British equivalent requirements for the development of infrastructure for bio-containment reviewed by AAHL personnel with a view to recommending the adoption of one of them by Australian authorities. The review was carried out by CSIRO AAHL Project Manager Bill Curnow and CSIRO Engineer Arthur Jenkins. They drafted outcomes for each of the levels of security. AAHL was notionally classified as \"substantially beyond P4\". These were adopted by the Australian Academy of Science and became the basis for Australian legislation. It opened in 1985 costing AU$185\u00a0million, built on Corio Oval. The Australian Animal Health Laboratory is a Class 4/ P4 Laboratory.\nIn 2003, the Chinese Academy of Sciences approved the construction of mainland China's first BSL-4 laboratory at the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV). In 2014, the WIV's National Bio-safety Laboratory was built at a cost of 300 million yuan (US$44\u00a0million), in collaboration and with assistance from the French government's CIRI lab.\nIn 2007 a scientific review paper stated that the Canadian Science Centre for Human and Animal Health, which was designed in the early 1990s, \"has become the prototype for modern BSL4 laboratories\".\nStarting with the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic near the facilities of the WIV, work in biocontainment facilities has been politicized, especially in the US Senate for example as the result of Rand Paul's work. Russia asked questions on 25 October 2022 in the United Nations over the presence in Ukraine of biolabs. In April 2023, Sudan's descent into civil war caused worries at the World Health Organization over its National Public Laboratory as contending factions battled over its area and NPL staff were kicked out in favor of installing a military base at its premises. At the time, the facility contained organisms rated at BSL-2.\nLevels.\nBiosafety level 1.\nBiosafety level 1 (BSL-1) is suitable for work with well-characterized agents which do not cause disease in healthy humans. In general, these agents should pose minimal potential hazard to laboratory personnel and the environment. At this level, precautions are limited relative to other levels. Laboratory personnel must wash their hands upon entering and exiting the lab. Research with these agents may be performed on standard open laboratory benches without the use of special containment equipment. However, eating and drinking are generally prohibited in laboratory areas. Potentially infectious material must be decontaminated before disposal, either by adding a chemical such as bleach or isopropanol or by packaging for decontamination elsewhere. Personal protective equipment is only required for circumstances where personnel might be exposed to hazardous material. BSL-1 laboratories must have a door which can be closed to limit access to the lab. However, it is not necessary for BSL-1 labs to be isolated from the general building.\nThis level of biosafety is appropriate for work with several kinds of microorganisms including non-pathogenic strains of \"Escherichia coli\" and \"Staphylococcus\", \"Bacillus subtilis\", \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" and other organisms not suspected to contribute to human disease. Due to the relative ease and safety of maintaining a BSL-1 laboratory, these are the types of laboratories generally used as teaching spaces for high schools and colleges.\nBiosafety level 2.\nAt this level, all precautions used at Biosafety level 1 are followed, and some additional precautions are taken. BSL-2 differs from BSL-1 in that:\nBiosafety level 2 is suitable for work involving agents of moderate potential hazard to personnel and the environment. This includes various microbes that cause mild disease to humans, or are difficult to contract via aerosol in a lab setting. Examples of pathogens classified as \"Risk Group 2\" in the United States include seasonal influenza, SARS-CoV-2, hepatitis A, B, and C viruses, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), pathogenic strains of \"Escherichia coli\" and \"Staphylococcus\", \"Salmonella\", \"Plasmodium falciparum\", and \"Toxoplasma gondii\". Notably, the European Union departs from the United States and classifies HIV and hepatitis B \u2013 G as Risk Group 3 agents best handled at BSL-3.\nPrions, the infectious agents that transmit prion diseases such as vCJD, are typically handled under Biosafety Level 2 or higher. This is due to the lack of any evidence of aerosol transmission and relatively higher infective dose of prion diseases, though some circumstances (such as handling animal-infective prions in a facility which cares for vulnerable animals) would require BSL-3 conditions.\nBiosafety level 3.\nBiosafety level 3 is appropriate for work involving microbes which can cause serious and potentially lethal disease via the inhalation route. This type of work can be done in clinical, diagnostic, teaching, research, or production facilities. Here, the precautions undertaken in BSL-1 and BSL-2 labs are followed, as well as additional measures including:\nAlso, the facility which houses the BSL-3 lab must have certain features to ensure appropriate containment. The entrance to the lab must be separated from areas of the building with unrestricted traffic flow. Also, the lab must be behind two sets of self-closing doors (to reduce the risk of aerosols escaping). The construction of the lab is such that it can be easily cleaned. Carpets are not permitted, and any seams in the floors, walls, and ceilings are sealed to allow easy cleaning and decontamination. Also, windows must be sealed, and a ventilation system installed which forces air to flow from the \"clean\" areas of the lab to the areas where infectious agents are handled. Air from the lab must be filtered before it can be recirculated.\nA 2015 study by \"USA Today\" journalists, identified more than 200 lab sites in the U.S. that were accredited biosafety levels 3 or 4. The Proceedings of a Workshop on \"Developing Norms for the Provision of Biological Laboratories in Low-Resource Contexts\" provides a list of BSL-3 laboratories in those countries.\nBiosafety level 3 is commonly used for research and diagnostic work involving various microbes which can be transmitted by aerosol and/or cause severe disease. These include \"Francisella tularensis\", \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\", \"Chlamydia psittaci\", Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, Eastern equine encephalitis virus, SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2, MERS-CoV, \"Coxiella burnetii\", Rift Valley fever virus, \"Rickettsia rickettsii\", several species of \"Brucella\", chikungunya, yellow fever virus, West Nile virus, and \"Yersinia pestis\".\nBiosafety level 4.\nBiosafety level 4 (BSL-4) is the highest level of biosafety precautions, and is appropriate for work with agents that could easily be aerosol-transmitted within the laboratory and cause severe to fatal disease in humans for which there are no available vaccines or treatments. BSL-4 labs are generally set up to be either cabinet laboratories or protective-suit laboratories. In cabinet laboratories, all work must be done within a class III biosafety cabinet. Materials leaving the cabinet must be decontaminated by passing through an autoclave or a tank of disinfectant. The cabinets themselves are required to have seamless edges to allow easy cleaning. Also, the cabinet and all materials within must be free of sharp edges to reduce the risk of damage to the gloves. In a protective-suit lab, all work must be done in a class II biosafety cabinet by personnel wearing a positive pressure suit. To exit a BSL-4 lab, personnel must pass through a chemical shower for decontamination, then a room for removing the positive-pressure suit, followed by a personal shower. Entry into the BSL-4 lab is restricted to trained and authorized individuals, and all persons entering and exiting the lab must be recorded.\nAs with BSL-3 laboratories, BSL-4 labs must be separated from areas that receive unrestricted traffic. Also, airflow is tightly controlled to ensure that air always flows from \"clean\" areas of the lab to areas where work with infectious agents is being performed. The entrance to the BSL-4 lab must also employ airlocks to minimize the possibility that aerosols from the lab could be removed from the lab. All laboratory waste, including filtered air, water, and trash must also be decontaminated before it can leave the facility.\nBiosafety level 4 laboratories are used for diagnostic work and research on easily transmitted pathogens which can cause fatal disease. These include a number of viruses known to cause viral hemorrhagic fever such as Marburg virus, Ebola virus, Lassa virus, and Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever. Other pathogens handled at BSL-4 include Hendra virus, Nipah virus, and some flaviviruses. Also, poorly characterized pathogens which appear closely related to dangerous pathogens are often handled at this level until enough data is obtained either to confirm continued work at this level, or to permit working with them at a lower level. This level is also used for work with smallpox virus, though this work is only performed at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, United States, and the State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology in Koltsovo, Russia.\nBSL-4 facilities for extraterrestrial samples.\nSample-return missions that bring samples from a Category V body back to Earth must be curated at facilities rated BSL-4. Because the existing BSL-4 facilities in the world do not provide the level of cleanliness needed for such pristine samples, there is a need to design a facility dedicated to curation of restricted (potentially biohazardous) extraterrestrial materials. The systems of such facilities must be able to contain unknown biohazards, as the size of any putative alien microorganism is unknown. Ideally, it should filter particles down to 10 nanometers, and release of a particle 50 nanometers or larger is unacceptable under any circumstance.\nBecause NASA and ESA are collaborating on the Mars Sample Return campaign, due to return samples from Mars in the early 2030s, the need for a Sample Receiving Facility (SRF) is becoming more pressing. An SRF is expected to take 7 to 10 years from design to completion, and an additional two years is recommended for the staff to become proficient and accustomed to the facilities.\nSafety concerns.\nA North Carolina Mosquito &amp; Vector Control Association (NCMVCA) study highlighted safety concerns. In the United States, laboratories can be funded by federal, state, private, non-profit, or academically. The last accounts for 72% of the funding.\nHigh-containment labs that are registered with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Select Agent Program must adhere to Department of Defense standards. Since BSL3 and 4 laboratories in the United States are regulated by either the CDC or USDA or another federal agency (depending on the pathogens they handle), no single federal agency is responsible for regulating or tracking the number of these labs. U.S. high-containment laboratories that handle pathogens which are declared as \"select agents\" must be inspected periodically by the CDC or USDA, adhere to certain standards, and maintain ongoing education on biosecurity and biosafety policies as mandated by law.\nList of BSL-4 facilities.\nAccording to a U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) report published on 4 October 2007, a total of 1,356 CDC/USDA registered BSL-3 facilities were identified throughout the United States. Approximately 36% of these laboratories are located in academia. 15 BSL-4 facilities were identified in the U.S. in 2007, including nine at federal labs. As of May 2021, there are 42 BSL-4 facilities in operation around the world, with a further 17 planned or under construction.\nThe following is a list of existing BSL-4 facilities worldwide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63943", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63943", "title": "Glorfindel", "text": "Fictional elf in Tolkien's Middle-Earth\nGlorfindel () is a fictional character in J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth legendarium. He is a member of the Noldor, one of the three groups of High Elves. The character and his name, which means \"blond\" or \"golden-haired\", were among the first created for what would become part of his Middle-earth legendarium in 1916\u201317, beginning with the initial draft of \"The Fall of Gondolin\". His name indicates his hair as a mark of his distinction, as the Noldor were generally dark-haired. A character of the same name appears in the first book of \"The Lord of the Rings\", \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", which takes place in Middle-earth's Third Age. Within the story, he is depicted as a powerful Elf-lord who could withstand the Nazg\u00fbl, wraith-like servants of Sauron, and holds his own against some of them single-handedly. Glorfindel and a version of the story of the Fall of Gondolin appear in \"The Silmarillion\", posthumously published in 1977.\nIn later writings, Tolkien explored Glorfindel's backstory in various material relating to the First Age of Middle-earth. He worked out how both characters named Glorfindel could be one and the same, something not evident from the published version of \"The Lord of the Rings\"; the question has been debated by scholars. The incremental changes made to Glorfindel's character, most notably the introduction of the theme of reincarnation, as part of the ongoing development of Tolkien's legendarium have been analysed by scholars.\nIn Peter Jackson's 2001 live-action film \"\", Glorfindel's role of rescuing Frodo from the pursuing Nazg\u00fbl by lending his horse is given to the elf-woman Arwen. He has also featured in various video games.\nDevelopment.\nConception and creation.\nIn \"The Fall of Gondolin\", which details the conquest of the Elven city Gondolin by the Dark Lord Morgoth, Tolkien writes that Glorfindel's name \"meaneth Goldtress for his hair was golden\". It was the first part of \"The Book of Lost Tales\" to be written, circa 1916\u201317, and the story was read aloud by Tolkien to the Exeter College Essay Club in the spring of 1920. \"The Fall of Gondolin\" appears in compressed form in \"The Silmarillion\", where the character is called \"yellow-haired Glorfindel\". According to Tolkien's son, Christopher Tolkien, \"this was from the beginning the meaning of his name\". An Elf of the same name appears in \"The Lord of the Rings\", written many years after the original draft of \"The Fall of Gondolin\": in \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", he appears to assist the hobbit Frodo Baggins in his attempt to escape the servants of the Dark Lord Sauron, Morgoth's successor.\nAs his ideas changed and evolved over the years, Tolkien wrote about Glorfindel's backstory at various times. In the very first draft of the \"Council of Elrond\", which was to become \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", the members of the Fellowship were to be Frodo, Gandalf, Trotter (later Strider/Aragorn), Glorfindel, Durin son of Balin (who became Gimli son of Gl\u00f3in), Sam, Merry and Pippin; Boromir and Legolas did not come in until much later. Early notes for the Council of Elrond state that Glorfindel \"tells of his ancestry in Gondolin\". In the final published version of \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", Legolas is the representative of the Elven people, though the power that Tolkien attributed to Glorfindel remains as he is depicted as being strong enough to stand against the Nazg\u00fbl, and so he is chosen to guide Frodo to safety from them.\nTowards the end of his life, Tolkien would devote his last writings to the issue of Glorfindel and some related topics, as detailed in \"The Peoples of Middle-earth\". Christopher Tolkien stated that his father had not conceived the Glorfindel of \"The Lord of the Rings\" as the same person as the similarly named Elf of Gondolin, but had simply reused the name. The issue lay in Tolkien's original conception of the spirits of dead Elves as being re-embodied in their old bodies after a Purgatory-like period in the Halls of Mandos in Valinor, the home of Tolkien's \"gods\", the Valar and Maiar, where Elves previously lived before (re)migrating to Middle-earth. After being re-embodied, previously dead Elves stay in Valinor permanently.\nTolkien eventually decided that each Elf's name should be unique, and therefore the two Glorfindels should be one and the same. In 1972, he wrote an essay in which he explains how Glorfindel returns to Middle-earth following his death in the First Age. On Glorfindel's status as a Noldor Exile, Tolkien noted that Glorfindel left Valinor reluctantly and is blameless in the Kinslaying, and since his sacrifice in defeating the Balrog was deemed to be \"of vital importance to the designs of the Valar\", he is granted an exemption to the Exiles' ban and purged of any guilt. Once restored and allowed to dwell in Valinor, his spiritual power is greatly enhanced, almost an equal of the Maiar. Tolkien considered having Glorfindel as a companion to Gandalf during the latter's travel to Middle-earth in the Third Age, but changed his mind as breaching the divide between Valinor and the \"Circles of the World\" would make him \"of greater power and importance than seems fitting\". He proposed that Glorfindel is sent back to Middle-earth by the Valar during the Second Age c.\u20091600, when Barad-d\u00fbr was completed and Sauron forged the One Ring, and while N\u00famenor was still friendly with the Elves under Tar-Minastir. In one version he is sent as a predecessor to the Istari (Wizards); in a different version, he arrived in Middle-earth together with the Blue Wizards. At one point he was even considered as a possibility for the identity of one of the Wizards, but Tolkien abandoned the idea since the Elves were not initially conceived as possibilities for the Wizards, and he had come to the conclusion that they were exclusively Maiar.\nBiography.\nThe First Age.\nAccording to \"The Silmarillion\", Glorfindel was born around the time of the Years of the Trees in Valinor. He was part of the host of Turgon, but only followed Turgon because of their kinship. He took no part in the Kinslaying at Alqualond\u00eb, but followed the rest of the Noldor host in their exile. Glorfindel later appears as a noble lord, one of King Turgon's chief lieutenants who oversees his retreat during the Battle of Unnumbered Tears. After fighting in the city's defence, Glorfindel escaped together with Tuor, Idril, E\u00e4rendil and others. The survivors passed through the Encircling Mountains above Gondolin. However, they were ambushed by enemies, including a Balrog. Glorfindel fought the Balrog and succeeded in slaying the monster, but was himself mortally wounded. His body was recovered by the great eagle Thorondor and buried under a stone cairn, where afterward grew yellow flowers. \"The Fall of Gondolin\" relates that \"Glorfindel and the Balrog\" became an in-universe proverb used in Elven culture to describe great skill and courage in battle.\nFollowing his death in the First Age, Glorfindel's spirit passed to the halls of Mandos in Valinor. The Valar eventually sent him back to Middle-Earth on a similar mission to that of the Istari, who appeared several thousand years later.\nThe Third Age.\nIn \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", Glorfindel was sent by Elrond of Rivendell in the direction that the Nazg\u00fbl were most likely to come from, to help the hobbit Frodo reach Rivendell. He set Frodo on his horse, Asfaloth, and has the hobbit riding ahead to the other side of the Ford of Bruinen, where he defies his pursuers. During his confrontation with Nazg\u00fbl at the Bridge of Mitheithel, Glorfindel reveals himself as a mighty Elf-lord terrible in his wrath; Frodo saw him as a shining figure. He is nearly captured, but manages to drive the Nazg\u00fbl into the nearby river with the aid of Strider and Frodo's hobbit companions, where they were swept away by a wave of water resembling charging horses, an enchantment created by Elrond and Gandalf. While enjoying the hospitality of the Elves in Rivendell, Frodo was enchanted by the beauty and stature of Glorfindel and his kinfolk. He sat in honour next to Elrond and Gandalf in the Hall of Fire in Rivendell, and was part of the Council of Elrond which deliberated on their collective response to the discovery of the One Ring. He showed unusual wisdom by voicing caution about sending the Ring to the enigmatic Tom Bombadil, and suggested that the Ring be destroyed and that the Three Rings of the Elves be sacrifice to accomplish this quest.\nGandalf described Glorfindel as \"one of the mighty of the Firstborn\" and \"an Elf-lord of a house of princes.\" When Frodo asks about the protection of Rivendell from Sauron's forces, Gandalf explains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen Elrond seeks to fill the last two spots in the Fellowship to destroy the One Ring with folk of his own house, Gandalf mentioned Glorfindel. He justified the inclusion of Merry Brandybuck and Pippin Took by saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOne of the Appendices usually published with the third volume, \"The Return of the King\", relates that earlier in the Third Age, Glorfindel led the Elvish forces of Rivendell, the Grey Havens, and Lothl\u00f3rien against Angmar in the Battle of Fornost. There he fought alongside E\u00e4rnur, the future king of Gondor, along with the remnants of Gondor's sister kingdom Arnor. When the Witch-king of Angmar, Lord of the Nazg\u00fbl and chief servant of Sauron, rode out to defend his ruling seat at the captured Fornost, his presence frightened E\u00e4rnur's horse and sent the prince flying backwards, and the Witch-king mocked him. Glorfindel confronted the Witch-king, who fled into the night. E\u00e4rnur wished to pursue him, but Glorfindel bade him not to and prophesied the Witch-king would fall in the far future, but not by \"the hand of man\". Many years later, during the War of the Ring, \u00c9owyn (a woman) slays the Witch-king during the Battle of Pelennor Fields, assisted by Meriadoc Brandybuck (a hobbit). Before \u00c9owyn's slaying of the Witch-king, the reference to \"man\" in the prophecy had been interpreted to mean that no human at all would slay him, rather than that no male human would do so.\nAnalysis.\nAlexander Lewis and Elizabeth Currie wrote that Glorfindel was a \"chance reuse of no significance\", and argued that Tolkien \"tied himself, as well as readers and critics, in knots over the question of whether there were one or two characters of the name\". Don Anger speculated that Glorfindel's unequivocal death in \"The Fall of Gondolin\" may have prevented Tolkien from making an explicit connection between this Silmarillion character and the Elf with the same name in the published version of \"The Lord of the Rings\". Anger took the view that Tolkien's idea of a resolved story for the character was only \"possibly realized\" with the complete publication of the 12-volume book series \"The History of Middle-earth\" by 1996. He explained that as much of the background material for Glorfindel was unpublished when \"The Silmarillion\" was posthumously released, various Tolkien compendiums were forced into speculation to sate the curiosity of readers concerning the mystery of the character's death and sudden reappearance in \"The Lord of the Rings\", citing \"The Complete Guide to Middle-earth: from The Hobbit to The Silmarillion\" as an example.\nThe theme of reincarnation and the concept of Elves being divinely empowered is explored in its fullest extent within Tolkien's legendarium through the character Glorfindel. Edmund Wainwright noted that Glorfindel is the best example of a male Elf in \"The Lord of the Rings\" who embodies his people's aspect as semi-divine beings, given his immense power. Verlyn Flieger noted that the concept of Elven incarnation had been considered by the time of the publication of \"The Lord of the Rings\". She suggested that being a devout Catholic, Tolkien initially found the idea to be theologically problematic and biologically difficult; he eventually reached the conclusion that \"it is a biological dictum\" in his imaginary world, and its purpose \"largely literary\".\nThe Tolkien scholar Elizabeth Whittingham cited correspondence from readers, particularly Catholics like Father Murray and Peter Hastings. This raised questions that ultimately prompted changes to the mythology of Middle-earth, as acknowledged by Tolkien and his son Christopher. Whittingham noted that Tolkien sought to make his \"secondary world\" compatible with his \"primary world\", reconsidering his focus on metaphysical and philosophical explorations from the 1950s onwards. His revisions gradually moved the texts of his legendarium into closer alignment with Christianity. She observed that Glorfindel is a notable exception to Tolkien's later stance on abandoning one of his oldest concepts, reincarnation through rebirth, and that he is Tolkien's first attempt of contemplating the portrayal of a reincarnated elf.\nIn \"Tor.com\"'s bi-weekly series on \"Exploring the People of Middle-earth\", Megan Fontenot described Glorfindel's role in \"The Fellowship of the Ring\" as a shaman-like figure, a medium who has direct access to both the spiritual (Valinor) and physical (Middle-earth) worlds, and that his purpose is to protect those who are threatened by the powers of the Shadow. She noted that his previous battle with the Balrog in the First Age essentially serves as an \"initiation\" to a shamanic trial and journey.\nIn other media.\nFilm and stage.\nIn Ralph Bakshi's 1978 animated version, his role and lines from the narrative are given to Legolas. In Peter Jackson's 2001 live-action film \"\", his role is given to Arwen, who takes Frodo to the Ford and summons the floodwaters to disperse the Nazg\u00fbl through an incantation. \nIn the British musical stage adaptation of \"The Lord of the Rings\", which ran from June 2007 to July 2008 at the Theatre Royal Drury Lane in London's West End, the character was reimagined as a dark-haired elf-woman, played by Alma Ferovi\u0107.\nIn the 2015 film \"The Martian\", NASA Director Teddy Sanders asks to be called Glorfindel during the discussion of Project Elrond, a secret meeting about plans to rescue stranded astronaut Mark Watney. The film's writer Drew Goddard claimed that the reference was his proudest moment in the film.\nGames.\nGlorfindel appears as a non-player character in the 2002 video game \". He is voiced by Steve Staley.\nIn the 2006 real-time strategy game, \", Glorfindel's hair is silver-blond as opposed to his trademark golden-blond colour. He is featured on the game's box art, and is one of the playable hero units of the Elvish faction who rides his steed Asfaloth.\nIn the \"Lord of the Rings Online\", Glorfindel appeared as a non-player character.\nThe Games Workshop tabletop strategy battle game adaptation of \"The Lord of the Rings\" features two versions of Glorfindel: In one form, he is fully clad in armour, while the other has Glorfindel clad in robes and riding Asfaloth. \nA version of Glorfindel appears in the \"Lego Lord of the Rings\" video game, where he is available as downloadable content.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63944", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63944", "title": "Key-agreement protocol", "text": "Protocol for agreeing on a cryptographic key\nIn cryptography, a key-agreement protocol is a protocol whereby two (or more) parties generate a cryptographic key as a function of information provided by each honest party so that no party can predetermine the resulting value.\nIn particular, all honest participants influence the outcome. A key-agreement protocol is a specialisation of a key-exchange protocol.\nAt the completion of the protocol, all parties share the same key. A key-agreement protocol precludes undesired third parties from forcing a key choice on the agreeing parties. A secure key agreement can ensure confidentiality and data integrity in communications systems, ranging from simple messaging applications to complex banking transactions.\nSecure agreement is defined relative to a security model, for example the Universal Model. More generally, when evaluating protocols, it is important to state security goals and the security model. For example, it may be required for the session key to be authenticated. A protocol can be evaluated for success only in the context of its goals and attack model. An example of an adversarial model is the Dolev\u2013Yao model. \nIn many key exchange systems, one party generates the key, and sends that key to the other party; the other party has no influence on the key.\nExponential key exchange.\nThe first publicly known public-key agreement protocol that meets the above criteria was the Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange, in which two parties jointly exponentiate a generator with random numbers, in such a way that an eavesdropper cannot feasibly determine what the resultant shared key is.\nExponential key agreement in and of itself does not specify any prior agreement or subsequent authentication between the participants. It has thus been described as an anonymous key agreement protocol.\nSymmetric key agreement.\nSymmetric key agreement (SKA) is a method of key agreement that uses solely symmetric cryptography and cryptographic hash functions as cryptographic primitives. It is related to symmetric authenticated key exchange.\nSKA may assume the use of initial shared secrets or a trusted third party with whom the agreeing parties share a secret is assumed. If no third party is present, then achieving SKA can be trivial: we tautologically assume that two parties that share an initial secret and have achieved SKA. \nSKA contrasts with key-agreement protocols that include techniques from asymmetric cryptography, such as key encapsulation mechanisms. \nThe initial exchange of a shared key must be done in a manner that is private and integrity-assured. Historically, this was achieved by physical means, such as by using a trusted courier. \nAn example of a SKA protocol is the\u202fNeedham\u2013Schroeder protocol. It establishes a\u202fsession key\u202fbetween two parties on the same network, using a server as a trusted third party. \nThe original Needham\u2013Schroeder protocol is vulnerable to a replay attack. Timestamps and nonces are included to fix this attack. It forms the basis for the\u202fKerberos\u202fprotocol.\nTypes of key agreement.\nBoyd et al. classify two-party key agreement protocols according to two criteria as follows:\nThe pre-shared key may be shared between the two parties, or each party may share a key with a trusted third party. If there is no secure channel (as may be established via a pre-shared key), it is impossible to create an authenticated session key.\nThe session key may be generated via: key transport, key agreement and hybrid. If there is no trusted third party, then the cases of key transport and hybrid session key generation are indistinguishable. SKA is concerned with protocols in which the session key is established using only symmetric primitives.\nAuthentication.\nAnonymous key exchange, like Diffie\u2013Hellman, does not provide authentication of the parties, and is thus vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks.\nA wide variety of cryptographic authentication schemes and protocols have been developed to provide authenticated key agreement to prevent man-in-the-middle and related attacks. These methods generally mathematically bind the agreed key to other agreed-upon data, such as the following:\nPublic keys.\nA widely used mechanism for defeating such attacks is the use of digitally signed keys that must be integrity-assured: if Bob's key is signed by a trusted third party vouching for his identity, Alice can have considerable confidence that a signed key she receives is not an attempt to intercept by Eve. When Alice and Bob have a public-key infrastructure, they may digitally sign an agreed Diffie\u2013Hellman key, or exchanged Diffie\u2013Hellman public keys. Such signed keys, sometimes signed by a certificate authority, are one of the primary mechanisms used for secure web traffic (including HTTPS, SSL or TLS protocols). Other specific examples are MQV, YAK and the ISAKMP component of the IPsec protocol suite for securing Internet Protocol communications. However, these systems require care in endorsing the match between identity information and public keys by certificate authorities in order to work properly.\nHybrid systems.\nHybrid systems use public-key cryptography to exchange secret keys, which are then used in a symmetric-key cryptography systems. Most practical applications of cryptography use a combination of cryptographic functions to implement an overall system that provides all of the four desirable features of secure communications (confidentiality, integrity, authentication, and non-repudiation).\nPasswords.\nPassword-authenticated key agreement protocols require the separate establishment of a password (which may be smaller than a key) in a manner that is both private and integrity-assured. These are designed to resist man-in-the-middle and other active attacks on the password and the established keys. For example, DH-EKE, SPEKE, and SRP are password-authenticated variations of Diffie\u2013Hellman.\nOther tricks.\nIf one has an integrity-assured way to verify a shared key over a public channel, one may engage in a Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange to derive a short-term shared key, and then subsequently authenticate that the keys match. One way is to use a voice-authenticated read-out of the key, as in PGPfone. Voice authentication, however, presumes that it is infeasible for a man-in-the-middle to spoof one participant's voice to the other in real-time, which may be an undesirable assumption. Such protocols may be designed to work with even a small public value, such as a password. Variations on this theme have been proposed for Bluetooth pairing protocols.\nIn an attempt to avoid using any additional out-of-band authentication factors, Davies and Price proposed the use of the interlock protocol of Ron Rivest and Adi Shamir, which has been subject to both attack and subsequent refinement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63946", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63946", "title": "Falkner Island", "text": "Island in the United States of America\nFalkner Island (also called Faulkner's Island) is a crescent-shaped island located in Long Island Sound 3 miles (5\u00a0km) off Guilford, Connecticut, United States. The island has been visited by the Native Americans for thousands of years. Its Quinnipiac name is \"Massancummock\", meaning \"the place of the great fish hawks\". In 1641, Henry Whitfield and the founders of Guilford purchased the island from the Mohegan tribe's sachem, Uncas, as part of a transaction for the land east of East River. Purchased by the Stone family in 1715, it remained in the family until it was sold to the government in 1801.\nThe Falkner Island Light was constructed in 1802 and commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson. The light is the second oldest in Connecticut and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The lighthouse was automated in 1978, and continues to operate as a navigational aid to the nearby Intracoastal Waterway. The island is part of the Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge and has the fifth-largest colony of nesting roseate terns in the northeastern United States. Much of the island's land mass has been lost to erosion, down to about from its original . The United States Army Corps of Engineers reinforced the eastern boundary to slow the advancing deterioration.\nName origins.\nThe first recorded name of the Falkner Island was coined by the Native Americans. The island name in Quinnipiac was \"Massancummock\" meaning \"the place of the great fish hawks\". The Quinnipiac name did not refer to possession, but instead the usage or resources of the island.\nThe identity of the first European explorer is unknown, but it was likely the Dutch explorer Adrian Block who sailed through Long Island Sound around 1614. The United States government credits Block as the discoverer. Early English settlers called it \"Falcon Island\", likely stemming from the Native American name. Helander writes that the island was probably named for the osprey, but the English translation to \"Falcon\" suggesting the presence of the peregrine falcon was one of \"simple ignorance\". The island's name on Dutch maps was \"Valcken Eylandt\". The name later evolved to Faulkner Island, perhaps as a result of the Faulkner family who lived on the island in the 1700s. When the island was transferred to the U.S. government in 1801, the deed states the name as \"Faulkners\". The U.S. Board on Geographic Names changed and established \"Falkner Island\" as its name in 1891. However, the name change is not universally recognized and \"popular usage\" and the Faulkner's Light Brigade that conserves the island's lighthouse use \"Faulkner\"; including publications.\nHistory.\nFalkner Island has been the site of human activity for thousands of years. An archaeological survey performed on the island from 1997-1998 found a quartz projectile point of the Squibnocket triangle variety which dates to 1000-3000 B.C. The study was conducted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as part of the erosion control project; it was required by law under the National Historic Preservation Act because the island is on the National Register of Historic Places. The findings were published in the Bulletin of the Archaeological Society of Connecticut in 2001. In 1994, John P. Menta's \"The History of the Quinnipiac Indians\" identifies Falker Island as the site of ceremonial and religious practices, but that these practices are still unknown. According to Bruchac's \"Thirteen Moons on Turtle's Back\" the island was not a permanent settlement, but was likely used for fishing and hunting trips in the summer.\nEuropean contact occurred in the first half of the 1600s. A map in the possession of Reverend Henry Whitfield from a 1639 deed shows the island and the Quinnipiac name of \"Massancummock\". In 1641, Whitfield and the founders of Guilford purchased the island from the Mohegan tribe's sachem, Uncas, as part of a transaction for the land east of East River. Uncas acquired the land when he married the daughter of the Hammonassett sachem, Sebequanash. At some point in the 1600s, Andrew Leete was an owner of the island. In 1715, Caleb and Ebenezer Stone purchased the island and it remained in the Stone family until 1801. In 1800, Noah Stone sold it to a distant relative named Medad Stone for $158.34 (). On May 12, 1801, Medad Stone sold the island to the government for $325 (). Joel Helander, a historian, notes that Medad Stone and the government were likely openly communicating about the island. The United States Congress appropriated $6000 in March 1801 for the lighthouse, prior to the government's acquisition of the property.\nIt was inhabited throughout the 1700s through 1976, with the Faulkner family and various lightkeepers of the Falkner Island Light. During the War of 1812, the British forces landed on the island and told the keeper's wife, Thankful Stone, that they had nothing to fear as long as they kept the light burning. Later, the keeper, Solomon Stone, had to put the light out per order of the New London customs inspector. The British threatened to blow up the lighthouse and Stone got an order to relight the lighthouse. In 2008, the generator house for the light was renovated to be a summer house for the United States Fish and Wildlife Service interns who study the endangered roseate terns. The erosion control project was completed, but Hurricane Irene and Hurricane Sandy greatly reduced the breeding habitat of the terns to just .\nErosion threatens the island's very existence, it is believed that it was around eight acres in 1639 before being reduced to 5.70 acres by 1818. By 1987, the total area has fallen to 2.87 acres and it was projected that it could lose another 12 inches each year until the lighthouse crumbles into the sea around 2026.\nFalkner Island Light.\nThe Falkner Island Lighthouse was constructed in 1802 and commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson. The lighthouse has had three keeper's houses throughout its service life, the first erected in 1802 and rebuilt in 1851 and again in 1871. The keeper's house burned in 1976 and the lighthouse was repaired and automated in 1978. The Faulkner's Light Brigade has undertaken the restoration and preservation of the lighthouse since 1991, with the last major restoration work being completed in March 2011. Access to Falkner Island and the light is restricted during the nesting season of the roseate terns, from May to August. The Falkner Island Lighthouse is the second oldest extant lighthouse in Connecticut and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nWildlife.\nIn 1985, the island became part of the Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge after it was acquired from the U.S. Coast Guard. According to the Connecticut Audubon Society, \"it currently supports over 95% of the nesting Common Terns in Connecticut. It is the site of one of the ten largest Roseate Tern (~45 pairs) colonies in Northeastern North America, and is the only regular nesting location for this federally endangered species in the state.\" Also living on the island is the American oystercatcher, with one to two breeding pairs noted each year. Although the erosion control project was completed, Hurricane Irene and Hurricane Sandy greatly reduced the breeding habitat of the terns to just . In spring 2014, the dock damaged by Hurricane Sandy was scheduled to be rebuilt."}
{"id": "63952", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63952", "title": "United Nations Population Fund", "text": "United Nations organization\nThe United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) is a UN agency aimed at improving reproductive and maternal health worldwide. Its work includes developing national healthcare strategies and protocols, increasing access to birth control, and leading campaigns against child marriage, gender-based violence, obstetric fistula, and female genital mutilation.\nThe UNFPA supports programs in more than 144 countries across four geographic regions: Arab States and Europe, Asia and the Pacific, Latin America, the Caribbean and Africa. Around three-quarters of the staff work in the field. It is a founding member of the United Nations Development Group, a collection of UN agencies and programmes focused on fulfilling the Sustainable Development Goals.\nOrigins.\nIn December 1966, 12 heads of state made a declaration urging the United Nations to work on population issues. The Secretary-General created a trust fund for population in 1967. The agency began operations in 1969 as the United Nations Fund for Population Activities under the administration of the United Nations Development Fund. In 1971 it was placed under the authority of the United Nations General Assembly. Its name was changed into United Nations Population Fund in 1987. However, the shortened term of UNFPA has been retained.\nUNFPA: Strategic outlook.\nSustainable Development Goals.\nIn September 2015, the 193 member states of the United Nations unanimously adopted the Sustainable Development Goals, a set of 17 goals aiming to transform the world over the next 15 years. These goals are designed to eliminate poverty, discrimination, abuse and preventable deaths, address environmental destruction, and usher in an era of development for all people, everywhere.\nUNFPA stated the Sustainable Development Goals are ambitious, and they will require enormous efforts across countries, continents, industries and disciplines, but they are achievable. UNFPA works with governments, partners and other UN agencies to directly tackle many of these goals \u2013 in particular Goal 3 on health, Goal 4 on education and Goal 5 on gender equality \u2013 and contributes in a variety of ways to achieving many of the other goals.\nWarning on declining fertility.\nIn June 2025, UNFPA issued a report, based on a survey of 14,000 people in 14 countries, warning of a decline in fertility. \"The world has begun an unprecedented decline in fertility rates,\" said Dr Natalia Kanem, head of UNFPA. The causes of people having less children than they wanted included the high cost of child care.\nCountries surveyed included USA, Sweden, Brazil, India, Indonesia, Morocco, South Africa, and Nigeria, a mix of low, middle and high-income countries, which amounted to a third of the global population. Professor Stuart Gietel-Basten, demographer at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, said \"This is the first time that [the UN] have really gone all-out on low fertility issues.\"\nLeadership.\nExecutive Directors and Under-Secretaries-General of the UNFPA:\nAreas of work.\nUNFPA is the world's largest multilateral source of funding for population and reproductive health programs. The Fund works with governments and non-governmental organizations in over 150 countries with the support of the international community, supporting programs that help women, men and young people:\nUNFPA uses a human rights-based approach in programming to address three \"transformative goals\":\nThe Fund raises awareness of and supports efforts to meet these goals, advocates close attention to population concerns and helps nations formulate policies and strategies in support of sustainable development. Osotimehin assumed leadership in January 2011. The Fund is also represented by UNFPA Goodwill Ambassadors and a Patron.\nHow it works.\nUNFPA works in partnership with governments, along with other United Nations agencies, communities, NGOs, foundations and the private sector, to raise awareness and mobilize the support and resources needed to achieve its mission to promote the rights and health of women and young people. For instance, it is one of the co-sponsors of the Special Programme on Human Reproduction.\nContributions from governments and the private sector to UNFPA in 2016 totaled $848 million. The amount includes $353 million for the organization's core resources and $495 million earmarked for specific programs and initiatives. As a result of the economic impact of coronavirus pandemic, the United Kingdom imposed 85% aid cut to UNFPA.\nExamples of campaigns:\nRelations with the US government.\nUNFPA has been accused by American pro-life groups of providing support for government programs which have promoted forced abortions and coercive sterilizations. UNFPA says it \"does not provide support for abortion services\". Its charter includes a strong statement condemning coercion. In response to these allegations, the U.S. Congress passed the Kemp-Kasten amendment in 1985 to empower the president to block U.S. funding of programs deemed by the president to include \"coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization\". Since its passage, all Republican presidents (Reagan, H.W. Bush, W. Bush, and Trump) have withheld funding from the UNFPA\u00a0\u2013 a policy known as the Mexico City Policy.\nUNFPA provided aid to Peru's reproductive health program in the mid-to-late 1990s. When it was discovered a Peruvian program had been engaged in carrying out coercive sterilizations, UNFPA called for reforms and protocols to protect the rights of women seeking assistance. UNFPA continued work with the country after the abuses had become public to help end the abuses and reform laws and practices.\nOver the course of the George W. Bush administration, a total of $244 million in Congressionally approved funding was blocked by the Executive Branch. From 2002 through 2008, the administration denied funding to UNFPA that had already been allocated by the US Congress, on the grounds that the UNFPA supported Chinese government programs which include forced abortions and coercive sterilizations. In a letter from the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns to Congress, the administration said it had determined that UNFPA's support for China's population program \"facilitates its government's coercive abortion program\", thus violating the Kemp-Kasten Amendment, which bans the use of United States aid to finance organizations that support or take part in managing a program of coercive abortion or sterilization.\nThe notion that UNFPA had any connection to China's administration of forced abortions was deemed to be unsubstantiated by investigations carried out by various US, UK, and UN teams sent to examine UNFPA activities in China. Specifically, a three-person US State Department fact-finding team was sent on a two-week tour throughout China. It wrote in its report that it found \"no evidence that UNFPA has supported or participated in the management of a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization in China,\" as has been charged by critics.\nHowever, according to then-Secretary of State Colin Powell, the UNFPA contributed vehicles and computers to the Chinese to carry out their population planning policies. However, both \"The Washington Post\" and \"The Washington Times\" reported that Powell simply fell in line, signing a brief written by someone else. US Representative Chris Smith criticized the State Department investigation, saying the investigators were shown \"Potemkin Villages\" where residents had been intimidated into lying about the family-planning program. Nafis Sadik, former director of UNFPA, said her agency had been pivotal in reversing China's coercive population planning methods, but a 2005 report by Amnesty International and a separate report by the US State Department found that coercive techniques were still regularly employed by the Chinese, casting doubt upon Sadik's statements. However, Amnesty International found no evidence that UNFPA had supported the coercion.\nA 2001 study conducted by the pro-life Population Research Institute claimed that the UNFPA shared an office with the Chinese family planning officials who were carrying out forced abortions. \"We located the family planning offices, and in that family planning office, we located the UNFPA office, and we confirmed from family planning officials there that there is no distinction between what the UNFPA does and what the Chinese Family Planning Office does,\" said Scott Weinberg, a spokesman for PRI. However, United Nations Members disagreed and approved UNFPA's new country programme in January 2006. The more than 130 members of the \"Group of 77\" developing countries in the United Nations expressed support for the UNFPA programmes. In addition, speaking for several European democracies \u2013 Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, the Netherlands, France, Belgium, Switzerland and Germany \u2013 the United Kingdom stated, \"UNFPA\u2019s activities in China, as in the rest of the world, are in strict conformity with the unanimously adopted Programme of Action of the ICPD\" and plays \"a key role in supporting our common endeavour, the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms\".\nIn response, the EU decided to fill the gap left behind by the US under the Sandb\u00e6k Report. According to its Annual Report for 2008, the UNFPA received its funding mainly from European governments: Of the total income of $845.3 million, $118 million was donated by the Netherlands, $67 million by Sweden, $62 million by Norway, $54 million by Denmark, $53 million by the UK, $52 million by Spain, and $19 million by Luxembourg. The European Commission donated a further $36 million. The most important non-European donor state was Japan, which gave $36 million. The number of donors exceeded 180 in one year.\nIn the United States, nonprofit organizations like Friends of UNFPA, formerly Americans for UNFPA, worked to compensate for the loss of United States federal funding by raising private donations.\nIn January 2009 President Barack Obama restored US funding to UNFPA, saying in a public statement that he would \"look forward to working with Congress to restore U.S. financial support for the U.N. Population Fund. By resuming funding to UNFPA, the U.S. will be joining 180 other donor nations working collaboratively to reduce poverty, improve the health of women and children, prevent HIV/AIDS and provide family planning assistance to women in 154 countries.\"\nThe United States said during the UNDP/UNFPA/UNOPS Executive Board meeting that considered the China programme in 2015:During its recent visit, the U.S. delegation observed the positive impact of UNFPA's rights-based programming in China. We commend the Fund's adherence to demonstrating the advantages of a voluntary approach to family planning and were pleased to see \u2013 in support of its ICPD commitments \u2013 increased provider emphasis on patient rights.\nIn April 2017, the Trump administration announced that it will cut off funding to UNFPA, on the grounds that it \"supports, or participates in the management of, a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization.\" UNFPA refuted this claim, as all of its work promotes the human rights of individuals and couples to make their own decisions, free of coercion or discrimination.\nOther UN population agencies and entities.\nEntities with competencies about population in the United Nations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63953", "revid": "4073766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63953", "title": "UNFPA", "text": ""}
{"id": "63954", "revid": "17", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63954", "title": "United Nations Fund for Population Activities", "text": ""}
{"id": "63956", "revid": "15957699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63956", "title": "ANSI C standard library", "text": ""}
{"id": "63961", "revid": "44626488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63961", "title": "Jinglish", "text": ""}
{"id": "63964", "revid": "32694456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63964", "title": "Athelas", "text": ""}
{"id": "63966", "revid": "44595678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63966", "title": "Warchalking", "text": "Graffiti indicating open Wi-Fi\nWarchalking is the drawing of symbols in public places to advertise an open Wi-Fi network.\nInspired by hobo symbols, the warchalking marks were conceived by a group of friends in June 2002 and published by Matt Jones who designed the set of icons and produced a downloadable document containing them. Within days of Jones publishing a blog entry about warchalking, articles appeared in dozens of publications and stories appeared on several major television news programs around the world.\nThe word is formed by analogy to \"wardriving\", the practice of driving around an area in a car to detect open Wi-Fi nodes. That term in turn is based on \"wardialing\", the practice of dialing many phone numbers hoping to find a modem.\nThere is a difference between \"wardriving\" and warchalking. Warchalking and wardriving both are used to share information about wireless networks. Warchalking is different from wardriving since warchalking involves marking \"public spaces\" with symbols indicating different types of Wi-Fi networks. Warchalking relies on \"visual cues\", while wardriving involves driving around with a device to detect wireless access points. It is a method used to search for networks.\nHaving found a Wi-Fi node, the warchalker draws a special symbol on a nearby object, such as a wall, the pavement, or a lamp post. Those offering Wi-Fi service might also draw such a symbol to advertise the availability of their Wi-Fi location, whether commercial or personal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63967", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63967", "title": "Double pendulum", "text": "Pendulum with another pendulum attached to its end\nIn physics and mathematics, in the area of dynamical systems, a double pendulum, also known as a chaotic pendulum, is a pendulum with another pendulum attached to its end, forming a complex physical system that exhibits rich dynamic behavior with a strong sensitivity to initial conditions. The motion of a double pendulum is governed by a pair of coupled ordinary differential equations and is chaotic.\nAnalysis and interpretation.\nSeveral variants of the double pendulum may be considered; the two limbs may be of equal or unequal lengths and masses, they may be simple pendulums or compound pendulums (also called complex pendulums) and the motion may be in three dimensions or restricted to one vertical plane. In the following analysis, the limbs are taken to be identical compound pendulums of length \u2113 and mass m, and the motion is restricted to two dimensions.\nIn a compound pendulum, the mass is distributed along its length. If the double pendulum mass is evenly distributed, then the center of mass of each limb is at its midpoint, and the limb has a moment of inertia of \"I\" = \"m\u2113\"2 about that point.\nAlthough it is possible to derive the equations of a double pendulum with Newtonian mechanics, it is considered to be cumbersome to work with as it would require resolving vectors with respect to constraint forces. So it is more convenient to use the angles between each limb and the vertical as the generalized coordinates defining the configuration of the system. These angles are denoted \"\u03b8\"1 and \"\u03b8\"2. The position of the center of mass of each rod may be written in terms of these two coordinates. If the origin of the Cartesian coordinate system is taken to be at the point of suspension of the first pendulum, then the center of mass of this pendulum is at:formula_1\nand the center of mass of the second pendulum is at\nformula_2\nThis is enough information to write out the Lagrangian.\nLagrangian.\nThe Lagrangian is given by\nformula_3\nThe first term is the \"linear\" kinetic energy of the center of mass of the bodies and the second term is the \"rotational\" kinetic energy around the center of mass of each rod. The last term is the potential energy of the bodies in a uniform gravitational field. The dot-notation indicates the time derivative of the variable in question.\nUsing the values of formula_4 and formula_5 defined above, we have\nformula_6\nwhich leads to\nformula_7\nSimilarly, for formula_8 and formula_9 we have\nformula_10\nand therefore\nformula_11\nSubstituting the coordinates above into the definition of the Lagrangian, and rearranging the equation, gives\nformula_12\nThe equations of motion can now be derived using the Euler\u2013Lagrange equations, which are given by\nformula_13\nWe begin with the equation of motion for formula_14. The derivatives of the Lagrangian are given by\nformula_15\nand\nformula_16\nThus\nformula_17\nCombining these results and simplifying yields the first equation of motion,\nformula_18\nSimilarly, the derivatives of the Lagrangian with respect to formula_19 and formula_20 are given by\nformula_21\nand\nformula_22\nThus\nformula_23\nPlugging these results into the Euler-Lagrange equation and simplifying yields the second equation of motion,\nformula_24\nNo closed form solutions for formula_14 and formula_19 as functions of time are known, therefore the system can only be solved numerically, using the Runge Kutta method or similar techniques.\nChaotic motion.\nThe double pendulum undergoes chaotic motion, and clearly shows a sensitive dependence on initial conditions. The image to the right shows the amount of elapsed time before the pendulum flips over, as a function of initial position when released at rest. Here, the initial value of \"\u03b8\"1 ranges along the x-direction from \u22123.14 to 3.14. The initial value \"\u03b8\"2 ranges along the y-direction, from \u22123.14 to 3.14. The color of each pixel indicates whether either pendulum flips within:\nInitial conditions that do not lead to a flip within formula_31 are plotted white.\nThe boundary of the central white region is defined in part by energy conservation with the following curve:\nformula_33\nWithin the region defined by this curve, that is ifformula_34then it is energetically impossible for either pendulum to flip. Outside this region, the pendulum can flip, but it is a complex question to determine when it will flip. Similar behavior is observed for a double pendulum composed of two point masses rather than two rods with distributed mass.\nThe lack of a natural excitation frequency has led to the use of double pendulum systems in seismic resistance designs in buildings, where the building itself is the primary inverted pendulum, and a secondary mass is connected to complete the double pendulum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63969", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63969", "title": "Chuck Palahniuk", "text": "American novelist (born 1962)\nCharles Michael Palahniuk (;, , born February 21, 1962) is an American novelist who describes his work as transgressional fiction. He has published 19 novels, three nonfiction books, two graphic novels, and two adult coloring books, as well as several short stories. His first published novel was \"Fight Club\", which was adapted into a film of the same title.\nEarly life.\nPalahniuk was born in Pasco, Washington, the son of Carol Adele (n\u00e9e Tallent) and Fred Palahniuk. He has French and Ukrainian ancestry. His paternal grandfather migrated from Ukraine to Canada and then to New York in 1907.\nPalahniuk grew up living in a mobile home in Burbank, Washington. His parents separated when he was 14 years old; they subsequently divorced, often leaving him and his three siblings to live with their maternal grandparents at their cattle ranch in eastern Washington. Palahniuk acknowledged in a 2007 interview that he is a distant relative of actor Jack Palance (n\u00e9 Volodymyr Palahniuk) and his daughter, Holly, and that his family had talked of distant relations with the Palances.\nPalahniuk attended the University of Oregon, graduating with a degree in journalism in 1986. As part of his coursework, he interned at the local public radio station, KLCC.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nPalahniuk wrote for his local newspaper for a short while but then began working for Freightliner Trucks as a diesel mechanic, continuing until his writing career took off. During that time, he wrote manuals on fixing trucks and had a stint as a journalist, a job which he did not return to until after he became a successful novelist. After casually attending a seminar by Landmark Education, Palahniuk quit his job as a journalist in 1988. He performed volunteer work for a homeless shelter and volunteered at a hospice as an escort, providing transportation for terminally ill people, taking them to support group meetings. He ceased volunteering upon the death of a patient to whom he had grown attached.\nPalahniuk began writing fiction in his early 30s. By his account, he started writing while attending workshops for writers that were hosted by Tom Spanbauer, which he attended to meet new friends. Spanbauer largely inspired Palahniuk's minimalistic writing style.\n\"Fight Club\".\nAfter his first novel \u2013 \"Invisible Monsters\" \u2013 was rejected by all publishers he submitted it to, he began work on his first published novel, \"Fight Club\". Palahniuk wrote this story in his spare time while working for Freightliner. After initially publishing it as a short story (which became chapter 6 of the novel) in the 1995 compilation \"Pursuit of Happiness\", Palahniuk expanded it into a full novel, which, contrary to his expectations, a publisher accepted.\nInitially, Palahniuk struggled to find a literary agent and went without one until after the publication of \"Fight Club\". After he began receiving attention from 20th Century Fox, Palahniuk was signed by actor and literary agent Edward Hibbert. Hibbert eventually guided and brokered the deal that took \"Fight Club\" to the big screen. In 1999, the film adaptation by director David Fincher was released.\n\"Invisible Monsters\", \"Survivor\", and \"Choke\".\nA revised version of \"Invisible Monsters\", as well as his fourth novel, \"Survivor\", were published in 1999. A few years later Palahniuk managed to complete his first \"New York Times\" bestseller, the novel \"Choke\", which later was made into a movie.\n\"Lullaby\".\nThe year 1999 brought a series of great personal tragedies to Palahniuk's life. At that time, his father, Fred Palahniuk, had started dating a woman named Donna Fontaine, whom he had met through a personal ad under the title \"Kismet\". Her former boyfriend, Dale Shackelford, had previously been imprisoned for sexual abuse and had vowed to kill Fontaine as soon as he was released from prison. Palahniuk believes that, using a personal ad, Fontaine was looking for \"the biggest man she could find\" to protect her from Shackelford, and Palahniuk's father qualified. After his release, Shackelford followed Fontaine and the senior Palahniuk to Fontaine's home in Kendrick, Idaho, after they had gone out for a date. Shackelford then shot them both and dragged their bodies into Fontaine's cabin home, which he then set alight. In the spring of 2001, Shackelford was found guilty for two counts of murder in the first degree and sentenced to death. In the wake of these events, Palahniuk began working on the novel \"Lullaby\". He has stated that he wrote the novel to help him cope with having participated in the decision to have Shackelford receive the death sentence.\n\"Guts\" and \"Haunted\".\nWhile on his 2003 tour to promote his novel \"Diary\", Palahniuk read to his audiences a short story entitled \"Guts\", a sensational tale of accidents involving masturbation, which appears in his book \"Haunted\". The story begins with the author telling his listeners to inhale deeply and that \"this story should last about as long as you can hold your breath.\" It was reported that 40 people had fainted listening to the readings while holding their breath. \"Playboy\" magazine later published the story in their March 2004 issue and Palahniuk offered to let them publish another story along with it, but the publishers found the second work too disturbing to publish. On his tour to promote \"\" during the summer of 2004, he read \"Guts\" to audiences again, bringing the total number of fainters up to 53 (and later up to 60 while on tour to promote the softcover edition of \"Diary\"). In the fall of that year, he began promoting \"Haunted\", and continued to read \"Guts\". In June 2005, Palahniuk noted that his number of fainters was up to 67.\nAt a 2005 appearance in Miami, Florida, during the \"Haunted\" tour, Palahniuk commented that \"Haunted\" represented the last of a \"horror trilogy\" (including \"Lullaby\" and \"Diary\"). He also indicated that his then-forthcoming novel, \"Rant\", would be the first of a \"science fiction trilogy\".\nIn 2008, Palahniuk spent a week at the Clarion West Writers Workshop, instructing eighteen students about his writing methods and theory of fiction.\nAdaptations.\nIn addition to the film, \"Fight Club\" was adapted into a fighting video game loosely based on the film, which was released in October 2004, receiving universally poor reviews. Palahniuk has mentioned at book readings that he is working on a musical based on \"Fight Club\" with David Fincher and Trent Reznor. Edward Norton has said that he thinks it is unlikely that he and Brad Pitt, who \"can't sing,\" would reprise their film roles in a musical.\nGraphic novel adaptations of \"Invisible Monsters\" and \"Lullaby\", drawn by comic artist Kissgz, a.k.a. Gabor, are available online.\nFollowing the success of the movie of \"Fight Club\", interest began to build about adapting \"Survivor\" to film. The film rights to \"Survivor\" were sold in early 2001, but no movie studio had committed to filming the novel. After the attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center on September 11, 2001, movie studios apparently deemed the novel too controversial to film because it includes the hijacking and crashing of a civilian airplane.\nFollowing that, the film rights to \"Invisible Monsters\" and \"Diary\" also were sold. While little is known about some of these projects, it is known that Jessica Biel was signed on to play the roles of both Shannon and Brandy in \"Invisible Monsters\", which was supposed to begin filming in 2004, but as of 2010[ [update]] was still in development.\nOn January 14, 2008, the film version of \"Choke\" premiered at the Sundance Film Festival, starring Sam Rockwell, Kelly Macdonald and Anjelica Huston with Clark Gregg directing. David Fincher expressed interest in filming \"Diary\" as an HBO miniseries.\nOn September 11, 2014, the film version of \"Rant\" was announced, starring James Franco, with Pamela Romanowsky writing and directing.\nWriting style and themes.\nStyle.\nPalahniuk says that his writing style has been influenced by authors such as the minimalist Tom Spanbauer (whose weekly workshop Palahniuk attended in Portland from 1991 to 1996), Amy Hempel, Mark Richard, Denis Johnson, Joan Didion, Thom Jones, Bret Easton Ellis and philosophers Michel Foucault, Friedrich Nietzsche and Albert Camus. In what the author refers to as a minimalistic approach, his writings include a limited vocabulary and short sentences to mimic the way that an average person telling a story would speak. In an interview, he said that he \"prefers to write in verbs instead of adjectives.\" Repetitions of certain lines or phrases in the story narrative (what Palahniuk refers to as \"choruses\") are one of the most common characteristics of his writing style, being dispersed within most chapters of his novels. Palahniuk has said that there also are some choruses between novels, noting that the color cornflower blue and the city of Missoula, Montana appear in many of his novels. The characters in Palahniuk's stories often break into philosophical asides (either by the narrator to the reader, or spoken to the narrator through dialogue), offering numerous odd theories and opinions, often misanthropic or darkly absurdist in nature, on complex issues such as death, morality, childhood, parenthood, sexuality, and a deity. Other concepts borrowed from Spanbauer include the avoidance of \"received text\" (clich\u00e9d phrases or wording) and use of \"burnt tongue\" (intentionally odd wording).\nIn an interview with Jason Tanamor, he said, \"It\u2019s pathetic how much I rewrite. I\u2019ll rework every scene a hundred times before my agent sees it. Then rework it a dozen times before my editor sees it. Then rework it all - almost beyond recognition - before it goes to the copy editor. My first draft is almost a bare-bones outline, fleshed out with every subsequent pass through. I\u2019ll \u201ctest\u201d the scenes in workshop and with friends, then revise them based on audience reaction and feedback. The only time a book is \u201cdone\u201d is when the type is set. By then I'm in love with a new idea, so the old one is officially finished.\"\nThemes.\nPalahniuk's writing often contains anti-consumerist themes. Writing about \"Fight Club\", Paul Kennett argues that because the Narrator's fights with Tyler Durden are fights with himself, and because he fights himself in front of his boss at the hotel, the Narrator is using the fights as a way of asserting himself as his own boss. These fights are a representation of the struggle of the proletarian at the hands of a higher capitalist power; by asserting himself as capable of having the same power he thus becomes his own master. Later when fight club is formed, the participants are all dressed and groomed similarly, allowing them to symbolically fight themselves at the club and gain the same power. In an interview with \"HuffPost\", Palahniuk says that \"the central message of \"Fight Club\" was always about the empowerment of the individual through small, escalating challenges.\"\nReception and criticism.\nThe content of Palahniuk's works has been described as nihilistic. Palahniuk has rejected this label, stating that he is a romantic, and that his works are mistakenly seen as nihilistic because they express ideas that others do not believe in.\nPersonal life.\nAs an adult, Palahniuk became a member of the rebellious Cacophony Society. \nHe is a regular participant in their events, including the annual Santa Rampage (a public Christmas party involving pranks and drunkenness) in Portland, Oregon. His participation in the Society inspired some of the events in his writings, both fictional and non-fictional.\nIn 2004, Palahniuk came out as gay after an interview with Karen Valby, a reporter for \"Entertainment Weekly\". Falsely believing that he would be outed by Valby after confidentially referring to his male partner, he openly declared his homosexuality on his website. Once Valby's article was published with no indication of Palahniuk's homosexuality (as she had promised), he publicly apologized for having unfairly smeared and excoriated her on his blog on a false pretense: \"I mis-represented, because I mis-remembered, some details about Karen's private life. I deeply regret doing that. It was something I did out of anger and fear, and it was something I did inaccurately, and something I wish I had not done.\" According to an interview with \"The Advocate\" in May 2008, he and his partner Mike live in a former church compound outside Vancouver, Washington. He and his partner have been together since the 1990s, having met while Palahniuk was working at Freightliner. He told one interviewer, \"We both had these very blue-collar lives, and now our lives are completely different.\"\nAwards.\nPalahniuk has won the following awards:\nHe was nominated for the 1999 Oregon Book Award for Best Novel for \"Survivor\" and for the Bram Stoker Award for Best Novel for \"Lullaby\" in 2002 and for \"Haunted\" in 2005.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "63971", "revid": "50523975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63971", "title": "Maserati", "text": "Italian luxury car manufacturer\nMaserati S.p.A. () is an Italian luxury car manufacturer. Established on 1 December 1914 in Bologna, Italy, the company's headquarters are now in Modena, and its emblem is a trident. The company has been owned by Stellantis since 2021. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe Maserati brothers.\nThe Maserati brothers, Alfieri (1887\u20131932), Bindo (1883\u20131980), Carlo (1881\u20131910), Ettore (1894\u20131990), and Ernesto (1898\u20131975), were all involved with automobiles from the beginning of the 20th century. Alfieri, Bindo, and Ernesto built 2-litre Grand Prix cars for Diatto. In 1926, Diatto suspended the production of race cars, leading to the creation of the first Maserati and the founding of the Maserati marque. One of the first Maseratis, driven by Alfieri, won the 1926 Targa Florio. Maserati began making race cars with 4, 6, 8, and 16 cylinders (two straight-eights mounted parallel to one another).\nThe trident logo of the Maserati car company, designed by Mario Maserati, is based on Neptune's trident of the Fountain of Neptune in Bologna's Piazza Maggiore. In 1920, one of the Maserati brothers used this symbol in the logo at the suggestion of family friend Marquis Diego de Sterlich. It was considered particularly appropriate for the sports car company due to the fact that Neptune represents strength and vigour; additionally the statue is a characteristic symbol of the company's original home city.\nAlfieri Maserati died in 1932, but three other brothers, Bindo, Ernesto, and Ettore kept the firm going.\nOrsi ownership.\nIn 1937, the remaining Maserati brothers sold their shares in the company to the Adolfo Orsi family, who, in 1940, relocated the company headquarters to their home town of Modena, where it remains to this day. The brothers continued in engineering roles with the company. Racing successes continued, even against the giants of German racing, Auto Union and Mercedes. \nIndianapolis 500.\nIn back-to-back wins in 1939 and 1940, an Maserati 8CTF won the Indianapolis 500, making Maserati the only Italian manufacturer ever to do so.\nThe second world war then intervened and Maserati abandoned car making to produce components for the Italian war effort. During this time, Maserati worked in fierce competition to construct a V16 town car for Benito Mussolini before Ferry Porsche of Volkswagen built one for Adolf Hitler. This failed, and the plans were scrapped. Once peace was restored, Maserati returned to making cars; the Maserati A6 series did well in the post-war racing scene.\nKey people joined the Maserati team. Alberto Massimino, a former FIAT engineer with both Alfa Romeo and Ferrari experience, oversaw the design of all racing models for the next ten years. With him joined engineers Giulio Alfieri, Vittorio Bellentani, and Gioacchino Colombo. The focus was on the best engines and chassis to succeed in car racing. These new projects saw the last contributions of the Maserati brothers, who, after their 10-year contract with Orsi expired, went on to form O.S.C.A. This new team at Maserati worked on several projects: the Maserati 4CLT, the Maserati A6 series, the 8CLT, and, pivotally for the future success of the company, the A6GCS.\nFormula One.\nThe famous Argentinian grand prix driver Juan-Manuel Fangio raced for Maserati for a number of years in the 1950s, achieving a number of stunning victories including winning the Formula One World Championship in 1957 in the 250F.\nWorld Sportscar Championship.\nOther racing projects in the 1950s were the Maserati 200S, Maserati 300S, Maserati 350S, and Maserati 450S, followed in 1961 by the famous Maserati Birdcage \"Tipo\" 61.\nMille Miglia.\nMaserati retired from factory racing participation because of the \"Guidizzolo tragedy\" during the 1957 Mille Miglia, though they continued to build cars for privateers. Maserati became more and more focused on building road-going grand tourers.\nThe 1957 3500 GT marked a turning point in the marque's history, as its first ground-up grand tourer design and first series-produced car. Production jumped from a dozen to a few hundred cars a year.\nChief engineer Giulio Alfieri took charge of the project and turned the 3.5-litre inline six from the 350S into a road-going engine. Launched with a Carrozzeria Touring 2+2 coup\u00e9 aluminium body over superleggera structure, a steel-bodied short wheelbase Vignale 3500 GT Spyder open top version followed in 1959. The 3500 GT's success, with over 2,200 made, was critical to Maserati's survival in the years following withdrawal from racing.\nThe 3500 GT also provided the underpinnings for the small-volume V8-engined 5000 GT, another seminal car for Maserati. Born from the Shah of Persia's whim of owning a road car powered by the Maserati 450S racing engine, it became one of the fastest and most expensive cars of its days. The third to the thirty-fourth and last example produced were powered by Maserati's first purely road-going V8 engine design.\nIn 1962, the 3500 GT evolved into the Sebring, bodied by Vignale and based on the shorter wheelbase convertible chassis. Next came the two-seater Mistral coup\u00e9 in 1963 and Spider in 1964, both powered by a six-cylinder engine and styled by Pietro Frua.\nIn 1963, the company's first saloon was launched, the Quattroporte, also styled by Frua. If the 5000 GT inaugurated the marque's first road-going V8, the Quattroporte's \"Tipo 107\" 4.2-litre DOHC V8 was the forefather of all Maserati V8s up to 1990.\nThe Ghia-designed Ghibli coup\u00e9 was launched in 1967. It was powered by a 4.7-litre dry sump version of Maserati's quad cam V8. The Ghibli Spyder and high performance 4.9-litre Ghibli SS followed.\nCitro\u00ebn ownership.\nIn 1968, Maserati was taken over by Citro\u00ebn. Adolfo Orsi remained the nominal president, but Maserati was controlled by its new owner. The relationship started as a joint venture, made public in January 1968, in which Maserati would design and manufacture an engine for Citro\u00ebn's upcoming flagship called SM. Launched in 1970, the SM was a four-seat front-wheel-drive coup\u00e9, powered by a Maserati \"Tipo C114\" 2.7-litre 90\u00b0 V6 engine; this engine and its gearbox had been used in other vehicles, such as rally-prepared Citro\u00ebn DSs used by Bob Neyret in Bandama Rally, and in the Ligier JS2.\nWith secure financial backing, new models were launched and built in much greater numbers than years prior. Citro\u00ebn borrowed Maserati's expertise and engines for the SM and other vehicles, and Maserati incorporated Citro\u00ebn's technology, particularly in hydraulics. Engineer Giulio Alfieri was key to many of the ambitious designs of this period.\nThe first new arrival was the 1969 Maserati Indy, a Vignale-bodied four-seater GT with a traditional V8 drivetrain, 1,100 units of the Indy were made.\nIn 1971, the Maserati Bora was the company's first series production mid-engine model, an idea agreed with administrator Guy Malleret shortly after the 1968 takeover. The Bora ended Maserati's reputation for producing fast but technologically out of date cars, being the first Maserati with four wheel independent suspension. In contrast, competitor Lamborghini had used independent suspension in 1964.\nIn 1972, the Bora was transformed to the Maserati Merak, now employing a \"Tipo 114\" SM-derived V6 enlarged to 3.0-litres.\nCitro\u00ebn never developed a 4-door version of the SM \u2013 instead Maserati developed the Maserati Quattroporte II, which shared most of its mechanical parts with the SM, including the mid-engine, front-wheel-drive layout, and six headlight arrangement.\nTo power this large car, Alfieri developed a V8 engine from the SM's V6 on the behest of Factory Manager Guy Malleret. The engine was rated at and fitted to a lightly modified SM, which proved that the chassis could easily handle the power increase. Citro\u00ebn's and Maserati's financial difficulties hampered the type homologation process; the development costs for the stillborn saloon further aggravated Maserati's situation. Only a dozen Quattroporte IIs were ever produced, all with the V6.\nThe replacement for the successful Ghibli was the Bertone-designed Maserati Khamsin, a front-engine grand tourer introduced in 1972 and produced until 1974; it combined the traditional Maserati V8 GT layout with modern independent suspension, unibody construction, and refined Citro\u00ebn technologies such as DIRAVI power steering.\nCrisis years.\nMeanwhile, the 1973 oil crisis put the brakes on the ambitious expansion of Maserati; demand for fuel-hungry sports cars and grand tourers shrank drastically. Austerity measures in Italy meant that the domestic market contracted by 60\u201370%. All of the main Italian GT car manufacturers were heavily affected, having to lay off workers in order to empty lots of unsold cars. Maserati received the hardest blow, as its home market sales accounted for over half of the total\u2014in contrast with Ferrari's 20%. In this situation, the only Maserati automobile that continued to sell in appreciable numbers was the small-displacement Merak.\nIn 1974, with the 1973\u201375 recession at its climax, things took a turn for the worse. Citro\u00ebn went bankrupt and its incorporation into PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn begun. The year closed with domestic sales tumbling from 1973's 360 to 150 units, and losses exceeding the share capital.\nOn 22 May 1975, a press release from Citro\u00ebn management abruptly announced Maserati had been put into liquidation. The workforce immediately picketed the factory, but production was not halted. Trade unions, the mayor of Modena, and local politicians mobilised to save the 800 jobs; industry minister Carlo Donat-Cattin even flew to Paris to meet Citro\u00ebn chairman Francois Rollier. An agreement was reached in June, after several meetings and assemblies. During one of these meetings, Citro\u00ebn liquidators disclosed that a possible Italian buyer had shown up, and the name of Alejandro de Tomaso was put forth for the first time. Citro\u00ebn accepted to suspend liquidation as requested by the Italian government, which on its part guaranteed six months of special redundancy fund to pay the salaries.\nDe Tomaso era.\nOn 8 August 1975, an agreement was signed at the Ministry of Industry in Rome, and property of Maserati passed from Citro\u00ebn to Italian state-owned holding company GEPI and Alejandro de Tomaso, an Argentinian industrialist and former racing driver, became president and CEO. As of December 1979, GEPI's quota amounted to 88.75% of Maserati, the remaining 11.25% stake was being controlled by de Tomaso through a holding company which grouped his automotive interests in Maserati and Innocenti.\nAfter de Tomaso bought Maserati in August 1975, he dismissed long time Chief Engineer Alfieri on the day of taking over the business.\nBeginning in 1976, new models were introduced, sharing their underpinnings\u2014but not their engines\u2014with De Tomaso cars; first came the Kyalami grand tourer, derived from the De Tomaso Longchamp, restyled by Frua and powered by Maserati's own V8. Following the Kyalami was the Giugiaro-designed Quattroporte III based on the De Tomaso Deauville, which was introduced in 1976 and put on sale in 1979.\nThe Bora's sales dwindled down; the Khamsin was discontinued between 1982 and 1983. Progressively stripped of its Citro\u00ebn-derived parts, the Merak continued to sell over one hundred units a year, until 1982. Despite the downturn in sales, awareness of the brand increased during this time as a result of the popular song Life's Been Good by Joe Walsh, which contained the lyrics \"My Maserati does one eighty-five.\"\nThe Biturbo.\nThe 1980s saw the company largely abandoning the mid-engine sports car in favour of a compact front-engine, rear-drive coup\u00e9, the Biturbo.\nOf fairly conventional construction, the Biturbo's highlight was its twin-turbocharged V6 engine, the first for a production car. This engine, descending from the 90\u00b0 V6 engineered by Giulio Alfieri, was fitted in a large number of models, all sharing key components; every new Maserati launched up to the 1990s would be based on the Biturbo's platform.\nThe Biturbo family was extremely successful at exploiting the aspirational image of the \"Maserati\" name\u2014selling 40,000 units.\nIn 1983 and 1984, the range was extended to include saloons (the 425 and 420) and a cabriolet (the Zagato-bodied Spyder), respectively on a long and short wheelbase of the Biturbo platform.\nDuring 1984, Chrysler bought a 5% share in Maserati. Following an agreement between De Tomaso's friend and Chrysler head Lee Iacocca, a joint venture was signed. Maserati would go on to produce a car for export to the American market, the Chrysler TC by Maserati, with Chrysler-sourced engines. In July of that same year, a merger between Maserati and Nuova Innocenti was decided; it was carried out in 1985. Chrysler upped its stake to 15.6% by underwriting three quarters of a 75 billion Lire capital raise in 1986.\nNew Biturbo-based cars and model evolutions were launched year after year. In 1984, it was the 228, a large coup\u00e9 built on the long wheelbase saloon chassis, with a new 2.8-litre version of the twin-turbocharged V6. Weber Fuel injection was phased in starting in 1986, bringing improved reliability and a host of new model variants. The same year, the ageing Quattroporte III was updated and marketed as the luxurious Royale, built to order in an handful of examples a year; its discontinuation in 1990 marked the disappearance of Maserati's four-cam V8 engine, a design that could trace its roots back to the 450S racer and the legendary 5000 GT. In 1987, the 2.8-litre 430 topped the saloon range. 1988 brought the Karif, a two-seater, based on the short wheelbase Spyder chassis. Meanwhile, the Biturbo name was dropped altogether, as updated coup\u00e9s and saloons were updated and became the 222 and 422. 1989 marked the reintroduction of an eight-cylinder grand tourer: the Shamal, built on a modified short wheelbase Biturbo chassis, clad in new muscular bodywork styled by Marcello Gandini. It was powered by an all-new twin-turbocharged 32-valve V8 engine paired to a 6-speed gearbox. 2.0-litre, 24-valve V6 engines were also added to the Shamal range.\nDe Tomaso-FIAT years.\nIn October 1989, De Tomaso bought the remaining GEPI quota. In December, FIAT entered in Maserati's history. Maserati and Innocenti were separated; Innocenti Milano S.p.A., the company that sold Innocenti cars, continued its business under a 51% FIAT Auto ownership. All of the Modena and Lambrate plants went to a newly created company, the still existent Maserati S.p.A.; 49% of it was owned by FIAT Auto and 51% was controlled by De Tomaso through the old company, Officine Alfieri Maserati.\nIn the early 1990s, a mid-engine sports car prototype was developed, the Maserati Chubasco, which was supposed to be built in 1992, but the project proved very expensive and was shelved. It featured Gandini-designed body, a V8 powertrain, and a backbone chassis. The project was cancelled, as part owner Fiat deemed the project to be too close to Ferrari in the marketplace. Starting in 1990, the entire range of the Biturbo received a facelift designed by Marcello Gandini, on the lines of the Shamal's styling. The last version of the Biturbo coup\u00e9 was called Racing. It was a transitional model in which several features to be found on the upcoming Ghibli were tested.\nThe Ghibli II was introduced in 1992. It was a six-cylinder coup\u00e9, with modified Biturbo underpinnings dressed by new Gandini bodywork (toned down from the Shamal) and the latest evolution of the 24-valve twin-turbocharged V6 with record breaking specific output. The underpinnings of the stillborn Chubasco gave birth to the Maserati Barchetta, a small open top mid-engine sports car styled by Synthesis Design's Carlo Gaino. a one-make racing series was held in 1992 and 1993, using the Barchetta Corsa racing version; the road-going Barchetta Stradale was never put into production. Just 17 units of the Barchetta were produced.\nBetween 1992 and 1994, all models save for the Ghibli and Shamal were progressively discontinued.\nFIAT ownership.\nOn 19 May 1993, 17 years after having rescued it from liquidation, Alejandro De Tomaso sold his 51% stake in Maserati to FIAT, which became the sole owner.\nIn 1994, the aging Quattroporte III/Royale was replaced by the Quattroporte IV which was ultimately based on Biturbo underpinnings. Styled by Marcello Gandini, it was initially available with a V6 engine shared with the Ghibli II. A more powerful V8 variant was made available in 1996 and \"Seicilindri\" and \"Ottocilindri\" (six and eight cylindres in Italian) badging was introduced to distinguish between the two models. The engine of the V8 model was a development of the Shamal's V8.\nOver two decades after the ill-fated Chrysler TC by Maserati during Chrysler's brief ownership stake in Maserati, the two companies became interconnected again when FIAT purchased majority control of Chrysler in 2011 as a result of Chrysler's bankruptcy. Maserati and Citro\u00ebn also later interconnected for the first time since 1975, following the PSA-FCA merger in 2021 with the formation of Stellantis.\nFerrari.\nIn July 1997, FIAT sold a 50% share in the company to Maserati's long-time arch-rival Ferrari (Ferrari itself being owned by FIAT). In 1999, Ferrari took full control, making Maserati its luxury division. A new factory was built, replacing the existing 1940s-era facility.\nThe steps taken by the new parent company resulted in the improved Quattroporte Evoluzione which was introduced at the March 1998 Geneva Motor Show.\nIn 1998, a new chapter began in Maserati's history when the company launched the 3200 GT. This two-door coup\u00e9 is powered by a 3.2\u00a0L twin-turbocharged V8 derived from the Shamal engine, which is rated at .\nIn 2002 the 3200 GT was replaced by the Maserati Coup\u00e9 and Spyder; evolved from the 3200, these cars used an all-new, naturally aspirated, dry sump 4.2-litre V8 with a transaxle gearbox. In turn Coup\u00e9 and Spyder were replaced by the GranTurismo and GranCabrio.\nMeanwhile, two new models were shown to the public: the Maserati MC12 road supersports and successful GT racer with a Ferrari Enzo\u2013derived chassis and engine and the new Quattroporte, a luxury saloon with the 4.2-litre V8 engine of the Gran Turismo. In 2001, Ferrari decided to change all of the old tooling and installed high-tech devices in the Modena factory.\nSince early 2002, Maserati once again entered the United States market, which has quickly become its largest market worldwide. The company has also re-entered the racing arena with their Trofeo and, in December 2003, the MC12 (formerly known as the MCC), which was developed according to FIA GT regulations and has since competed with great success in the world FIA GT championship, winning the teams championship three consecutive times from 2005 to 2007. The MC12 has also been raced in various national GT championship as well as in the American Le Mans series. The Maserati MC12 is based on the Ferrari Enzo sports car; 50 street-legal homologation models (roadsters and coup\u00e9s) have been sold.\nThe Maserati and Alfa Romeo Group under FIAT Group.\nThe Maserati and Alfa Romeo group, under FIAT Group, started in 2005, when Maserati was split off from Ferrari and partnered with Alfa Romeo. On 9 June 2005, the 20,000th Maserati, a Quattroporte V, left the factory. In the second quarter of 2007, Maserati made profit for the first time in 17 years under FIAT ownership.\nOn January 22, 2010, FIAT announced that it had created a new partnership/brand group for Alfa Romeo, Maserati, and Abarth. The group was led by Harald J. Wester, the current CEO of Maserati. Sergio Marchionne stated that \"[the] purpose of bringing the Alfa Romeo, Maserati and Abarth brands under the same leadership is to emphasize and leverage the value of the shared qualities of the three brands in terms of their sporting characteristics and performance.\" Abarth stayed under Wester's leadership until 2013, leaving Maserati and Alfa Romeo in the brand group, led by Wester. Although Maserati and Alfa Romeo are in a brand group, Alfa Romeo is structured under FCA Italy S.p.A., which itself is structured under FCA, whereas Maserati is structured solely under FCA. In addition, in an interview with Wester in 2015, he clarified that his \"role at Maserati is different from that in the Alfa Romeo as the latter is better integrated into the FIAT Group\" and that \"the new Alfa car won't share any parts with the current Maserati model. I'm not planning any technical merging of these two makes.\"\nIn 2013, Maserati started its expansion with the Quattroporte VI, which was designed to better compete with the Mercedes-Benz S-Class. This was followed by the introduction of the Ghibli, which was slated to compete against the Mercedes-Benz E-Class and the BMW 5 Series. \nThe 100th anniversary of the foundation.\nIn 2014, to celebrate the centenary of its foundation, it released a concept car called Maserati Alfieri, in honor of the brand's founder, Alfieri Maserati.\nOn May 6, 2014, Maserati confirmed production of the Maserati Levante SUV and the Maserati Alfieri.\nHowever, the Maserati Alfieri concept, which received great critical and commercial success, never came to production. This model was supposed to replace the Maserati GranTurismo, but this production change was cancelled due to the success of the GranTurismo, which underwent improvements and updates until 2019.\nAlong with their expansion, Maserati started their re-entrance into the high-performance car field, in order to compete with brands such as Mercedes-AMG, BMW M, Porsche, Jaguar, and in certain cases, Ferrari. This was done by introducing Maserati models that have high power output engines, higher performance components, and better handling. The top-of-the-line variants of the Quattroporte VI, Ghibli, and Levante have V8 engines with all-wheel drive, in order to better compete with their rival offerings.\nMaserati sales in 2013 was 15,400 units, which is up from just over 6,000 units worldwide in 2012 (2013 included the release of the new Quattroporte and Ghibli towards the end of the year, and thus the first year to fully represent the sales inclusive of these models is 2014). In May, 2014, Maserati sold a company record of over 3,000 cars worldwide, causing them to increase production of the Ghibli and Quattroporte. For that same month in the United States, Maserati sold 1,114 vehicles, which is up 406.19% over the same month in the previous year in the United States. Maserati's best month of sales in the United States was September 2014, with 1,318 units sold.&lt;ref name=\"autoblog.com 10/14\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The month in 2014 where the increase on sales for the same month of the previous year was the highest was May, with a volume increase of 406.19%. The sales target for 2018 was 75,000 units worldwide.\n2014 marked a historic record of 13,411 total units sold in North America for the year, a 169% increase versus 2013, boasting the highest-ever overall sales year for Maserati North America, Inc. Worldwide, in 2014 Maserati sold about 36,500 cars, a 136% increase over 2013. Harald J. Wester stated that Maserati would not surpass the 70,000 sales per year mark, and that Maserati would maintain its current position in the higher end of the luxury sports car market, rather than expanding downmarket and making vehicles smaller and less expensive than the Ghibli and Levante (such as those similar to the Audi Q5 and Mercedes-Benz C-Class), as other FCA brands, specifically Alfa Romeo, are in those market spaces.\nSince 2009, Marco Tencone was the head designer of Maserati cars, although, in late 2015, he was announced as remaining in executive positions at Lancia and FIAT only.\nFCA.\nIn 2014, Fiat S.p.A. merged with American automaker Chrysler to form Fiat Chrysler Automobiles. Under FCA, new models were released that met with excellent critical and commercial success, but above all, sales, such as the Maserati Levante, Maserati's first SUV. Furthermore, the Maserati Ghibli and Maserati Quattroporte also confirmed excellent sales. The Maserati GranTurismo was produced until 2019, confirming its huge success for the brand. Furthermore, in 2020, a year marred by the COVID-19 pandemic, a new sports car, the Maserati MC20, was released, which achieved great critical and commercial success. The Maserati range consolidated the brand's profitability and image and prestige.\nStellantis.\nSubsequently, in 2021, FCA merged with the French PSA Group to form Stellantis, reuniting Maserati with Citro\u00ebn.\nUnder Stellantis, a new SUV will be released starting in 2022 alongside the Maserati Levante, the Maserati Grecale, smaller in size than the Levante, which achieves good critical and sales success. In 2023, production of the Maserati Ghibli and Maserati Quattroporte was halted, while the new Maserati GranTurismo was released also with the new electric motor called Folgore. \nIn 2024, the GranCabrio, an open-top variant based on the GranTurismo, was released, while the production of Maserati Levante was halted.\nHowever, starting in 2024, uncertainties surrounding the transition from combustion engines to electric ones and in 2025, uncertainties due to the application of tariffs leaded to a weakening of both production and sales for the entire Stellantis group and consequently also for Maserati.\nThe inefficiencies of Stellantis's commercial strategy in 2024, which resulted in a drastic loss of both production and sales and consequently market share, led to the resignation of Stellantis CEO Carlos Tavares and a renewal or redefinition of the positions of all the group's corporate managers, and led to a period of great uncertainty within Maserati. In 2025, the new Stellantis CEO, Antonio Filosa, supported by Santo Ficili, the CEO of Maserati, relaunched the brand through a commercial policy aimed at building customer loyalty, drawing on the brand's glorious history in races such as the Mille Miglia and in vehicle customization through the Officine Fuoriserie program.\nIn 2025, Maserati unveiled at the Goodwood Festival of Speed the Maserati MCPura based on the previous Maserati MC20, but with minor styling changes, including redesigned front and rear fascias and slightly modified driver and passenger seats. It is expected to begin production in 2026 and will replace the MC20. As for the MC20, the MCPura is also available in the Cielo version, an open-top variant. Furthermore, the customization program developed by Officine Fuoriserie also continues for the MCPura.\nElectrification.\nOn 17 March 2022, chief executive officer Davide Grasso announced that Maserati will produce an electric version of all of its models by 2025. CEO also announced the plans to phase out all of its internal combustion engine vehicles by 2030. All Maserati EVs will wear the Folgore name (that means \"lightning\" in Italian).\n\"See List of Maserati vehicles for a complete historical list\"\nAutomobiles.\nCurrent models.\nMaserati MC20.\nThe Maserati MC20 is a 2-door, mid-engined sports car that debuted in September 2020. The car features a carbon fibre monocoque and a 3-litre V6 engine producing 630 horsepower.\nMaserati Grecale.\nThe Maserati Grecale is a front-engine, five-door, five passenger compact luxury crossover SUV. Grecale shares the company's Giorgio platform with the Alfa Romeo Stelvio and the fifth generation Jeep Grand Cherokee. Available engines include 300 or 330\u00a0hp mild hybrid inline-four and a 530\u00a0hp V6 \"Nettuno\" engine for the Trofeo specification.\nMaserati GranTurismo.\nThe Maserati GranTurismo is a grand tourer introduced in 2007. The GranTurismo has a 4.7-litre V8, rated at in Sport trim and for the MC Stradale. A convertible (GranCabrio) version is also available in standard, Sport, and MC models. The final production year for the Maserati GranTurismo was scheduled to be 2014, and its position would be succeeded by Maserati Alfieri. Production continued until 2019, with final example called Z\u00e9da rolled off the line. \nThe current 2nd generation GranTurismo was revealed online in 2022 and production commenced in April 2023. It comes with either a 3-litre V6 engine, shared with the MC20, albeit detuned to 483 and 542\u00a0hp for the Modena and Trofeo trims respectively, or as an electrified version with 3 motors producing 761\u00a0hp under the Folgore trim.\nMotorsport.\nThe Maserati brothers were among the pioneers of motorsport, having participated in numerous races in the early 1920s.\nIn 1922, the Maserati brothers were appointed to manage the racing activities of the Turin-based Diatto company, with Alfieri Maserati as their lead driver. However, after just three years, due to debt, the Piedmontese manufacturer withdrew from racing.\nThe first Maserati-branded car was the 1926 Tipo 26, a racing car derived from the Diatto 30 Sport, equipped with a new 1.5-liter inline-eight engine producing 120 hp. It made its racing debut at the 1926 Targa Florio, taking a class victory and ninth place overall.\nIn 1926, Mario Maserati, the only brother who had chosen an artistic career over a racing career, designed the famous Trident logo, inspired by the Fountain of Neptune in Bologna.\nIn the following years, Maserati established itself in motor racing, achieving significant successes such as the 1928 Coppa dell'Etna and its first historic international victory in 1929 at the Tripoli Grand Prix, with the Maserati Tipo V4 16-cylinder driven by Borzacchini, who set a new world speed record in the Cremona 10 km race at 247.933 km/h. However, in 1932, Alfieri Maserati died due to injuries sustained in a car accident five years earlier, and Ernesto Maserati abandoned his racing career to oversee the technical side of the company alongside Ettore, while Bindo, the second-born of the Maserati brothers, became president.\nIn 1937, Maserati was acquired by Modena-based entrepreneur Adolfo Orsi, who in 1939 moved the headquarters from Bologna to Modena, where they remain today. The three brothers remained with the company under Orsi's direction for another 10 years in the engineering department.\nAdolfo Orsi moved the production of Maserati cars from Bologna to Modena in 1940, close to his steelworks and his spark plug factory.\nIt was precisely in those years, 1939 and 1940, that Maserati won the Indianapolis 500-Mile Race. Wilbur Shaw won driving a Maserati 8CTF named the 'Boyle Special'.\nSince the early 1950s, Maserati has participated in numerous competitions through its sports division Maserati Corse, initially competing in Formula Grand Prix, then in Formula 1, where it won two Formula One World Drivers' Championship, but also in Endurance races until the end of the 1960s. Only in 2004 did Maserati return to compete in an official championship, specifically in the FIA GT Championship with the Maserati MC12, developed based closely on the Ferrari Enzo.\nMaserati has been competing in Formula E since 2022 and in the GT2 European Series since 2023.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdditional sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "63972", "revid": "49218370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63972", "title": "Murmansk", "text": "City in Murmansk Oblast, Russia\nMurmansk () is a port city and the administrative center of Murmansk Oblast in the far northwest part of Russia. It is the world's largest city north of the Arctic Circle and sits on both slopes and banks of a modest fjord, Kola Bay, an estuarine inlet of the Barents Sea, with its bulk on the east bank of the inlet. The city is a major port of the Arctic Ocean and is about from the border with Norway, from the border with Finland and from Moscow.\nBeing a non-freezing port due to the warm North Atlantic Current, Murmansk resembles cities of its size across western Russia, with highway and railway access to the rest of Europe, and the northernmost trolleybus system on Earth. Its connectivity contrasts with the isolation of Arctic ports like the Siberian Dikson on the shores of the Kara Sea, and Iqaluit, in the Canadian Arctic. Despite long, snowy winters, Murmansk's climate is moderated by the generally ice-free waters around it.\nThere was a building boom in the early twentieth century's arms races. \nMurmansk's population has been in decline since the end of the Cold War, from \u2009(1989 Soviet census); \u2009(2002 census); \u2009(2010 census); to 270,384 (2021 Census).\nEtymology.\nThe name of the city is derived from \"Murman\", from an old name for Norwegians by Russians; it is likely a borrowing from Old Norse \"nor\u00f0ma\u00f0r\" (possibly related to Old English \"Nor\u00femann\" and English \"Northman\"), which gave its name to the Murman Coast and the surrounding region including the Kola Peninsula.\nHistory.\nMurmansk was the last city founded in the Russian Empire. \nIn 1915, World War I needs led to the construction of the northern part of the Kirov Railway: a railroad from Petrozavodsk to an ice-free location on the Murman Coast in the Russian Arctic, to which Russia's allies shipped military supplies. \nThe terminus became known as the Murman station and soon boasted a port, a naval base, and an adjacent settlement with a population that quickly grew in size and soon surpassed the nearby towns of Alexandrovsk and Kola.\nOn June\u00a029 [O.S. July\u00a012], 1916, Russian Transport Minister Alexander Trepov petitioned to grant urban status to the railway settlement. On July\u00a06 [O.S. July\u00a019], 1916, the petition was approved and the town was named Romanov-on-Murman (, \"Romanov-na-Murmane\"), after the Imperial Russian dynasty, the Romanovs. \nOn September\u00a021 [O.S. October\u00a04], 1916, the official ceremony was performed, and the date is now considered the official date of the city's foundation. After the February Revolution of March 1917, on April\u00a03 [O.S. April\u00a016], 1917, the town was given its present name.\nIn the winter of 1917 the British North Russia Squadron under Rear Admiral Thomas Kemp was based at Murmansk.\nFrom 1918 to 1920, during the Russian Civil War, the town was occupied by the Western powers, who had been allied in World War I, and was also controlled by White Army forces.\nOn 13\u00a0February 1926, local self-government was organized in Murmansk for the first time, during a plenary session of the Murmansk City Soviet, which elected a Presidium. \nBefore this, the city was governed by the authorities of Alexandrovsky Uyezd and later of Murmansk Governorate. \nOn 1\u00a0August 1927, the All-Russian Central Executive Committee (VTsIK) issued two resolutions: \"On the Establishment of Leningrad Oblast\" and \"On the Borders and Composition of the Okrugs of Leningrad Oblast\", which transformed Murmansk Governorate into Murmansk Okrug within Leningrad Oblast and made Murmansk the administrative center of Murmansk Okrug.\nIn 1934, the Murmansk Okrug Executive Committee developed a redistricting proposal, which included a plan to enlarge the city by merging the surrounding territories in the north, south, and west into Murmansk. \nThis plan was not confirmed by the Leningrad Oblast Executive Committee. In 1935\u20131937 several rural localities of Kolsky and Polyarny Districts were merged into Murmansk anyway.\nAccording to the Presidium of the 'Leningrad Oblast Executive Committee resolution of 26\u00a0February 1935', the administrative center of Polyarny District was moved from Polyarnoye to Sayda-Guba. However, the provisions of the resolution were not fully implemented, and due to military construction in Polyarnoye, the administrative center was instead moved to Murmansk in the beginning of 1935. \nIn addition to being the administrative center of Murmansk Okrug, Murmansk continued to serve as the administrative center of Polyarny District until 11\u00a0September 1938. On 10\u00a0February 1938, when the VTsIK adopted a Resolution changing the administrative-territorial structure of Murmansk Okrug, the city of Murmansk became a separate administrative division of the okrug, equal in status to that of the districts. This status was retained when Murmansk Okrug was transformed into Murmansk Oblast on 28\u00a0May 1938. The Germans were promised the use of the port they called for transportation of goods and raw materials from 1922 to 1941.\nFrom March 1941 to 1945, the US government supplied Allied nations with food, oil, and materiel through the Lend-Lease policy. \nMurmansk was a link to the Western world for the Soviet Union. \nArctic convoys brought large quantities of goods: primarily military equipment, manufactured goods and raw materials.\nWehrmacht and Finnish forces in Finnish territory launched an offensive against Murmansk as part of Operation Silver Fox (29 June to 17 November 1941). Fierce Soviet resistance and harsh local weather, with the bad terrain, prevented them from capturing it. The \"Luftwaffe\" bombed Murmansk 792 times during World War II. \nIt suffered extensive destruction, the magnitude of which was rivaled only by the destruction in Leningrad and Stalingrad.\nOn 6\u00a0May 1985, the city's resistance was commemorated at the 40th anniversary of the victory over Nazi Germany in the formal designation of Murmansk as a Hero City. \nDuring the Cold War Murmansk was a center of Soviet submarine and icebreaker activity. \nSince the dissolution of the Soviet Union (December 1991), the nearby city and naval base of Severomorsk remain the headquarters of the Russian Northern Fleet.\nIn 1974, a tall statue \"Alyosha\", depicting a Soviet World War II soldier, was installed on a high foundation. The Hotel Arctic opened in 1984, becoming the tallest building above the Arctic Circle.\nOn 1\u00a0January 2015, the territory of Murmansk was expanded when the urban-type settlement of Roslyakovo, previously under the jurisdiction of the closed administrative-territorial formation of Severomorsk, was abolished and its territory merged into Murmansk.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nWithin the framework of administrative divisions, it is incorporated as the City of Murmansk\u2014an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the City of Murmansk is incorporated as Murmansk Urban Okrug.\nCity divisions.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], the city is divided into three administrative okrugs:\nCity districts were established in Murmansk for the first time by the Decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR of 20\u00a0April 1939; at the time, three city districts (Kirovsky, Leninsky, and Mikoyanovsky) were created. They were abolished on 2\u00a0June 1948. The same city districts were created for the second time on 23\u00a0June 1951.\nMikoyanovsky City District was renamed Oktyabrsky on 30\u00a0October 1957, but on 30\u00a0September 1958, all three city districts were again abolished. On 10\u00a0June 1967, two city districts were created (Leninsky and Oktyabrsky); Pervomaysky City District was split from Oktyabrsky on 21\u00a0February 1975. In the Charter of the Hero City of Murmansk, adopted on 17\u00a0December 1995, the districts started to be referred to as administrative okrugs.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nMurmansk experiences a subarctic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfc\"), with long and cold (though average by arctic standards) winters and short, cool summers. In the city, freezing temperatures are routinely experienced from October to May. Average temperatures exceed 0 degrees Celsius only from May through October. The average low during the coldest part of the year in Murmansk is approximately . However, temperatures routinely plunge below during the winter.\nMurmansk's brief summer is mild, with average highs in July exceeding . The city is slightly wetter during the summer than the winter and receives an annual average of just under of precipitation.\nThe \"midnight sun\" is above the horizon from 22 May to 23 July (63 days), and the period with continuous darkness is somewhat shorter \u2014 the polar night lasts from 2 December to 10 January (40 days).\nExtreme temperatures range from on 6 January 1985, and 27 January 1999, up to on 9 July 1972; the record cold daily maximum is , set on 6 January 1985, while, conversely, the record warm daily minimum is last set on 9 July 1972.\nMurmansk has been affected by global warming in recent decades, similar to other Arctic locations. For example, December 2007 had an average high of , while a average high was measured for March 2007. \nSummer has also been affected, with a average high for June 2013, and a average high during July 2018.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population of the city, according to the 2010 Census, was 307,257, of these, 141,130 men (45.9%) and 166,127 women (54.1%), down from 468,039 recorded in the 1989 Census. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the city has been consistently losing population, as the extensive military facilities the city is built around have declined. Ethnic Russians make up the majority of the population, but Ukrainian and Belarusian minorities also live in the city.\nEthnic composition (2010):\nPolitics.\nIn November 2010, direct mayoral elections were abolished; they were reinstituted in January 2014, with the most recent elections for mayor and city council taking place in September 2014.\nMuseums and monuments.\nMurmansk has two main museums: Murmansk Oblast Museum and Murmansk Oblast Art Museum; there are also several small museums. There are three professional theaters, libraries, and an aquarium in Murmansk.\nMurmansk is the venue of the decommissioned \"Lenin\" which is now a museum ship.\nAlyosha Monument, Murmansk or Defenders of the Soviet Arctic during the Great Patriotic War monument is also located in Murmansk. The main square of Murmansk is Five Corners, Murmansk.\nCulture.\nThere are three professional theaters in Murmansk. The oldest is the Murmansk Puppetry, which opened in 1933. The largest in the city was the Murmansk Regional Drama Theater, which opened in 1939. The Drama Theater of the Northern Fleet was opened in 1946.\nSports.\nThe city's association football teams are FC Sever Murmansk, which played in the Russian Second Division until 2014 when it folded due to financial difficulties, and FC Murmansk, a football team founded in 2022.\nBandy club Murman has played in the Russian Bandy Super League, last in 2011\u20132012. Between 2012 and 2018, they were playing in the second tier Russian Bandy Supreme League, but will from the 2018\u201319 season be a Super League team again. Their home arena, Stadium Stroitel, has an audience capacity of 5,000.\nThe city is one of only three places with representation in the female league, through the team Arktika. Proximity to pole and its side effects, Polar Night, has brought sport festivals such as North Festival Polar Olympiad and Sun Festival. The former has been awarded every year since the inaugural tournament in 1934. Norway, Finland, Sweden, Ukraine, Belarus and the Baltic countries take part in the North Festival Polar Olympiad.\nReligion.\nTo commemorate the 85th anniversary of the city's foundation, the snow-white Church of the Saviour on the Waters was modeled after the White Monuments of Vladimir and Suzdal and built on the shore for the sailors of Murmansk.\nFifteen religious associations have been registered in Murmansk. The largest is the Russian Orthodox Church. Murmansk is the center of its Murmansk and Monchegorsk diocese, as well as the Murmansk Metropolis. The city has about a dozen Orthodox churches. The department of the head of the diocese and the metropolis of Metropolitan Simon is located in St. Nicholas Cathedral.\nEconomy.\nMedia.\nMurmansk's evening newspaper is \"Vecherniy Murmansk\"; it has been published since 1991.\nTransportation.\nThe Port of Murmansk remains ice-free year round due to the warm North Atlantic Current and is an important fishing and shipping destination. It is home port to Atomflot, the world's only fleet of nuclear-powered icebreakers.\nThe Port is also the headquarters of Sevmorput (Northern Sea Route) and the administration of Russian Arctic maritime transport. In 2018, the Russian government transferred the main responsibility for the Northern Sea Route to Rosatom which through its ROSATOMFLOT subsidiary manages the Russian nuclear powered icebreaker fleet based in Murmansk.\nMurmansk is linked by the Kirov Railway to St.\u00a0Petersburg and is linked to the rest of Russia by the M18 Kola Motorway. Murmansk Airport provides air links to Moscow and St.\u00a0Petersburg.\nBuses and trolleybuses provide local transport.\nArctic Bridge.\nMurmansk is set to be the Russian terminus of the Arctic Bridge, a sea route linking it to the Canadian port of Churchill, Manitoba. Even though the passage has not been fully tested for commercial shipping yet, Russian interest in this project (along with the Northwest Passage) is substantial, as the bridge will serve as a major trade route between North America, Europe and Asia.\nEducation.\nMurmansk is home to Murmansk State Technical University, the Murmansk Arctic State University (formerly Murmansk State Pedagogical University), the Murmansk Institute of Humanities and the Murmansk College of Arts (the only art school of the Kola Peninsula, formerly the 'Murmansk Music School'). The city has 86 primary schools and 56 secondary schools, two boarding schools, and three reform schools. There is also a branch of the Naval Academy in Murmansk, where cadets study, to become officers of the Russian Navy.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMurmansk is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63973", "revid": "9243992", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63973", "title": "Wi-Fi", "text": "Family of wireless network protocols\nWi-Fi () is a family of wireless network protocols based on the IEEE 802.11 family of standards, which are commonly used for local area networking of devices and Internet access, allowing nearby digital devices to exchange data by radio waves. These are the most widely used computer networks, used globally in home and small office networks to link devices and to provide Internet access with wireless routers and wireless access points in public places such as coffee shops, restaurants, hotels, libraries, and airports.\n\"Wi-Fi\" is a trademark of the Wi-Fi Alliance, which restricts the use of the term \"\"Wi-Fi Certified\" to products that successfully complete interoperability certification testing. Non-compliant hardware is simply referred to as WLAN, and it may or may not work with \"Wi-Fi Certified\"\" devices. As of 2017,[ [update]] the Wi-Fi Alliance consisted of more than 800 companies from around the world. As of 2019,[ [update]] over 3.05 billion Wi-Fi-enabled devices are shipped globally each year.\nWi-Fi uses multiple parts of the IEEE 802 protocol family and is designed to work well with its wired sibling, Ethernet. Compatible devices can network through wireless access points with each other as well as with wired devices and the Internet. Different versions of Wi-Fi are specified by various IEEE 802.11 protocol standards, with different radio technologies determining radio bands, maximum ranges, and speeds that may be achieved. Wi-Fi most commonly uses the UHF and SHF radio bands, with the 6 gigahertz SHF band used in newer generations of the standard; these bands are subdivided into multiple channels. Channels can be shared between networks, but, within range, only one transmitter can transmit on a channel at a time.\nWi-Fi's radio bands work best for line-of-sight use. Common obstructions, such as walls, pillars, home appliances, etc., may greatly reduce range, but this also helps minimize interference between different networks in crowded environments. The range of an access point is about indoors, while some access points claim up to a range outdoors. Hotspot coverage can be as small as a single room with walls that block radio waves or as large as many square kilometers using multiple overlapping access points with roaming permitted between them. Over time, the speed and spectral efficiency of Wi-Fi has increased. As of 2019,[ [update]] some versions of Wi-Fi, running on suitable hardware at close range, can achieve speeds of 9.6\u00a0Gbit/s (gigabit per second).\nHistory.\nA 1985 ruling by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission released parts of the ISM bands for unlicensed use for communications in the United States. These frequency bands include the same 2.4\u00a0GHz bands used by equipment such as microwave ovens, and are thus subject to interference.\nIn 1991 in to the city of Nieuwegein in the Netherlands, the NCR Corporation and AT&amp;T invented the precursor to 802.11, intended for use in cashier systems, under the name WaveLAN. NCR's Vic Hayes, who held the chair of IEEE 802.11 for ten years, along with Bell Labs engineer Bruce Tuch, approached the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) to create a standard and were involved in designing the initial 802.11b and 802.11a specifications within the IEEE. They have both been subsequently inducted into the Wi-Fi NOW Hall of Fame.\nIn 1989 in Australia, a team of scientists began working on wireless LAN technology. A prototype test bed for a wireless local area network (WLAN) was developed in 1992 by a team of researchers from the Radiophysics Division of the CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation) in Australia, led by John O'Sullivan. A patent for Wi Fi was lodged by the CSIRO in 1992.\nThe first version of the 802.11 protocol was released in 1997, and provided up to 2\u00a0Mbit/s link speeds. This was updated in 1999 with 802.11b to permit 11\u00a0Mbit/s link speeds.\nIn 1999, the Wi-Fi Alliance formed as a trade association to hold the Wi-Fi trademark under which most IEEE 802.11 products are sold.\nThe major commercial breakthrough came with Apple Inc. adopting Wi-Fi for their iBook series of laptops in 1999. It was the first mass consumer product to offer Wi-Fi network connectivity, which was then branded by Apple as AirPort. This was in collaboration with the same group that helped create the standard: Vic Hayes, Bruce Tuch, Cees Links, Rich McGinn, and others from Lucent.\nIn 2000, Radiata, a group of Australian scientists connected to the CSIRO, were the first to use the 802.11a standard on chips connected to a Wi-Fi network.\nWi-Fi uses a large number of patents held by multiple different organizations. Australia, the United States and the Netherlands simultaneously claim the invention of Wi-Fi, and a consensus has not been reached globally. In 2009, the Australian CSIRO was awarded $200 million after a patent settlement with 14 technology companies, with a further $220 million awarded in 2012 after legal proceedings with 23 companies.\nIn 2016, the CSIRO's WLAN prototype test bed was chosen as Australia's contribution to the exhibition \"A History of the World in 100 Objects\" held in the National Museum of Australia.\nEtymology and terminology.\nThe name \"Wi-Fi\", commercially used as early as August 1999, was coined by the brand-consulting firm Interbrand. The Wi-Fi Alliance had hired Interbrand to create a name that was \"a little catchier than 'IEEE 802.11b Direct Sequence'.\" According to Phil Belanger, a founding member of the Wi-Fi Alliance, the term \"Wi-Fi\" was chosen from a list of ten names that Interbrand proposed. Interbrand also created the Wi-Fi logo. The yin-yang Wi-Fi logo indicates the certification of a product for interoperability. The name is often written as \"WiFi\", \"Wifi\", or \"wifi\", but these are not approved by the Wi-Fi Alliance.\nThe name \"Wi-Fi\" is \"not\" short-form for 'Wireless Fidelity', although the Wi-Fi Alliance did use the advertising slogan \"The Standard for Wireless Fidelity\" for a short time after the brand name was created, and the Wi-Fi Alliance was also called the \"Wireless Fidelity Alliance Inc.\" in some publications. IEEE, a separate but related organization, has stated \"WiFi is a short name for Wireless Fidelity\" on their website. The name \"Wi-Fi\" was partly chosen because it sounds similar to Hi-Fi, which consumers take to mean \"high fidelity\" or \"high quality\". Interbrand hoped consumers would find the name catchy, and that they would assume this \"wireless\" protocol has high fidelity because of its name.\nOther technologies intended for fixed points, including Motorola Canopy, are usually called \"fixed wireless\". Alternative wireless technologies include Zigbee, Z-Wave, Bluetooth and mobile phone standards.\nTo connect to a Wi-Fi LAN, a computer must be equipped with a wireless network interface controller. The combination of a computer and an interface controller is called a \"station\". Stations are identified by one or more MAC addresses.\nWi-Fi nodes often operate in infrastructure mode in which all communications go through a base station. \"Ad hoc mode\" refers to devices communicating directly with each other, without communicating with an access point.\nA service set is the set of all the devices associated with a particular Wi-Fi network. Devices in a service set need not be on the same wavebands or channels. A service set can be local, independent, extended, mesh, or a combination. Each service set has an associated identifier, a 32-byte service set identifier (SSID), which identifies the network. The SSID is configured within the devices that are part of the network. A basic service set (BSS) is a group of stations that share the same wireless channel, SSID, and other settings that have wirelessly connected, usually to the same access point. Each BSS is identified by a MAC address called the \"BSSID\".\nCertification.\nThe IEEE does not test equipment for compliance with their standards. The Wi-Fi Alliance was formed in 1999 to establish and enforce standards for interoperability and backward compatibility, and to promote wireless local-area-network technology. The Wi-Fi Alliance enforces the use of the Wi-Fi brand to technologies based on the IEEE 802.11 standards from the IEEE. Manufacturers with membership in the Wi-Fi Alliance, whose products pass the certification process, gain the right to mark those products with the Wi-Fi logo. Specifically, the certification process requires conformance to the IEEE 802.11 radio standards, the WPA and WPA2 security standards, and the EAP authentication standard. Certification may optionally include tests of IEEE 802.11 draft standards, interaction with cellular-phone technology in converged devices, and features relating to security set-up, multimedia, and power-saving.\nNot every Wi-Fi device is submitted for certification. The lack of Wi-Fi certification does not necessarily imply that a device is incompatible with other Wi-Fi devices. The Wi-Fi Alliance may or may not sanction derivative terms, such as Super Wi-Fi, coined by the US Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to describe proposed networking in the UHF TV band in the US.\nVersions and generations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEquipment frequently supports multiple versions of Wi-Fi. To communicate, devices must use a common Wi-Fi version. The versions differ between the radio wavebands they operate on, the radio bandwidth they occupy, the maximum data rates they can support and other details. Some versions permit the use of multiple antennas, which permits greater speeds as well as reduced interference.\nHistorically, the equipment listed the versions of Wi-Fi supported using the name of the IEEE standards. In 2018, the Wi-Fi Alliance introduced simplified Wi-Fi generational numbering to indicate equipment that supports Wi-Fi 4 (802.11n), Wi-Fi 5 (802.11ac) and Wi-Fi 6 (802.11ax). These generations have a high degree of backward compatibility with previous versions. The alliance has stated that the generational level 4, 5, or 6 can be indicated in the user interface when connected, along with the signal strength.\nThe most important standards affecting Wi\u2011Fi are: 802.11a, 802.11b, 802.11g, 802.11n (Wi-Fi 4), 802.11h, 802.11i, 802.11-2007, 802.11\u20132012, 802.11ac (Wi-Fi 5), 802.11ad, 802.11af, 802.11-2016, 802.11ah, 802.11ai, 802.11aj, 802.11aq, 802.11ax (Wi-Fi 6), 802.11ay.\nUses.\nInternet.\nWi-Fi technology may be used to provide local network and Internet access to devices that are within Wi-Fi range of one or more routers that are connected to the Internet. The coverage of one or more interconnected access points can extend from an area as small as a few rooms to as large as many square kilometres. Coverage in the larger area may require a group of access points with overlapping coverage. For example, public outdoor Wi-Fi technology has been used successfully in wireless mesh networks in London. An international example is Fon.\nWi-Fi provides services in private homes, businesses, as well as in public spaces. Wi-Fi hotspots may be set up either free of charge or commercially, often using a captive portal webpage for access. Organizations, enthusiasts, authorities and businesses, such as airports, hotels, and restaurants, often provide free or paid-use hotspots to attract customers, to provide services to promote business in selected areas. Routers often incorporate a digital subscriber line modem or a cable modem and a Wi-Fi access point, are frequently set up in homes and other buildings, to provide Internet access for the structure.\nSimilarly, battery-powered routers may include a mobile broadband modem and a Wi-Fi access point. When subscribed to a cellular data carrier, they allow nearby Wi-Fi stations to access the Internet. A number of smartphones have a built-in mobile hotspot capability of this sort, though carriers often disable the feature, or charge a separate fee to enable it. Standalone devices such as MiFi- and WiBro-branded devices provide the capability. Some laptops that have a cellular modem card can also act as mobile Internet Wi-Fi access points.\nMultiple traditional university campuses in the developed world provide at least partial Wi-Fi coverage. Carnegie Mellon University built the first campus-wide wireless Internet network, called Wireless Andrew, at its Pittsburgh campus in 1993 before Wi-Fi branding existed. A number of universities collaborate in providing Wi-Fi access to students and staff through the Eduroam international authentication infrastructure.\nCity-wide.\nIn the early 2000s, multiple cities around the world announced plans to construct citywide Wi-Fi networks. There are a number of successful examples; in 2004, Mysore (Mysuru) became India's first Wi-Fi-enabled city. A company called WiFiyNet has set up hotspots in Mysore, covering the whole city and a few nearby villages.\nIn 2005, St. Cloud, Florida and Sunnyvale, California, became the first cities in the United States to offer citywide free Wi-Fi (from MetroFi). Minneapolis has generated $1.2 million in profit annually for its provider.\nIn May 2010, the then London mayor Boris Johnson pledged to have London-wide Wi-Fi by 2012. Several boroughs including Westminster and Islington already had extensive outdoor Wi-Fi coverage at that point.\nNew York City announced a city-wide campaign to convert old phone booths into digital kiosks in 2014. The project, titled LinkNYC, has created a network of kiosks that serve as public Wi-Fi hotspots, high-definition screens and landlines. Installation of the screens began in late 2015. The city government plans to implement more than seven thousand kiosks over time, eventually making LinkNYC the largest and fastest public, government-operated Wi-Fi network in the world. The UK has planned a similar project across major cities of the country, with the project's first implementation in the London Borough of Camden.\nOfficials in South Korea's capital Seoul were moving to provide free Internet access at more than 10,000 locations around the city, including outdoor public spaces, major streets, and densely populated residential areas. Seoul was planning to grant leases to KT, LG Telecom, and SK Telecom. The companies were supposed to invest $44 million in the project, which was to be completed in 2015.\nGeolocation.\nWi-Fi positioning systems use known positions of Wi-Fi hotspots to identify a device's location. It is used when GPS isn't suitable due to issues like signal interference or slow satellite acquisition. This includes assisted GPS, urban hotspot databases, and indoor positioning systems. Wi-Fi positioning relies on measuring signal strength (RSSI) and fingerprinting. Parameters like SSID and MAC address are crucial for identifying access points. The accuracy depends on nearby access points in the database. Signal fluctuations can cause errors, which can be reduced with noise-filtering techniques. For low precision, integrating Wi-Fi data with geographical and time information has been proposed.\nThe Wi-Fi RTT capability introduced in IEEE 802.11mc allows for positioning based on round trip time measurement, an improvement over the RSSI method. The IEEE 802.11az standard promises further improvements in geolocation accuracy.\nMotion detection.\nWi-Fi sensing is used in applications such as motion detection and gesture recognition.\nOperational principles.\nWi-Fi stations communicate by sending each other data packets, blocks of data individually sent and delivered over radio on various channels. As with all radio, this is done by the modulation and demodulation of carrier waves. Different versions of Wi-Fi use different techniques, 802.11b uses direct-sequence spread spectrum on a single carrier, whereas 802.11a, Wi-Fi 4, 5 and 6 use orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing.\nChannels are used half duplex and can be time-shared by multiple networks. Any packet sent by one computer is locally received by stations tuned to that channel, even if that information is intended for just one destination. Stations typically ignore information not addressed to them. The use of the same channel also means that the data bandwidth is shared, so for example, available throughput to each device is halved when two stations are actively transmitting.\nAs with other IEEE 802 LANs, stations come programmed with a globally unique 48-bit MAC address. The MAC addresses are used to specify both the destination and the source of each data packet. On the reception of a transmission, the receiver uses the destination address to determine whether the transmission is relevant to the station or should be ignored.\nA scheme known as carrier-sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) governs the way stations share channels. With CSMA/CA stations attempt to avoid collisions by beginning transmission only after the channel is sensed to be idle, but then transmit their packet data in its entirety. CSMA/CA cannot completely prevent collisions, as two stations may sense the channel to be idle at the same time and thus begin transmission simultaneously. A collision happens when a station receives signals from multiple stations on a channel at the same time. This corrupts the transmitted data and can require stations to re-transmit. The lost data and re-transmission reduces throughput, in some cases severely.\nWaveband.\nThe 802.11 standard provides several distinct radio frequency ranges for use in Wi-Fi communications: 900\u00a0MHz, 2.4\u00a0GHz, 3.6\u00a0GHz, 4.9\u00a0GHz, 5\u00a0GHz, 6\u00a0GHz and 60\u00a0GHz bands. Each range is divided into a multitude of channels. In the standards, channels are numbered at 5\u00a0MHz spacing within a band (except in the 60\u00a0GHz band, where they are 2.16\u00a0GHz apart), and the number refers to the centre frequency of the channel. Although channels are numbered at 5\u00a0MHz spacing, transmitters generally occupy at least 20\u00a0MHz, and standards allow for neighbouring channels to be bonded together to form a wider channel for higher throughput.\nCountries apply their own regulations to the allowable channels, allowed users and maximum power levels within these frequency ranges. 802.11b/g/n can use the 2.4\u00a0GHz band, operating in the United States under FCC Part 15 rules and regulations. In this frequency band, equipment may occasionally suffer interference from microwave ovens, cordless telephones, USB 3.0 hubs, Bluetooth and other devices.\nSpectrum assignments and operational limitations are not consistent worldwide: Australia and Europe allow for an additional two channels (12, 13) beyond the 11 permitted in the United States for the 2.4\u00a0GHz band, while Japan has three more (12\u201314).\n802.11a/h/j/n/ac/ax can use the 5\u00a0GHz U-NII band, which, for much of the world, offers at least 23 non-overlapping 20\u00a0MHz channels. This is in contrast to the 2.4\u00a0GHz frequency band where the channels are only 5\u00a0MHz wide. In general, lower frequencies have longer range but have less capacity. The 5\u00a0GHz bands are absorbed to a greater degree by common building materials than the 2.4\u00a0GHz bands and usually give a shorter range.\nAs 802.11 specifications evolved to support higher throughput, the protocols have become much more efficient in their bandwidth use. Additionally, they have gained the ability to aggregate channels together to gain still more throughput where the bandwidth for additional channels is available. 802.11n allows for double radio spectrum bandwidth (40\u00a0MHz) per channel compared to 802.11a or 802.11g (20\u00a0MHz). 802.11n can be set to limit itself to 20\u00a0MHz bandwidth to prevent interference in dense communities. In the 5\u00a0GHz band, 20\u00a0MHz, 40\u00a0MHz, 80\u00a0MHz, and 160\u00a0MHz channels are permitted with some restrictions, giving much faster connections.\nCommunication stack.\nWi-Fi is part of the IEEE 802 protocol family. The data is organized into 802.11 frames that are very similar to Ethernet frames at the data link layer, but with extra address fields. MAC addresses are used as network addresses for routing over the LAN.\nWi-Fi's MAC and physical layer (PHY) specifications are defined by IEEE 802.11 for modulating and receiving one or more carrier waves to transmit the data in the infrared, and 2.4, 3.6, 5, 6, or 60\u00a0GHz frequency bands. They are created and maintained by the IEEE LAN/MAN Standards Committee (IEEE 802). The base version of the standard was released in 1997 and has had many subsequent amendments. The standard and amendments provide the basis for wireless network products using the Wi-Fi brand. While each amendment is officially revoked when incorporated in the latest version of the standard, the corporate world tends to market to the revisions because they concisely denote capabilities of their products. As a result, in the market place, each revision tends to become its own standard.\nIn addition to 802.11, the IEEE 802 protocol family has specific provisions for Wi-Fi. These are required because Ethernet's cable-based media are not usually shared, whereas with wireless all transmissions are received by all stations within the range that employ that radio channel. While Ethernet has essentially negligible error rates, wireless communication media are subject to significant interference. Therefore, the accurate transmission is not guaranteed so delivery is, therefore, a best-effort delivery mechanism. Because of this, for Wi-Fi, the Logical Link Control (LLC) specified by IEEE 802.2 employs Wi-Fi's media access control (MAC) protocols to manage retries without relying on higher levels of the protocol stack.\nFor internetworking purposes, Wi-Fi is usually layered as a link layer below the internet layer of the Internet Protocol. This means that nodes have an associated internet address and, with suitable connectivity, this allows full Internet access.\nModes.\nInfrastructure.\nIn infrastructure mode, which is the most common mode used, all communications go through a base station. For communications within the network, this introduces an extra use of the airwaves but has the advantage that any two stations that can communicate with the base station can also communicate through the base station, which limits issues associated with the hidden node problem and simplifies the protocols.\nAd hoc and Wi-Fi direct.\nWi-Fi also allows communications directly from one computer to another without an access point intermediary. This is called \"ad hoc\" Wi-Fi transmission. Different types of ad hoc networks exist. In the simplest case, network nodes must talk directly to each other. In more complex protocols nodes may forward packets, and nodes keep track of how to reach other nodes, even if they move around.\nAd hoc mode was first described by Chai Keong Toh in his 1996 patent of wireless ad hoc routing, implemented on Lucent WaveLAN 802.11a wireless on IBM ThinkPads over a size nodes scenario spanning a region of over a mile. The success was recorded in \"Mobile Computing\" magazine (1999) and later published formally in \"IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications\", 2002 and \"ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review\", 2001.\nThis wireless ad hoc network mode has proven popular with multiplayer video games on handheld game consoles, such as the Nintendo DS and PlayStation Portable. It is also popular on digital cameras, and other consumer electronics devices. Some devices can also share their Internet connection using ad hoc, becoming hotspots or virtual routers.\nSimilarly, the Wi-Fi Alliance promotes the specification Wi-Fi Direct for file transfers and media sharing through a new discovery and security methodology. Wi-Fi Direct launched in October 2010.\nAnother mode of direct communication over Wi-Fi is Tunneled Direct Link Setup (TDLS), which enables two devices on the same Wi-Fi network to communicate directly, instead of via the access point.\nMultiple access points.\nAn Extended Service Set may be formed by deploying multiple access points that are configured with the same SSID and security settings. Wi-Fi client devices typically connect to the access point that can provide the strongest signal within that service set.\nIncreasing the number of Wi-Fi access points for a network provides redundancy, better range, support for fast handover, and increased overall network capacity by using more channels or by defining smaller cells. Except for the smallest implementations (such as home or small office networks), Wi-Fi implementations have moved toward \"thin\" access points, with more of the network intelligence housed in a centralized network appliance, relegating individual access points to the role of dumb transceivers. Outdoor applications may use mesh topologies.\nPerformance.\nWi-Fi operational range depends on factors such as the frequency band, modulation technique, transmitter power output, receiver sensitivity, antenna gain and type, and propagation and interference characteristics in the environment. At longer distances, speed is typically reduced.\nTransmitter power.\nCompared to cell phones and similar technology, Wi-Fi transmitters are low-power devices. In general, the maximum amount of power that a Wi-Fi device can transmit is limited by local regulations, such as FCC Part 15 in the US. Equivalent isotropically radiated power (EIRP) in the European Union is limited to 20\u00a0dBm (100\u00a0mW).\nWi-Fi, however, has higher power compared to some other standards designed to support wireless personal area network applications. For example, Bluetooth provides a much shorter propagation range between 1 and 100 metres (1 and 100 yards) and so in general has a lower power consumption. Other low-power technologies such as Zigbee have fairly long range, but much lower data rate. The high power consumption of Wi-Fi makes battery life in some mobile devices a concern.\nAntenna.\nOn wireless routers with detachable antennas, it is possible to improve range by fitting upgraded antennas. An access point compliant with either 802.11b or 802.11g, using the stock omnidirectional antenna might have a range of 0.1\u00a0km. The same radio with an external semi-parabolic antenna (15\u00a0dB gain) with a similarly equipped receiver at the far end might have a range of over 32\u00a0km.\nHigher gain rating (dBi) indicates deviation from a theoretical, perfect isotropic radiator toward a directional antenna, and therefore the antenna can project or accept a usable signal further in particular directions, as compared to a similar output power on a more isotropic antenna. For example, an 8\u00a0dBi antenna used with a 100\u00a0mW driver has a similar horizontal range to a 6\u00a0dBi antenna being driven at 500\u00a0mW. This assumes that radiation in the vertical direction is not useful for communications.\nMIMO (multiple-input and multiple-output).\nWi-Fi 4 and higher standards allow devices to have multiple antennas on transmitters and receivers. Multiple antennas enable the equipment to exploit multipath propagation on the same frequency bands, giving higher speeds and more than doubled range.\nThe Wi-Fi 5 standard uses the 5\u00a0GHz band exclusively, and is capable of multi-station WLAN throughput of at least 1 gigabit per second, and a single station throughput of at least 500\u00a0Mbit/s. This standard uses several signal processing techniques such as multi-user MIMO and spatial multiplexing streams, and wide channel bandwidth (160\u00a0MHz) to achieve its gigabit throughput.\nRadio propagation.\nWith Wi-Fi signals, line-of-sight usually works best, but signals can absorb, reflect, refract, diffract and fade through and around structures, both man-made and natural. Wi-Fi signals are very strongly affected by metallic structures (including rebar in concrete, low-e coatings in glazing), rock structures (including marble) and water (such as found in vegetation).\nDue to the complex nature of radio propagation at typical Wi-Fi frequencies, particularly around trees and buildings, algorithms can only approximately predict Wi-Fi signal strength for any given area in relation to a transmitter. Performance associated with long-range Wi-Fi is more easily predicted, since longer links typically operate line-of-sight from towers that transmit above the surrounding foliage.\nDistance records.\nDistance records (using non-standard devices) include in June 2007, held by Ermanno Pietrosemoli and EsLaRed of Venezuela, transferring about 3 MB/sec of data between the mountain-tops of El \u00c1guila and Platillon. The Swedish National Space Agency transferred data , using 6 watt amplifiers to reach an overhead stratospheric balloon.\nInterference.\nWi-Fi connections can be blocked or the Internet speed lowered by having other devices in the same area. Wi-Fi protocols are designed to share the wavebands reasonably fairly, and this often works with little to no disruption. To minimize collisions with Wi-Fi and non-Wi-Fi devices, Wi-Fi employs Carrier-sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA), where transmitters listen before transmitting and delay transmission of packets if they detect that other devices are active on the channel, or if noise is detected from adjacent channels or non-Wi-Fi sources. Nevertheless, Wi-Fi networks are still susceptible to the hidden node and exposed node problem.\nA standard speed Wi-Fi signal occupies five channels in the 2.4\u00a0GHz band. Interference can be caused by overlapping channels. Any two channel numbers that differ by five or more, such as 2 and 7, do not overlap (no adjacent-channel interference). The oft-repeated adage that channels 1, 6, and 11 are the \"only\" non-overlapping channels is, therefore, not accurate. Channels 1, 6, and 11 are the only \"group of three\" non-overlapping channels in North America. However, whether the overlap is significant depends on physical spacing. Channels that are four apart interfere a negligible amount\u00a0\u2013 much less than reusing channels (which causes co-channel interference)\u00a0\u2013 if transmitters are at least a few metres apart. In Europe and Japan where channel 13 is available, using Channels 1, 5, 9, and 13 for 802.11g and 802.11n is viable and recommended.\nHowever, multiple 2.4\u00a0GHz 802.11b and 802.11g access-points default to the same channel on initial startup, contributing to congestion on certain channels. Wi-Fi pollution, or an excessive number of access points in the area, can prevent access and interfere with other devices' use of other access points as well as with decreased signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) between access points. These issues can become a problem in high-density areas, such as large apartment complexes or office buildings with multiple Wi-Fi access points.\nOther devices use the 2.4\u00a0GHz band: microwave ovens, ISM band devices, security cameras, Zigbee devices, Bluetooth devices, video senders, cordless phones, baby monitors, and, in some countries, amateur radio, all of which can cause significant additional interference. It is also an issue when municipalities or other large entities (such as universities) seek to provide large area coverage. On some 5\u00a0GHz bands interference from radar systems can occur in some places. For base stations that support those bands they employ Dynamic Frequency Selection which listens for radar, and if it is found, it will not permit a network on that band.\nThese bands can be used by low power transmitters without a licence, and with few restrictions. However, while unintended interference is common, users that have been found to cause deliberate interference (particularly for attempting to locally monopolize these bands for commercial purposes) have been issued large fines.\nThroughput.\nVarious layer-2 variants of IEEE 802.11 have different characteristics. Across all flavours of 802.11, maximum achievable throughputs are either given based on measurements under ideal conditions or in the layer-2 data rates. This, however, does not apply to typical deployments in which data are transferred between two endpoints of which at least one is typically connected to a wired infrastructure, and the other is connected to an infrastructure via a wireless link.\nThis means that typically data frames pass an 802.11 (WLAN) medium and are being converted to 802.3 (Ethernet) or vice versa.\nDue to the difference in the frame (header) lengths of these two media, the packet size of an application determines the speed of the data transfer. This means that an application that uses small packets (e.g. VoIP) creates a data flow with high overhead traffic (low goodput).\nOther factors that contribute to the overall application data rate are the speed with which the application transmits the packets (i.e. the data rate) and the energy with which the wireless signal is received. The latter is determined by distance and by the configured output power of the communicating devices.\nThe same references apply to the attached throughput graphs, which show measurements of UDP throughput measurements. Each represents an average throughput of 25 measurements (the error bars are there, but barely visible due to the small variation), is with specific packet size (small or large), and with a specific data rate (10\u00a0kbit/s \u2013 100\u00a0Mbit/s). Markers for traffic profiles of common applications are included as well. This text and measurements do not cover packet errors but information about this can be found at the above references. The table below shows the maximum achievable (application-specific) UDP throughput in the same scenarios (same references again) with various WLAN (802.11) flavours. The measurement hosts have been 25 metres (yards) apart from each other; loss is again ignored.\nHardware.\nWi-Fi allows wireless deployment of local area networks (LANs). Also, spaces where cables cannot be run, such as outdoor areas and historical buildings, can host wireless LANs. However, building walls of certain materials, such as stone with high metal content, can block Wi-Fi signals.\nA Wi-Fi device is a short-range wireless device. Wi-Fi devices are fabricated on RF CMOS integrated circuit (RF circuit) chips.\nSince the early 2000s, manufacturers are building wireless network adapters into most laptops. The price of chipsets for Wi-Fi continues to drop, making it an economical networking option included in ever more devices.\nDifferent competitive brands of access points and client network-interfaces can inter-operate at a basic level of service. Products designated as \"Wi-Fi Certified\" by the Wi-Fi Alliance are backward compatible. Unlike mobile phones, any standard Wi-Fi device works anywhere in the world.\nAccess point.\nA wireless access point (WAP) connects a group of wireless devices to an adjacent wired LAN. An access point resembles a network hub, relaying data between connected wireless devices in addition to a (usually) single connected wired device, most often an Ethernet hub or switch, allowing wireless devices to communicate with other wired devices.\nWireless adapter.\nWireless adapters allow devices to connect to a wireless network. These adapters connect to devices using various external or internal interconnects such as mini PCIe (mPCIe, M.2), USB, ExpressCard and previously PCI, Cardbus, and PC Card. As of 2010, most newer laptop computers come equipped with built-in internal adapters.\nRouter.\nWireless routers integrate a Wireless Access Point, Ethernet switch, and internal router firmware application that provides IP routing, NAT, and DNS forwarding through an integrated WAN-interface. A wireless router allows wired and wireless Ethernet LAN devices to connect to a (usually) single WAN device such as a cable modem, DSL modem, or optical modem. A wireless router allows all three devices, mainly the access point and router, to be configured through one central utility. This utility is usually an integrated web server that is accessible to wired and wireless LAN clients and often optionally to WAN clients. This utility may also be an application that is run on a computer, as is the case with as Apple's AirPort, which is managed with the AirPort Utility on macOS and iOS.\nBridge.\nWireless network bridges can act to connect two networks to form a single network at the over Wi-Fi. The main standard is the wireless distribution system (WDS).\nWireless bridging can connect a wired network to a wireless network. A bridge differs from an access point: an access point typically connects wireless devices to one wired network. Two wireless bridge devices may be used to connect two wired networks over a wireless link, useful in situations where a wired connection may be unavailable, such as between two separate homes or for devices that have no wireless networking capability (but have wired networking capability), such as consumer entertainment devices; alternatively, a wireless bridge can be used to enable a device that supports a wired connection to operate at a wireless networking standard that is faster than supported by the wireless network connectivity feature (external dongle or inbuilt) supported by the device (e.g., enabling Wireless-N speeds (up to the maximum supported speed on the wired Ethernet port on both the bridge and connected devices including the wireless access point) for a device that only supports Wireless-G).\nA dual-band wireless bridge can also be used to enable 5\u00a0GHz wireless network operation on a device that only supports 2.4\u00a0GHz wireless and has a wired Ethernet port.\nRepeater.\nWireless range-extenders or wireless repeaters can extend the range of an existing wireless network. Strategically placed range-extenders can elongate a signal area or allow for the signal area to reach around barriers such as those pertaining in L-shaped corridors. Wireless devices connected through repeaters suffer from an increased latency for each hop, and there may be a reduction in the maximum available data throughput. Besides, the effect of additional users using a network employing wireless range-extenders is to consume the available bandwidth faster than would be the case whereby a single user migrates around a network employing extenders. For this reason, wireless range-extenders work best in networks supporting low traffic throughput requirements, such as for cases whereby a single user with a Wi-Fi-equipped tablet migrates around the combined extended and non-extended portions of the total connected network. Also, a wireless device connected to any of the repeaters in the chain has data throughput limited by the \"weakest link\" in the chain between the connection origin and connection end. Networks using wireless extenders are more prone to degradation from interference from neighbouring access points that border portions of the extended network and that happen to occupy the same channel as the extended network.\nEmbedded systems.\nThe security standard, Wi-Fi Protected Setup, allows embedded devices with a limited graphical user interface to connect to the Internet with ease. Wi-Fi Protected Setup has 2 configurations: The Push Button configuration and the PIN configuration. These embedded devices are also called The Internet of things and are low-power, battery-operated embedded systems. Several Wi-Fi manufacturers design chips and modules for embedded Wi-Fi, such as GainSpan.\nIncreasingly in the last few years (particularly as of 2007[ [update]]), embedded Wi-Fi modules have become available that incorporate a real-time operating system and provide a simple means of wirelessly enabling any device that can communicate via a serial port. This allows the design of simple monitoring devices. An example is a portable ECG device monitoring a patient at home. This Wi-Fi-enabled device can communicate via the Internet.\nThese Wi-Fi modules are designed by OEMs so that implementers need only minimal Wi-Fi knowledge to provide Wi-Fi connectivity for their products.\nIn June 2014, Texas Instruments introduced the first ARM Cortex-M4 microcontroller with an onboard dedicated Wi-Fi MCU, the SimpleLink CC3200. It makes embedded systems with Wi-Fi connectivity possible to build as single-chip devices, which reduces their cost and minimum size, making it more practical to build wireless-networked controllers into inexpensive ordinary objects.\nSecurity.\nThe main issue with wireless network security is its simplified access to the network compared to traditional wired networks such as Ethernet. With wired networking, one must either gain access to a building (physically connecting into the internal network), or break through an external firewall. To access Wi-Fi, one must merely be within the range of the Wi-Fi network. Most business networks protect sensitive data and systems by attempting to disallow external access. Enabling wireless connectivity reduces security if the network uses inadequate or no encryption.\nAn attacker who has gained access to a Wi-Fi network router can initiate a DNS spoofing attack against any other user of the network by forging a response before the queried DNS server has a chance to reply.\nSecuring methods.\nA common measure to deter unauthorized users involves hiding the access point's name by disabling the SSID broadcast. While effective against the casual user, it is ineffective as a security method because the SSID is broadcast in the clear in response to a client SSID query. Another method is to only allow computers with known MAC addresses to join the network, but determined eavesdroppers may be able to join the network by spoofing an authorized address.\nWired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) encryption was designed to protect against casual snooping but it is no longer considered secure. Tools such as AirSnort or Aircrack-ng can quickly recover WEP encryption keys. Because of WEP's weakness the Wi-Fi Alliance approved Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) which uses TKIP. WPA was specifically designed to work with older equipment usually through a firmware upgrade. Though more secure than WEP, WPA has known vulnerabilities.\nThe more secure WPA2 using Advanced Encryption Standard was introduced in 2004 and is supported by most new Wi-Fi devices. WPA2 is fully compatible with WPA. In 2017, a flaw in the WPA2 protocol was discovered, allowing a key replay attack, known as KRACK.\nA flaw in a feature added to Wi-Fi in 2007, called Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS), let WPA and WPA2 security be bypassed. The only remedy as of 2011[ [update]] was to turn off Wi-Fi Protected Setup, which is not always possible.\nVirtual private networks can be used to improve the confidentiality of data carried through Wi-Fi networks, especially public Wi-Fi networks.\nA URI using the WIFI scheme can specify the SSID, encryption type, password/passphrase, and if the SSID is hidden or not, so users can follow links from QR codes, for instance, to join networks without having to manually enter the data. A MeCard-like format is supported by Android and iOS 11+.\nData security risks.\nWi-Fi access points typically default to an encryption-free (\"open\") mode. Novice users benefit from a zero-configuration device that works out-of-the-box, but this default does not enable any wireless security, providing open wireless access to a LAN. To turn security on requires the user to configure the device, usually via a software graphical user interface (GUI). On unencrypted Wi-Fi networks connecting devices can monitor and record data (including personal information). Such networks can only be secured by using other means of protection, such as a VPN, or Hypertext Transfer Protocol over Transport Layer Security (HTTPS).\nThe older wireless-encryption standard, Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), has been shown easily breakable even when correctly configured. Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) encryption, which became available in devices in 2003, aimed to solve this problem. Wi-Fi Protected Access 2 (WPA2) ratified in 2004 is considered secure, provided a strong passphrase is used. The 2003 version of WPA has not been considered secure since it was superseded by WPA2 in 2004.\nIn 2018, WPA3 was announced as a replacement for WPA2, increasing security; it rolled out on 26 June.\nPiggybacking.\nPiggybacking refers to access to a wireless Internet connection by bringing one's computer within the range of another's wireless connection, and using that service without the subscriber's explicit permission or knowledge.\nDuring the early popular adoption of 802.11, providing open access points for anyone within range to use was encouraged to cultivate wireless community networks, particularly since people on average use only a fraction of their downstream bandwidth at any given time.\nRecreational logging and mapping of other people's access points have become known as wardriving. Indeed, many access points are intentionally installed without security turned on so that they can be used as a free service. Providing access to one's Internet connection in this fashion may breach the Terms of Service or contract with the ISP. These activities do not result in sanctions in most jurisdictions; however, legislation and case law differ considerably across the world. A proposal to leave graffiti describing available services was called warchalking.\nPiggybacking often occurs unintentionally\u00a0\u2013 a technically unfamiliar user might not change the default \"unsecured\" settings to their access point and operating systems can be configured to connect automatically to any available wireless network. A user who happens to start up a laptop in the vicinity of an access point may find the computer has joined the network without any visible indication. Moreover, a user intending to join one network may instead end up on another one if the latter has a stronger signal. In combination with automatic discovery of other network resources (see DHCP and Zeroconf) this could lead wireless users to send sensitive data to the wrong middle-man when seeking a destination (see man-in-the-middle attack). For example, a user could inadvertently use an unsecured network to log into a website, thereby making the login credentials available to anyone listening, if the website uses an insecure protocol such as plain HTTP without TLS.\nOn an unsecured access point, an unauthorized user can obtain security information (factory preset passphrase or Wi-Fi Protected Setup PIN) from a label on a wireless access point and use this information (or connect by the Wi-Fi Protected Setup pushbutton method) to commit unauthorized or unlawful activities.\nSocietal aspects.\nWireless Internet access has become much more embedded in society. It has thus changed how the society functions in a number of ways.\nInfluence on developing countries.\nAs of 2017[ [update]] over half the world did not have access to the Internet, prominently rural areas in developing nations. Technology that has been implemented in more developed nations is often costly and energy inefficient. This has led to developing nations using more low-tech networks, frequently implementing renewable power sources that can solely be maintained through solar power, creating a network that is resistant to disruptions such as power outages. For instance, in 2007, a network between Cabo Pantoja and Iquitos in Peru was erected in which all equipment is powered only by solar panels. These long-range Wi-Fi networks have two main uses: offer Internet access to populations in isolated villages, and to provide healthcare to isolated communities. In the case of the latter example, it connects the central hospital in Iquitos to 15 medical outposts which are intended for remote diagnosis.\nWork habits.\nAccess to Wi-Fi in public spaces such as caf\u00e9s or parks allows people, in particular freelancers, to work remotely. While the accessibility of Wi-Fi is the strongest factor when choosing a place to work (75% of people would choose a place that provides Wi-Fi over one that does not), other factors influence the choice of specific hotspots. These vary from the accessibility of other resources, like books, the location of the workplace, and the social aspect of meeting other people in the same place. Moreover, the increase of people working from public places results in more customers for local businesses thus providing an economic stimulus to the area.\nAdditionally, in the same study it has been noted that wireless connection provides more freedom of movement while working. Both when working at home or from the office it allows the displacement between different rooms or areas. In some offices (notably Cisco offices in New York) the employees do not have assigned desks but can work from any office connecting their laptop to Wi-Fi hotspot.\nHousing.\nThe Internet has become an integral part of living. As of 2016[ [update]], 81.9% of American households have Internet access. Additionally, 89% of American households with broadband connect via wireless technologies. 72.9% of American households have Wi-Fi.\nWi-Fi networks have also affected how the interior of homes and hotels are arranged. For instance, architects have described that their clients no longer wanted only one room as their home office, but would like to work near the fireplace or have the possibility to work in different rooms. This contradicts architect's pre-existing ideas of the use of rooms that they designed. Additionally, some hotels have noted that guests prefer to stay in certain rooms since they receive a stronger Wi-Fi signal.\nHealth concerns.\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) says, \"no health effects are expected from exposure to RF fields from base stations and wireless networks\", but notes that they promote research into effects from other RF sources. Although the WHO's International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) later classified radio-frequency electromagnetic fields (EMFs) as \"possibly carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B)\" (a category used when \"a causal association is considered credible, but when chance, bias or confounding cannot be ruled out with reasonable confidence\"), this classification was based on risks associated with wireless phone use rather than Wi-Fi networks.\nThe United Kingdom's Health Protection Agency reported in 2007 that exposure to Wi-Fi for a year results in the \"same amount of radiation from a 20-minute mobile phone call\".\nA review of studies involving 725 people who claimed electromagnetic hypersensitivity, \"...suggests that 'electromagnetic hypersensitivity' is unrelated to the presence of an EMF, although more research into this phenomenon is required.\"\nAlternatives.\nSeveral other wireless technologies provide alternatives to Wi-Fi for different use cases:\nSome alternatives are \"no new wires\", re-using existing cable:\nSeveral \"wired\" technologies for computer networking, which provide viable alternatives to Wi-Fi:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63975", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63975", "title": "Wireless Fidelity", "text": ""}
{"id": "63978", "revid": "252195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63978", "title": "Fresnel lens", "text": "Compact composite lens\nA Fresnel lens ( ; ; or ) is a type of composite compact lens which reduces the amount of material required compared to a conventional lens by dividing the lens into a set of concentric annular sections.\nThe simpler dioptric (purely refractive) form of the lens was first proposed by Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, and independently reinvented by the French physicist Augustin-Jean Fresnel (1788\u20131827) for use in lighthouses. The catadioptric (combining refraction and reflection) form of the lens, entirely invented by Fresnel, has outer prismatic elements that use total internal reflection as well as refraction to capture more oblique light from the light source and add it to the beam, making it visible at greater distances.\nThe design allows the construction of lenses of large aperture and short focal length without the mass and volume of material that would be required by a lens of conventional design. A Fresnel lens can be made much thinner than a comparable conventional lens, in some cases taking the form of a flat sheet.\nBecause of its use in lighthouses, it has been called \"the invention that saved a million ships\".\nHistory.\nForerunners.\nThe first person to focus a lighthouse beam using a lens was apparently the London glass-cutter Thomas Rogers, who proposed the idea to Trinity House in 1788. The first Rogers lenses, in diameter and thick at the center, were installed at the Old Lower Lighthouse at Portland Bill in 1789. Behind each lamp was a back-coated spherical glass mirror, which reflected rear radiation back through the lamp and into the lens. Further samples were installed at Howth Baily, North Foreland, and at least four other locations by 1804. But much of the light was wasted by absorption in the glass.\nIn 1748, Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon was the first to replace a convex lens with a series of concentric annular prisms, ground as steps in a single piece of glass, to reduce weight and absorption. In 1790 (although secondary sources give the date as 1773609 or 1788), the Marquis de Condorcet suggested that it would be easier to make the annular sections separately and assemble them on a frame; but even that was impractical at the time. These designs were intended not for lighthouses, but for burning glasses.609 David Brewster, however, proposed a system similar to Condorcet's in 1811, and by 1820 was advocating its use in British lighthouses.\nPublication and refinement.\nThe French Commission des Phares (Commission of Lighthouses) was established by Napoleon in 1811, and placed under the authority of French physicist Augustin-Jean Fresnel's employer, the Corps of Bridges and Roads. As the members of the commission were otherwise occupied, it achieved little in its early years. However, on 21\u00a0June 1819\u2014three months after winning the physics of the Academy of Sciences for his celebrated memoir on diffraction\u2014Fresnel was \"temporarily\" seconded to the commission on the recommendation of Fran\u00e7ois Arago (a member since 1813), to review possible improvements in lighthouse illumination.\nBy the end of August 1819, unaware of the Buffon-Condorcet-Brewster proposal, Fresnel made his first presentation to the commission, recommending what he called ('lenses by steps') to replace the reflectors then in use, which reflected only about half of the incident light. Another report by Fresnel, dated 29 August 1819 (Fresnel, 1866\u201370, vol.\u00a03, pp.\u00a015\u201321), concerns tests on reflectors, and does not mention stepped lenses except in an unrelated sketch on the last page of the manuscript. The minutes of the meetings of the Commission go back only to 1824, when Fresnel himself took over as Secretary. Thus the exact date on which Fresnel formally recommended is unknown. Much to Fresnel's embarrassment, one of the assembled commissioners, Jacques Charles, recalled Buffon's suggestion. However, whereas Buffon's version was biconvex and in one piece, Fresnel's was plano-convex and made of multiple prisms for easier construction.\nWith an official budget of 500 francs, Fresnel approached three manufacturers. The third, Fran\u00e7ois Soleil, found a way to remove defects by reheating and remolding the glass. Arago assisted Fresnel with the design of a modified Argand lamp with concentric wicks (a concept that Fresnel attributed to Count Rumford), and accidentally discovered that fish glue was heat-resistant, making it suitable for use in the lens. The prototype, finished in March 1820, had a square lens panel on a side, containing 97 polygonal (not annular) prisms\u2014and so impressed the Commission that Fresnel was asked for a full eight-panel version. This model, completed a year later in spite of insufficient funding, had panels square. In a public spectacle on the evening of 13\u00a0April 1821, it was demonstrated by comparison with the most recent reflectors, which it suddenly rendered obsolete.\nSoon after this demonstration, Fresnel published the idea that light, including apparently unpolarized light, consists exclusively of transverse waves, and went on to consider the implications for double refraction and partial reflection.\nFresnel acknowledged the British lenses and Buffon's invention in a memoir read on 29\u00a0July 1822 and printed in the same year. The date of that memoir may be the source of the claim that Fresnel's lighthouse advocacy began two years later than Brewster's; but the text makes it clear that Fresnel's involvement began no later than 1819.\nFresnel's next lens was a rotating apparatus with eight \"bull's-eye\" panels, made in annular arcs by Saint-Gobain, giving eight rotating beams\u2014to be seen by mariners as a periodic flash. Above and behind each main panel was a smaller, sloping bull's-eye panel of trapezoidal outline with trapezoidal elements. This refracted the light to a sloping plane mirror, which then reflected it horizontally, 7\u00a0degrees ahead of the main beam, increasing the duration of the flash. Below the main panels were 128 small mirrors arranged in four rings, stacked like the slats of a louver or Venetian blind. Each ring, shaped like a frustum of a cone, reflected the light to the horizon, giving a fainter steady light between the flashes. The official test, conducted on the unfinished on 20 August 1822, was witnessed by the Commission\u2014and by Louis XVIII and his entourage\u2014from away. The apparatus was stored at Bordeaux for the winter, and then reassembled at Cordouan Lighthouse under Fresnel's supervision\u2014in part by Fresnel's own hands. On 25\u00a0July 1823, the world's first lighthouse Fresnel lens was lit. As expected, the light was visible to the horizon, more than out.\nThe day before the test of the Cordouan lens in Paris, a committee of the Academy of Sciences reported on Fresnel's memoir and supplements on double refraction\u2014which, although less well known to modern readers than his earlier work on diffraction, struck a more decisive blow for the wave theory of light. Between the test and the reassembly at Cordouan, Fresnel submitted his papers on photoelasticity (16\u00a0September 1822), elliptical and circular polarization and optical rotation (9\u00a0December), and partial reflection and total internal reflection (7\u00a0January 1823), essentially completing his reconstruction of physical optics on the transverse wave hypothesis. Shortly after the Cordouan lens was lit, Fresnel started coughing up blood.\nIn May 1824, Fresnel was promoted to Secretary of the , becoming the first member of that body to draw a salary, albeit in the concurrent role of Engineer-in-Chief. Late that year, being increasingly ill, he curtailed his fundamental research and resigned his seasonal job as an examiner at the , in order to save his remaining time and energy for his lighthouse work.\nIn the same year he designed the first \"fixed\" lens\u2014for spreading light evenly around the horizon while minimizing waste above or below. Ideally the curved refracting surfaces would be segments of toroids about a common vertical axis, so that the dioptric panel would look like a cylindrical drum. If this was supplemented by reflecting (catoptric) rings above and below the refracting (dioptric) parts, the entire apparatus would look like a beehive. The second Fresnel lens to enter service was indeed a fixed lens, of third order, installed at Dunkirk by 1 February 1825. However, due to the difficulty of fabricating large toroidal prisms, this apparatus had a 16-sided polygonal plan.\nIn 1825 Fresnel extended his fixed-lens design by adding a rotating array outside the fixed array. Each panel of the rotating array was to refract part of the fixed light from a horizontal fan into a narrow beam.\nAlso in 1825, Fresnel unveiled the ('lighthouse map'), calling for a system of 51 lighthouses plus smaller harbor lights, in a hierarchy of lens sizes called \"orders\" (the first being the largest), with different characteristics to facilitate recognition: a constant light (from a fixed lens), one flash per minute (from a rotating lens with eight panels), and two per minute (16 panels).\nIn late 1825, to reduce the loss of light in the reflecting elements, Fresnel proposed to replace each mirror with a catadioptric prism, through which the light would travel by refraction through the first surface, then total internal reflection off the second surface, then refraction through the third surface. The result was the lighthouse lens as we now know it. In\u00a01826 he assembled a small model for use on the , but he did not live to see a full-sized version: he died on 14\u00a0July 1827, at the age of 39.\nAfter Fresnel.\nThe first stage of the development of lighthouse lenses after the death of Augustin Fresnel consisted in the implementation of his designs. This was driven in part by his younger brother L\u00e9onor\u2014who, like Augustin, was trained as a civil engineer but, unlike Augustin, had a strong aptitude for management. L\u00e9onor entered the service of the Lighthouse Commission in 1825, and went on to succeed Augustin as Secretary.\nThe first fixed lens to be constructed with toroidal prisms was a first-order apparatus designed by the Scottish engineer Alan Stevenson under the guidance of L\u00e9onor Fresnel, and fabricated by Isaac Cookson &amp; Co. using French glass; it entered service at the Isle of May, Scotland, on 22 September 1836. The first large catadioptric lenses were made in 1842 for the lighthouses at Gravelines and \u00cele Vierge, France; these were fixed third-order lenses whose catadioptric rings (made in segments) were one metre in diameter. Stevenson's first-order Skerryvore lens, lit in 1844, was only partly catadioptric; it was similar to the Cordouan lens except that the lower slats were replaced by French-made catadioptric prisms, while mirrors were retained at the top. The first \"fully\" catadioptric first-order lens, installed at Pointe d'Ailly in 1852, also gave eight rotating beams plus a fixed light at the bottom; but its top section had eight catadioptric panels focusing the light about 4\u00a0degrees ahead of the main beams, in order to lengthen the flashes. The first fully catadioptric lens with \"purely revolving\" beams\u2014also of first order\u2014was installed at Saint-Cl\u00e9ment-des-Baleines in 1854, and marked the completion of Augustin Fresnel's original \"Carte des Phares\".\nThomas Stevenson (younger brother of Alan) went a step beyond Fresnel with his \"holophotal\" lens, which focused the light radiated by the lamp in nearly all directions, forward or backward, into a single beam. The first version, described in 1849, consisted of a standard Fresnel bull's-eye lens, a paraboloidal reflector, and a rear hemispherical reflector (functionally equivalent to the Rogers mirror of 60\u00a0years earlier, except that it subtended a whole hemisphere). Light radiated into the forward hemisphere but missing the bull's-eye lens was deflected by the paraboloid into a parallel beam surrounding the bull's-eye lens, while light radiated into the backward hemisphere was reflected back through the lamp by the spherical reflector (as in Rogers' arrangement), to be collected by the forward components. The first unit was installed at North Harbour, Peterhead, in August 1849. Stevenson called this version a \"catadioptric holophote\", although each of its elements was either purely reflective or purely refractive. In the second version of the holophote concept, the bull's-eye lens and paraboloidal reflector were replaced by a catadioptric Fresnel lens\u2014as conceived by Fresnel, but expanded to cover the whole forward hemisphere. The third version, which Stevenson confusingly called a \"dioptric holophote\", was more innovative: it retained the catadioptric Fresnel lens for the front hemisphere, but replaced the rear hemispherical reflector with a hemispherical array of annular prisms, each of which used \"two\" total internal reflections to turn light diverging from the center of the hemisphere back toward the center. The result was an all-glass holophote, with no losses from metallic reflections.\nJames Timmins Chance modified Thomas Stevenson's all-glass holophotal design by arranging the double-reflecting prisms about a vertical axis. The prototype was shown at the 1862 International Exhibition in London. Later, to ease manufacturing, Chance divided the prisms into segments, and arranged them in a cylindrical form while retaining the property of reflecting light from a single point back to that point. Reflectors of this form, paradoxically called \"dioptric mirrors\", proved particularly useful for returning light from the landward side of the lamp to the seaward side.\nAs lighthouses proliferated, they became harder to distinguish from each other, leading to the use of colored filters, which wasted light. In 1884, John Hopkinson eliminated the need for filters by inventing the \"group-flashing\" lens, in which the dioptric and/or the catadioptric panels were split so as to give multiple flashes\u2014allowing lighthouses to be identified not only by frequency of flashes, but also by multiplicity of flashes. Double-flashing lenses were installed at Tampico (Mexico) and Little Basses (Sri\u00a0Lanka) in 1875, and a triple-flashing lens at Casquets Lighthouse (Channel Islands) in 1876. The example shown (right) is the double-flashing lens of the Point Arena Light, which was in service from 1908 to 1977.\nThe development of hyper-radial lenses was driven in part by the need for larger light sources, such as gas lights with multiple jets, which required a longer focal length for a given beam-width, hence a larger lens to collect a given fraction of the generated light. The first hyper-radial lens was built for the Stevensons in 1885 by F.\u00a0Barbier &amp; Cie of France, and tested at South Foreland Lighthouse with various light sources. Chance Brothers (Hopkinson's employers) then began constructing hyper-radials, installing their first at Bishop Rock Lighthouse in 1887. In the same year, Barbier installed a hyper-radial at Tory\u00a0Island. But only about 30 hyper-radials went into service before the development of more compact bright lamps rendered such large optics unnecessary (see \"Hyperradiant Fresnel lens\").\nProduction of one-piece stepped dioptric lenses\u2014roughly as envisaged by Buffon\u2014became feasible in 1852, when John L. Gilliland of the Brooklyn Flint-Glass Company patented a method of making lenses from pressed and molded glass. The company made small bull's-eye lenses for use on railroads, steamboats, and docks; such lenses were common in the United States by the 1870s.488 In 1858 the company produced \"a\u00a0very small number of pressed flint-glass sixth-order lenses\" for use in lighthouses\u2014the first Fresnel lighthouse lenses made in America. By the 1950s, the substitution of plastic for glass made it economic to use Fresnel lenses as condensers in overhead projectors.\nDesign.\nThe Fresnel lens reduces the amount of material required compared to a conventional lens by dividing the lens into a set of concentric annular sections. An ideal Fresnel lens would have an infinite number of sections. In each section, the overall thickness is decreased compared to an equivalent simple lens. This effectively divides the continuous surface of a standard lens into a set of surfaces of the same curvature, with stepwise discontinuities between them.\nIn some lenses, the curved surfaces are replaced with flat surfaces, with a different angle in each section. Such a lens can be regarded as an array of prisms arranged in a circular fashion with steeper prisms on the edges and a flat or slightly convex center. In the first (and largest) Fresnel lenses, each section was actually a separate prism. 'Single-piece' Fresnel lenses were later produced, being used for automobile headlamps, brake, parking, and turn signal lenses, and so on. In modern times, computer-controlled milling equipment (CNC) or 3-D printers might be used to manufacture more complex lenses.\nFresnel lens design allows a substantial reduction in thickness (and thus mass and volume of material) at the expense of reducing the imaging quality of the lens, which is why precise imaging applications such as photography usually still use larger conventional lenses.\nFresnel lenses are usually made of glass or plastic; their size varies from large (old historical lighthouses, meter size) to medium (book-reading aids, OHP viewgraph projectors) to small (TLR/SLR camera screens, micro-optics). In many cases they are very thin and flat, almost flexible, with thicknesses in the range.\nMost modern Fresnel lenses consist only of refractive elements. Lighthouse lenses, however, tend to include both refracting and reflecting elements, the latter being \"outside\" the metal rings seen in the photographs. While the inner elements are sections of refractive lenses, the outer elements are reflecting prisms, each of which performs two refractions and one total internal reflection, avoiding the light loss that occurs in reflection from a silvered mirror.\nLighthouse lens sizes.\nFresnel designed six sizes of lighthouse lenses, divided into four \"orders\" based on their size and focal length. The 3rd and 4th orders were sub-divided into \"large\" and \"small\". In modern use, the orders are classified as first through sixth order. An intermediate size between third and fourth order was added later, as well as sizes above first order and below sixth.\nA first-order lens has a focal length of and stands about high, and wide. The smallest (sixth) order has a focal length of and a height of .\nThe largest Fresnel lenses are called hyperradiant (or hyper-radial). One such lens was on hand when it was decided to build and outfit the Makapuu Point Light in Hawaii. Rather than order a new lens, the huge optic construction, tall and with over a thousand prisms, was used there.\nTypes.\nThere are two main types of Fresnel lens: \"imaging\" and \"non-imaging\". Imaging Fresnel lenses use segments with curved cross-sections and produce sharp images, while non-imaging lenses have segments with flat cross-sections, and do not produce sharp images. As the number of segments increases, the two types of lens become more similar to each other. In the abstract case of an infinite number of segments, the difference between curved and flat segments disappears.\nImaging lenses can be classified as:\nNon-imaging lenses can be classified as:\nUses.\nIllumination.\nHigh-quality glass Fresnel lenses were used in lighthouses, where they were considered state of the art in the late 19th and through the middle of the 20th centuries. These lighthouse Fresnel lens systems typically include extra annular prismatic elements, arrayed in faceted domes above and below the central planar Fresnel, in order to catch all light emitted from the light source. The light path through these elements can include an internal reflection, rather than the simple refraction in the planar Fresnel element. These lenses conferred many practical benefits upon the designers, builders, and users of lighthouses and their illumination. Among other things, smaller lenses could fit into more compact spaces. Greater light transmission over longer distances, and varied patterns, made it possible to triangulate a position. Starting in the mid-20th century, most lighthouses have retired glass Fresnel lenses from service and replaced them with much less expensive and more durable aerobeacons or similar systems, including the Vega Industries VRB-25, which contains plastic Fresnel lens panels.\nPerhaps the most widespread use of Fresnel lenses, for a time, occurred in automobile headlamps, where they can shape the roughly parallel beam from the parabolic reflector to meet requirements for dipped and main-beam patterns, often both in the same headlamp unit (such as the European H4 design). For reasons of economy, weight, and impact resistance, newer cars have dispensed with glass Fresnel lenses for sealed beam headlamp units, instead using multifaceted reflectors with plain polycarbonate lenses. However, Fresnel lenses continue in wide use in automobile tail, marker, and reversing lights.\nGlass Fresnel lenses also are used in lighting instruments for theatre and motion pictures (see Fresnel lantern); such instruments are often called simply \"Fresnels\". The entire instrument consists of a metal housing, a reflector, a lamp assembly, and a Fresnel lens. Many Fresnel instruments allow the lamp to be moved relative to the lens' focal point, to increase or decrease the size of the light beam. As a result, they are very flexible, and can often produce a beam as narrow as 7\u00b0 or as wide as 70\u00b0. The Fresnel lens produces a very soft-edged beam, so is often used as a wash light. A holder in front of the lens can hold a colored plastic film (\"gel\") to tint the light or wire screens or frosted plastic to diffuse it. The Fresnel lens is useful in the making of motion pictures not only because of its ability to focus the beam brighter than a typical lens, but also because the light is a relatively consistent intensity across the entire width of the beam of light.\nAircraft carriers and naval air stations typically use Fresnel lenses in their optical landing systems. The \"meatball\" light aids the pilot in maintaining proper glide slope for the landing. In the center are amber and red lights composed of Fresnel lenses. Although the lights are always on, the angle of the lens from the pilot's point of view determines the color and position of the visible light. If the lights appear above the green horizontal bar, the pilot is too high. If it is below, the pilot is too low, and if the lights are red, the pilot is very low.\nFresnel lenses are also commonly used in searchlights, spotlights, and flashlights. Another use of such Lenses are in 300 mm (12 inch) code beacons placed on radio and television towers. The number of such beacons being a function of height as specified by the FAA. These beacons contain two 300 watt incandescent lamps. Perhaps unlike the lenses in lighthouses these two piece beacons were made of circular cast glass. The latest technology is to utilize LED optics in a non Fresnel configuration to supply the needed obstruction characteristics.\nImaging.\nFresnel lenses are used as simple hand-held magnifiers. They are also used to correct several visual disorders, including ocular-motility disorders such as strabismus. Fresnel lenses have been used to increase the visual size of CRT displays in pocket televisions, notably the Sinclair TV80. They are also used in traffic lights.\nFresnel lenses are used in left-hand-drive European lorries entering the UK and Republic of Ireland (and vice versa, right-hand-drive Irish and British trucks entering mainland Europe) to overcome the blind spots caused by the driver operating the lorry while sitting on the wrong side of the cab relative to the side of the road the car is on. They attach to the passenger-side window.\nAnother automobile application of a Fresnel lens is a rear view enhancer, as the wide view angle of a lens attached to the rear window permits examining the scene behind a vehicle, particularly a tall or bluff-tailed one, more effectively than a rear-view mirror alone. Fresnel lenses have been used on rangefinding equipment and projected map display screens.\nFresnel lenses have also been used in the field of popular entertainment. The British rock artist Peter Gabriel made use of them in his early solo live performances to magnify the size of his head in contrast to the rest of his body, for dramatic and comic effect. In the Terry Gilliam film \"Brazil\", Fresnel lenses are used as magnifiers for small CRT monitors in the Ministry of Information. The lenses occasionally appear between the actors and the camera, distorting the scale and composition of the scene to humorous effect. In the Pixar movie Wall-E, the protagonist watches the musical \"Hello, Dolly!\" on an iPod, magnified by a Fresnel lens.\nVirtual reality headsets, such as the Meta Quest 2 and the HTC Vive Pro use Fresnel lenses, as they allow a thinner and lighter form factor than regular lenses. Newer devices, such as the Meta Quest Pro, have switched to a pancake lens design due to its smaller form factor and less chromatic aberration than Fresnel lenses.\nMulti-focal Fresnel lenses are also used as a part of retina identification cameras, where they provide multiple in- and out-of-focus images of a fixation target inside the camera. For virtually all users, at least one of the images will be in focus, thus allowing correct eye alignment.\nMany cameras are equipped with viewfinders which project the scene through a lens onto a ground glass screen for focusing and composition, including view, twin-lens reflex, and single-lens reflex cameras; often a Fresnel condenser lens is applied to the ground glass to increase the perceived brightness of the projected image and make the illumination more even from center to corner. For example, the Polaroid SX-70 camera uses a Fresnel reflector as part of its viewing system.\nProjection.\nThe use of Fresnel lenses for image projection reduces image quality, so they tend to occur only where quality is not critical or where the bulk of a solid lens would be prohibitive. Cheap Fresnel lenses can be stamped or molded of transparent plastic and are used in overhead projectors and projection televisions.\nFresnel lenses of different focal lengths (one collimator, and one collector) are used in commercial and DIY projection. The collimator lens has the lower focal length and is placed closer to the light source, and the collector lens, which focuses the light into the triplet lens, is placed after the projection image (an active matrix LCD panel in LCD projectors). Fresnel lenses are also used as collimators in overhead projectors.\nSolar power.\nSince plastic Fresnel lenses can be made larger than glass lenses, as well as being much cheaper and lighter, they are used to concentrate sunlight for heating in solar cookers, in solar forges, and in solar collectors used to heat water for domestic use. They can also be used to generate steam or to power a Stirling engine to generate electricity.\nFresnel lenses can concentrate sunlight onto solar cells with a ratio of almost 500:1. This allows the active solar-cell surface to be reduced, lowering cost and allowing the use of more efficient cells that would otherwise be too expensive. In the early 21st century, Fresnel reflectors began to be used in concentrating solar power (CSP) plants to concentrate solar energy. One application was to preheat water at the coal-fired Liddell Power Station, in Hunter Valley Australia.\nFresnel lenses can be used to sinter sand, allowing 3D printing in glass.\nAnidolic focusing for detection purposes.\nWhere imaging is not required, a passive infrared sensor equipped with multiple low-quality Fresnel lenses can be used to collect infrared energy from a wide area and focus it for motion detection in both area-protection and energy-saving applications. The plastic used is selected for its transparency to infrared energy as well as being UV-stabilised for outdoor durability."}
{"id": "63981", "revid": "18242346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63981", "title": "Overtone singing", "text": "Style of multiphonic singing\nOvertone singing, also known as overtone chanting, harmonic singing, polyphonic overtone singing, or diphonic singing, is a singing technique in which the vocalist produces two distinct pitches at the same time. \nFrom a fundamental pitch made by a human voice, harmonic overtones can be selectively amplified through manipulating the dimensions and the shape of the resonant cavities of the mouth and the pharynx.\nOvertone singing should not be confused with throat singing, although many throat singing techniques include overtone singing. While overtone singing involves careful manipulation of the vocal tract, throat singing mostly involves the voice source.\nAsia.\nMongolia and Buryatia.\nIt is thought that the art of overtone singing originated in southwestern Mongolia (modern Khovd Province and Govi Altai region). Overtone singing can be found throughout the country and Mongolia is often considered the world's most active area. The most commonly practiced style, (Cyrillic: ), comes in these varieties:\nMongolians also have many other singing styles, such as (literally, \"growling\") and .\nTuva.\nTuvan overtone singing is practiced in the Republic of Tuva (southern Siberia, Russia).\nThe Tuvan method of singing overtones is based on appreciation of complex sounds with multiple layers or textures. Tuvans have developed a wide range of rhythmic and melodic styles. Most are sung with (literally, \"with chest voice\"). Styles include:\nOther sub-styles include:\nThe melodies are traditionally created by using the 6th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 12th, 13th and sometimes the 16th harmonics, which form the major pentatonic scale, so the 7th and 11th harmonics are carefully skipped.\nThe most peculiar melody from the Tuvan tradition is \"\", mostly performed in kargyraa style.\nAltai and Khakassia.\nTuva's neighbouring Russian regions, the Altai Republic to the west and Khakassia to the northwest, have developed forms of throat singing called kai (, \"qay\") or khai (, \"xay\"). In Altai, this is used mostly for epic poetry, with the instrumental accompaniment of a topshur. Altai narrators () perform in kargyraa, kh\u00f6\u00f6mei, and sygyt styles, which are similar to those in Tuva. They also have their own style with very high harmonics, related to kargyraa. Variations of kai are:\nThe first well-known kai-chi was Alexei Kalkin.\nChukchi Peninsula.\nThe Chukchi people of the Chukchi Peninsula in the extreme northeast of Russia also practice a form of throat singing.\nTibet.\nTibetan Buddhist chanting is a subgenre of throat singing, mainly practiced by monks of Tibet, including Khokhonor (Qinghai) province in the Tibetan Plateau area, Tibetan monks of Nepal, Bhutan, India, and various locations in the Himalayan region. Most often the chants hold to the lower pitches possible in throat singing. Various ceremonies and prayers call for throat singing in Tibetan Buddhism, often with more than one monk chanting at a time. There are various Tibetan throat singing styles, such as Gyuke ( Wylie: ), which uses the lowest pitch of voice; Dzoke ( ); and Gyer ( ).\nUzbekistan and Kazakhstan.\nThe poet-musicians of Kazakhstan and the Uzbek region of Karakalpakstan, known as , employ throat singing in their epic poetry recitations, accompanied by the dombra. singers believe that the ability to throat-sing is an innate gift of selected Kazakhs, and that it cannot be taught.\nBesides zhirau, there is another form of throat singing, \"K\u00f6meimen \u00e4n aituw (\u041a\u04e9\u043c\u0435\u0439\u043c\u0435\u043d \u04d9\u043d \u0430\u0439\u0442\u0443)\", in Kazakhstan. This technique is similar to throat singing in Altai Republic. K\u00f6meimen \u00e4n aituw is being revived by the Kazakh ethno-folk musical bands HasSak and Turan Ensemble, after Kazakhs believed that this form of throat singing might have died out because of Russian conquest.\nPakistan, Iran, and Afghanistan.\nBalochi Nur Sur is one of the ancient forms of overtone singing and is still popular in parts of Pakistan, Iran, and Afghanistan, especially the Sulaiman Mountains.\nKurdistan.\nDengb\u00eaj, the Kurdish-Yazidi style of bardic chanting, often incorporates overtones as part of the chant, and in a way which is distinct from other forms of overtone singing. Nick Hobbs's 2020 article \"Dengb\u00eaj\u2014Kurdish long song and overtone singing\" discusses the use of overtones in dengb\u00eaj in detail. Dengb\u00eaj is largely a traditional style of Turkish Kurdistan and practitioners are mostly Anatolian. Dengb\u00eaj singers often also sing Kurdish folk song but overtones can rarely be heard in Kurdish traditional music outside of dengb\u00eaj.\nEurope.\nSardinia.\nOn the island of Sardinia (Italy), especially in the subregion of Barbagia, one of the two styles of polyphonic singing is marked by the use of throat singing. This kind of choir is called \"singing \"a tenore\"\". The other style, known as \"cuncordu\", does not use throat singing. Cantu a Tenore is practiced by groups of four male singers, each of whom has a distinct role; the\" 'oche \"or \"boche\" (pronounced or , \"voice\") is the solo voice, while the\" mesu 'oche \"or \"mesu boche\" (\"half voice\"), \"contra\" (\"against\"), and \"bassu\" (\"bass\")\u2014listed in descending pitch order\u2014form a chorus (another meaning of \"tenore\"). \"Boche\" and \"mesu boche\" sing in a regular voice, while \"contra\" and \"bassu\" sing with the false vocal folds, just like the Tuvan Khoomei and Kargyraa techniques. In 2005, Unesco classed the \"cantu a tenore\" as an intangible world heritage. The best-known groups who perform a Tenore are from Bitti, Orosei, Oniferi, and Neoneli. Each town has usually more than one group, and its name is based on a specific place or monument and its hometown, for example Tenore Su Remediu (place) de Orosei (town).\nNorthern Europe.\nThe Sami people of the northern parts of Sweden, Norway, Finland, and the Kola Peninsula in Russia have a singing genre called yoik. While overtone techniques are not a defining feature of yoik, its singers sometimes use them.\nBashkortostan.\nThe Bashkirs of Bashkortostan, Russia, have a style of overtone singing called \"\u00f6zl\u00e4\u00fc\" (sometimes spelled \"uzlyau\"; Bashkort \u04e8\u0437\u043b\u04d9\u04af), which has nearly died out. Bashkorts also sing uzlyau while playing the kurai flute, a national instrument. This technique of vocalizing into a flute can also be found in folk music as far west as the Balkans and Hungary.\nAndalusia.\nIn Flamenco's Cante Jondo singers often include overtonal color at the end of phrases. This may have originated as a way of facilitating sustain and then become an appreciated ornamentation in its own right. Carmen Linares and Duquende, among others, often incorporate overtones.\nAfrica.\nSouth Africa.\nSome Thembu Xhosa women of South Africa have a low, rhythmic style of throat-singing, similar to the Tuvan Kargyraa style, called umngqokolo. It is often accompanied by call-and-response vocals and complicated polyrhythms.\nNon-traditional styles.\nCanada, United States, and Europe.\nThe 1920s Texan singer of cowboy songs Arthur Miles independently created a style of overtone singing, similar to sygyt, as a supplement to the yodeling of country western music. Blind Willie Johnson, also of Texas, is not a true overtone singer according to National Geographic, but his ability to shift from guttural grunting noises to a soft lullaby is suggestive of the tonal timbres of overtone singing.\nStarting in the 1960s, some Western musicians collaborated with traditional throat singers and/or ventured into throat singing themselves. Some made original musical contributions. As harmonics are universal to all physical sounds, the notion of authenticity is best understood in terms of musical quality. Musicians of note in this genre include Collegium Vocale K\u00f6ln (which began using this technique in 1968), Michael Vetter, Tr\u1ea7n Quang H\u1ea3i, David Hykes, Jill Purce, Jim Cole, Ry Cooder, Paul Pena (mixing traditional Tuvan style with American blues), Steve Sklar, and Kiva (specializing in jazz/world beat genres and composing for overtone choirs). Others include composer Baird Hersey and his group Prana with Krishna Das (overtone singing and Hindu mantra) and Canadian songwriter Nathan Rogers, who has become an adept throat singer and teaches Tuvan throat singing in Winnipeg, Manitoba.\nPaul Pena was featured in the documentary \"Genghis Blues\", which tells the story of his pilgrimage to Tuva to compete in its annual throat-singing competition. The film won the documentary award at the 1999 Sundance Film Festival, and was nominated for an Oscar in 2000.\nTuvan singer Sainkho Namtchylak has collaborated with free jazz musicians such as Evan Parker and Ned Rothenberg. Lester Bowie and Ornette Coleman have worked with the Tenores di Bitti and Eleanor Hovda has written a piece using the Xhosa style of singing. DJs and performers of electronic music like The KLF have also merged their music with throat singing, overtone singing, or the theory of harmonics behind it.\nTr\u1ea7n Quang H\u1ea3i, a researcher on overtone singing since 1969 in Paris, France, has published many articles, videos on overtone singing from 1971. His 1989 film \"The Song of Harmonics\", directed by Hugo Zemp, won prizes in Estonia, France, and Canada.\nDavid Hykes founded Harmonic Chant in New York in 1975, the year he also founded his group The Harmonic Choir, considered one of the world's preeminent overtone ensembles.\nhttps://, of Germany, is considered one of Europe's major teachers/performers of \"polyphonic overtone singing\". His unique skills make him instantly recognizable. Trained as a classical baritone, he is also a composer and arranger of polyphonic overtone singing music for solo voice and choirs.\nA cappella singer Avi Kaplan has done overtone singing during his group Pentatonix's performances. He merged throat singing with a cappella dubstep.\nThe Overtone Choir Spektrum, of Prague, Czech Republic, is unique among overtone choirs, particularly because it connects traditional choir singing with overtone techniques. It is the only one of its kind in the Czech Republic, and one of only a few in the world.http:// https://\nMuOM Ecstatic Voices is another unique and peculiar overtone singing choir. It combines in its own compositions, Western overtone singing, and Tuvan/Mongolian throat singing techniques (such as kargyraa, khoomei, sygyt, ezengiler, and bonbarnadyr). Created in Barcelona in 2008, with eight singers on average, it specializes in the creation of overtone polyphony (each singer emits an overtone) and the polyphony of the fundamentals, creating two distinguishable sound planes.https://\nSherden Overtone Choir was founded in 2016 in Sardinia by Ilaria Orefice and Giovanni Bortoluzzi. The choir combines Tuvan throat-singing styles with Sardinian throat-singing.\nContemporary multi-instrumentalist performer The Suitcase Junket employs a self-taught overtone singing or throat-singing technique.\nSeveral contemporary classical composers have incorporated overtone singing into their works. Karlheinz Stockhausen was one of the first, with \"Stimmung\" in 1968. Tr\u1ea7n Quang H\u1ea3i, a French national of Vietnamese origin, wrote \"V\u1ec1 Ngu\u1ed3n\" with the Vietnamese composer Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n T\u01b0\u1eddng in 1975. \"Past Life Melodies\" for SATB chorus by Australian composer Sarah Hopkins also calls for this technique. In Tan Dun's \"Water Passion after St. Matthew\", the soprano and bass soloists sing in a variety of techniques, including overtone singing of the Mongolian style.\nIn 2014 German singer Anna-Maria Hefele went viral on YouTube with her \"polyphonic overtone\" singing. The Huffington Post wrote of her \"amazing ability\", calling her singing \"utterly bizarre\". On 10 October 2014, she was number two on The Guardian's Viral Video Chart, with the video \"Polyphonic Overtone Singing\", in which Hefele demonstrates and explains overtones.\nIstanbul-based British singer Nikolai Galen incorporates overtones into his experimental work. They can be heard on his solo album \"Emanuel Vigeland\", the Black Paintings album \"Screams and Silence\" and the Hoca Nasreddin album \"A Headful of Birds\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63984", "revid": "47787258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63984", "title": "List of adaptations of works by Stephen King", "text": "Stephen King is an American author widely known for his works of contemporary horror, thriller, science fiction, and fantasy. In addition to many novels, King has written approximately 200 short stories. His works have been widely adapted to film, television, and other media.\nStage.\nThere have also been dramatizations of many of King's short stories, including \"Nona\", \"Quitters, Inc.\", \"In the Deathroom\", \"Strawberry Spring\", \"Harvey's Dream\", \"The Man Who Loved Flowers\", \"Mute\", \"The Ten O'Clock People\" and King's poem, \"\". There have also been alleged stage productions of \"Rage\" as well as several parody stage versions of \"The Shining\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63986", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63986", "title": "Charles VII Albert", "text": ""}
{"id": "63988", "revid": "9177019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63988", "title": "Wireless Ethernet Compatibility Alliance", "text": ""}
{"id": "63989", "revid": "30173097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63989", "title": "WECA", "text": "WECA may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63990", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63990", "title": "Six Stories", "text": "1997 short story collection by Stephen King\nSix Stories is a short story collection by Stephen King, published in 1997 by Philtrum Press. It is limited to 1100 copies, which are signed and numbered. \"Six Stories\" contains:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63994", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63994", "title": "Different Seasons", "text": "1982 collection of Stephen King novellas\nDifferent Seasons (1982) is a collection of four Stephen King novellas with a more dramatic bent, rather than the horror fiction for which King is famous. The four novellas are tied together via subtitles that relate to each of the four seasons. The collection is notable for having three out of its four novellas turned into Hollywood films, one of which, \"The Shawshank Redemption\", was nominated for the 1994 Academy Award for Best Picture, and another, \"Stand by Me\", was nominated for the 1986 Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay.\nTitle.\nAt the ending of the book, there is also a brief afterword, which King wrote on January 4, 1982. In it, he explains why he had not previously submitted the novellas (each written at a different time) for publication. Early in his career, his agents and editors expressed concern that he would be \"written off\" as someone who only wrote horror. However, his horror novels turned out to be quite popular and made him much in demand as a novelist. Conversely, the novellas, which did not deal (primarily) with the supernatural, were very difficult to publish as there was not a mass market for \"straight\" fiction stories in the 25,000- to 35,000-word format. Thus, King and his editor conceived the idea of publishing the novellas together as \"something different\", hence the title of the book.\nPlot summaries.\n\"Hope Springs Eternal\" - \"Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption\".\nThe story takes place in Maine at Shawshank State Penitentiary and is told from the first-person perspective of prisoner Ellis \u201cRed\u201d Reddings as he recounts his time in prison. His writings mainly focus on his friend and fellow prisoner, Andy Dufresne. Red opens by describing himself and why he was in prison- having staged a car accident in 1938 intended only to kill his wife after insuring his wife for a large amount of money, but incidentally also killed his neighbor and her child as his wife had offered to give them a ride- thus leading to him being sentenced soon after to serve three life sentences, one for each murder. One of Red\u2019s most important aspects is that he\u2019s \u201cthe guy who can get it for you\u201d as his various connections allow him to easily smuggle contraband into the prison.\nRed describes meeting Andy Dufrense for the first time in 1948, one year after Andy was potentially falsely accused of murdering his wife and her lover, a well-to-do golfer. Andy asks Red to get him a rock hammer, stating that he is a \u201crock hound\u201d. A year later, Andy asks Red to get him a large poster of Rita Hayworth. Red also details the various encounters he had during his time in prison, detailing his initial trouble with one of the prison\u2019s rape gangs. Red insinuates that Andy eventually paid off the prison guards to beat up the leader of the rape gang, Bogs Diamond. Along with this, Red describes how Andy had become somewhat of a financial advisor to many of the prison\u2019s guards and higher-ups through his encounter with prison guard, Byron Hadley, in which Andy advises him to use a loophole to avoid the taxation on the inheritance he recently received. Along with helping prison guards with their tax returns, loans, and any other financial advice, Andy begins to help some of the higher-ups with money laundering.\nAndy eventually begins working as the prison\u2019s librarian and expands it past its original location, a small room that was originally used to store paint. It is during this time that he meets prisoner fellow Tommy Williams. Tommy tells Andy that his former cellmate at the previous prison he was in, a man by the name of Elwood Blatch, had confided in Tommy that he had been the one who killed Andy\u2019s wife and her lover. Andy uses this information to go to the prison\u2019s warden, Samuel Norton, as a means to try and gain his freedom. Norton denies Andy\u2019s request, stating he is far too valuable as an asset and that he knows too much since he aided the administration in money laundering. Norton sentences Andy to twenty days in solitary confinement and transfers Tommy to a different prison during his sentence.\nFour years after his time in solitary confinement, Andy confronts Red and tells him about his pseudonym- \u201cPeter Stevens\u201d. Andy had sold all of his assets to this pseudonym before getting sentenced to prison, stating he had upwards of $370,000 in the bank waiting for him once he got out of prison. Andy shares that he intends to use this money to move to Zihuatanejo, Mexico, and open a small hotel. He implies that he wishes for Red to come with him when that day ever comes. On March 12, 1975, 8 years after Andy tells Red about his pseudonym, Andy is missing from his cell. They discover that he had used his rock hammer to create a hole in the prison wall through which he could escape and had hidden it behind the poster he hung up in his cell. Nine months after his escape, Red receives a blank postcard from McNary, Texas, and assumes that it is from Andy and that he has successfully crossed the border.\nIn 1977, Red was released on parole. He finds a note addressed to him from \u201cPeter Stevens\u201d inviting Red to join him in Zihuatanejo along with $1,000. The story ends with Red deciding to join Andy and sharing his hope for the future.\n\"Summer of Corruption\" - \"Apt Pupil\".\nThe story is set in Los Angeles in 1974 and is told in the third-person perspective. The story follows Todd Bowden from the age of thirteen up until he graduates high school. The story opens with Todd as he arrives at the doorstep of an elderly German immigrant, named Auther Denker, and accuses him of being Nazi war criminal Kurt Dussander. Dussander does little to deny his identity and Todd insists that Dussander tells Todd about the crimes he had committed lest he turn him in to the authorities. Todd then begins to go to Dussander\u2019s house every day demanding to know the details of all of his crimes in excruciating detail.\nAs months go by, Todd begins to have nightmares and his grades begin to slip. He resigns to forging his report card before giving it to his parents. Eventually, his school\u2019s guidance counselor Ed French, requests to meet with Todd and his parents to discuss his failing grades. Todd, desperate for his parents not to find out convinces Dussander to pretend to be his grandfather and accompany him to the meeting. Now aware of his failing grades, Dussander uses this as blackmail to force Todd into studying during their meetings. Todd\u2019s grades begin to improve and he decides he no longer has any need of Dussander and plots to kill him and make it seem like it was an accident. Todd tells Dussander that should anything happen to him he has a friend he gave a letter to listing all of Dussander\u2019s crimes that will be mailed to the police upon his death. Dussander realizes Todd\u2019s plot, however, and tells him that he wrote his statement and placed it in a safe deposit box so that if Todd were to kill him, the authorities would know he was willingly conversing with a war criminal. These statements prevent them from killing each other despite both of them lying about the \u2018evidence\u2019 they had on one another.\nAs the months go by, Todd begins killing homeless people on the street as it helps alleviate his nightmares. Years pass and Todd visits Dussander less and less. Todd greatly enjoys the thrill associated with killing, stating that he believes it to be better than sex. However, he is uncertain if he dislikes sex in comparison to the thrill of killing simply because he enjoys killing more or if sex with his girlfriend is unenjoyable because she is Jewish. Similarly to Todd, Dussander has also begun to have nightmares and kills homeless people to relieve them, burying the bodies in his basement.\nOne night when Dussander is burying one of his victims he has a heart attack. He asks Todd to clean up and hide the body before calling an ambulance and being sent to the hospital. While in the hospital Dussander shares a room with holocaust survivor Morris Heisel. Heisel does not immediately remember Dussander\u2019s identity but makes it known that he remembers his face. Todd visits the hospital a few days later to tell Dussander that he would never visit him again, only for Dussander to tell Todd to be more careful with his murders.\nEventually, Heisel realizes \u201cMr. Denker\u201d\u2019s true identity as the commandant of the concentration camp where his wife and daughter were killed. Heisel contacts a Nazi hunter named Weiskopf to visit Dussander and tell him he had been found out. After the encounter, Dussander steals drugs from the hospital dispensary and commits suicide. Weiskopf along with police detective Richler then interviews Todd because of his connections to Dussander.\nLater, French meets with Todd\u2019s real grandfather and realizes that he had been lying when he said that Dussander had been his grandfather. This leads French to check Todd\u2019s report cards and discover that Todd had been tampering with them. French confronts Todd, showing him a newspaper clipping describing Dussander\u2019s death and his true identity. Todd kills French in retaliation. Afterward, Todd goes on a killing spree and is eventually killed by police five hours later.\n\"Fall From Innocence\" - \"The Body\".\nGordon \"Gordie\" Lachance reminisces about his childhood in Castle Rock, Maine. At that time, Gordie's elder brother Dennis (also known as Denny), whom his parents favored, had recently died, leaving Gordie's parents too depressed to pay much attention to him. In 1960, Gordie and his three friends \u2212 Chris Chambers, Teddy Duchamp and Vern Tessio \u2212 learn that a gang of hooligans led by John \"Ace\" Merrill have accidentally discovered the dead body of a missing boy named Ray Brower, who was hit by a train. Because the gang found the body while driving a stolen car, they elected not to report the body to the police. The boys get the idea to find the body \"officially\" so that they may become famous. In preparation for the expedition, Chris steals a gun from his father, and the boys camp out in a nearby field.\nOver the course of the narrative, the adult Gordie recalls his first published story, Stud City, about the life of a simple man named Edward \"Chico\" May whose older brother also died. He has a girlfriend, Jane, who he does not have particularly strong feelings for. Chico knows that his stepmother Virginia slept with his brother before he died, but he hesitates to tell his father about it. One day, Chico has a fight with his father over Virginia and leaves the house.\nAlong the way, the boys trespass at the town dump and are chased by Chopper, the dump custodian Milo Pressman's dog. Teddy gets into a verbal skirmish with Milo when the latter insults Teddy's father (a WW2 veteran who was given a \"Section 8\" medical discharge for trauma related to the Normandy invasion) by calling him a \"loonie\". Gordie and Vern are nearly run over by a train while crossing a trestle. While at a resting point, Gordie tells his friends another story, \"The Revenge of Lard-Ass Hogan\", in which the titular Davie \"Lard-Ass\" Hogan exacts vengeance on the town locals for ridiculing his wide girth by downing a whole bottle of castor oil before engaging in the town's annual pie-eating contest and vomiting on the previous year's champion, which causes a chain reaction that nauseates the entire audience. The next morning, the boys stumble upon a small pond and partake in a swim, but jump out in horror when they find that the pond is teeming with leeches.\nAfter a thunderstorm, the boys finally find the dead body. The body of Ray Brower was discovered to be mangled by the train while attempting to escape the locomotive's path. Ace's gang arrives shortly after. During an argument, Chris pulls the gun on the gang and forces them to leave, but Ace promises reprisals. Tired, depressed and fearing retaliation, the boys decide there is nothing more to be done with the body and return home. Subsequently, one of the gang members reports the body as an anonymous tip, and the gang members severely beat all four boys. The four friends eventually drift apart, but Gordie and Chris remain close. Chris decides to prepare for higher education, and with Gordie's support, they both graduate from the University of Maine. In the present day, Gordie tells how he learned of Chris's death after he was fatally stabbed while trying to stop an argument in a restaurant, about the deaths of Vern and Teddy (in a house fire and car accident respectively), about his successful writing career, and about his recent visit to Castle Rock, where he found that Ace has become an alcoholic and a worker at the town's mill.\n\"A Winter's Tale\" - \"The Breathing Method\".\nDavid, the narrator of the frame tale, is a middle-aged Manhattan lawyer. At the invitation of a senior partner, he joins a strange gentlemen's club where the members, in addition to reading, chatting and playing billiards and chess, like to tell stories, some of which range into the bizarre and macabre.\nOne Thursday before Christmas, the elderly physician Dr. Emlyn McCarron tells a story about an episode that took place early in his long and varied career: that of a patient, Sandra Stansfield, who was determined to give birth to her illegitimate child, no matter what, despite financial problems and social disapproval. McCarron comes to admire her bravery and humor, and the implication is that he has even fallen a bit in love with her.\nSandra masters Dr. McCarron's unusual (for the 1930s) breathing method intended to help her through childbirth. However, when she goes into labor and is on the way to the hospital on an icy winter night, her taxi crashes and she is decapitated. McCarron arrives at the crash site and realizes that Sandra is somehow still alive. Her lungs in her decapitated body are still pumping air, as her head, some feet away, is working to sustain the breathing method so that the baby can be born. McCarron manages to deliver the infant alive and well.\nOn a sweet but haunting end note, Sandra whispers \"Thank you\"\u2014her severed head mouthing the words, which are distortedly heard from the throat jutting from her headless body. McCarron is able to tell her that her baby is a boy and to see that she has registered this before she dies. McCarron and his office nurse pay for the woman's burial, for she has no one else.\nThe child is adopted, and despite the confidential nature of adoption records, McCarron is able to keep track of him over the years. When the man is \"not yet 45\", and an accomplished college professor, McCarron arranges to meet him socially. \"He had his mother's determination, gentlemen,\" he tells the club members, \"and his mother's hazel eyes.\"\nIn popular culture.\nThe second episode of the seventh season of the 2016 American television series \"Billions\" featured a copy of the book in the possession of a prisoner character played by Clancy Brown. Brown played a sadistic prison guard in the 1994 movie adaptation of \"Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63995", "revid": "50713485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63995", "title": "Professional wrestling match types", "text": "Various types of matches used in professional wrestling\nMany types of wrestling matches, sometimes called \"gimmick matches\" in the jargon of the business, are performed in professional wrestling. Some gimmick matches are more common than others and are often used to advance or conclude a storyline. Throughout professional wrestling's decades-long history, some gimmick matches have spawned many variations of the core concept.\nSingles match.\nThe singles match is the most common of all professional wrestling matches, which involves only two competitors competing for one fall. A victory is obtained by pinfall, submission, knockout, countout, or disqualification. One of the most common variations on the singles match is to restrict the possible means for victory.\nBlindfold match.\nIn a blindfold match, the two participants must wear a blindfold over their eyes for the entire duration of the match. A well-known example of this match is the WrestleMania VII match between Jake \"The Snake\" Roberts and Rick Martel.\nNo count-out match.\nA no count-out match is a singles match in which both competitors can stay outside of the ring without being counted out. A well-known example is at Vengeance (2003) between Stephanie McMahon and Sable, which Sable won.\nPure wrestling rules match.\nA type of match contested in Ring of Honor Wrestling (ROH), usually for the ROH Pure Championship; each wrestler is allowed only three rope breaks; once they are all used, the wrestler cannot use the ropes to escape pins or submissions. Closed fists are illegal, and the first offense (if seen by the official) results in a warning. A second offense results in disqualification. \nSpecial challenge match.\nA special challenge match was often used in World Championship Wrestling (WCW) to refer to a singles match in which the champion is not defending the title, so the title doesn't change hands if the champion loses the match. It can be announced by name, as a non-title match or as a singles match. It was also used in a tag team format. World TV Champion Arn Anderson vs. Paul Orndorff at Clash of the Champions XI was one example. Though Orndorff won the match, Anderson remained champion.\nChampion vs Champion match.\nA champion vs. champion match can also be referenced to a Winner Takes All match, but in some cases each superstars' title is not contested in the match or only one title is on the line. During WWE's second brand extension, this type of match was frequently used at Survivor Series, with both titles not defended, up until 2021, with the champion vs. champion matches being replaced by WarGames. This type of match has now been used at Crown Jewel since 2024, with both the men's and women's world title holders facing each other for a commemorative Crown Jewel Championship.\nBloodsport/Underground match.\nThis event consists of a unique ruleset compared to a traditional pro wrestling event, in that every match must end in either a knockout or submission. The traditional wrestling ring is replaced by a ring canvas with no ropes or turnbuckles.\nGCW Bloodsport.\nThis event features worked shoot matches in a style that mimics the early days of MMA and catch wrestling. It is common for Bloodsport competitors to have some knowledge in other combat sports and/or MMA, as well as professional wrestling, as these one on one matches often appear stiff and have a feel of classic Shoot-style wrestling fights.\nRaw/NXT Underground.\nIn August 2020 (amid its shift to the ThunderDome studio due to the COVID-19 pandemic), \"Raw\" introduced a new segment in its third hour known as \"Raw Underground.\" Hosted by Shane McMahon, It was a \"Fight Club\" inspired concept taking place in the basement of the WWE Performance Center. The matches were held in a ring with no ropes and a black canvas, and were short work shoot style and could end by knockout, submission or McMahon's call. \"Raw Underground\" segments aired from August 3 to September 21, 2020, in 8 episodes of \"Raw\".\nWWE's NXT brand then adopted the concept beginning on the July 4 episode of \"NXT\" between Eddy Thorpe and Damon Kemp. Unlike the \"Raw\" matches, these took place in the show's main studio, with the ring ropes being taken down and a black canvas covering the ring. \nOn the December 26, 2023 episode of \"NXT\", Thorpe defeated Dijak in the second NXT Underground match.\nThe first women's NXT Underground match took place on week 2 of NXT Spring Breakin' (2024), where Lola Vice defeated Natalya.\nOn NXT Battleground (2024), Vice defeated Shayna Baszler in the second NXT Underground match.\nOn NXT Deadline (2024), Vice defeated Jaida Parker in the third NXT Underground match.\nBattle royale-based variations.\nThe battle royale is a multi-competitor match type in which wrestlers are eliminated until only one is left. Typical battle royales begin with 20 or more participants all in the ring at the same time, who are then eliminated by being thrown over the top rope and having both feet touch the venue floor.\nBattlebowl.\nThe Battlebowl is a two-ring variation on a battle royale. In these matches, the wrestlers start in one ring and try to throw wrestlers into the second ring, after which they can be eliminated by being thrown out of that ring. The last remaining wrestler in the first ring can rest until only one wrestler is left in the second ring, after which they fight in both rings until one is eliminated and a winner is declared, in similar fashion to a double elimination tournament. This was held by World Championship Wrestling at the 1991 Starrcade event, but future Battlebowl matches were contested under normal battle royale rules.\nBattle Zone.\nThe battle zone features any number of men in a one-ring, over-the-top-rope elimination. A typical battle royale, except this one features tables covered with barbed wire, thumbtacks, and light bulbs on the outside of the ring, which may catch wrestlers as they are thrown out of the ring.\nBunkhouse Stampede.\nThe National Wrestling Alliance's (NWA) Bunkhouse Stampede involved wrestlers wearing what was described as \"bunkhouse gear\"\u2014cowboy boots, jeans, T-shirts\u2014instead of their normal wrestling tights and not only allowed but encouraged the bringing of weapons. In 1988 the NWA named a pay-per-view after the Bunkhouse Stampede, headlined by a Bunkhouse Stampede match held inside a cage. Recently, the match has been revitalized by Ricky Morton of the Rock n' Roll Express at his wrestling academy in Chuckey, Tennessee.\nHardcore battle royale.\nA battle royale with hardcore rules (no disqualifications and no count-outs) involving several competitors in the ring at the same time. The match could last for either 15 or 20 minutes. All participants are not eliminated by being thrown out of the ring and both feet touching the floor. Pinning or forcing to submit whoever was current Hardcore champion would result in the victorious participant becoming the interim champion. Whoever the person held the title at end of the time limit would be declared the winner of the match and the official champion. The most famous example is the Hardcore Title Battle Royal from WWF's WrestleMania 2000.\nLast Blood battle royale.\nA last blood battle royale is essentially a multi-competitor First Blood match. All competitors start at the same time and wrestlers are eliminated when they start bleeding. The winner is the last wrestler in the match not bleeding. This match was held in the Tri-State Wrestling Association, a predecessor to Extreme Championship Wrestling.\nReverse battle royale.\nGenerally used in TNA/Impact Wrestling, a reverse battle royale begins with wrestlers surrounding the ring instead of inside it. At the start of the match they battle for half of them to get into the ring, at which point a standard last person standing wins the battle royale.\nThe Cage Reverse Battle Royale is another TNA variation of this match type. This actually has three stages; It begins the first stage as an inside-out battle royale with 15 or more wrestlers involved. The first seven to enter the ring over the top cage will advance to the second stage which is a gauntlet match. When it gets down to the final stage, only two wrestlers will battle in a singles match which is decided by pinfall or submission.\nSemi-final battle royale.\nA semi-final battle royale consists of a battle royale where when a specific number of wrestlers are remaining, the match ends, and those that remain are placed in a standard wrestling match for the prize at stake. An example of this occurred on a January 2024 episode of \"NXT\", where 20 women competed in a battle royal that became a Fatal 4-Way once there were four competitors remaining.\nIn All Elite Wrestling (AEW), it is known as a \"Dynamite Dozen Battle Royale\", as twelve competitors compete until it is reduced to two, and there is a subsequent episode where the final two compete, in this case, \"AEW Dynamite Diamond Ring\".\nIn New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW), the 2021 New Japan Rumble at Wrestle Kingdom 15 was conducted as a semi-final battle royale. Chase Owens, Bad Luck Fale, Tetsuya Bushi, and Toru Yano were the final four that competed in a championship match the next day.\nTag Team battle royale.\nThe tag team battle royale consist of designated tag teams of wrestlers with two members on the team. This match uses the normal battle royale rules, teams may be eliminated when either one or both partners are thrown over the top rope with both feet touching the floor. This match is conducted similarly to a battle royale but in these cases, both wrestlers are considered active at the same time and there are no tags using the tornado tag team stipulation.\nThis variation of the tag team battle royale was used during the 2011 WWE Draft on April 25, 2011; where the wrestler's team has to eliminate all members of the opposing team, much like an elimination tag team match where the losing wrestler of a team, who just got thrown over the ring ropes with both feet touching the floor, must return to their locker room. The team winner receives a #1 draft pick for their respective brand. Another notable version of this match was used at the WrestleMania XV as well.\nWorld War 3.\nCreated by WCW in 1995, the World War 3 battle royale involved a three-ring setup and 60 competitors; 20 wrestlers started in each of the three rings, in which they would wrestle under regular battle royale rules. Once there were 30 competitors remaining (except in 1997, where the number was 20), all competitors would enter the center ring and continue under regular rules until only one wrestler was left standing.\nCinematic match.\nA cinematic match is not technically a match type itself, but rather, it is a term used to refer to matches that are produced with various cinematic techniques. The rules vary from match to match, but generally have a basis in hardcore wrestling. Unlike a normal wrestling match, which is done in one take and typically in front of a live audience, cinematic matches are shot over several hours with various scenes filmed, similar to filmmaking, with higher-budget production involved. The final product (the complete match) generally lasts from 20 to 40 minutes and airs at a later time, typically for a pay-per-view event. They are also usually filmed on-location or at a custom built set.\nOn October 4, 1987, Antonio Inoki defeated Masa Saito in a Ganry\u016b-jima Island Death Match in a shoreside ring with no referee which lasted for two hours. Inoki billed the match to pay homage to the island's famous duel between Miyamoto Musashi and Sasaki Kojir\u014d. The match was captured by a multi camera setup by a ground crew and from the air via helicopter. The action mostly took place in the ring and only occasionally spilling out to the area around it. As the match drew on into the evening, torches were placed in order to illuminate the surrounding area. Inoki would defeat Saito with a sleeper hold. Despite the match title having \"deathmatch\" in the name, it was more of a submission based match. This match is considered to be the first ever cinematic match.\nWhile not considered a cinematic match at the time, the Hollywood Backlot Brawl between Roddy Piper and Goldust at WrestleMania XII in 1996 is considered an early cinematic match by the World Wrestling Federation (now WWE), as it used techniques now featured in cinematic matches. Unlike future cinematic matches (which typically air during one segment), the match aired during several segments in between matches inside the ring, and featured both pre-taped segments outside the Arrowhead Pond of the two fighting as well as Piper \"chasing\" Goldust's solid gold Cadillac in a white Ford Bronco in an obvious reference to the then-ongoing O. J. Simpson murder case. (Vince McMahon mentioned on commentary without completely breaking kayfabe that the \"footage looked awfully familiar\"; in reality, repurposed footage of Simpson's infamous Bronco chase was actually used as part of the match.) The match eventually ended in the ring live, when Piper stripped Goldust down to women's lingerie and kissed him as part of \"making him a man\". WrestleMania XII featured a second cinematic match between \"The Huckster\" and \"Nacho Man\".\nAt SummerSlam 1996, The Undertaker faced Mankind in a \"Boiler Room Brawl\" that was largely pre-taped, incorporating props and unorthodox camera angles.\nIn 2016, Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) held a match entitled the \"Final Deletion\" between brothers Matt Hardy and Jeff Hardy for the July 5 episode of \"Impact Wrestling\", which was filmed at Matt Hardy's compound. It was a hardcore wrestling match with falls count anywhere. The sequel was a brawl between The Broken Hardys and Decay titled \"Delete or Decay\". The Broken Hardys and Decay continued their feud at Bound for Glory, where Decay lost their TNA World Tag Team Championship to The Hardys in \"The Great War\". The Hardys issued an open tag team invitational at their compound on the December 15 episode of \"Impact Wrestling\", titled Total Nonstop Deletion. The main event was the \"Tag Team Apocalypto\" where The Hardys last defeated Decay.\nAlthough not contested as a match, WWE followed this up shortly after and filmed a cinematic-style brawl between The New Day (Big E, Kofi Kingston, and Xavier Woods) and The Wyatt Family (Bray Wyatt, Erick Rowan, and Braun Strowman) that was held at The Wyatt Family Compound and shown on the July 11, 2016 episode of \"WWE Raw\". WWE then taped their own cinematic match for their 2017 pay-per-view Payback, called a House of Horrors match between Randy Orton and Bray Wyatt. Similar to the \"Final Deletion\" match in TNA, this one was held at an abandoned house, but instead of falls count anywhere, this match had to end in the ring in the arena that the event was held in (the House of Horrors scenes were pre-taped, while the in-ring portion was live). The next cinematic match would occur on the March 19, 2018 episode of \"Raw\", which featured Matt Hardy, who had returned to WWE and became \"Woken\" Matt Hardy, against Bray Wyatt and was called the \"Ultimate Deletion;\" this was just like the \"Final Deletion,\" including being held at Matt's compound.\nCinematic matches became more frequent in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; the pandemic began affecting the professional wrestling industry in March that year, forcing promotions to hold events behind closed doors. WWE would hold several cinematic matches at their pay-per-views between March and August, being highly praised for the two that occurred at WrestleMania 36; a Boneyard match between The Undertaker and AJ Styles, which was a Buried Alive match held at a custom built cemetery set in the Orlando area, and a Firefly Fun House match between John Cena and \"The Fiend\" Bray Wyatt. (Although the match ended with The Fiend pinning Cena in a ring, the match itself was a dream-like sequence of Cena's career, showing his perceived character flaws; the various segments were filmed at WWE's Titan Towers headquarters in Stamford, Connecticut). Following this, cinematic matches occurred at Money in the Bank in May, which was the event's eponymous ladder matches that occurred at WWE's headquarters, a Backlot Brawl between Adam Cole and Velveteen Dream in the parking lot of Full Sail University at in June, a cinematically produced singles match between Edge and Randy Orton at Backlash (billed as \"The Greatest Wrestling Match Ever\") also in June, and a Wyatt Swamp Fight between Bray Wyatt and Braun Strowman at The Horror Show at Extreme Rules in July. Following the introduction of the WWE ThunderDome and Capitol Wrestling Center (CWC) staging arenas in August and October, respectively, the use of cinematic matches was greatly reduced, as these new staging arenas allowed fans to attend the events virtually. To go with the Halloween-theme at in October, a Haunted House of Terrors match was held between Dexter Lumis and Cameron Grimes, which was similar to the House of Horrors match from Payback 2017. Matches involving Randy Orton, \"The Fiend\" Bray Wyatt, and Alexa Bliss have also used cinematic techniques, such as the Firefly Inferno match between Orton and The Fiend at in December, where Orton set The Fiend's entire body on fire, and an intergender match between Orton and Bliss at Fastlane in March 2021, where Bliss used supernatural powers. Since the resumption of live touring in July 2021, WWE ceased producing cinematic matches.\nAEW also incorporated cinematic matches during pandemic restrictions in 2020 and 2021, most notably the Stadium Stampede match at Double or Nothing 2020, which was a 5v5 empty arena match in the TIAA Bank Field stadium. During that period, AEW featured at least one cinematic match at each of their PPVs: a \"Tooth and Nail match\" at All Out 2020 between Dr. Britt Baker, D.M.D. and Big Swole at Baker's real-life dental office, a match entitled \"The Elite Deletion\" at Full Gear 2020, featuring Matt Hardy against Sammy Guevara and similar to the other \"Deletion\" matches involving Hardy, and a tag team street fight pitting Darby Allin and Sting against Team Taz (Brian Cage and Ricky Starks) at Revolution 2021, which was held at an abandoned warehouse somewhere in Atlanta, Georgia. At Double or Nothing 2021 the Stadium Stampede match was a hybrid cinematic match with the first half recorded at TIAA Bank Field, then concluding live at the adjacent Daily's Place. The audience in attendance watched the first half of the match on video screens before the action spilled into the amphitheater. This would be AEW's final cinematic match produced before the company resumed live touring in July that year.\nImpact Wrestling would also return to producing cinematic matches in 2021 when Ethan Page wrestled his alter ego \"The Karate Man\" at Hard to Kill in a \"Mortal Kombat\"-style cinematic match that saw The Karate Man \"kill\" Page in what would be Page's last appearance with Impact before leaving for AEW.\nContainer-based variations.\nSome matches have a container stationed in or near the ring, with the object of the match being to trap the opposing wrestler in it. All of these matches are fought under hardcore rules, and many of these matches take the name of the container, such as Ambulance match and the Casket match. A similar type of match aims to restrain opposing wrestlers somehow, and the match often takes the name of the restraining device \u2013 for example, the Stretcher. None of these matches can end in a pinfall, submission, countout, or disqualification.\nCommon containers used for these matches are caskets (connected to The Undertaker's Deadman persona, either using a typical coffin or a double-deep, double-wide casket, sometimes specially designed for specific opponents The Undertaker takes on), ambulances, dumpsters, hearses (known as a \"Last Ride match\", also connected to The Undertaker gimmick), and stretchers.\nAmbulance match.\nAn Ambulance match is fought under hardcore rules, no pinfalls, no submissions, no disqualifications, no countouts and the only way to win is for one wrestler to force their opponent into the back of an ambulance and close the door. The first ambulance match took place at Survivor Series 2003 where Kane defeated Shane McMahon. The second one took place at Elimination Chamber (2012) which also involved Kane as one of the competitors. His opponent was John Cena, who won the match, where an additional rule was added in that the ambulance has to leave to win. The third Ambulance match was part of Three Stages of Hell match at WWE Payback on June 16, 2013, in Rosemont, Illinois between John Cena and Ryback for the WWE Championship. The most recent was at NXT Halloween Havoc in October 2024, between Ridge Holland and Andre Chase. The famous 2017 Lucha Underground \"Hell of War\" bout between Dante Fox (A.R. Fox) and Killshot (Swerve Strickland) was that promotion's only ambulance match. Stretcher matches in All Elite Wrestling also involve ambulance match rules, where the objective is to place your opponent onto a stretcher, roll the stretcher into the back of an ambulance, and close both doors to gain the victory.\nBuried alive match.\nA buried alive match is one in which the object is for one wrestler to throw his opponent into a grave dug out of a large mound of soil placed outside the ring. Once in the grave, the wrestler must bury his opponent in dirt and soil to the referee's discretion. Equipment ranging from shovels and wheelbarrows to bulldozers are often made available to completely bury the opponent. The Buried Alive match is one of three of The Undertaker's signature matches (the Casket and Last Ride matches being the others).\nA cinematic Buried Alive match was held between The Undertaker and AJ Styles for WrestleMania 36, referred to as a \"Boneyard match\" . The match took place outdoors in a cemetery-like setting near an abandoned warehouse rather than in a traditional ring.\nBody Bag match.\nA Body Bag match is a no-disqualification match where the objective is for a wrestler to put an opposing wrestler in a body bag situated in the middle of the ring for the victory. This was one of The Undertaker\u2019s early gimmick matches; he had one of these matches in 1991 against The Ultimate Warrior at the Madison Square Garden.\nCasket match.\nThe casket match (also known as the Coffin match) has a casket near the ring, with the objective of the match being to trap the opposing wrestler inside. The casket match began its life as a one-off coffin match in the 1970s fought between Dusty Rhodes and Ivan Koloff. The coffin match was revived as one of The Undertaker's signature matches and first appeared on television at the Survivor Series as the coffin match against Kamala. Prior to that, at a house show on July 14, 1991, the Ultimate Warrior defeated the Undertaker in a casket match in St. Louis, Missouri at Busch Stadium. There have been 17 casket matches, 11 of which have been won by The Undertaker. The 20th edition was held at Halloween Havoc and the first following the retirement of The Undertaker involving Grayson Waller vs. Apollo Crews in which Crews won. WWE held its first women's casket match on the October 29, 2024 episode of \"NXT\" involving Tatum Paxley and Wendy Choo in which Paxley won.\nIn addition to WWE, the casket match has been adopted for use in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling, All Elite Wrestling, and Lucha Underground, with Lucha Underground denominating it as the Grave Consequences (subsequently Graver Consequences) match. Another toned-down version of the Casket Match is when a victory is not obtained by placing the opponent in the coffin but by pinfall or submission. However, the defeated wrestler is then placed into the coffin.\nLast Rites match.\nThe Last Rites match is a Total Nonstop Action Wrestling variation where a casket is lowered into the center of the ring, and the objective is to get your opponent into the casket, which is raised to the ceiling following the match. The first Last Rites match was done between Sting and Abyss. Vince Russo came up with this match; it was perceived to be a disaster because neither wrestler could work properly due to the placement of the casket in the center of the ring, which limited and obstructed their workspace. The match was such a failure that during the match, the enraged crowd screamed \"Fire Russo!\" so loudly that the commentators had to yell into their microphones to be heard.\nIn 2023, TNA Wrestling brought back the Last Rites match, but modified it to be more of a basic casket match.\nDumpster match.\nA dumpster match is a no-disqualification, no-submission, no-countout, no-fall hardcore match in which the only objective to win is by forcing your opponent into a dumpster and closing the lid. The first match occurred was at WrestleMania XIV, pitting The New Age Outlaws against Cactus Jack and Chainsaw Charlie.\nThe most recent Dumpster match taking place, was on the October 4th, 2024 episode of \"Smackdown\", in which Michin powerbombed Chelsea Green through a table and into a Dumpster.\nLast Ride match.\nA Last Ride match is a hardcore match similar to an Ambulance match, in which the victory condition is for one wrestler to force their opponent into the back of a hearse, close the door, and drive it out of the arena. The first match of this type occurred at No Mercy when Undertaker challenged John \"Bradshaw\" Layfield for the WWE Championship, although a match was held previously with similar stipulations. The second match of this type occurred at Armageddon when The Undertaker challenged Mr. Kennedy and defeated him. A variation of this match was used at NXT Spring Breakin', called a Trunk match contested between Tony D'Angelo and Channing \"Stacks\" Lorenzo, who were the victors; and Pretty Deadly (Kit Wilson and Elton Prince).\nEnclosure-based variations.\nSome matches take place in specific enclosed environments. Although the majority of these enclosures are set up either in or around the ring, some of them are placed apart from it. In all cases, the structure itself is considered \"in play\" and most enclosure-based matches are decided by pinfall or submission unless specific other stipulations are made beforehand.\nSteel cage match.\nSteel cages are one of the oldest form of enclosures used in professional wrestling. The earliest known \"steel cage matches\" of any kind took place on January 9, 1936, in Caruthersville, Missouri, in a card that included two such \"chicken wire fence\" matches between Jez and Otto Ludwig, and Joe Dillman vs. Charles Sinkey. These matches took place in a ring surrounded by chicken wire, to keep the athletes inside, and prevent any potential interference. They have evolved a great deal over time, changing from chicken wire to steel bars to chain-link fencing (the latter is now the standard, due to it being cheaper to manufacture, lighter to transport, and more flexible and thus safer for the wrestlers).\nA steel cage match is a match fought within a cage formed by placing sheets of mesh metal around, in, or against the edges of the wrestling ring. The most common way of winning is by simply escaping the cage, either over the top of the cage wall and having both feet touch the arena floor, or by escaping through the cage door with both feet touching the arena floor. The other occasional ways to win a steel cage match are by pinfall or by submission.\nIt is also possible to have one wrestler attempting to escape over the top of the cage wall while another tries to escape through the cage door. In Mexico, steel cage matches are won by just climbing to the top of the cage wall. In TNA, the matches were previously branded \"Six Sides of Steel\" as the cage surrounded their six-sided ring.\nBungee Match.\nA Bungee Match is a type of match in which two competitors are enclosed in a steel cage with on side open, each are wearing a secure harness attached to a bungee cord and are suspended high into the air to have a wrestling match. The winner is the wrestler who throws their opponent out of the cage forcing the opponent to swing from the cord. The match was held in Global Wrestling Federation between Chaz Taylor and Steven Dane on August 14, 1992 which Dane was thrown out of the cage. This match type was never attempted again likely due to the low match quality (as both Dane and Taylor were enclosed in a small cage with little room to move), poor camera work with only camera inside the cage not functioning and taking place at night offering low visibility for the audience and camera crew below, and the overall danger of the match itself.\nWeaponized Steel Cage Match.\nWhile steel cage matches aren't normally accompanied by weapons for singles matches, a hardcore variation does allow for weapons to be used. In 2025, Blake Monroe and Jordynne Grace would have a weaponized steel cage match at No Mercy. Weapons are clipped around the cage and clearly seen, and it can only be decided by pinfall or submission, making the cage shorter than a normal cage.\nAsylum match.\nThe Asylum match is the name given to three different types of matches, involving a chain link cage in the shape of a circle placed in the middle of the ring.\nThe first type was a match created by Scott Steiner in WCW, held within a small chain link cage in the shape of a circle placed in the middle of the ring. Victory occurred only by submission.\nOn May 16, 2016, a second type was introduced and scheduled between Dean Ambrose and Chris Jericho at Extreme Rules, a variation to the steel cage match where weapons are suspended above the cage and escaping the cage is not a means of victory, leaving only pinfall or submission.\nOn August 10, 2019, a third type, which also included a barbed wire steel cage stipulation (a type of match where the steel cage door is locked with chains and a padlock), was introduced after Adam Cole and Johnny Gargano tied one to one after a normal match and a no holds barred match at where weapons are connected to the steel cage and barbed wire on the top.\nBarbed Wire Steel Cage match.\nA barbed wire steel cage match is a match that uses strands of barbed wire in a steel cage match in some capacity, usually around the top of the cage. Simply using barbed wire in an otherwise regular steel cage match does \"not\" make the match a barbed wire steel cage match; the barbed wire must be part of the cage's design. This type of match is one where escape from the cage is almost impossible, because in addition to the barbed wire preventing escape over the top of the cage, the cage's door is also locked with chains and a padlock, like a Hell in a Cell match. One particular example was John \"Bradshaw\" Layfield vs. Big Show at No Way Out 2005 where in addition to the barbed wire there was also razor wire wrapped around the top of the cage in a circular fashion; and another example was Adam Cole vs Johnny Gargano at where in addition to the barbed wire and the chain-locked door, various weapons were made available at the top of the cage; this cage however did not have razor wire.\nWire Steel Cage match.\nOther variations are the razor wire steel cage match, a similar concept to that of the barbed wire cage match, however the barbed wire is replaced by larger and thicker razor wire and is wrapped around the top, corners, and walls of the cage, and barbed wire razor wire steel cage match is the same as the barbed wire cage match, however the top, corners, and walls of the cage are covered with barbed wire, then also further covered with razor wire. There are also boards in the ring that are covered in razor wire.\nCage of Death match.\nThe Cage of Death match is a type of steel cage match with various weapons littered in the cage, such as electrified cage walls, cacti, tables, light tubes, glass, thumbtacks, baseball bats, barbed wire and numerous other weapons and objects. This match always features as the main event of CZW's biggest show, Cage of Death. Some of these matches have been done under WarGames style rules with two rings being used.\nChamber match.\nIn TNA, a Chamber match starts off between two wrestlers (or up to six) fighting inside a chamber. Wrestlers who were not involved in the match surrounded the chamber. About five minutes into the match, the outside wrestlers throw weapons into the chamber. This match only ends when one wrestler knocks out his opponent.\nChamber of Extreme match.\nIn a Chamber of Extreme match, created by Extreme Canadian Championship Wrestling (ECCW), an 8-feet-high steel cage surrounds the ringside area with the top wrapped in barbed wire and \"extreme\" weapons scattered around the ring and ringside area. Disqualifications, count-outs and rope-breaks do not apply. The winner is decided by pinfall, submission or being unable to stand up at 10-count.\nChamber of Horrors match.\nThe Chamber of Horrors match was an enclosed steel cage match between two teams of four men. In the middle of the cage there was a smaller cage with an electric chair connected to a lever. The way to win this match is to put the opponent in the chair and switch the lever on (which was attached to the outer cage and six feet off the ground), so as, in kayfabe, the person is electrocuted. This match was used in WCW only once, with Abdullah the Butcher being electrocuted accidentally by his teammate Cactus Jack after being placed in the chair at the last second by Rick Steiner.\nDixieland match.\nA Dixieland match (named for TNA President Dixie Carter, who \"invented\" the match) is a hybrid steel cage/ladder match. The wrestlers start the match in the ring enclosed in a steel cage. To win the match, a wrestler must first climb out of the cage, then go up the entrance ramp where a championship belt is hung from the ceiling, and finally climb a ladder to retrieve the belt. The first match of this type occurred during the \"Impact Wrestling: Final Resolution\" taping on December 3, 2013, as Magnus defeated Jeff Hardy to become TNA World Heavyweight Champion.\nDoomsday Cage match.\nAlso called a Tower of Doom, the Doomsday Cage is a three-story cage \u2013 the middle one split into two rooms \u2013 all of which house wrestlers. The object of the match is for a team of wrestlers to fight their way from the top cage to the bottom, where pinfalls and submissions come into play. In the later days of WCW, it was referred to as a Triple Decker Cage match, a reference to the match type being used in the finale of the film \"Ready to Rumble\". The most notable match of this type occurred at WCW's Uncensored event in 1996, when Hulk Hogan and Randy Savage fought Ric Flair, Arn Anderson, Meng, The Barbarian, Lex Luger, Kevin Sullivan, Z-Gangsta, and The Ultimate Solution.\nDoomsday Chamber of Blood match.\nThe Doomsday Chamber of Blood match was created by Abyss. This match is a combination of the Barbed Wire Cage, Six Sides of Steel and Sadistic Madness match types, with the cage having a barbed wire roof on top. This match is won by making your opponent bleed first, then pinning your opponent for the victory. Matt Morgan and Abyss competed in one of these matches at TNA's Lockdown (2009) pay-per-view.\nElectrified Cage match.\nThe Electrified Cage match is a variation of a steel cage match where the ring is surrounded by an electrified steel cage. The cage can be also used as a weapon. The only way to win is by pinfall or submission. The Lucha en Jaula Electrificada is another variation of the electrified cage match in which the only way to win is by escape. The cage is turned off in a time interval, allowing the participants a chance at escape before it turns back on. This match type is used by the AAA promotion in Mexico.\nElimination Chamber match.\nThe Elimination Chamber (known as No Escape in Germany to avoid a potential brand blunder over references of gas chambers in The Holocaust), which was the result of an idea by Triple H and introduced by Eric Bischoff for WWE in 2002, is a steel cage with a grid-locked, chain-linked enclosure with support bars that surrounds the ring entirely, including creating a steel grated (later padded) floor area on the apron. Inside the cage, at each turnbuckle, is a clear pod in which competitors in the match wait to join the match. As the name implies, this is an elimination-style match, so wrestlers are eliminated one-by-one via pinfall or submission until only one remains.\nThe original Chamber, used from 2002 to 2016, was cylindrical, and a re-designed chamber introduced in 2017 was cubic, but still used the same materials with the same 4 enclosures.\nAn Extreme Elimination Chamber took place at the 2006 December to Dismember pay-per-view, where each waiting wrestler was given a weapon. Since 2010, WWE has held an eponymous Elimination Chamber pay-per-view every February, with this match type as one of its marquee matches. At its 2018 edition, the first-ever women's Elimination Chamber match was held, as well as the first seven-man Elimination Chamber match.\nFight Pit match.\nThe Fight Pit match is a variation of a cage match where the ring is surrounded by a steel cage rather than ropes and turnbuckles, with a catwalk surrounding the top. The catwalk also has chain-linked fence surrounding the outer edge (originally railings), which the wrestlers can climb up to and jump from. The match also has a no-pinfall stipulation, which means it can only be won by submission or knockout either by making the opponent unable to stand up at a 10-count or via technical knockout, making the match somewhat of a hybrid of a professional wrestling match and a mixed martial arts fight- MMA fights can only be won in those ways. The inaugural fight pit match was held during the May 27, 2020 episode of \"NXT\", between Matt Riddle and Timothy Thatcher (with Kurt Angle as a guest referee). A modified version of the Pit with chain-linked fencing was used at the Extreme Rules premium live event where Matt Riddle and Seth Rollins continued their rivalry (with UFC Hall of Famer Daniel Cormier as a guest referee). The match between Riddle &amp; Rollins was the first ever Fight Pit match in a WWE PPV.\nHell in a Cell match.\nThe Hell in a Cell match is a specific kind of enclosure match run by WWE inside an enlarged 4-sided cuboid steel cage made from open-weave steel mesh chain-link fencing, which extends beyond the ring apron, leaving a gap between the edge of the ring and the Cell fence. As opposed to a conventional steel cage, the cell fencing continues across the top as a ceiling, hence the name 'Cell'. Unlike a standard cage match, there is no escape clause because after the combatants enter the Cell, the door of the Cell is locked with chains and a padlock from the outside by referees to prevent the combatants from escaping (although it has been fairly common for Hell in a Cell matches to spill out of the cell and even onto the roof of the cage). The match has a no disqualification \"anything goes\" stipulation, and can only be won via pinfall or submission inside the ring. One exception could be made is Hell in a Cell 2018 and 2019 where the WWE Universal Championship match ended via stoppage.\nBecause of the \"anything goes\" rule, this match developed an infamous reputation in its early years. This match usually takes place on pay-per-view shows (there have only been five exceptions: four Cell matches occurred on \"Raw\": two in 1998, one in 2011 (as a dark match), and one in 2021, while the first-ever Cell Match on \"Smackdown\" happened on June 18, 2021). Many wrestlers were legitimately injured during these matches (most notably Mick Foley) thanks to the dangerous bumps involved and the chain-link fencing of the Cell. In kayfabe, it is regarded as the most dangerous match in the entire promotion. Jim Ross has referred to the cell itself as \"a demonic structure\" that is \"custom built for injury\". There have been 53 Hell in a Cell matches to date, with The Undertaker competing in 14 (with his last at WrestleMania 32), more than any other WWE performer. The first Hell in a Cell match was between The Undertaker and Shawn Michaels at in St. Louis in October 1997.\nKennel from Hell match.\nA Kennel from Hell match was held at WWF's Unforgiven pay-per-view in 1999, between Al Snow and The Big Boss Man for the WWF Hardcore Championship. The match was held within a steel cage, but with the Hell in a Cell cage also placed over the steel cage and the ring. The objective of the match was to escape through the door of the outer Hell in a Cell cage first, with the added obstacle of hostile attack dogs that would roam the apron between the two cages. This match was conceived by Vince Russo as part of Snow's short-lived feud with The Big Boss Man\u2014in which he had kidnapped and killed his pet chihuahua Pepper.\nAfter being unable to obtain trained attack dogs, Russo sought dogs from local owners on short notice. The dogs were playful and friendly towards Russo, and during the match, they were seen urinating, defecating, and trying to mate with one another rather than making any attempt at attacking the wrestlers when they stepped outside the steel cage. The match was deemed by critics to be one of the worst gimmick matches, if not one of the worst matches in WWE history.\nInferno match.\nIn an Inferno match (a type of no-disqualification, no-fall, no-submission, no-countout match), the ring is completely surrounded by flames once both contenders have entered the ring. The only way to win is to set your opponent on fire. Inferno matches usually end on the outside of the ring; this way, paramedics can assist the loser of the match. Due to the potentially graphic or dangerous nature of this type of match, it is very rarely seen in North America. As of \u00a02020[ [update]], there have only been six inferno matches in WWE, with almost all of them involving Kane, this being his signature match.\nThe first Inferno match took place in 1987 at the Juan Pachin Vicens coliseum in Ponce, Puerto Rico, where the ropes were simply soaked with gasoline and lit on fire. This kind of match was also done again in 1992 at FMW in Japan, and was called a Hellfire Deathmatch, which featured barbed wire as the ring ropes which were lit on fire. The match was a total disaster as wrestlers such as Sabu, his uncle The Original Sheik and Atsushi Onita, due to unbearably hot conditions, dashed out of the ring after just a minute. The Sheik was badly burned as a result and went into a coma. The first WWF Inferno Match was between Kane and The Undertaker at Unforgiven (1998) pay-per-view in Greensboro, North Carolina, and it was a safer and much more professional affair where special effects and pyrotechnics experts were brought in from Hollywood to set up and control the fire around the ring. Kane had been thrown out of the ring and the Undertaker had no way of attacking him unless he too went out of the ring. The match ended in the Undertaker's victory. WCW also attempted an Inferno match, known as the Human Torch match, at The Great American Bash in 2000 between Sting and Vampiro.\nAnother version of the match known as the Firefly Inferno match was held at in 2020, between \"The Fiend\" Bray Wyatt and Randy Orton; its title referenced Wyatt's \"Firefly Fun House\" gimmick. In addition to the ring being surrounded by fire, other objects that are placed around the ring are also set on fire.\nAnother variation of the Inferno match, dubbed a Ring of Fire match, took place at SummerSlam in 2013, when Kane faced Bray Wyatt. While the ring is surrounded by flames just like in a standard Inferno match, the match is decided by pinfall or submission and not by burning your opponent. In addition, the flames prevent others from possibly interfering in the match, as was the case with Luke Harper and Erick Rowan of The Wyatt Family.\nLethal Lockdown match.\nSimilar to the WarGames match used in WCW, TNA/Impact Wrestling's Lethal Lockdown consists of a single ring enclosed by a steel cage with two teams facing off with each other. The staggered entry system is identical, but weapons are permitted and are even provided. When all competitors have entered the ring, a roof is lowered onto the top of the cage, with various weapons hanging from it. Victory can be attained by pinfall or submission. This match has become a staple of TNA's Lockdown pay-per-view event, but has also made appearances at other TNA pay-per-views.\nLion's Den match.\nThe Lion's Den match is a steel cage match where a wrestler must knock out their opponent unconscious or make them submit inside an octagonal cage. The rules are made to mimic mixed martial arts matches, with the octagonal cage meant to mimic the cage used by the Ultimate Fighting Championship. This was Ken Shamrock's specialty match; two examples were at the 1998 and 1999 editions of SummerSlam, where Shamrock respectively fought Owen Hart and Steve Blackman.\nPunjabi Prison match.\nThe Punjabi Prison match, named after the Punjab state that The Great Khali (the match's founder) is billed from, consists of two large steel-reinforced bamboo cages. The first is four sided and stands 16 feet (4.8 m) tall, while the second has eight sides and stands 20 feet (6 m) and surrounds the first.\nThe inner cage has a four-foot (1.2 m) by four-foot door on each of its sides, with a referee standing by to open them at a wrestler's request. Each door may only be opened once and is only allowed to remain open for sixty seconds, after which it is padlocked. Should all four doors end up locked before the wrestlers escape, they are forced to climb out over the top, where the bamboo is fashioned into spikes. Between the two cages are sometimes placed two tables, on which are weapons (both \"medieval\" and \"bamboo\" variations of standard wrestling weapons). There are also extended straps at the corners of the cage which can be used to choke the opponent. Once a wrestler has escaped the first cage, he must climb over and out of the second cage, with the first wrestler having both of their feet touch the arena floor becoming the winner of the match.\nThe match was revived with modifications in 2017 as the main event of Battleground, which featured the Indian-Canadian Jinder Mahal facing Randy Orton for the WWE Championship; The Great Khali made a surprise run-in to assist Mahal.\nRage in a Cage match.\nThe Rage in a Cage match is held in an oval-shaped steel cage. It is typically used as the arena for the blowoff match of a feud and can be used for a tag team or singles match. In this match, wins are usually by pinfall or submission. Alternatively, Rage in a Cage may refer to the match that held in a Florida independent organization such as NWA Florida in which 20 or more wrestlers take part in a battle royale inside the oval-shaped steel cage. Each wrestler is encouraged to bring different weapons to the match, and a wrestler is eliminated by being thrown through the cage door. The last man standing wins.\nScramble Cage match.\nThe Scramble Cage match was contested exclusively in Ring of Honor (ROH), in which the ring is surrounded by a steel cage with four wooden platforms at the corners of the cage to make the \"high risk\" wrestling moves. All participants are allowed to be inside and outside the cage at any time. The Scramble Cage Melee match is an elimination cage match held in a cage similar to the one used in the Scramble Cage match, with wooden platforms on the top corners. There are no pinfalls or submissions; wrestlers are eliminated only by aerial moves performed from the platforms. The first and only match took place at Ring of Honor (ROH) on August 24, 2004. The competitors in this match were Jack Evans, Trent Acid, H. C. Loc, Tony Devito, Dan Maff, B. J. Whitmer, Oman Turtuga, Diablo Santiago, Fast Eddie, Altar Boy Luke, Kevin Dunn and Kirby Marcos.\nThundercage.\nWCW's Thundercage, based on the film \"Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome\", is a large domed structure of steel bars engulfing the ring. Although it does not have a top, the sides curve in to prevent escape.\nMexico's AAA promotion tweaked the concept with the \"Domo de la Muerte\" (\"Dome of Death\"), which uses a similar cage but only allows victory by escaping through a hole at the top center. This variation is also used in TNA, where it was called the TerrorDome, or more recently the Steel Asylum. In AAA it is typically used for multi-man \"luchas de apuestas\" (bet matches), with the last man standing in the cage losing his mask or hair.\nThe Thunderdome is a variation on the Thundercage, with the area near the top of the cage electrified. The only way for a wrestler to win the Thunderdome match is to have their opponents' \"terminator\" (usually a manager who stands outside of the ring) throw in the towel to stop the match. In another variation of this match, each pinned competitor in the match is handcuffed to the cage. The last man left is given a key to unlock his teammates to attack the other team, who are still handcuffed. Ironically, the ThunderDome name was used for WWE's bio-secure bubble during the pandemic between 2020 and 2021.\nTriple Cage match.\nTriple cage matches have been held by WCW and its predecessor, Jim Crockett Promotions, in which two smaller cages are stacked on top of the cage enclosing the ring.\nAt The Great American Bash in 1988, a \"Tower of Doom\" match was held, in which two teams attempted to make their way from the uppermost cage to the bottom, with victory achieved when all five members of a team escaped a door there. The cages were cut off from each other, with doors controlled from outside by referees, who only opened them for two-minute intervals.\nAt Uncensored in 1996, a \"Doomsday Cage Match\" was held where Hulk Hogan and Randy Savage faced off against the Alliance to End Hulkamania, which consisted of Ric Flair, Arn Anderson, Lex Luger, The Taskmaster, Meng, The Barbarian, The Ultimate Solution and Z-Gangsta. Hogan and Savage had to start at the top of the three tiered structure, and on each level there were members of the Alliance waiting for them. The structure featured scaffolding with steps on it to enable the wrestlers to traverse it, with the object being to make it to the bottom cage where the ring was and score a fall to win.\nA triple cage match at Slamboree in 2000 was held between David Arquette, Diamond Dallas Page, and Jeff Jarrett; it was conducted similarly to a ladder match, with the objective being for the competitors to make their way to the roof of the third cage, and retrieve the championship belt. The roof of the first cage\u2014which extended beyond the apron\u2013had a trapdoor leading to the second cage, which contained weapons. The competitors then had to exit through a side door in the second cage, and climb the structure to reach the belt above the third cage. The third cage contained guitars, used for Jarrett's signature move.\nThe same year, WCW conducted another match using the same structure, \"WarGames 2000: Russo's Revenge\", on an episode of \"WCW Monday Nitro.\" Despite sharing its name with WCW's well-known WarGames match, its only similarity was its use of teams. A belt was placed inside the uppermost cage, with the first team to have a member escape from the bottom cage with the belt being declared the winner.\nWarGames match.\nSometimes suffixed with the tagline \"The Match Beyond,\" the WarGames match features two rings surrounded by an enclosed steel cage (usually with a roof), with two teams (or sometimes three) of four or five wrestlers facing one another. After a portion of the match fought one-on-one, members of the two teams begin to alternate entering the other ring at staggered intervals (with the order decided by a coin toss); once both teams' members have all entered the ring, the first team to score submission or surrender over a member of the opposing team is declared the winner. Depending on the rules used, a team may also win by scoring a knockout or pinfall.\nThis match was made famous by Jim Crockett Promotions' annual Great American Bash, and later WCW's Wrestle War, before becoming a tradition at their annual Fall Brawl pay-per-view event from 1993 to 1998. At Fall Brawl 1998, a three-team WarGames match was held, with pinfalls counting. An in name only revamp of WarGames, \"WarGames 2000\", was held on an episode of \"WCW Monday Nitro\".\nECW held its own version of WarGames known as an \"Ultimate Jeopardy steel cage match\" (typically as part of an eponymous event), with weapons available, pinfalls counting, and the losing team receiving a stipulation as a penalty. In 2017, WWE's NXT brand began to hold a live event known as , which feature a version of the WarGames match as their signature event. The NXT version of WarGames does not use a roofed cage, and pinfalls count. In 2022, the match moved to WWE's main roster PPV Survivor Series.\nIn 2021, AEW held a WarGames match between The Pinnacle and The Inner Circle as a \"Blood and Guts match\", during an eponymous special episode of its weekly series \"Dynamite\". AEW adopted the WarGames rules that were used by WCW, with a roofed cage and no pinfalls.\nXscape match.\nThe Xscape match has been held by TNA/Impact Wrestling as one of the signature matches of its Lockdown pay-per-view, which exclusively features cage matches. The match begins with four to eight competitors, who are eliminated by either pinfall or submission; eliminated wrestlers leave the cage through a door. When only two competitors remain, the first to escape the cage by climbing out and reaching the floor is declared the winner.\nFlag match.\nThe flag match is essentially the professional wrestling version of capture the flag. For the match two flags are placed on opposite turnbuckles, each representing a specific wrestler or team of wrestlers and the objective of the match is to retrieve the opponent's flag and raise it while defending the flag in the wrestler's corner. If the referee is knocked down and cannot acknowledge the win, the defender can put the flag back in its place, thus resetting the match.\nAnthem match.\nAn Anthem match is a variation of a flag match with the added stipulation that the national anthem of the winning wrestler's or team's home country will be played in the arena after the match, similarly to a medal ceremony. This can be used to promote patriotism for the face wrestler or heat for the heel wrestler.\nAnother variation of the Flag match can be a regular Interpromotion match between two wrestlers, each usually representing a different wrestling promotion, fighting for the right to raise the flag of their respected promotion. This variation was only used at ECW's November to Remember 1997 in a match between Rob Van Dam (representing WWE) vs. Tommy Dreamer (representing ECW) which ended in a no-contest.\nHandicap match.\nA handicap match is any match pitting one wrestler or team of wrestlers against a team of wrestlers with numerical superiority, such as two against one or three against two. Normally the babyfaces are outnumbered with the heels having more members on their team to provide an unfair advantage. In some two-on-one handicap matches, the team with superior numbers act under tag team rules, with one person in the ring at a time. In others, such as tornado tag team handicap matches, all competitors are in the ring at the same time. In the 1980s and 1990s, handicap matches were used in preliminary matches involving large star wrestlers (usually heels), such as King Kong Bundy, Big Van Vader or Yokozuna, who \u2013 as a way to get a monster heel persona/gimmick over with the crowd \u2013 would completely dominate their opponents despite the latter's superiority in numbers.\nHardcore-based variations.\nHardcore wrestling, the most violent and bloody type of professional wrestling, is a subset in which some or all of the traditional rules do not apply. Most often this simply means there are no-disqualifications, which itself eliminates countouts, sometimes allowing decisions to take place anywhere. Most hardcore matches or deathmatches often have a combination of match types within one, and elaborate titles are often used, particularly in Japanese wrestling promotions. (example: \"Barbed Wire Rope, Exploding Barbed Wire Boards and Exploding Ring Time Bomb Deathmatch\")\nSome promotions, such as Frontier Martial-Arts Wrestling, the International Wrestling Association of Japan, International Wrestling Syndicate, Extreme Championship Wrestling, Big Japan Pro Wrestling, and Combat Zone Wrestling, have specialized in hardcore matches, with \"standard\" non-hardcore matches being the exception.\nHardcore match.\nA standard hardcore match, also known as a Devil's Playground match, a Belfast Brawl match or a Guerrilla Warfare match is a no-disqualification, no-countout, falls count anywhere, one-fall match where the only rule (unless specifically noted) is to achieve a fall by pinning the opponent for a 3-count or making them submit. Otherwise, anything goes: any weapon can be used, any amount of wrestlers who are not booked in the match can be involved, either wrestler booked in the match can be pinned anywhere and any move can be used (except moves banned by the promotion booking the match before-hand). Hardcore matches came to prominence in Japan in the 1970s, and then in the United States in the 1990s in promotions like ECW and later WWE. Blunt objects such as steel chairs, wooden event tables, ladders, wrestling ring stairs, kendo sticks, baseball bats, flour, metal cylindrical trashcans, trashcan lids and road signs are often featured in hardcore matches.\nOther common euphemisms for hardcore matches are the No Holds Barred match (which suggests wrestlers are allowed to use any illegal moves), Street Fight (which suggests wrestlers are to dress in normal street clothes), and World Championship Wrestling used the term Raven's rules match for hardcore matches involving the wrestler Raven. They also created their own specific brand of hardcore match, for which bouts were to begin backstage rather than in the ring.\nUnsanctioned match.\nA variant of a hardcore match is a non-sanctioned match or unsanctioned match. In kayfabe, the match is not officially \"recognised\" by the promotion, and is sometimes used when a wrestler is \"injured\" (at the hands of another wrestler) and wants revenge but cannot be \"medically cleared\", thus he agrees to a non-sanctioned match where \"the promotion is not held liable\" for any injuries incurred during the match. A lights out match is an intensified variant of the unsanctioned match, most notably utilised by All Elite Wrestling. In these cases, the match is placed at the end of a card, and in-storyline, the preceding match is instead treated as the \"main event\" and before the match starts, the house lights of the venue will momentarily flash to signify the \"official\" end of the show.\nDeathmatch.\nA more extreme version of a hardcore match, a deathmatch is even more violent and bloody. In addition to the blunt weapons and thumbtacks familiar to hardcore matches, deathmatches often include more dangerous elements, such as bricks, nails, staple guns, explosives, barbed wire, light tubes, glass shards, gardening tools (from trowels to weed whackers), and even fire produced from lighter fluid or gasoline. Other euphemisms for deathmatch include extreme rules match, ultraviolent rules match (hardcore rules matches exclusively in CZW), and HardKore X-Treme match.\nBarbed Wire Ring Rope match.\nA barbed wire ring rope match or no rope barbed wire match is a hardcore match where the ring ropes are replaced with barbed wire. There are four known ways to prop up barbed wire in place of ring ropes: with three strands of barbed wire run from turnbuckle to turnbuckle; with five strands of wire tied to form an \"X\"; \"spider net\", where the ring ropes are not replaced and barbed wire is wrapped up and down the ropes to create a wall of barbed wire, and finally barbed wire wrapped in the \"X\" fashion- that has been electrified or rigged with explosives. These types of matches were made popular in the late 1970s and early 1980s by American territory wrestling promotions, as well as Japanese promotions during the 1990s. These types of matches often included other stipulations and weapons in them.\nBarbed Wire Massacre.\nA Barbed Wire Massacre is a type of barbed wire rope match where the barbed wire ropes are set up in the \"X\" fashion and the use of additional items that have barbed wire attached to or wrapped around them are made available, such as plywood, baseball bats, steel folding chairs and other weapons. This match originated in TNA in 2005. Since then, there have been six such matches, the most recent in 2025. However, unlike the first three Barbed Wire Massacre matches, the fourth did not replace the ring ropes. The Japanese Barbed Wire Massacre is a variation in which there are wooden boards covered with barbed wire, and a small charge goes off when someone lands on one.\nBath House Deathmatch.\nThe Bath House Deathmatch was believed to have been started by IWA Japan in 1995. The wrestlers compete in the pool of a public bathhouse, with even naked or toweled women in this bath house during this match. Besides regular wrestling rules, if they leave the pool, they are disqualified. The pool is heated by a fire that is regularly fed more logs, making staying in it harder and harder.\nCaribbean Barbed Wire Deathmatch.\nThe Caribbean Barbed Wire Deathmatch is a hardcore match where barbed wire is wrapped around the ring ropes in \"spidernet\" fashion on two sides, and on the other two sides are barricaded traps on ground level situated right next to the ring. These elaborate traps are wooden structures featuring multiple strands of barbed wire strung from short adjacent wooden poles covered by panes of glass, with a thick wooden board below as foundation for the entire trap. The wooden poles stand 18 inches high on one side, and two feet on the other side. This match was featured in the W*ING hardcore wrestling promotion in Japan and was first done in 1993.\nCircus Deathmatch.\nA Circus Deathmatch is a type of scaffold match where in the ring is a scaffold and under that scaffold, there is a type of spider net made of barbed wire six feet below. The first wrestler to fall off of the scaffold into the barbed wire spider net loses. The first match was between Mad Man Pondo and Ryuji Ito in Japan.\nClockwork Orange House of Fun match.\nThe Clockwork Orange House of Fun match, known as \"Raven's House of Fun\" or simply \"House of Fun\", was created by professional wrestler Raven (legitimately, as Raven pitched the idea himself to TNA's creative team). It is a singles match for which poles attached to the ring posts measured about five to six feet above the turnbuckles, with single chains wrapped from and hanging on the poles to various points on the ring itself with many weapons hanging from and attached to steel chains above the ring, sometimes with sides of a steel cage attached to and erected on the ring. In the first match the use of weapons is legal, and the only way to win was to put an opponent through two tables after throwing them off \"Raven's perch\" (a small scaffold), but afterwards it was changed to falls-count-anywhere rules.\nElectric Pool match.\nIn an Electric Pool match, the ring is placed in a large pool of water, with no ropes on two sides of the ring, and exploding barbed wire on the other two sides of the ring. Wrestlers were transported to the ring via a dinghy, and the ring was put on a floating device, then it was surrounded by four metal barricades. There was a current running through these four barricades (which were essentially small sections of the pool enclosed off from the rest of the pool), enabling the water to \"explode\" when a wrestler was thrown into one of these barricaded areas. Considering the danger involved in allowing a current to run through water, this match was only used once in FMW in 1994, which was known for its extreme hardcore matches.\nExplosion/Bomb Deathmatch.\nThe Explosion or Bomb Deathmatch is usually accompanied with barbed wire ropes, a large barbed wire wrapped explosion board is placed in the ring laced with a small amount of C-4. The match can be won by either a pinfall or a submission, or in other versions of the match, by blowing up the eventual loser. In some versions of the C-4 match is to finish the match before the timer runs out and detonates the ring (although this does not necessarily end the match) while in others the explosives are concentrated in a specific area, with the wrestlers struggling not to get pushed onto it. Almost all of these matches so far have been done in Japan in promotions with larger budgets.\nAnus Explosion Deathmatch.\nAn Anus Explosion Deathmatch is a hardcore match where the only way to win is to stick a firecracker up an opponent's buttocks and light it. Once the firecracker goes off while lodged inside an incapacitated wrestler's buttocks, the match ends. This match was only done once, by Japanese hardcore wrestling promotion Frontier Martial-Arts Wrestling in October 1999, where Mr. Gannosuke faced off against Hayabusa.\nDouble Hell Deathmatch.\nA Double Hell Deathmatch is a hardcore match where exploding (or non-exploding) barbed wire is put up at two sides of the ring in place of ropes, and the other two are left with nothing. However, at ringside on the empty sides, there are huge boards laden with barbed wire and landmines/explosives (and sometimes glass). This makes it a lot easier for a participant to fall out of the ring.\nExploding Barbed Wire Deathmatch.\nAEW's variation is an Exploding Barbed Wire Deathmatch which is a combination of an Explosion Deathmatch, Barbed Wire Ring Rope match, Double Hell Deathmatch, and Time Bomb Deathmatch. There was three sides of barbed wire ring ropes with explosives triggered upon contact, three zones around the ringside floor wired to explosives (Triple Hell), and a 30-minute countdown timer until all explosives in and around the ring detonate. The match was contested between Kenny Omega and Jon Moxley for the AEW World Championship at Revolution, which Omega won.\nThe concept was planned to be used in the WWE but according to Court Bauer in November 2022, Vince McMahon had once accepted an idea for an Exploding Barbed Wire Deathmatch. This stipulation did not appear at all but it would later appear in a form of a Punjabi Prison Match which debuted at The Great American Bash in 2006.\nLandmine Deathmatch.\nA Landmine Deathmatch is a hardcore match where explosives are set up at ringside, usually laced with barbed wire. This match was first done with FMW in Japan in the mid-1990s.\nTime Bomb Deathmatch.\nA Time Bomb Deathmatch is a type of deathmatch where explosives or fireworks set up around the ring are set off after an allotted time. This match originated in Japan and was done various times in the 1990s. Mick Foley and Terry Funk participated in a \"Barbed Wire Rope, Exploding Barbed Wire Boards and Exploding Ring Time Bomb Deathmatch\" as the final match of the 1995 Kawasaki Dream King of the Deathmatch tournament, where there were multiple plywood boards with barbed wire and explosives attached to them strewn around the ring.\nTime Bomb Exploding Cage Deathmatch.\nA Time Bomb Exploding Cage Deathmatch is a mixture of a Steel Cage match and a Time Bomb Deathmatch, where every square foot of a steel cage is wrapped in barbed wire and explosives set up around the ring go off after a set time, and five minutes before the explosion a loud siren is activated. The match, unlike a traditional steel cage match is a one-fall match and victory cannot be achieved via escaping the cage, which, if attempted would be very painful and difficult. This match also originated in Japan in the early 1990s.\nEye for an Eye match.\nAn Eye for an Eye match is a hardcore match that could only be won when one competitor \"extracts\" an eyeball out of the socket of their opponent. This match only occurred once, between Rey Mysterio and Seth Rollins at The Horror Show at Extreme Rules. In it, Rollins shoved Mysterio's eye into the corner of the steel steps, causing the eyeball to pop out and giving Rollins the victory.\nFalls Count Anywhere match.\nA falls count anywhere match allows pinfalls to take place in any location, negating the standard rule that they must take place inside the ring and between the ropes, and these matches largely take place outside of the ring. Submissions may or may not also be covered by this rule. This also eliminates the usual \"countout\" rule. A variation of the rules states that once a pinfall takes place, the pinned wrestler loses the match if they are unable to return to the ring within a specific amount of time \u2013 usually a referee's count of 10 or 30. If the pinned wrestler makes it to the ring in this time, the match continues. Occasionally, this stipulation is listed as having a specific territory in which falls count (e.g. the state, county, or general location the match is in). As the match may take place in various parts of the arena, the \"falls count anywhere\" provision is almost always accompanied with a \"no-disqualification\" stipulation to make the match a hardcore match, so as to allow wrestlers the convenience to use any objects they may find wherever they wrestle.\nFirst Blood match.\nA First Blood match is a no-disqualification, no-submission, no-fall, no-countout match in which the first wrestler to bleed anywhere loses the match. Depending on the nuance of the stipulation, this might include bleeding noses. Although there are no-disqualifications, outside interference cannot be seen causing the participant to bleed. The first televised First Blood match was Stone Cold Steve Austin vs. Kane at King of the Ring 1998. This type of match became rare in the WWE since 2008 in which blood is rarely shown in its programming to adhere with the TV-PG standards. The most recent first blood match in WWE was John Cena vs. JBL at One Night Stand in 2008. However, in TNA in 2010 they did a women's first blood match between Tara and Daffney.\nDoomsday Chamber of Blood match.\nA Doomsday Chamber of Blood match, created by Total Nonstop Action Wrestling, is a First Blood match that takes place inside of a barbed wire topped cage.\nSadistic Madness match.\nA Sadistic Madness match, created by Total Nonstop Action Wrestling, is another variation of the First Blood match, the main difference being that the opponent must be bleeding before a wrestler can legally pin them.\nFour Corners of Pain match.\nA Four Corners of Pain match is a hardcore match where in each corner of the ring, there is a container that has a weapon or another type of harmful item. This match was first seen at the 1997 IWA Mid-South King of the Deathmatch Tournament, with later appearances at the 2003 Combat Zone Wrestling Tournament of Death II, and at the 2006 IWA-MS Queen of the Deathmatch, Amy Lee took on Sexxxy Eddy in this match.\nPools of Fuckery Deathmatch.\nA Pools of Fuckery Deathmatch is similar to a Four Corners of Pain match, only the harmful items in each corner are in small plastic pools. This match originated in March 2021 in the independent wrestling promotion Asylum Wrestling Revolution (AMR), where Mickie Knuckles faced Akira.\nGood Old Fashioned Donnybrook match.\nA Good Old Fashioned Donnybrook match is a hardcore stipulation created by Sheamus; named after the former Dublin fair, it is a no disqualifications match where a bar, large wood barrels of brandy, and shillelaghs are made available at ringside. It was first contested on the July 29, 2022 episode of \"WWE SmackDown\" between Sheamus and Drew McIntyre, with the winner becoming the number-one contender for the Undisputed WWE Championship at Clash at the Castle. At Extreme Rules 2022, the stipulation was used for a six-man tag team match between Sheamus's The Brawling Brutes and Imperium. The stipulation returned at Clash in Paris in 2025, contested between Sheamus and Rusev.\nHard Ten match.\nThe Hard Ten match is a hardcore match that was created by TNA/Impact Wrestling. It is contested on a points system, in which the points are earned for the use of weapons. The first wrestler to earn ten points and be at least two points ahead is the winner. Regular strikes with a weapon are worth one point, while putting an opponent through a table is worth five points. This match type happened only once in TNA history.\nLast Man/Woman Standing match.\nA last man standing match (or last woman standing) is a hardcore-style match in which the only way to win is by count out via standing, and a wrestler can be counted out anywhere. A wrestler will lose the match if they are unable to answer a ten-count after being downed, similar to the knockout rules of a boxing match. To avoid losing, the downed wrestler must be on their feet by the count of 10, but they can not lose by leaving the ring for 10-count (ring out) if they are still on his feet while recovering. Because of the hardcore nature of the match restraining a downed opponent is a permissible way to ensure that they do not respond to the ten-count, even if they would otherwise be able to.\nBaseball Brawl match.\nA Baseball Brawl match or Brawl Game match is variant of a Last Man Standing match where baseball bats are initially banned, but if a wrestler is counted out by 10, then baseball bats for the wrestler or team that got the count-out automatically become legal, and the match converts over to a standard hardcore match where victory is achieved by either pinfalls, submissions or count outs. This match was first done at ECW's Hardcore Heaven in August 1994, and was known as the signature match of The Public Enemy tag team.\nTexas Deathmatch.\nA variant of the Last Man Standing match is the Texas Deathmatch (a.k.a. Mexican Deathmatch, or Armageddon Rules match), in which a wrestler must be pinned to a 3-count or made to submit/rendered unconscious before the referee will begin the ten-count. Some of these matches have been known to last for hours, including one that Dory Funk Jr. participated in that went on for more than four hours. This match was often done by Dory and his brother Terry Funk in the 1960s in their father Dory Sr.'s promotion Western States Sports. In All Elite Wrestling's variant of the Texas Death Match, the match can only be won by submission or knockout, and have become a trademark match of \"Hangman\" Adam Page.\nLight Tube Deathmatch.\nA light tube match is a hardcore match where hundreds (usually 200) of long, cylindrical, glass fluorescent light tubes are attached to the ring ropes (usually via tape), and mock shaped weapons and mock large objects made of light tubes are made available. These matches often end with most or all of the light tubes broken or shattered; these matches are some of the bloodiest, most gruesome and most dangerous types of wrestling matches because the glass in a light tube contains poisonous and carcinogenic chemicals, and when broken, the poisonous and carcinogenic dust from the shattered glass gets into the air and allows audience members, the referee and the wrestlers to breathe it in. Another hazard of this match is shards of broken glass still rife with dangerous chemicals laying around the ring mat and sticking in the wrestlers' bodies (when they are slammed onto the wrestling mat); in more organized wrestling promotions, attendants briefly enter the ring and quickly sweep the broken glass off the mat. This type of match originated in Japan in the late 1990s and early 2000s in Big Japan Pro Wrestling, and some independent promotions in the United States feature this type of match.\n2/3 Light Tube Log cabins Deathmatch.\nA 2/3 Light Tube Log Cabins Deathmatch is a hardcore match where the only way to win is to break two shaped light tube weapons over and/or on an opponent. Combat Zone Wrestling has used this match in their Tournament of Death series.\nMonster's Ball match.\nA Monster's Ball match is a hardcore match that was invented and staged by TNA Wrestling. The key premise of the match was that all contenders are sequestered alone in a locked room without light, food or water for 24 hours before the match. This stipulation is intended to induce extreme feelings of aggression in the competitors. Once released, the wrestlers fight one another in a hardcore match, with the usage of weapons encouraged. Victory can be achieved by pinfall or submission, with the match ending as soon as one wrestler is pinned or submits.\nThe Monster's Ball match typically features numerous high spots. There have been 54 matches taking place under TNA, as well as several unaffiliated independent promotions hosting the match. The match has almost always featured Abyss in some capacity, wrestling in 48 and managing in one, as it is his signature match. There are various weapons frequently used in the match, including thumbtacks, \"Janice\" (a board filled with nails, Abyss's signature weapon), and a bed of barbed wire.\nNo Disqualification match.\nA No Disqualification match, also known as a No Holds Barred match, or sometimes as an Anything Goes match, an Extreme Rules match (in WWE, since the establishment of the now-former ECW brand), Tribal Combat and Bloodline Rules (in WWE, for wrestlers in the Anoa\u02bbi family) or a No Ropes Catch Wrestling match (in MLW), is a match in which neither wrestler can be disqualified, allowing for weapons and outside interference. However, unlike a hardcore match pinfalls and submissions must be made inside the ring.\nNo-disqualification matches may be used in feuds in which a challenger may have won matches against the champion, but did not claim the championship because the champion was disqualified (championships usually only change hands via pinfall or submission). Unless stipulated, a no-disqualification match can end in a countout. Those that cannot are no-disqualification, no-countout matches, therefore they're called no holds barred matches.\nPiranha Deathmatch.\nA Piranha Deathmatch or Amazon River Piranha Deathmatch, similar to a Desert Deathmatch is a type of highly dangerous match where a fish tank containing dangerous and flesh-eating Piranha fish is placed in the center of the ring, and the first wrestler who gets put into the tank for 10 seconds loses. There was only one match ever done, and it was at Big Japan Pro Wrestling's Summer Night Dream event in Yokohama, Japan in September 1996, where in the main event Kendo Nagasaki put Mitsuhiro Matsunaga in the tank, defeating him.\nPitch Black match.\nA Pitch Black match is a hardcore-based match during which the arena lights are turned off or extremely dimmed, with most of the action visible due to the competitors wearing clothes or body paint that glows in the dark. The only known Pitch Black match, sponsored by Mountain Dew, happened at the 2023 Royal Rumble, with Bray Wyatt defeating LA Knight.\nRazor Deathmatch.\nA Razor Deathmatch is an often extremely bloody match where boards full of razor blades are made available as weapons. This match is a trademark of Japanese hardcore wrestler Jun Kasai who has participated in five such contests.\nSpike Nail Deathmatch.\nA Spike Nail Deathmatch is a hardcore match where a large bed of six-inch spiked nails sticking out of a rectangular piece of plywood is made available. The most famous example of this kind of match was at the IWA Kawasaki Dream King of the Deathmatch, where Cactus Jack faced Shoji Nakamaki in August 1995. Another type of Spike Nail match was rather than achieving a fall to win, the first wrestler to take a bump on the huge planks of wood infested with six-inch nails at ringside loses.\nNail Hell Deathmatch.\nA Nail Hell Deathmatch is a hardcore match where some boards with nails were hung on the ring ropes all the way across, and onto opposing sides of the ring there was a board, on one side there was nails and on the other side was barbed wire. Only one match like this was done, in December 1994 by IWA Japan.\nStreet fight.\nA street fight is a type of hardcore match with no disqualifications, in which falls count anywhere, and weapons are legal. The main difference between a hardcore match and a street fight is that while wrestlers wear their normal wrestling gear in hardcore matches, wrestlers (particularly in modern times) almost always wear their own street clothes in street fights, and weapons typically used in street fights are items typically found on or are often used on city streets, such as trash cans, road signs, broomsticks, dumpsters and sometimes vehicles and shopping carts filled with those items, among other things. Sometimes street fights have the name of the host arena's city in the name, such as \"Chicago Street Fight\" or \"New York Street Fight\".\nBunkhouse match.\nA Bunkhouse match is a type of street fight where wrestlers compete with each other dressed in cowboy clothes or wearing items cowboys wear, such as cowboy boots, leather belts, jeans and ten-gallon cowboy hats. This is named a \"Bunkhouse match\" because bunkhouses were barracks-like buildings that historically were used to house working cowboys on ranches.\n\"Miracle on 34th Street\" Fight.\nA \"Miracle on 34th Street\" Fight is a Christmas-themed variant of a Street Fight, named after the movie Miracle on 34th Street, involving Christmas-themed weapons including fire extinguishers, pumpkin pies, presents, Christmas trees, Christmas wreaths, candy cane themed kendo sticks, bowling balls, and teddy bears, plus common wrestling weapons such as tables and chairs. One specific match of its kind is between Alberto Del Rio and John Cena way back in 2012, where Cena won.\nTrick or Street Fight.\nA Trick or Street Fight is a Halloween-themed variant of a Street Fight, named after the Halloween tradition \"trick or treating\", involving Halloween-themed weapons including pumpkins, buckets of candy, bowls full of water and apples, skeletons, witches' brooms, gravestones, candy corn themed kendo sticks, plus common wrestling weapons such as tables and chairs.\nTaipei Deathmatch.\nA Taipei Deathmatch, (also known as an Ancient Way Deathmatch) is a very bloody and violent hardcore match where the wrestlers' fists are taped and dipped into glue or honey, and then into broken and crushed glass, allowing shards to stick to their fists. Win by pinfall or submission. It is unknown why this match is named after the capital city of Taiwan; the first time this match was ever held was at ECW's Hardcore Heaven in July 1995 where the Rotten brothers, Axl and Ian, faced off in this match, and it was held in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, not in Taipei.\nThumbtack Deathmatch.\nA Thumbtack Deathmatch is a hardcore match where one or more trays containing thousands (usually 10,000) of thumbtacks is/are made available and usually placed in either the center or apron of the ring. The most well-known version of this match was at the IWA Kawasaki Dream King of the Deathmatch, where Terry Gordy faced Cactus Jack in August 1995. Variants of the thumbtack deathmatch staged by TNA/Impact Wrestling have been done where the objective is modified to simply slam an opponent into the pile of thumbtacks on the mat.\nA variation of this match is a cross between a Ladder Match and 10,000 Thumbtacks Match called a Thumbtacks Ladder match in which a ladder is placed in the ring with a reward at the top. Thumbtacks are also spread out across the ring. A variant of the 10,000 thumbtacks deathmatch is the East Coast Thumbtack match, this match has 177,000 thumbtacks placed in the ring. The first match was introduced between Ian Rotten and The Messiah.\nBarefoot Thumbtack match.\nA Barefoot Thumbtack match is a hardcore match where both wrestlers have bare feet, and there is a large container containing thousands of thumbtacks in the middle of the ring that are legal to use it. Originated in Big Japan Pro Wrestling.\nThumbtack Balloons match.\nBig Japan Pro Wrestling staged a 'Thumbtacks In Balloons' match on 5/22/96. The match, which saw Axl Rotten and Shoji Nakamaki lock up with Kendo Nagasaki and Seiji Yamakawa, had six black balloons suspended above the ring. At a certain point in the match, the balloons exploded and released 30,000 thumbtacks onto the ring.\nUnlucky 13 Deathmatch.\nAn Unlucky 13 Deathmatch is a hardcore match invented by Ian Rotten. In order to win the match, a wrestler must staple seven out of thirteen one dollar bills to their opponent's mouth.\nLocation-based variations.\nThough most matches take place in and around the ring, some are designed specifically for more exotic locales. The majority of these matches take on the name of their setting, often appending \"brawl\" to the end, and all of them are hardcore by definition. The following is a list of locale-based variations that supplant or replace the standard rules.\nBar Room Brawl.\nA Bar Room Brawl is a multi-competitor no disqualification match held in a bar. During the match wrestlers are encouraged to drink while fighting, and the \"last man standing\" is declared winner. Wrestlers can be eliminated from the match both by the standard pinfall, submission, or by simply becoming too (kayfabe) drunk to continue the match. A known example of this match is the APA Invitational Bar Room Brawl at Vengeance 2003 which Bradshaw won after knocking down Brother Love. Another example, a Bar Fight was done in 2020, with Jeff Hardy facing off against Sheamus.\nBoiler Room Brawl.\nA Boiler Room Brawl or Boiler Room match starts in a boiler room, with the winner being the first wrestler to successfully get out. This match is a no-disqualification, no-falls, no-countout match, so anything goes, so long as someone escapes first. The rather hazardous environment of this match featured some of the arena's internal infrastructure, such as all sorts of large, exposed metal piping with large bolts, concrete flooring and solid electrical equipment everywhere, among other features. Mick Foley participated in all of the WWF-run Boiler Room Brawls under his persona Mankind, because this persona dwelled in boiler rooms, hence this being Mankind's signature match. The first Boiler Room Brawl happened at SummerSlam 1996 with Mankind vs. The Undertaker, where in addition to escaping the boiler room the combatant had to make his way to the ring and grab Paul Bearer's urn; but when the next Boiler Room Brawl was contested at Backlash 1999 with Mankind against The Big Show, the objective was simplified to just escaping the boiler room first. World Championship Wrestling used a match with similar rules, naming their match and its location the Block.\nBody of Water match.\nA Body of Water match is a hardcore match where the sole objective is to get your opponent into a large body of water. This match was only done once, where CM Punk faced Chavo Guerrero during an ECW show in Corpus Christi, Texas (which is located right on the Gulf of Mexico, the body of water used) in February 2008.\nDungeon match.\nA Dungeon match is a hardcore match that took place in the legendary Hart Family Dungeon in Calgary, where Owen Hart challenged Ken Shamrock to come to the Dungeon (referred to as Hart's \"basement\") for a fight. The match can only be won by submission.\nEmpty Arena match.\nAn empty arena match is a hardcore (no disqualification, falls count anywhere) \"anything goes\" match between two or more wrestlers that takes place in an arena or stadium that although is fully set up for a wrestling event, is devoid of fans. The only people present are the competitors, referee, commentators, and cameramen. The match is broadcast or videotaped and played later. An example of this is the WWF championship match between The Rock and Mankind that took place in Tucson, Arizona, at the Tucson Convention Center, which aired as part of a special Halftime Heat edition of \"Sunday Night Heat\" aired against the Super Bowl halftime show of Super Bowl XXXIII in 1999. One of the earliest and best-known empty arena matches occurred in 1981 in Memphis, Tennessee, at the Mid-South Coliseum between Jerry Lawler and Terry Funk.\nA lack of audience that is a legitimate aspect of the production and not a kayfabe stipulation of the match (i.e. the match is conducted normally, except a live audience is not present) is not necessarily considered an empty arena match. For example, audiences were barred from attending televised AEW, and later WWE, shows in 2020 during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nParking Lot Brawl.\nA Parking Lot Brawl is a Falls Count Anywhere match that is usually fought in an interior location or in an outside parking lot around a tightly parked circle of cars. The first wrestler to score a pinfall, submission, or knockout in a Parking Lot Brawl is the winner. Both wrestlers are allowed to use everything around them as weapons, including the cars. The first Parking Lot Brawl was between Jerry Lawler and Eddie Gilbert in Memphis, Tennessee in 1988, which was fought all over the arena and its outside parking lot. More well-known examples of a Parking Lot Brawl both involved John Cena, where he faced Eddie Guerrero in 2003 and JBL in 2008.\nHollywood Backlot Brawl.\nA Hollywood Backlot Brawl was a no-disqualification match that started in a Hollywood studio backlot, and it was fought between Goldust and Roddy Piper. This match also involved the two performers actually driving cars for a long period of time, and then ended with the two arriving in the Honda Center in Anaheim 30 miles away to finish their match in the ring.\nIron Circle match.\nAn Iron Circle match is a type of Parking Lot Brawl that is fought specifically in a parking garage around a rowdy live audience sitting on the cars encircling the competitors. An Iron Circle match was a falls count anywhere match where Ken Shamrock fought Steve Blackman at WWF Fully Loaded 1999.\nTrain match.\nA Train match is a Falls Count Anywhere match fought in a moving train. All weapons are legal, and there is no disqualification (except for damage to the train). This happened in 2023 by CyberFight's DDT Pro Wrestling promotion, where Sanshiro Takagi competed against Minoru Suzuki on the Shinkansen TGV from Tokyo to Nagoya, with speeds exceeding 170 MPH on the train.\nTooth and Nail match.\nA Tooth and Nail match is a Falls Count Anywhere-stipulation match that is fought in and around a dental office, and any weapon is legal. This is Britt Baker's specialty match, based on her role as a dentist in both kayfabe and off-screen reality, and the objective of this match is to achieve a pinfall or submission.\nLumberjack match.\nA lumberjack match is a standard match with the exception that the ring is surrounded by a group of wrestlers not directly involved in it. These wrestlers, known collectively as lumberjacks (female wrestlers serving in this manner are sometimes called lumberjills; lumberjack matches between female wrestlers are called lumberjill matches, a play on the famous Nursery Rhyme, \"Jack and Jill\"), are there to prevent the wrestlers in the match from getting out of the ring. The groups of lumberjacks are typically split up into groups of faces and heels who occupy opposing sides around the ring. Usually, the \"opposing\" lumberjacks (that is, face lumberjacks if the wrestler is a heel, and vice versa) swarm the wrestlers if they leave the ring and force them back in it. Occasional interference from the lumberjacks is common, as is an all-out brawl on the outside involving most of the lumberjacks. Early lumberjack matches even featured the lumberjacks wearing stereotypical lumberjack clothing in keeping with the lumberjack theme, though this is generally no longer done. A common theme is for the lumberjacks to consist entirely of heel wrestlers to stack the odds against the face competitor. The Lumberjill Snowbunny match is another variation of the Lumberjill match with female lumberjacks, held in a pit of snow.\nCanadian Lumberjack match.\nIn a \"Canadian\" lumberjack match, the lumberjacks are equipped with leather straps. TNA's \"fan's revenge\" match was their own version of a Canadian lumberjack match, where fans equipped with straps act as lumberjacks and were encouraged to whip wrestlers. A similar \"fans' revenge\" variation was used in Lucha Underground where it was called a Believers' Backlash match (\"Believers\" was the nickname for fans of the series).\nExtreme Lumberjack match.\nThe Extreme Lumberjack match is a lumberjack match competed under hardcore rules, where there are no disqualifications, no countouts, and falls count anywhere.\nMulti-competitor-based variations.\nOn some occasions, a match may be held between more than two individual wrestlers or teams. Multi-competitor matches are often broken down to eliminations and non-eliminations.\nBasic non-elimination matches.\nNon-elimination matches with three competitors.\nThe most common example of a non-elimination match is the Three-Way match (also known as a Triple Threat match in WWE, Triangle match in WCW and Three-Way Dance in ECW), in which three wrestlers compete under standard rules with the first competitor to achieve a pinfall or submission being declared the winner. Triple Threat matches are fought under no-disqualification and no-countout stipulations. Triangle matches are often contested like a tag match where only two can be in the match at one time while the third waits on the ring apron and the only elimination factor is if a competitor is disqualified.\nNon-elimination matches with four or more competitors.\nIn many promotions, there are typically no distinctions between the two terms. Non-elimination variations are the Four-Way match (known as a Fatal Four-Way in WWE, Four Corners match in WCW and Four-Way Dance in ECW), the Five-Way match (known as a Fatal Five-Way in WWE) or the Six-Way match (known as the Six-Pack Challenge in WWE), involving four, five, or six wrestlers, respectively.\n American independent promotion USA Xtreme Wrestling hosted a match involving 8\u201312 competitors known as the 8 Ball Challenge. These types of matches can be used in certain situations to take a title off a wrestler without weakening him in the process.\nOn some occasions, multi-competitor matches are contested under similar rules as a tag team match. Two competitors start the match in the ring while the other wrestler(s) wait outside the ring for a tag from another wrestler, often achieved by touching an unsuspecting competitor in the ring. Variations of this include a Four Corners Survival match or Six-Man Mayhem match in Ring of Honor. Competitors are permitted to leave their position and attack wrestlers outside of the ring, such as when one or both wrestlers have been thrown over the top rope.\nBasic elimination matches.\nMatches involving a larger number of competitors are typically elimination matches. These matches may begin with all of the competitors in the ring at the same time. The standard match rules apply as wrestlers may leave the position and attack other wrestlers outside the ring with a twist that the wrestler be pinned or forced to submit is eliminated from the match.\nElimination matches with three competitors.\nThe most common example of an elimination match is the Three-Way Dance, where the first fall would eliminate one wrestler, reducing the match to a standard one-fall singles match. The Three-Way Dance was a specialty of Extreme Championship Wrestling.\nElimination matches with four or more competitors.\nA Four-Way Dance is similar except it involves four wrestlers in Extreme Championship Wrestling and some promotions use a tag format for the match instead of having all the wrestlers in the ring at the same time. Elimination variations are the Four-Way match (known as a Fatal Four-Way in WWE), the Five-Way match (known as a Fatal Five-Way in WWE) or the Six-Way match (known as the Six-Pack Challenge in WWE), involving four, five, or six wrestlers inside the ring, respectively.\nThe Deadly Draw match is a TNA variation where four competitors wrestle. The match begins with two competitors in the ring. After five minutes pass, the third competitor enters the ring, then after another five minutes pass, the fourth competitor enters the ring. Any wrestler who gets pinned or force to submit is eliminated, and any wrestler in the ring not involved in the fall is also eliminated. The last man standing wins.\nBeat the Clock Challenge.\nA Beat the Clock challenge is a multi-competitor match in which wrestlers must defeat their opponent in a singles match before the clock runs out. Additionally, the next wrestler must beat the winner's set time by defeating their opponent to advance, otherwise that wrestler is eliminated. In doing so, the victorious wrestler usually gets some type of reward in return, such as inclusion in a title match, for instance. In a variation on the November 20, 2013 episode of NXT, two wrestlers completed a match, with the match duration being used as the marker for two other wrestlers to complete their match. The first ever Divas Beat the Clock challenge occurred in the August 2015 episode of Raw when Paige, Becky Lynch and Charlotte Flair faced a different competitor to earn a WWE Divas Championship match against Nikki Bella at Night of Champions.\nChampionship Scramble.\nWWE features a match called the Championship Scramble in which none of the wrestlers are eliminated. Two wrestlers start the match and every five minutes another wrestler enters until all five participants are present. After the last wrestler enters, there is a predetermined time limit. Each time a wrestler scores a pinfall or submission, he becomes the interim champion. Such reigns are not recorded as title reigns. The winner is the wrestler who scores the last pinfall or submission before the time limit expires. The Unforgiven pay-per view of 2008 is arguably the most prominent showcase of this match type, as all three world titles were contested under a Championship Scramble match.\nElimination Chase.\nThe Elimination Chase, first used in WWE's version of ECW brand in 2007, is a series of multi-competitor, one fall matches, with the loser of the fall being eliminated from future matches until one competitor remains.\nIron Survivor Challenge.\nWWE's NXT brand features a match called the Iron Survivor Challenge at its annual December event Deadline, in which none of the wrestlers are eliminated. There is one each for the men and women. The rules are as follows:\nThe Iron Survivor Challenge combines elements of the Championship Scramble, Iron Man, and TNA Wrestling's King of the Mountain matches. It was used for the first time at Deadline in 2022.\nSpecial Guest Referee.\nThe Special Guest Referee is any match in which the usual referee is replaced with a \"guest\" filling in as the official. Celebrities (such as Muhammad Ali in the main event of WrestleMania I), managers and other wrestlers can \"guest\" as the special referee. In some cases, a special referee is put into a match which is already a different match type or stipulation. The special referee will often be biased towards or against one of the competitors or will be assigned as the Special Referee to ensure the match is called down the line. Special Outside Referee\nalso known as Special Enforcer or Special Guest Enforcer is same as the Special Referee but the guest referee stays on the outside enforcing what the normal referee doesn't see. These guests are sometimes known as \"enforcers\", the most famous of which was Mike Tyson, who served as the Special Guest Enforcer for the WWF title match between Steve Austin and Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania XIV, and Chuck Norris who served as Special Guest Enforcer at Survivor Series 1994 in a match between The Undertaker and Yokozuna. Another example of this is Triple H vs. The Undertaker in a Hell in a Cell match at WrestleMania 28 with Shawn Michaels being the Special Guest Referee.\nNon-wrestling matches.\nOccasionally, a match would take place under the rules of a different type of contest. Like professional wrestling matches, the matches would be worked, with the participants not being in the perceived danger and the winner being predetermined.\nArm Wrestling match.\nAn arm wrestling match, in the context of professional wrestling, is a basic arm wrestling contest. It can be contested between two females, two males or between one male and one female. Often the male in the latter will be a manager going against the wrestler of a competitor.\nBoxing match.\nThe professional wrestling version of a boxing match has standard boxing rules applied to it. Wrestlers wear boxing gloves and the match is contested in rounds with fouls given out, though the matches are generally worked and end with one wrestler cheating and using wrestling maneuvers.\nMixed Martial Arts match.\nThe professional wrestling version of a mixed martial arts (MMA) match under standard MMA. As in MMA, pinfalls are not a valid method of victory. Matches can typically only be won by knockout, submission, disqualification, forfeit or by going to a referee's decision.\nSumo match.\nFor a sumo match, the ropes are removed from the ring and standard sumo rules apply. The first person to step outside of the ring or touch the mat with any part of the body except the soles of the feet is the loser. The most infamous match of this kind in WWE happened at WrestleMania 21 between The Big Show and Sumo legend, Akebono.\nSumo Monster Truck match.\nA Sumo Monster Truck match is a regular tug-o-war contest where two wrestlers are driving monster trucks, pushing and shoving each other. An example of this match type is at the Halloween Havoc (1995) pay-per-view between Hulk Hogan and The Giant.\nRumble rules-based variations.\nIn this version \u2013 unlike traditional battle royales where all the wrestlers begin the match in the ring \u2013 the competitors (after numbers 1 and 2 begin the match) enter at timed intervals in accordance with the number that they have drawn until the entire field has entered.\nAztec Warfare.\nAztec Warfare is the Lucha Underground version of the \"Rumble Rules\" battle royale. Upwards to 20 participants enter every 90 seconds and elimination occurs by either pinfall or submission and has to take place inside the ring. There are no count-outs and no disqualifications. As of \u00a02019[ [update]], four Aztec Warfare matches have occurred\u2014one in each season of Lucha Underground.\nBattle Riot.\nThe Battle Riot is Major League Wrestling's \"Rumble\" style battle royale. This match isn't that much different from other Pin, Submission &amp; Over the top rope elimination rumble rules, however is different from the WWE Royal Rumble, of which you can only get eliminated via going over the top rope with both feet hitting the floor.\nCasino Battle Royale.\nThe Casino Battle Royale is used by All Elite Wrestling (AEW). It is a modified rumble rules battle royale that features 21 entrants. It begins with a group of five wrestlers, and every three minutes, another group of five wrestlers enter, while the 21st and final entrant enters alone. The wrestlers are grouped based on the suit they drew from a deck of cards \u2013 spades, diamonds, clubs, or hearts \u2013 and the order of when each group enters is based on a random draw of the cards. The 21st and final entrant is the wrestler who drew the joker. The winner receives a world championship match of their respective gender's division\u2014either the AEW World Championship or the AEW Women's World Championship.\nThe first Casino Battle Royale occurred during the pre-show of AEW's inaugural event, Double or Nothing in 2019, and was a men's match. The winner of the inaugural match was entered into the match to determine the inaugural AEW World Champion at All Out that year. The second Casino Battle Royale was an all-female version and was held during the pre-show of the aforementioned All Out event. Like the first, the winner of this second iteration was entered into the match to determine the inaugural AEW Women's World Champion on the debut episode of AEW's weekly television show, \"Dynamite\". The third Casino Battle Royale\u2014a men's match\u2014took place at All Out in 2020 and the winner received a future AEW World Championship match.\nHonor Rumble.\nRing of Honor (ROH) also periodically features the \"Rumble\" style of battle royale on their shows, billing it as the Honor Rumble. This battle royal differs from a standard version of the match in that the contestants do not all begin in the ring at the same time, but instead enter the match at timed intervals in order of their assigned entry numbers (comparable in style to WWE's Royal Rumble match). Numbers are usually drawn through a lottery that is typically staged right before the event begins, although participants can also win desirable spots via a number of other means, the most common being winning a match.\nNew Japan Rumble.\nNew Japan Pro-Wrestling's annual \"Rumble\" battle royale, takes place on the pre-show of Wrestle Kingdom on January 4. Participants enter at one minute intervals and are eliminated via pinfall, submission or by being thrown over the top rope. Typically leaning towards light comedy, the match includes past stars as surprise entrants.\nRoyal Rampage.\nUsed by All Elite Wrestling (AEW) on its program \"Rampage\". The Royal Rampage is a two ring rumble rules battle royale. It features 20 wrestlers between the two rings (10 in each). It begins with two wrestlers in each ring, with two new wrestlers entering at timed intervals - one in the red ring and one in the blue ring (as differentiated by the color of the ropes). After all 20 wrestlers have entered, and once the field narrows to the last four participants, they will then consolidate into a single ring and fight until there is a winner, who then receives a championship match at a later date.\nRoyal Rumble.\nWWE's Royal Rumble is the original battle royale to use this format. It begins with two wrestlers in the ring, with the remaining participants introduced one by one at a set time period, usually 90 seconds or two minutes. Elimination occurs in the normal way with the last person standing as the winner, after all participants (traditionally 30 or 40 in Royal Rumble 2011 and 20 in Royal Rumble 1988) have entered the ring eliminated by being thrown over the top rope and having both feet touch the venue floor. (referred to as the \"Shawn Michaels rule\" in Royal Rumble 1995 in which he was thrown over the top rope, hung on to the top rope and only had one foot land on the floor). There is both a men's and women's Royal Rumble match, although WWE's first official women's Royal Rumble match debuted in 2018 used the same rules as the men's version, with the winners getting a world championship match (in their respective divisions) at that year's WrestleMania, which is WWE's biggest annual show. At the Greatest Royal Rumble in 2018, 50 participants entered the match. Stone Cold Steve Austin is the only 3-time Royal Rumble winner.\nRoyal Sambo.\nDragon Gate's version takes place exclusively at touring shows at the Kobe Sambo Hall venue, as the promotion's home location is Kobe, Japan. Royal Sambo matches typically consist of 10-16 participants entering two at a time at 60 second intervals, with both wrestlers' entrance themes crossfading back and forth over the speakers. If an odd number of wrestlers are booked in the match, the final participant enters solo. Participants can be eliminated via over-the-top rope elimination, pinfall, or submission, and multiple wrestlers may pin or submit someone simultaneously. Typically booked as a comedy match, or with one high-profile wrestler as the obvious winner among others with much lower status on the roster.\nSquare Go!\nSquare Go! is Insane Championship Wrestling's (ICW) very own hybrid of WWE's Royal Rumble and Money in the Bank matches, and named for the Glaswegian term for a street fight. The competitors will compete in a 30-man over-the-top-rope \"rumble rules\" battle royale, the Square Go!, with the winner earning the Square Go Briefcase. It has mostly the same rules apply as Royal Rumble, two competitors who draw the numbers 1 and 2. The remaining participants which will enter the ring one-by-one at every two-minute intervals.\nFive people have drawn entry numbers that allow them to carry a weapon of their choice into the ring. Participants were eliminated when thrown over the top ropes with both feet landing on the floor. The winner will win a briefcase that will entitle him to a match for the ICW World Championship at any time and anywhere of their choosing for one year (similar to Money in the Bank).\nSeries-based variations.\nSeries matches may involve the same match throughout, or may use different matches for some or all of the series.\nThe most common form of a series match is extending the one-fall concept to a series of falls.\nBest of Series match.\nA \"Best of Series\" match is similar to a two out of three falls match but an extended series to five or seven; Even though it takes place over several nights to continue a feud rather than settle it in one night.\nOne variation is a Best of Five Series where a wrestler must win three matches to win the series. John Cena defeated Booker T 3\u20132 to win the WWE United States Championship at No Mercy (2004).\nThe Best of Seven Series is another variation, where a wrestler must win four matches to win the series. Chris Benoit and Booker T fought in such a series to determine the #1 contender for the WCW World Television Championship in 1998. The two resumed their Best of Seven series in 2006 for the WWE United States Championship. Sheamus and Cesaro ended in a 3\u20133 draw when their seventh match at Clash of Champions (2016) ended in a no-contest. Death Triangle (Pac, Penta El Zero Miedo, and Rey F\u00e9nix) wrestled The Elite (Kenny Omega and The Young Bucks (Matt Jackson and Nick Jackson)) in a series for the AEW World Trios Championship in 2022.\nGauntlet match.\nA Gauntlet match, also referred to as a Turmoil match, is a quick series of one-fall one-on-one matches. Two wrestlers begin the match and are replaced whenever one is eliminated (by pinfall or submission). After a predetermined number of wrestlers have competed in the match, the last person standing is named the winner. A Gauntlet match may also be played out in multiple \"parts\" as part of a storyline (in which a face wrestler must face a series of a heel wrestler's underlings before facing the heel himself, for instance) this was common in World Championship Wrestling in the early 1990s. A participant involved in a Gauntlet match may be said to be \"running the gauntlet\" but in most cases this designation being reserved for those who are involved for most of the match. Sometimes, it could also be (one-on-three) or (one-on-four) handicap match. Unlike tag matches, the three/four-man team will challenge the person handicapped individually until he is knocked out, at which time the match is over.\nOne example of this was on September 23, 1999, edition of \"WWE SmackDown\" where Triple H, being punished by Vince McMahon for his actions against him and his family, was booked in five gimmick matches in one night: a Chokeslam Challenge match (a match where the first to Chokeslam their opponent wins) against The Big Show, a Handicap Casket match against Viscera and Mideon, an Inferno match against Kane, a Boiler Room Brawl against Mankind, and a Brahma Bullrope match against The Rock.\nGauntlet Eliminator.\nThe Gauntlet Eliminator is a modified gauntlet match in which two wrestlers start in the ring and every four minutes, another wrestler enters until all the entire field has entered. Eliminations can occur only by pinfall or submission. The last wrestler remaining wins. An example of this match was on between Leon Ruff, Isaiah \"Swerve\" Scott, Bronson Reed, Dexter Lumis and L. A. Knight.\nCasino Gauntlet.\nThe Casino Gauntlet match is a modified version of the Gauntlet Eliminator promoted by All Elite Wrestling (AEW). Two wrestlers begin the match, with new entrants coming in at randomly timed intervals, with a maximum number of 21 entrants. It is a one fall match that can end at any time via pinfall or submission inside the ring, even before the entire field has entered. The prize for winning the Casino Gauntlet is a championship match at a later date.\nGauntlet for the Gold.\nTNA Wrestling uses the \"Gauntlet for the Gold\" format, which is named similarly to the Gauntlet match but is actually very different. The wrestlers enter at regular intervals, and elimination occurs when thrown over the top rope with both feet hitting the floor (as in a Royal Rumble match). This continues until only two wrestlers remain, after which the final winner is decided by pinfall or submission. This match type was first featured on the first ever NWA-TNA PPV, with Ken Shamrock defeating Malice in the final two.\nIron Man/Woman match.\nAn Iron Man (or Iron Woman for female matches) match is a multiple-fall match with a set time limit (usually 30 or 60 minutes). The match is won by the wrestler who wins the most falls within the time limit by either pinfall, submission, disqualification, or countout. If there is ever a tie, the match goes to sudden death overtime in which the wrestler who scores one fall on their opponent will immediately be declared the winner. An example of an Iron Man Match is Dolph Ziggler vs. Seth Rollins at 2018 Extreme Rules for the Intercontinental Championship. Other examples are MJF vs. Bryan Danielson at AEW Revolution in 2023 for the AEW World Championship, and Bret Hart vs. Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania XII for the WWE Championship. The first Iron Woman match was between Team JWP (Cutie Suzuki, Dynamite Kansai, Hikari Fukuoka and Mayumi Ozaki) and Team AJW (Aja Kong, Kyoko Inoue, Sakie Hasegawa and Takako Inoue) at Thunder Queen Battle in Yokohama in 1993.\nAnything Goes Iron Man match.\nAn Anything Goes Iron Man match is the hardcore variation of an Iron Man match: there are no disqualifications, no countouts and falls count anywhere. John Cena faced Randy Orton in an Anything Goes Iron Man match at Bragging Rights 2009 for 60 minutes.\nThunder Queen battle.\nThe Thunder Queen battle is a hybrid match, a variation of Tag Team and Iron Woman match types. This stipulation was used in All Japan Women's Pro-Wrestling. The match starts off with two teams of four members wrestle each other for 60 minutes. Individual members will have a 5-minute Singles Iron Woman match (20 minutes total each), followed by a 40-minute Tag Team Iron Woman match. The team with the highest total number of points within the time limit wins.\nTotal Count match.\nThe Total Count match is a variation of an Iron Man match where the winner is not decided by the number of falls scored, but by the cumulative seconds of pinfalls counted by the referee (a one-count pinfall scores one point, a two-count pinfall scores two points, etc.). Depending on the specific rules of each match, the match can be won by the wrestler who has the largest score at the end of the allotted time, or by the first to reach a certain score. This stipulation has been used in DDT Pro-Wrestling. Shiori Asahi and Akito had a Total Count match for the DDT Extreme Championship at Judgement 2015 for 10 minutes plus one minute and 32 seconds of tie-breaking overtime; Shunma Katsumata and Mao had a hardcore version of the match billed as a \"Kids Room Deathmatch 37 (Sauna) Count Edition\" at Into The Fight 2021, in which the goal was to reach a score of 37.\nUltimate Submission match.\nAn Ultimate Submission match is a variation of an Iron Man match where the only way to score a fall within the allotted time limit is to make your opponent submit. Chris Benoit and Kurt Angle had an Ultimate Submission match at Backlash 2001 for 30 minutes plus one minute and 33 seconds of tie-breaking overtime.\nThree Strikes match.\nThe Three Strikes match (often shortened to Three Strikes' You're Out) is a multiple-fall match where wrestlers must achieve three victories of a specific nature in a specific order before the other. The name of the match is taken from baseball, referring to the notion that having three strikes would entail losing the match. The most common arrangement for the three strikes are pinfall, submission and knockout with the entire match being fought under no disqualification and no countout rules. Diamante faced Big Swole in a Three Strikes match on AEW Dark on September 7, 2021.\nTwo out of Three falls match.\nIn a Two out of Three falls match, a wrestler or tag team must beat their opponent(s) twice to win. This can be achieved by pinfall, submission, disqualification or count-out. Examples of this match type include the 2012 Extreme Rules match between Daniel Bryan and Sheamus, as well as the 2000 SummerSlam match between Chris Benoit and Chris Jericho. A tag team version of this match occurred at the 2015 Payback pay-per-view event between The New Day and Cesaro &amp; Tyson Kidd for the WWE Raw Tag Team Championship.\nThis stipulation is considered the norm in \"lucha libre\".\nGate of Heaven match.\nA Gate of Heaven match is a multiple-fall match that is applied to tag team matches. Started in Dragon Gate, with the first match being a strict tag team match with two referees to make sure tags actually happen. The second match being the Dragon Gate rules. The third match, if necessary; tables, ladders and chairs are now legal. The first team to gain two victories before the other is the winner.\nThree Stages of Hell match.\nA Three Stages of Hell match is a multiple-fall match in which two wrestlers must wrestle three special types of matches. A wrestler must achieve two victories before the other. There have only been six occasions in which this match has been contested in WWE history. The first Three Stages of Hell match occurred in 2001 between Triple H and Steve Austin at 2001 No Way Out, which Triple H won 2\u20131. Another match of this type took place at 2002 Armageddon between Shawn Michaels and Triple H for the World Heavyweight Championship. The most recent example was at NXT TakeOver 36, when Adam Cole faced Kyle O'Reilly.\nThree Degrees of Pain match.\nThe Three Degrees of Pain match is a hybrid match, a variation of Two out of Three Falls and Steel Cage match types where a wrestler must achieve a victory in the specific order before the other. The first victory is a pinfall, the second victory is a submission and if necessary, the third victory is to escape from the steel cage. There have only been two of these matches occurred in TNA history and both were feud-enders.\nStipulation-based variations.\nAs professional wrestling seeks to also tell a story, some matches are made solely for the purposes of advancing the plot. This typically involves the loser of a match being penalized in some way.\nClock Strikes Midnight match.\nThe Clock Strikes Midnight match is a singles match where a match is contested under different stipulations, and stipulations of the match keep changing after random intervals. This match was contested between Alexxis Falcon and Nina Samuels at the 2023 Super Strong Style 16. The stipulations changed from time to time from a singles match to different stipulations such as Tables match, First Blood match, Submission match, Last Man Standing match, and Deathmatch.\nCrybaby match.\nA Crybaby match is a singles match with the exception that the loser would have to dress as a baby by wearing a nappy and sucking from a bottle. This match only occurred once between 1-2-3 Kid and Razor Ramon at the In Your House 6 pay-per-view.\nJailhouse match.\nA Jailhouse match is a singles match with the exception that the loser would have to spend the night in a New York City jail cell. This match featured heavy brawling by both competitors The Mountie and Big Bossman at SummerSlam 1991. At one point the Mountie tried to use his cattle prod, but missed. Bossman got the pin following a double leg slam and NYC police officers came down to handcuff the Mountie and take him to jail.\nA variant of this match, entitled \"Jailhouse Street Fight\" is a hardcore match where the winner throws an opponent into a cage. This concept was introduced at NXT Roadblock 2023 where Tony D'Angelo defeated Dijak.\nKiss My Foot match.\nA Kiss My Foot match is a singles match with the exception that the loser must kiss the winner's bare foot. Such matches included Bret Hart vs. Jerry Lawler during the 1995 King of the Ring, Jerry Lawler vs. Michael Cole during the 2011 Over the Limit pay-per-view. A version of this match was used as a No Holds Barred kiss my foot match at Major League Wrestling's 2023 Fury Road event between Matt Cardona and Mance Warner.\nKiss My Ass match.\nA Kiss My Ass match is a singles match in which the loser has to kiss the winner's bare buttocks, in front of the crowd; it became prominent during WWE's Attitude Era. A notable example is The Rock vs. Billy Gunn at SummerSlam 1999, which The Rock won. The match type made a reappearance for Sheamus vs. Dolph Ziggler at Extreme Rules 2015, where it was branded a Kiss Me Arse match in reference to Sheamus' Irish accent. Ziggler won, but Sheamus attacked him and forced Ziggler's unconscious self to kiss Sheamus' behind.\nLast Chance match.\nA last chance match, also called a do or die match, is a championship match where, if the challenger does not win the title, they are banned from challenging for it again as long as the winner of the same match holds it. Rarely, the loser may even be barred from challenging for that title for as long as he remains employed at the company. For example, at Slammiversary XI's main event, Sting was defeated by defending champion Bully Ray in a No Holds Barred variant of this match; as per the pre-match stipulation, he was barred from challenging for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship ever again no matter who holds it. A similar situation occurred at All Elite Wrestling's 2019 Full Gear event, in which Cody Rhodes lost to AEW World Champion Chris Jericho and could never challenge for the title again as long as he was employed by AEW. Tyson Kidd lost a last chance match against Adrian Neville for the NXT Championship in 2014. As a result, Tyson Kidd would never get another chance at the NXT Championship as long as he remained employed with WWE.\nThese matches are usually a way to finish a feud between the champion and a certain challenger. It can also be used as a way of keeping the same challenger a title feud with a multiple champions; someone who had previously lost a last chance match may issue a challenge to a new champion as soon as the previous champion - who won a last chance match \n- loses their title. An example of this would be Drew McIntyre, who lost a last chance match for Bobby Lashley's WWE Championship but immediately challenged new champion Big E when the latter won the belt from Lashley. A ban may also not be lifted in some other way, such as when Sting was able to challenge Magnus for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship in a No Disqualification Title vs. Career match at Genesis (2014), though Sting lost.\nAEW introduced a variation on the Last Chance match called a \"Championship\" Eliminator. In this variation, if the challenger defeats the champion, they get a future match for the title, but if they lose, then they can no longer challenge that champion for as long as the champion holds the title.\nLoser Leaves Town match.\n\"Loser leaves town\" is a generic term for any match in which the loser has to leave the current promotion or sub-division. These matches were most often held during the \"territorial days\", when wrestlers frequently jumped from company to company. It has been held with greater frequency in WWE during the brand split; the losing wrestler typically leaves the brand (usually either Raw or SmackDown), only to go to the other brand. It is also used as a way to write a wrestler off TV to give them some time off.\nLoser Wears A Chicken Suit match.\nLoser Wears a Chicken Suit match is a singles match where the loser must wear a chicken suit either following the match or at another event soon after. Col. Robert Parker had to wear a chicken suit on the January 29, 1994 episode of \"WCW Saturday Night\" following his loss to Flyin' Brian Pillman at Clash of the Champions XXVI.\nLoser Wears Dress match.\nLoser Wears Dress match is a singles match where the loser must wear a woman's dress temporarily after the match occurred. The match is won by pinfall or submission. An example of this type of match is at Souled Out (1999) between Chris Jericho and Perry Saturn which Jericho won.\n\"Luchas de apuestas\".\n\"Luchas de apuestas\" (in English meaning \"gambling fights\") are matches in which both wrestlers wager something specific (the mask or hair) on the outcome. The loser of the match then loses the item, being forced to take off their mask or be shaved bald. It is also possible for a wrestler to put someone else's item on the line, with the same stipulation applying in the event of a loss. These matches have a storied history in Mexico. Upon unmasking, it is not unheard of for a wrestler's real name and information to be published. As a form of further humiliation, the loser can be forced to physically hand the mask they just lost to the winner.\nThe most popular types of wager are the mask of a masked wrestler or the hair of a non-masked wrestler, most commonly put against each other in mask vs. mask (in Spanish: \"m\u00e1scara contra m\u00e1scara\"), mask vs. hair (\"m\u00e1scara contra cabellera\"), or hair vs. hair (\"cabellera contra cabellera\") matches. Throughout Mexico, when masked wrestlers lose their masks, they are not allowed to compete under a mask with that same gimmick. In addition to masks and hair, championships, or careers \u2014 as a form of retirement match \u2014 can be put up as the wager in any combination.\nBounty match.\nSimilarly the mask can be used in a bounty match, which can be a single match or series of matches where a third party will reward whoever can unmask the targeted competitor. The match can also be used to defeat a targeted individual or take them out of action with a reward. Sometimes the reward is disclosed and sometimes not. An example of the mask bounty match was Flyin' Brian Pillman having a bounty by Barry Windham after making appearances as The Yellow Dog in order to continue wrestling after losing a loser leaves match.\nMove match.\nThe Move match has the objective of performing a specific move first. Usually a signature move or finisher of the wrestlers is selected, although on occasion it will be a generic move that is notoriously hard to perform on both wrestlers. The match usually takes the name of the target move if both wrestlers are trying to perform their finisher for the win. The best known of these was Yokozuna's Bodyslam Challenge, which Lex Luger won. Another famous move match was the $15,000 Body Slam Challenge between Andre The Giant and Big John Studd at the first WrestleMania. Another move match was the Masterlock Challenge which was created by Chris Masters. A Chokeslam Challenge match was also done between The Big Show and Triple H on WWE Smackdown in September 1999. A Stink Face Challenge match is another move match where whoever delivers the Stink Face to their opponent first wins.\nBanned Move match.\nThe Banned Move match is a singles match when one or both of the competitors is not allowed to use their finishing move or else they will be disqualified. One of the competitors cannot be disqualified if that wrestler uses the move to give an unfair disadvantage. Sometimes this stipulation is used in a feud with wrestlers whose finishers are the same or similar, in these cases it is common to see the stipulation added that the losing wrestler is no longer allowed to use that move anymore. This type of match often forces the banned wrestler to get more creative and use moves they don't normally use in an attempt to win. An example of this match took place at Extreme Rules in 2015 between Seth Rollins and Randy Orton, where, in addition to the match taking place in a Steel Cage, Orton's finisher, the RKO, was banned. Another example was at the 2020 edition of AEW's All Out event, where AEW Champion Jon Moxley defended his title successfully against MJF. In that match, Moxley's finisher, the Paradigm Shift (a variation of a DDT), was banned, although he did use it when the referee had his back turned.\nRetirement match.\nThe retirement stipulation can be applied to just one wrestler or both wrestlers in a match can be wrestling for their careers (though in practice some wrestlers career may resume their career later either inside or outside the promotion the match occurs in despite being \"retired\" per the stipulation of the match). Some examples of this stipulation of match are Shawn Michaels vs. Ric Flair at WrestleMania XXIV and Shawn Michaels vs. The Undertaker at WrestleMania XXVI. More loosely, the term can refer to the last match of a (usually \"legendary\") wrestler's career. Such a match is designed to be a last hurrah, showcasing the wrestler's talent one last time for their fans. An example of this type includes Sting's retirement match at Revolution 2024 and Ric Flair's Last Match in 2022. Statistically speaking: Most matches occur when the person retiring loses the match to put a younger talent over.\nSpin the Wheel, Make the Deal.\nThe Spin the Wheel, Make the Deal concept was introduced in WCW at the 1992 Halloween Havoc to determine the stipulation for the match pitting Sting versus Jake Roberts. While not a match type in and of itself, Spin the Wheel, Make the deal involves a wheel of fortune featuring a number of match types. When the wheel is spun, the stipulation it lands on is the one used for the match. The concept was later used in TNA as the \"Wheel of Dixie\" and in WWE as \"Raw Roulette\". Since 2020, WWE has revived Spin the Wheel, Make the Deal for Halloween Havoc, which was itself revived as an event for the NXT brand.\nStrip matches.\nIn two kinds of matches, a wrestler does not win by pinfall or submission, but only by stripping their opponent of their clothing. Historically, these types of matches were contested between managers or valets, due to their supposed lack of wrestling ability. In the Attitude Era, however, full-time female wrestlers (known formerly as Divas in WWE) began engaging in strip matches for the purpose of titillation.\nBra and Panties match.\nA bra and panties match is usually contested by two or more female wrestlers where the only objective to win this match is to strip her opponent down to her bra and panties.\nEvening Gown match.\nAn evening gown match is usually contested by two female competitors in evening gowns. The only objective to win this match is the wrestler must remove the evening gown from her opponent.\nTuxedo match.\nA tuxedo match is usually contested by two male competitors in tuxedos. The only objective to win this match is the wrestler must remove his opponent's tuxedo.\nSubmission match.\nA submission match is typically a variation of a singles match in which pinfalls, count-outs, and disqualifications are not legal and the match could only end by making an opponent tap out to a submission hold.\nThrow in the Towel match.\nA Throw in the Towel match, also known as a No Surrender Rules match in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling, is a singles match where there are one or more cornermen for each participant, and victory is obtained when an opponent's cornerman throws a towel into the ring to signal surrender on behalf of their wrestler. An example of this type of match is between Bob Backlund with Owen Hart as his cornermen and Bret Hart with The British Bulldog as his cornermen at the 1994 Survivor Series.\nCatch-as-Catch Can match.\nA Catch-as-Catch Can match is a singles match where any submission hold are allowed that is not intended to inflict injury, which contained mostly submission amateur-style wrestling. This match is altered to stipulate that a wrestler may lose by going to or being forced to the arena floor, like in a battle royale. An example of this type of match is the infamous match between Dean Malenko and Billy Kidman during WCW's Souled Out (2000), where Malenko lost in two minutes by forgetting the rules and escaping to the floor after a barrage of attacks from Kidman.\n\"I quit\" match.\nAn \"I quit\" match is a singles match where a wrestler must force the other wrestler to submit in the form of saying the words \"I quit\" into a microphone to win. This match is run under hardcore rules - no disqualifications, no countouts and the submission can happen anywhere. The referee follows the action with a microphone in hand during the event.\n\"I respect you\" match.\nAn \"I respect you\" match is a singles match also similar to an \"I quit\" match, that means: anything goes. In order to win, a wrestler must hurt his opponent brutally that it leaves the other wrestler no other choice but force to say, \"I respect you\" into the microphone. This match type took place at WCW's SuperBrawl VI in 1996 which marked Brian Pillman's final match in WCW in his \"I respect you\" Strap Match against The Taskmaster, before Pillman shouted \"I respect you, booker man!\", breaking kayfabe, before leaving the ring.\nSubmission Count Anywhere match.\nThe Submission Count Anywhere match is a variation of a Submission and Falls Count Anywhere match, and was debuted at Breaking Point 2009 between D-Generation X and The Legacy. This is a tag-team stipulation where a wrestler can be submitted anywhere to win, and there are no pinfalls, no disqualifications and no countouts. This match occurred only once in WWE history.\nSubstance match.\nThe match is contested in a large container filled with various substances, typically between two female individuals who may or may not have experience with wrestling. Substances can include anything from mud to chocolate milk. Sometimes, specialty substances are used for certain occasions like gravy for Thanksgiving and eggnog for Christmas.\nA notable example of this match type was the Mimosa Mayhem match, which was contested between Chris Jericho and Orange Cassidy at All Elite Wrestling's All Out pay-per-view in September 2020, where the only ways to gain victory were by pinfall, submission or by knocking the opponent into a large vat of mimosa. Unlike the traditional reasoning, the theme fit with both parties' gimmicks: Jericho was promoting his own line of champagne, and Cassidy is billed as \"Freshly Squeezed\" as part of his gimmick (in the independent circuit Cassidy would often spit orange juice into his opponent's eyes).\nAnother example of this match was the Chocolate Pudding match when Candice Michelle defeated Melina in one of these matches.\nBlood Bath match.\nA Blood Bath match is a no-disqualification match where the first to be covered in a vat of blood dispensed from a bucket loses. The Brood members Edge and Gangrel had a Blood Bath match on WWE Raw in August 1999.\nMud match.\nPerhaps the most notable substance match was a mud match, where wrestlers would wrestle in an area or container full of mud, usually away from the ring. Usually women would participate in these matches with some occasional male involvement.\nHog Pen match.\nA variation of a Mud Match is the Hog Pen match, which is a Mud Match held in a pig pen on a farm, often filled with mud and pig excrement. Triple H and Henry O. Godwinn participated in a Hog Pen match at WWE's In Your House 5 in December 1995. The only objective to win is to be the first wrestler to throw his opponent into a pig pen.\nTeam matches.\nMatches are often contested between two or more teams, most often consisting of two members each. Tag team matches can range from two teams of two fighting, to multiple man teams challenging each other.\nTag Team match.\nOn most occasions, one member of the team competes in the ring with one or more of his or her teammates standing behind the ropes. Wrestlers switch positions by \"tagging\" one another, usually similar to a high five and, as a result, these teams are referred to as tag teams. This can create tension during the match as an injured wrestler in the middle of the ring attempts to reach his or her teammates, often with the heel team preventing them from doing so. In typical tag team matches, standard wrestling rules apply with a match ending by pinfall, submission, countout, or disqualification. Tag team matches have also been seen in mixed martial arts and boxing.\nPromotions usually have a tag team championship for a team of two wrestlers, and on rare occasion allies of the reigning tag team will be allowed to defend the title in the place of one of the reigning wrestlers under the Freebird rule. Though common in Mexican \"lucha libre\", at one point, World Championship Wrestling (WCW) had a championship for teams of three. WWE also can have three (triple threat) or four (fatal four-way) tag teams going against each other as well. The Tag Team Triple Threat match (known as Tag Team Triangle match in WCW) involves three teams where a member of two teams are in the ring and can tag their partner or a member of the third team. The first team with an active competitor to win by pinfall or submission wins the match for the team.\nThe Tag Team Four Corners match (also known as Tag Team Fatal Four-Way match) is another variation that starts off with four teams positioned as in a tag team match and two wrestlers active in the ring. The two wrestlers in the ring can tag their partner or members of a team not already represented in the match. It is an advantage to have a team member tagged into the match as you can only win by being a legal competitor in the match and the one who scores the fall wins the match for the team. One example was a four team match for the WWE Women's Tag Team Championship at Starrcade (2019).\nAnother variation of the four-way tag team match is to have a member of each of the four teams in competition while their partners are on the apron and the active member who scores a pinfall or submission wins the match for the team. One example of this variation was contested for the SmackDown Tag Team Championship at Clash of Champions (2017).\nSometimes a team will have members of three, four or five in non-elimination tag matches. They are often named based on the number of participants and gender involved. Six-Man (Six-Woman) Tag Team match (known as Trios match in AEW) is one variation. The Wyatt Family defeated The Shield at Elimination Chamber (2014) in a six-man tag team match.\nTornado Tag Team match.\nThe tornado tag team match (Originally known as the Texas Tornado) is a hardcore-rules match where all wrestlers involved are allowed to be in and wrestle in the ring and elsewhere at the same time, and thus all wrestlers are vulnerable to having a fall scored against them. Whether or not it is truly a tag team match is debatable, as it involves no tagging, but it is contested between tag teams. The first match of this kind was held on October 2, 1937, in Houston between Milo Steinborn and Whiskers Savage against Tiger Daula and Fazul Mohammed. It was the brainchild of promoter Morris Sigel. Another well-known example of this match is when The Shield (Roman Reigns &amp; Seth Rollins) challenged Team Hell No (Daniel Bryan &amp; Kane) for the WWE Tag Team Championship at Extreme Rules (2013).\nElimination Tag Team match.\nTag team matches are occasionally held under elimination rules; that is, the losing wrestler is eliminated from the match, but their team is allowed to continue with their remaining members until all members of one team are eliminated. WWE and other promotions also has three or four tag teams going against each other as well. Anyone can be tagged in by anyone else and can be subject to immediate disqualification for failure to accept a tag. When a wrestler is pinned or force to submit, the entire team is eliminated and the last team remaining wins.\nIn WWE, these matches are primarily featured during its Survivor Series pay-per-views, where they are billed as a \"Survivor Series match\". Teams of four or five, though on some occasions as many as seven, compete under elimination rules. All other standard rules apply, and team members may tag in and out in any order. While some teams are already established stables, others may need to recruit members for their team. In \"lucha libre\" promotions, a \"torneo cibernetico\" is a similar type of match between teams of up to eight wrestlers who enter in a predetermined order.\nCaptain's Fall match.\nA captain's fall match is a tag team elimination match where the two teams of four competitors to compete and captains are assigned to both teams. The purpose of the match is to score a fall over the captain to get the win. Eliminations may occur until the captain is pinned or force to submit; the team loses if the captain is eliminated. Although common in Mexican promotions, as well as certain Japanese promotions to an extent, the only time this match type occurred in WWE was at the August 20, 2019, edition of WWE 205 Live, between Team Drew Gulak vs. Team Lorcan.\nTag Team Turmoil.\nA tag team turmoil is another version of an elimination tag team match. The match has a team in each of the four corners to start the match, but as each team is eliminated another team takes its place, similar to a gauntlet match. There are five pay-per-view matches of the tag team turmoil took place at SummerSlam in 1999, Armageddon in 2003, Night of Champions in 2010, Night of Champions Kickoff Show in 2013 and Elimination Chamber in 2017. Two teams start, when one is eliminated a new team comes to the ring until all teams have competed, the remaining team is the winner. This was used on the May 31, 2011 episode of \"NXT\", with a team consisting of a WWE pro and an NXT rookie. The winning team earned three redemption points for the rookie in this version. This was also used on the May 8, 2017 episode of \"Raw\", where the winning team earned a number one contender's spot for Matt and Jeff Hardy's WWE Raw Tag Team Championship.\nUltimate Endurance match.\nPrimarily associated with Ring of Honor (ROH), An Ultimate Endurance match is a tag team elimination match that typically includes three to four tag teams with the members of two. The match starts off with a particular set of special stipulations, with the stipulation changing every time a team is eliminated. These stipulations are predetermined and are not limited to any specific type.\nMixed Tag Team match.\nA mixed tag team match features mixed-gender teams that only wrestlers of the same gender may be in the ring at the same time will wrestle each other under the standard rules. For example, if a female wrestler tags her male partner, both women leave the ring and both men enter the ring, the roles is also reversed as well. The Mixed Match Challenge tournament was debuted on January 16, 2018, which both team winners The Miz and Asuka won season one while R-Truth and Carmella won season two, earning themselves the #30 spots in the 2019 Royal Rumble matches and an all-expenses-paid vacation.\nIntergender Tag Team match.\nA intergender tag team match features mixed-gender teams but it differs from the \"Mixed Tag Team match\" in which that both men and women can be in the ring at the same time to wrestle each other under the tornado tag team rules. This concept was used and popularized in the early 2000s by Team Xtreme during the Attitude Era.\nStadium Stampede / Anarchy in the Arena match.\nA Stadium Stampede match is a type of hybrid tag team, location and cinematic match that originated in All Elite Wrestling. It has been run twice at their Double or Nothing pay-per-view event under this name and four times under the Anarchy in the Arena name, as well as once at their 2023 All In pay-per-view event for a total of seven times (when conducted indoors, it is called an Anarchy in the Arena match). This match typically involves 10 wrestlers in a 5 vs 5 match, and all five wrestlers of the two teams are each part of an established faction in AEW. This often violent and brutal match is contested under hardcore rules, and it starts in a ring in the middle of the stadium or arena and progresses through various environments, such as bars, cargo loading areas and offices. The 2020 edition of this match stayed within the empty TIAA Bank Field and featured the teams brawling around the stadium, while the 2021 edition of this match had the combatants exit the empty stadium and then finally end up in the audience-present central event space at the adjacent Daily's Place outdoor amphitheatre, where the match was finished in the Daily's Place ring. The first indoor edition took place under the name Anarchy in the Arena at Double or Nothing 2022. The third match under the Stadium Stampede name was held at All In inside London's Wembley Stadium in 2023. However, unlike the previous stadium editions, the entire match took place live in front of a crowd, instead of it being a cinematic match.\nStrange Bedfellows match.\nA Strange Bedfellows match is a standard \ntag team match where a member of one tag team has to team up with a member of another tag team they are feuding with. One example of this was when Matt Hardy had to team up with Christian against his brother/tag team partner Jeff Hardy and Christian's tag team partner Edge.\nWeapon-based variations.\nThrough the use of foreign objects, the matches generally take the name of the weapon being used (\"Singapore cane match\", \"Chairs match\"). In the following list of weapon-based matches, additional rules have supplanted or replaced the standard rules.\nArcade Anarchy match.\nAn Arcade Anarchy match is a tag-team hardcore match that originated in AEW where various items found in arcades like air hockey tables, mallet hammers (for Mogura Taiji (Whac-a-Mole)), various video game stalls, a claw crane, and even Teddy bears filled with Lego bricks are made available and placed around the ring. There is also a \"prize wall\" made available with traditional hardcore professional wrestling weapons hanging on this wall. This match was first done on AEW Dynamite on March 31, 2021.\nBeach Brawl.\nA Beach Brawl is a hardcore match where objects that are found at a beach, like surfboards, wooden benches, wooden tables, beach balls, sports balls and a kiddle pool filled with plastic balls are made available. The match is no-disqualification, so other weapons are also legal. The first Beach Brawl was between Sol Ruca and Blair Davenport in WWE NXT's Spring Breakin' in April 2024.\nBricks match.\nA Bricks match is a hardcore match where concrete bricks are made available as weapons. Bricks were often integrated into no-rope barbed wire deathmatches, and bricks first made their appearance in Japanese deathmatches in 1993.\nChairs match.\nA Chairs match is a standard weapons match with any number of steel chairs being the only legal weapon to be used. This match can be won by pinfall or submission. The first Chairs match was introduced at between Batista vs. The Undertaker, which Undertaker won by pinfall.\nCountry Whipping match.\nA Country Whipping match is a hardcore match where all competitors are armed with leather belts, which is the only legal weapon in the match. This was known to be The Godwinns speciality match. Also called a Corporal Punishment match and a Badstreet deathmatch.\nCrazy 8 match.\nThe Crazy 8 match, used mostly in the defunct Pro Wrestling Unplugged promotion, involves placing a championship belt at the top of a scaffold with the first wrestler to retrieve it being declared the winner. Placed in and around the ring for the wrestlers to use during the match are one side of a steel cage, two trampolines, and four rope swings.\nDoors match.\nA Doors match is a standard hardcore match with any number of wooden doors as the legal weapons to be used.\nFans Bring the Weapons match.\nA Fans Bring the Weapons match is a type of dangerous hardcore match where the competing wrestlers take random blunt objects from audience members and use them in the match. This match was first pioneered in Extreme Championship Wrestling in the mid-1990s.\nGood Housekeeping match.\nA Good Housekeeping match is a hardcore match where various items usually found in private homes such as trashcans, kitchen sinks, ironing boards, pans, tables, brooms, utensils and various raw food ingredients are made available as weapons and these are the only legal weapons. This match is fought under no-disqualification and no-countout rules. Jeff Jarrett fought Chyna in a Good Housekeeping match at WWF's No Mercy 1999.\nHandcuff match.\nA Handcuff match is a hardcore match when the only way to win is a wrestler must retrieve a pair of handcuffs then handcuff the opposing wrestler to a ring fixture, sometimes so that the opposing wrestler is unable to make use of their hands.\nHangman's Horror match.\nThe Hangman's Horror match was created by Raven to end his feud with Vampiro w/James Mitchell at TNA's IMPACT Wrestling on October 29, 2003. The objective in this match is to wrap your opponent's neck with a steel chain and then proceed in hanging him over the ring ropes. Once he is declared unconscious by the referee, the person in charge of the horrific hanging will gain the victory.\nKendo Stick match.\nA kendo stick match (also known as a Singapore cane match or Dueling canes match) is a standard weapons match with a kendo stick being the only legal weapon. Often, the ring will be lined with many kendo sticks for the wrestlers to use. Hardcore wrestling promotion Combat Zone Wrestling has used this match with fluorescent light tubes instead of kendo sticks.\nLadder match.\nA ladder match is a no-disqualification style match in which a specific object (usually a title belt, a contract or a briefcase) is placed above the ring\u2014out of the reach of the competitors\u2014with the winner being the first person to climb a ladder and retrieve it. This is often used in WWE with their Money in the Bank matches. The ladder may be used as a weapon.\nCasino Ladder match.\nThe Casino Ladder match was created by All Elite Wrestling as a variation of its Casino Battle Royale mixed with a traditional ladder match. A poker chip is hung above the ring beneath a ladder, which can be used as a weapon. The match starts with two wrestlers, with a new participant entering every 2 minutes. The first wrestler to grab the poker chip wins the match, and with it a future AEW World Championship match at a time and place of the wrestler's choosing. Notably, the match can be won before all of the intended participants have entered.\nFull Metal Mayhem match.\nA Full Metal Mayhem match is a variation of a TLC match (see below), where in addition to tables and chairs being present, steel chains are also made available, and any other weapon that is metallic (trashcans, thumbtacks) often make appearances. This match originated in TNA/Impact Wrestling and this promotion has had at least one of these matches every year since 2005.\nKing of the Mountain match.\nThe King of the Mountain match is described as a \"reverse ladder match\". Instead of retrieving an object hanging above the ring, the winner is the first person to use a ladder to \"hang\" a championship belt above the ring\u2014after having scored a pinfall or submission (pinfalls count anywhere) to earn the right to try. A wrestler who has been pinned or forced to submit must spend two minutes in a penalty box. At Slammiversary (2022), the first-ever Queen of the Mountain match took place, with Jordynne Grace defeating champion Tasha Steelz, along with Chelsea Green, Deonna Purrazzo and Mia Yim to win the Impact Knockouts Championship. Four-time Knockouts World Champion Mickie James was the match's enforcer.\nStairway to Hell match.\nUsed in ECW, a Stairway to Hell match is a ladder match with a weapon hanging over the ring. Rather than winning the match by retrieving it, the first wrestler to climb a ladder and retrieve the weapon is allowed to use it in the match. The match is won by standard pinfall or submission.\nTLC match.\nA tables, ladders and chairs match, often abbreviated as TLC match, is an extension of a ladder match with chairs and tables also being present as legal weapons. This match was introduced because each of the three teams specialized in one of these weapons: Edge and Christian were known for their frequent use of steel folding chairs and the tandem \"con-chair-to\" move; the Dudley Boyz were known for their pioneering, hard-hitting use of slamming their opponents through wooden event tables; and the Hardy Boyz were known for their high-flying acrobatics off of twin-step ladders. There had been a similar type of match at WrestleMania 2000 called the Triangle Ladder match which also involved tables and chairs. But the first ever official TLC match took place between Edge and Christian, The Dudley Boyz and The Hardy Boyz at the WWF event SummerSlam 2000; and another at Wrestlemania X-Seven.\nDue to the destructive, dangerous, violent, frenetic and physically demanding nature of these matches, every subsequent TLC match after the third one held a month after X-Seven was toned down to reduce the physical demands and risks this type of match poses. From 2009 to 2020, WWE has held a pay-per-view in December named , which features this stipulation in its main event. The match has two variations: one is competed as a ladder match, which the person/people must retrieve an object suspended above the ring, and the other is a traditional style match won by pinfall or submission. In WWE, Edge has competed in the most TLC matches (7) including the first three, and has often used this match to gain an advantage in a storyline, with some referring to it as his specialty match.\nThis match has also been run and contested under hardcore match rules where a wrestler can win via pinfall or submission, and tables, ladders and chairs are heavily featured as weapons. Two examples were the \u201cWeeLC\u201d match in 2014 and the Tables, Ladders and Scares (a renamed TLC match) between Tony D\u2019Angelo and Oba Femi in 2024.\nUltimate X match.\nThe Ultimate X match is a \"ladder match without the ladders\" where two cables are strung metal structures rising from the four corners of the ring, crossing above the middle of the ring, forming an \"X\" pattern. The objective to win this match is to climb the turnbuckles and then climb hand-over-hand across the cables to claim the prize of the match, usually a championship belt. A signature match of Impact Wrestling's X Division, the match is contested by three or more wrestlers.\nNigerian Drum Fight.\nA Nigerian Drum Fight is a no-disqualification stipulation weapons match where various musical percussion instruments used in traditional Nigerian music, such as bongos and a gong are made available at ringside, as are tables and kendo sticks. Big E faced Apollo Crews at WrestleMania 37 in a Nigerian Drum Fight.\nObject on a Pole match.\nThe Object on a Pole match, whose name is usually derived from the object being hung, i.e. \"Brass knuckles on a Pole\", \"Steel chair on a Pole\", \"Singapore cane on a Pole\", \"Paddle on a Pole\", \"Viagra on a Pole\", \"Contract on a pole\", \"Mistletoe on a Pole\" or \"Judy Bagwell on a Forklift\", is the spiritual forebear of the ladder match. In this case, an object is placed on a pole that extends from one of the four turnbuckles on the ring with the wrestlers battling to reach it first. Unlike the ladder match, however, reaching the object doesn't usually end the match; it simply allows that wrestler to use it as a weapon. This is \"not\" a no-disqualification match; the weapon on the pole is merely an exception to the disqualification rule. However, this is sometimes a no-disqualification match in which any weapon, plus the one on the pole, can be used. This match is referred to by many wrestling critics as a \"Russo Special\", due to the propensity of WCW booker Vince Russo's use of Pole Matches during his tenure at the company. Another World Championship Wrestling specialty is the San Francisco 49ers match, where four boxes are placed in the four corners of the ring, one with the championship belt and the other three with weapons. You must find the box with the belt to win the match and the championship. To date, this match is only known to have happened in a major wrestling federation once, with Booker T defeating Jeff Jarrett to become the WCW World Heavyweight champion on October 2, 2000.\nMultiple variations of the \"Pole match\" exist. In some cases the match \"is\" closer to the ladder match, in that reaching the object does end the match. In others there will be objects above all of the turnbuckles. Further still, there can be a mixture of the two, with an object placed at (though not above) each turnbuckle, one to end the match, the rest to be used as weapons. Total Nonstop Action Wrestling used a \"Pole match\" as a setup to another match, placing objects at four of their six turnbuckles with the promise that the first wrestler to reach each object would be allowed to use them weeks later at an already scheduled cage match. In a Feast or Fired match each case contains a contract to fight for a TNA World Heavyweight Championship, TNA Tag Team Championship or TNA X-Division Championship, with the final case contains a pink slip, mean the holder of that case would be fired immediately, but if the person holding the X-Division title shot briefcase went on to win that title, it cannot be cashed in right away for the World Heavyweight Championship (Option C). The Coal Miner's Glove match is a variation of the typical \"Object on a Pole match\" in which the object in question is a coal miner's glove, which can be used on one's opponent upon retrieval.\nBiker Chain match.\nA Biker Chain match is a hardcore match where a chain is attached to a pole and is the only legal weapon, but the objective of this match is to pin your opponent. Brock Lesnar and The Undertaker did a Biker Chain match at WWE's No Mercy 2003.\nPillow Fight.\nA pillow fight is a weapons match with only pillows and a bed are placed in the ring. The pillows may be used as weapons, but other than that, standard wrestling rules apply. Notably, Torrie Wilson once picked up the bed with Candice Michelle on it and threw it. Another variation, the Lingerie Pillow Fight, requires the participants to wear lingerie. Another variation, the Pajama Pillow Fight, requires the participants to wear pajamas.\nStraitjacket match.\nIn a straitjacket match, a wrestler must put their opponent into a straitjacket, usually after knocking the opponent out or by rendering them unconscious by submission holds. It made its televised debut on TNA when Samuel Shaw beat Mr. Anderson by first rendering him unconscious with a chokehold and then putting him into the straitjacket. On WWF Raw in June 1999, Ken Shamrock, who was the only participant confined to the straitjacket, still won his match with Jeff Jarrett after forcing him to submit to a headscissors submission hold.\nStrap match.\nA strap match, known by many names and done with many slight variations, is any match in which the competitors are placed on the opposite ends of a restraint to keep them in close physical proximity. By definition, the strap and anything tied to it are considered legal and in play weapons. The most common rule for victory is to achieve a pinfall, but there is a common variation where one wrestler must circle the ring and touch all four corners in quick order, without interruption. Because of the strap's legality, and subsequent use as a choking device, submissions are generally not allowed.\nThe traditional strap match involves two wrestlers tied together via a leather strap, with the strap match being one of the most varied forms of professional wrestling match type, both in name and implements used. The name used for the match generally comes from the implement used and one or both of the participants. Common restraints include a belt, bullrope (length of rope with a cowbell the center), steel chains, one to two-foot \"leash\", or leather strap, where the wrestlers are tied together at one wrist. This match type is often named Caribbean Strap match when a wrestler from Puerto Rico (such as Savio Vega) is participating on the match or the match is being held on a Puerto Rican promotion like the International Wrestling Association.\nBarbed Wire Chain Deathmatch.\nA Barbed Wire Chain Deathmatch is a strap match where instead of two wrestlers being bound together with a leather strap at the wrists, they are bound together with barbed wire at the wrists. This match was done a few times in 1995 in the IWA promotion in Japan with Shoji Nakamaki, Hiroshi Ono and Cactus Jack.\nDog collar match.\nA Dog Collar match is a type of strap match where instead of a leather strap at a wrist, the competing wrestlers are bound together by the neck via dog collars and chains. Made famous by the match between Roddy Piper and Greg Valentine at , AEW has brought the match back in recent times, with Brodie Lee vs. Cody following the stipulation in 2020 (the last match of the former's career before his death later that year), and CM Punk vs. MJF at Revolution being highly regarded for their violence. Punk himself competed in another famously violent dog collar match against Raven at ROH Death Before Dishonour 2003.\nFour Corners Strap match.\nThe Four Corners Strap match is when the first wrestler to touch all four turnbuckle pads in succession without any form of interruption from his opponent or anyone else wins. If at any point a wrestler starts touching pads but is taken down before the wrestler can finish touching them all, they must start over again. There are no pinfalls, no submissions, no countouts, or no disqualifications in this match. At WCW's Uncensored 1995, Hulk Hogan actually dragged non-participant (Ric Flair) to all four corners to win his strap match against Big Van Vader. This match was renamed a Samoan Strap match for WWE's Extreme Rules 2009 pay-per-view with Umaga facing off against CM Punk. WCW has their own variation strap match as well named the Yapapi Indian Strap match between Hulk Hogan vs. Ric Flair at the 2000 Uncensored pay-per-view. A No Surrender Dog Collar Strap match is a strap match with the \"No Surrender\" stipulation added, meaning that neither competitor would be permitted to submit in the match. TNA had a main event at the TNA No Surrender 2005 pay-per-view for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship between Raven and Abyss, which Raven won. All Elite Wrestling (AEW) also has its own variation of the Four Corners Strap match, dubbed the South Beach Strap match, which has been used once in a match between Cody Rhodes and Q. T. Marshall at the Road Rager event in July 2021. It was named as such due to the event taking place in Downtown Miami, close to the neighbourhood of South Beach.\nRussian chain match.\nA Russian Chain match is a type of strap match where instead of an elastic strap, a thick, 15-foot steel chain is used to bound the wrestlers, and this chain is often used as a weapon. This match has come under many names, including a Texas Chain match and a Tennessee Chain match. A Biker Chain match is a variation of an Object on a Pole match. The Russian Chain match was the speciality of Ivan Koloff and Boris Malenko.\nTexas Bullrope match.\nA Texas Bullrope match is a type of strap match where the wrestlers are bound together by a thick cattle rope with a cowbell attached; the objective of this match is to achieve a single pinfall, or in another variation, victory is achieved by touching all four turnbuckles successively similar to a standard Strap Match (as in the case of JBL vs. Eddie Guerrero in The Great American Bash (2004)). The Rock had his own signature match, the Brahma Bullrope match which was a renamed Texas Bullrope match.\nStretcher match.\nA Stretcher match is a hardcore match where a wrestler must incapacitate their opponent to such an extent that they are able to get them onto a stretcher and roll them to the finish line for the victory; usually past a line at the top of the entrance ramp. The stretcher can also be used as a weapon. Stretcher matches contested in All Elite Wrestling are a combination of a stretcher match and an ambulance match, where the objective is to place your opponent onto a stretcher, roll the stretcher into the back of an ambulance, and close both doors to gain the victory.\nSteel Stairs match.\nA Steel Stairs match is a hardcore match where the only legal weapon are any number of steel stairs typically situated on the opposite sides of the ring that can be used to enter the ring. The Big Show faced Erick Rowan in a Steel Stairs match at the WWE pay-per view.\nSymphony of Destruction match.\nA Symphony of Destruction match is a hardcore match where various musical instruments are available at ringside as weapons. This is Elias's speciality match and debuted in 2018 when Elias faced Braun Strowman.\nTables match.\nA Tables match is a hardcore match in which, to win, one's opponent must be driven through a table. It can only be won with an .\nTables matches can be contested with tag teams, under both elimination and one fall rules. The first tables match was contested at ECW's 1995 Double Tables event between The Public Enemy and The Tazmaniac &amp; Sabu for the ECW World Tag Team Championship, whilst the first in the WWE was a tag-team Tables match with The Hardy Boyz versus The Dudley Boyz at the 2000 Royal Rumble. The objective of both of these matches was to drive all opposing team members through tables with offensive moves, but subsequent WWE Tables matches have only required one member to be driven through a table. It is common for tables matches to also include a \"no-disqualification\" clause, turning them into hardcore matches (although this variation may also be known as a Hardcore Tables match). In some tag matches, a person can save his teammate by breaking the table with his own body. Apparently this does not count against the team.\nFlaming Tables match.\nA Flaming Tables match is an Extreme Championship Wrestling specialty match where the tables are set on fire and the only way to win is to put opponents through the flaming tables.\nThanksgiving Leftovers Throwdown.\nThe Thanksgiving Leftovers Throwdown is a specialty match based on the Thanksgiving holiday. It debuted on the November 26, 2021 Black Friday edition of \"SmackDown\" between Rick Boogs and Angel Garza. It is a standard wrestling match with a table by ringside covered with leftover foods. No competitor was thrown into the table although Humberto Carrillo, who distracted Boogs, was thrown into the table by Shinsuke Nakamura.\nTwo out of Three Tables match.\nA Two out of Three Tables match is a hardcore match where it can only be won when a wrestler or tag team puts their opponent or opponent's team through two tables, but it does not have to be at the same time. Performing a move on double tables does not count as a victory. It is also a variation of a two out of three falls match.\nTaped fist match.\nFor a taped fist match, the wrestlers are allowed to tape and/or wrap their hands to allow them to punch harder without damaging their hands. The wrestlers must compete with their fists taped, the idea being that this would make it harder to grab each other while at the same time protecting their hands while punching, encouraging the athletes to \"fight\" instead of wrestle. In one variation, the Taipei Deathmatch, the taped fists are dipped in super glue, then broken glass.\nViking Rules match.\nThe Viking Rules match is a viking-themed hardcore match with the ring decorated in a style of a viking ship. This match was introduced by The Viking Raiders on the September 2, 2022, edition of \"SmackDown\" (taped on August 26, 2022) against The New Day.\nWater Fight.\nA water fight is a weapons match which the ring is surrounded with buckets of water, water guns and water balloons to use as weapons. Other than that, standard wrestling rules apply. Notably, Jillian Hall once smacked Mickie James over the head with a water gun during this match.\nWeapon Rumble match.\nThe Weapon Rumble match is a hardcore match invented in DDT Pro-Wrestling in which, similarly to a Rumble rules match, with every time interval a new weapon is introduced in the match. The weapons are chosen by the participants beforehand and can widely vary due to the loose interpretation of the definition of a \"weapon\" that's used by the company in a comedic manner.\nWeapons Wild match.\nA Weapons Wild match is a hardcore match where various blunt weapons are made available along the padded barriers at ringside, and are all legal. Wrestlers are armed with at least one weapon when they start the match. This match originated in WWE's NXT promotion.\nWinner Takes All match.\nTwo scenarios constitute a Winner Takes All match; a title-versus-title match is a match in which both wrestlers (or teams if a tag team match) are champions going into the match, and the winner receives the championship of the loser, thus \"taking all\". This differs from a championship unification match, where one championship is absorbed into the other and retired/deactivated. In a Winner Take All scenario, both titles are still active and defended as separate entities. Winner Takes All matches may also take the form of tag team matches, in which two separate titles are fought for in the same match; such as when Seth Rollins and Becky Lynch defended the Universal Championship and Raw Women's Championship respectively against Baron Corbin and Lacey Evans at 2019's Extreme Rules event.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63996", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63996", "title": "Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption", "text": "1982 novella by Stephen King\nRita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption is a realist novella by Stephen King. It was first published in 1982 by Viking Press in his collection \"Different Seasons\". It was later included in the 2009 collection \"Stephen King Goes to the Movies\". The plot follows former bank vice president Andy Dufresne, who is wrongly convicted of murdering his wife and her lover and ends up in Shawshank State Penitentiary, where corruption and violence are rampant.\nStephen King described \"Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption\" as a prison escape story in the vein of old Warner Bros. films. The work, written in a genre unusual for King, is considered one of his best works. The story was adapted to film in 1994 by Frank Darabont. The film, \"The Shawshank Redemption\", was nominated for seven Academy Awards in 1994, including Best Picture, and has been regarded as one of the best films of all time. The main roles were played by Tim Robbins and Morgan Freeman. In 2009, the story was adapted for the stage as \"The Shawshank Redemption\".\nPlot.\nThe story takes place in Maine and is told from the perspective of Shawshank State Prison inmate Ellis \"Red\" Redding, a 57-year-old Irish-American. In 1938, Red staged a car accident, having previously insured his wife for a large amount, but a neighbor and her child also got into his wife\u2019s car. As a result, Red was sentenced to three life sentences for the murders. Red is known for his ability to smuggle in almost any contraband via his connections.\nIn 1948, he is approached by former bank vice president Andy Dufresne, a prisoner who arrived at Shawshank a year earlier. Dufresne was sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of his wife and her lover, despite his claims of innocence. He asks Red to get him a rock hammer, explaining that he is collecting minerals. A year later, Andy requests a large poster of Rita Hayworth. He gets into several fights with a gang of prison rapists led by Bogs Diamond, which end after Bogs is severely injured by the guards; Red suggests that Andy bribed the guards into doing so. One day, Andy overhears guard Byron Hadley complaining about the tax imposed on an inheritance he had recently received and offers help in resolving this issue. Hadley accepts the offer and treats all the prisoners to beer in gratitude. Over the years, Andy provides financial advice to the prison administration and assists with tax returns and loans.\nHe is transferred to the prison library, in which he launders money for the prison administration. He also seeks funding from the Maine Senate to expand the library, which he hopes will better prepare prisoners for life after release. Andy meets Tommy Williams, who tells him that his cellmate from another prison bragged about committing the murders that Andy was convicted of. Andy attempts to use Tommy's testimony to get his case reconsidered, but the warden, Samuel Norton, does not grant his freedom, as Andy knows too much about the administration's money laundering scheme and is too valuable as an accountant to release. Hoping to break Andy's spirit, Norton places him in solitary confinement for 20 days and transfers Tommy to another prison. While in confinement, Andy refuses to continue accounting but complies when Norton threatens to worsen his living conditions and destroy the library.\nIn October 1967, Andy tells Red about \"Peter Stevens\", a pseudonym under which Andy had sold off his assets and invested the proceeds. He says that one day Peter Stevens will own a seaside resort hotel in Zihuatanejo, Mexico. On the morning of March 12, 1975, after 28 years in prison, Andy disappears from his locked cell. Norton discovers that the poster pasted to Andy's cell wall covers a man-sized hole \u2013 Andy had used his rock hammer to slowly dig a tunnel through the wall. Norton resigns three months after Andy's escape, and six months later, Red receives a blank postcard from McNary, Texas, a town near the Mexican border, and surmises that Andy crossed the border there.\nIn March 1977, Red is paroled but has difficulty adjusting to life outside of prison. He finds a letter addressed to him from Peter Stevens containing $1,000 and inviting him to join Andy in Mexico. Red decides to break his parole and join Andy.\nAdaptation.\nThe novella has been adapted into a film, \"The Shawshank Redemption\", starring Tim Robbins as Andy, and Morgan Freeman as Red, and a play of the same name. The film version was nominated for seven Oscars at the 67th Academy Awards in 1995, including Best Picture and Best Actor for Freeman. Morgan Freeman stated in an interview that this novella is his favorite story.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63997", "revid": "46643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63997", "title": "The Body (King novella)", "text": "1982 coming-of-age story novella by Stephen King\nThe Body is a novella by American writer Stephen King. \"The Body\" was published in King's 1982 collection \"Different Seasons\" and later adapted into the 1986 film \"Stand by Me\".\nThe story takes place during the summer of 1960 in the fictional town of Castle Rock, Maine. After a boy disappears and is presumed dead, twelve-year-old Gordie LaChance and his three friends set out to find his body along the railway tracks. During the course of their journey, the boys, who all come from abusive or dysfunctional families, come to grips with death and the harsh truths of growing up in a small factory town that does not seem to offer them much of a future. \nPlot summary.\nGordon \"Gordie\" Lachance reminisces about his childhood in Castle Rock, Maine. At that time, Gordie's elder brother Dennis (also known as Denny), whom his parents favored, had recently died, leaving Gordie's parents too depressed to pay much attention to him. In 1960, Gordie and his three friends \u2212 Chris Chambers, Teddy Duchamp and Vern Tessio \u2212 learn that a gang of hooligans led by John \"Ace\" Merrill have accidentally discovered the dead body of a missing boy named Ray Brower, who was hit by a train. Because the gang found the body while driving a stolen car, they elected not to report the body to the police. The boys get the idea to find the body \"officially\" so that they may become famous. In preparation for the expedition, Chris steals a gun from his father, and the boys camp out in a nearby field.\nOver the course of the narrative, the adult Gordie recalls his first published story, \"Stud City\", about the life of a simple man named Edward \"Chico\" May whose older brother also died. He has a girlfriend, Jane, whom he does not have particularly strong feelings for. Chico knows that his stepmother Virginia slept with his brother before he died, but he hesitates to tell his father about it. One day, Chico has a fight with his father over Virginia and leaves the house.\nAlong the way, the boys trespass at the town dump and are chased by Chopper, the dog belonging to the dump custodian, Milo Pressman. Teddy gets into a verbal skirmish with Milo when the latter insults Teddy's father (a World War II veteran who was given a Section 8 discharge for trauma related to the Normandy invasion) by calling him a \"loonie\". Gordie and Vern are nearly run over by a train while crossing a trestle. While at a resting point, Gordie tells his friends another story, \"The Revenge of Lard-Ass Hogan\", in which the titular Davie \"Lard-Ass\" Hogan exacts vengeance on the town locals for ridiculing his wide girth by downing a whole bottle of castor oil before engaging in the town's annual pie-eating contest and vomiting on the previous year's champion, which causes a chain reaction that nauseates the entire audience. The next morning, the boys stumble upon a small pond and take a swim, but jump out in horror when they find that the pond is teeming with leeches.\nAfter a thunderstorm, the boys finally find the body of Ray Brower, who has been hit by a train. Ace's gang arrives shortly after. During an argument, Chris pulls the gun on the gang and forces them to leave, but Ace promises reprisals. Tired, depressed and fearing retaliation, the boys decide there is nothing more to be done with the body and return home. Subsequently, one of the gang members reports the body as an anonymous tip, and the gang members severely beat all four boys. The four friends eventually drift apart, but Gordie and Chris remain close. Chris decides to prepare for higher education, and he and Gordie both graduate from the University of Maine.\nIn the present day, Gordie tells how he learned of Chris's death after he was fatally stabbed while trying to stop an argument in a restaurant, about the deaths of Vern and Teddy (in a house fire and car crash, respectively), about his own successful writing career, and about his recent visit to Castle Rock, where he has discovered that Ace has become an alcoholic and works at the town's mill.\nPublication.\n\"The Body\" was published in King's 1982 novellas collection \"Different Seasons\". It incorporates two earlier short stories by King: \"Stud City\" (published in \"Ubris\" in 1969) and \"The Revenge of Lard-Ass Hogan\" (published in \"The Maine Review\" in 1975). In the afterwords of \"Different Season\", King says that \"The Body\" is the oldest story in the collection, which King began writing after finishing \"'Salem's Lot\".\nAccusation of plagiarism.\nA friend and college roommate of King's, George MacLeod, claimed that King had cribbed the idea for \"The Body\" from a short story MacLeod had been working on, but these claims are disputed by King. MacLeod\u2019s story was written from an experience he had as a child. His father had told him about a dead dog he had spotted on railroad tracks, prompting MacLeod and his friends to go looking for \u201cthe body\u201d one day after school. Since MacLeod\u2019s accusations, King has refused his fans' requests to read their manuscripts for advice; King has explained that he is concerned that there may be further accusations of plagiarism.\nAdaptations.\n\"The Body\" was adapted into the 1986 film \"Stand by Me\" directed by Rob Reiner. The screenplay, by Bruce A. Evans and Raynold Gideon, was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and Writers Guild of America Award for in the same category. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63998", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63998", "title": "HURD", "text": ""}
{"id": "63999", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63999", "title": "The New Lieutenant's Rap", "text": "\"The New Lieutenant's Rap\" is a short story by Stephen King. It was originally published as a limited run chapbook by Philtrum Press in 1999 and was later reworked into \"Why We're in Vietnam\", a short story appearing in King's 1999 book \"Hearts in Atlantis\".\nPlot summary.\nThe story, set in summer 1999, opens with two American veterans of the Vietnam War, Dieffenbaker and John Sullivan, conversing after the funeral of Dick Pagano, another veteran whom they had served with. Sullivan recalls an incident in \u0110\u00f4ng H\u00e0 when Dieffenbaker, his commanding officer, had ordered him to kill another soldier, Clemson, to prevent him from massacring Vietnamese civilians. After Sullivan asks Dieffenbaker \"Why were we in Vietnam to begin with?\", Dieffenbaker - who has grown immensely cynical and bitter following his experiences in Vietnam - opines that their generation \"had achieved little of value\" and postulates that the two men are still in Vietnam - with their memories of events that have happened since the product of \"a pot-bubble\" - and that Vietnam is the preferable of the two competing realities. The story ends with Sullivan agreeing, thinking \"We stay because it's better.\"\nPublication.\n\"The New Lieutenant's Rap\" was originally published by Philtrum Press (King's own imprint) in chapbook format, with 500 numbered copies being printed. The text of the chapbooks was in King' handwriting. The chapbooks, which were autographed by King, were gifted to attendees at a party held to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the publishing of King's debut novel \"Carrie\" that was held at Tavern on the Green in New York City. It has never been sold commercially. A \"substantially revised\" version of \"The New Lieutenant's Rap\", retitled \"Why We're in Vietnam\", was published in King's book \"Hearts in Atlantis\" later that year.\nReception.\nRocky Wood states, \"It is as great a pleasure to read a story in King's handwriting as it is to listen to his audio recordings.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64000", "revid": "1301901600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64000", "title": "Bibliography of works on Stephen King", "text": "There have been many books published about Stephen King and his works. \nMaterial about King can also be found in his own partly autobiographical \"\" (2000), as well as scattered throughout King's \"Danse Macabre\" (1981).\nA critical analysis of King's work can be found in S. T. Joshi's \"The Modern Weird Tale\" (2001).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64003", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64003", "title": "Nightmares and Dreamscapes", "text": ""}
{"id": "64004", "revid": "51021839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64004", "title": "Apt Pupil (film)", "text": "1998 film by Bryan Singer\nApt Pupil is a 1998 American thriller film directed by Bryan Singer and starring Ian McKellen and Brad Renfro. It is based on the 1982 novella \"Apt Pupil\" by Stephen King. In the 1980s in southern California, high school student Todd Bowden (Renfro) discovers fugitive Nazi war criminal Kurt Dussander (McKellen) living in his neighborhood under the pseudonym Arthur Denker. Bowden, obsessed with Nazism and acts of the Holocaust, persuades Dussander to share his stories, and their relationship stirs malice in each of them.\nThe novella was first published in King's 1982 collection \"Different Seasons\". Producer Richard Kobritz sought to adapt the novella into a film during the 1980s, but two actors he invited to play Dussander died. When filming began in 1987, a loss of financing led to the production being shut down. Forty minutes of usable footage existed, but production was never revived. In 1995, when rights to the novella returned to King, Bryan Singer petitioned King for an opportunity to adapt the novella. With King's support, Singer filmed \"Apt Pupil\" with McKellen and Renfro in Altadena, California, in 1997. Singer shortened the novella's storyline, reduced its violence, and changed the ending. Singer called \"Apt Pupil\" \"a study in cruelty\" with Nazism only serving as a vehicle for the capacity of evil.\nDuring the $14 million production, a lawsuit was filed by several extras, including some underage who alleged that they were told to strip naked during a shower scene. There was no cause to file criminal charges, and a civil-case lawsuit was dismissed due to insufficient evidence. The film was released in the United States and Canada on October 23, 1998 to mixed reviews and made under $9 million. The main actors won several minor awards for their performances.\nPlot.\nIn 1984 Southern California, 16-year-old high school student Todd Bowden discovers that his elderly neighbor, Arthur Denker, is actually Kurt Dussander\u2014a former Nazi concentration camp commandant, who is now a fugitive war criminal. Todd, fascinated with Nazi atrocities perpetrated during World War II, blackmails Dussander, forcing him to share disturbing stories of what it was like working at Nazi extermination camps and how it felt to participate in genocide.\nTodd purchases an SS uniform from a costume shop and forces Dussander to wear it. As he spends more time with Dussander, his schoolwork suffers, he loses interest in his girlfriend, and he conceals his bad grades from his parents. Dussander begins blackmailing Todd in return, forcing him to work to restore his grades by threatening to expose the subterfuge and his dalliance with Nazism to his parents. Dussander even poses as Todd's grandfather and goes to an appointment with Todd's school counselor Edward French. Talking about the war crimes affects both the old man and the young boy. An intoxicated Dussander tries and fails to kill a cat with his gas oven. Dussander also takes pride in Todd's remarkable turnaround, going from near-dropout to straight As in a matter of weeks.\nOne night, Dussander tries to kill a homeless person who earlier had seen him in the uniform. When Dussander has a heart attack, he calls Todd, who finishes the killing, cleans up, and calls an ambulance for Dussander. At the hospital, Dussander is recognized by a death camp survivor sharing his room. He is arrested and an extradition to Israel is arranged. Todd graduates as valedictorian and gives a speech about Icarus, saying, \"All great achievements arose from dissatisfaction. It is the desire to do better, to dig deeper, that propels civilization to greatness.\" The scene is juxtaposed in a montage with Dussander's home being searched and the corpse being found in the basement.\nTodd is questioned about his relationship with Dussander and he convinces the police that he knew nothing of the man's true identity. A group of Neo-Nazis demonstrates outside the hospital; realizing his situation is hopeless, Dussander commits suicide by giving himself an air embolism. When French learns that the man who met Todd at school was not Todd's grandfather but a war criminal, he confronts Todd, who then blackmails French into silence by threatening to accuse him of making inappropriate sexual advances.\nCast.\nIan McKellen stars as Kurt Dussander, a Nazi war criminal who hides in America under the pseudonym Arthur Denker. Screenwriter Brandon Boyce described Dussander as being \"a composite of these ghosts of World War II\" but not based on any real-life individual. McKellen was attracted to the role because he was impressed with Singer's \"The Usual Suspects\" and saw the role of Dussander as \"a nice, meaty part and difficult\". Singer, who enjoyed McKellen in John Schlesinger's 1995 film \"Cold Comfort Farm\", invited the actor to take the role. The character's language was written originally for \"a very stoic German\", but Singer felt that McKellen's \"complex\" personality could contribute to the character. The director said of choosing McKellen, \"I felt if I could combine his complexity, his colorfulness, to the stoic German character it would create a character that, although evil, would garner more sympathy and would be more enjoyable for the audience to watch.\"\nBrad Renfro stars alongside McKellen as Todd Bowden, a 16-year-old who discovers Denker's criminal past. Singer auditioned a couple of hundred young men and chose 14-year-old Renfro, saying of him, \"Brad was the brightest, the most intense and the most real. Not only could he have the intensity when we wanted, there was a hollowness that he could convey, and by the end of the picture he had to become this empty vessel.\" Portraying a manipulative character temporarily influenced Renfro, who said that people around him were worried about his state of mind. Renfro said of his performance, \"It's a trip I have to take. People just kind of have to leave me alone when I'm doing it. It's my job.\" He described Todd as a \"very articulate boy\" who unveils himself as a \"monster\", which also signified a departure from his previous roles as the \"rebel\" or the \"oversensitive bad boy\". Singer described his impression of the character:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I don't believe for one minute that [Todd Bowden] was pure as the driven snow. The capacity to blackmail an old man \u2014 obviously there's a search for something going on that's a good hard step beyond innocence. I think he had it within him, some emptiness that needed fulfillment and taken to a new place, a new direction. His school, his parents, his environment weren't doing it for him. This particular individual came along before some other, but it perhaps could have been drugs, it could have been rape. Todd was probably not a very good guy. But that kind of bad guy can exist within a lot more people than we realize.\nDavid Schwimmer plays Edward French, Todd Bowden's high school guidance counselor. Before Schwimmer, Kevin Pollak was attached to the role. While Schwimmer was known for his comedic role on the television show \"Friends\", Singer was impressed by the actor's performance in a Los Angeles stage production and decided to cast him as the counselor.\nProduction.\nUnder the studio Sony Pictures Entertainment, \"Apt Pupil\" was directed by Bryan Singer based on a screenplay by Brandon Boyce that adapted the 1982 novella \"Apt Pupil\" by Stephen King. The production was \"a Sony Pictures Entertainment release from TriStar Pictures of a Phoenix Pictures presentation of a Bad Hat Harry production\".\nPrevious production attempt.\nWhen Stephen King's novella \"Apt Pupil\" was published as part of his collection \"Different Seasons\" in 1982, producer Richard Kobritz optioned feature film rights to the novella. Kobritz met with actor James Mason to play the novella's war criminal Kurt Dussander, but Mason died in July 1984 before production as a result of a heart attack. The producer also approached Richard Burton for the role, but Burton also died in August that same year. By 1987 production on the film began with Nicol Williamson cast as Kurt Dussander, and 17-year-old Rick Schroder was cast as Todd Bowden. In that year, Alan Bridges began direction of the film with a script co-written by Ken Wheat and his brother Jim Wheat. After ten weeks of filming, the production suffered from a lack of funds from its production company Granat Releasing, and the film had to be placed on hold. Kobritz sought to revive production, but when the opportunity came a year later, Schroder had aged too considerably for the film to work. Forty minutes of usable footage was abandoned.\nDirection under Bryan Singer.\nBryan Singer first read \"Apt Pupil\" when he was 19 years old, and when he became a director, he wanted to adapt the novella into a film. In 1995, Singer asked his friend and screenwriter Brandon Boyce to write a spec script adapting the novella. Boyce recalled the writing process, \"I thought it was a great stageplay, actually ... two people, pretty much in a house talking. My script was completely on spec, so, if it didn't work out, at least I'd have a writing sample.\" When the original option to the novella expired in 1995, Stephen King sued to get the rights back. Singer and Boyce then provided to King a first draft of their script and a copy of Singer's film \"The Usual Suspects\" (1995), which had yet to be publicly released. Impressed with Singer, King optioned the rights to the director for $1, arranging to be compensated when the film was released. Singer said of King's ultimate response to the film, despite some changes made to the source material, \"Stephen loved it. He seemed to think I captured the mood of the piece.\" The director appreciated being able to make a Stephen King horror film but with less supernatural terror and more character-driven terror. Singer spoke of his goal, \"There have been a lot of fun horror movies like \"Nightmare on Elm Street\" and \"Scream\", and \"I Know What You Did Last Summer\". But I miss movies like \"The Shining\", \"The Exorcist\", and \"The Innocents\" by Jack Clayton, so this is a movie sort of in the spirit of the real horror movie.\"\nSinger described \"Apt Pupil\"'s premise as a \"study in cruelty\". He prepared for the film by reading books like the 1996 history book \"Hitler's Willing Executioners\", which confirmed his beliefs that Nazi war criminals felt \"guiltless and matter-of-fact about what they did\". He referred to how young Todd Bowden's interactions with Nazi war criminal Kurt Dussander start to affect him, \"I liked the idea of the infectious nature of evil ... The notion that anybody has the capacity within them to be cruel if motivated properly is, I think, a scary concept.\" The director also perceived the film as not about the Holocaust, believing that the Nazi war criminal could have been replaced by one of Pol Pot's executioners or a mass murderer from Russia. \"It wasn't about fascism or National Socialism. It was about cruelty and the ability to do awful deeds, to live with them and be empowered by them,\" Singer said. To this end, the director sought to avoid overt use of swastikas and other Nazi symbols. He was also attracted to the film as \"[an] idea that the collective awfulness of this terrible thing that happened decades ago in Europe had somehow crept up across the ocean and through time, like a golem, into this beautiful Southern California suburban neighborhood\".\nSinger turned down directing opportunities with films like \"The Truman Show\" and \"The Devil's Own\" after the success of \"The Usual Suspects\". He instead pursued \"Apt Pupil\", \"It was a very dark subject matter, and it was something that came from passion.\" He acknowledged in retrospect that \"Apt Pupil\" \"wasn't really supposed to be a big success\". Singer was financially supported by producer Scott Rudin and the production company Spelling Films. Ian McKellen was cast as Dussander, and Brad Renfro was cast as Bowden. With $1\u00a0million paid toward pre-production, filming was scheduled to begin in June 1996. Due to financial disagreements between Singer and Rudin, the start date was pushed back and subsequently canceled. Singer and his production team stayed together while producer Don Murphy and his partner Jane Hamsher sought refinancing. Mike Medavoy, a former chairman of TriStar Pictures, rescued the production with the financial backing of his production company Phoenix Pictures. The company provided filmmakers with $14\u00a0million to produce \"Apt Pupil\". Filming took place on location in Altadena, California. Singer related to how Todd Bowden rebelled against his suburban environment. The director used the name of his high school football team, the Pirates, and the green-and-gold team colors in the film, saying, \"I just projected my own childhood right out to Southern California.\"\nEditing and composition.\nJohn Ottman served as both film editor and music composer for \"Apt Pupil\". When he edited the film, he found it a challenge to create the proper musical score. Ottman recalled, \"Normally, an editor will score scenes with temporary music from CDs, and so forth, and nothing I could find worked for this film.\" The composer sought a mix between the scores of the science fiction film \"\" (1968) and the military-based comedy \"1941\" (1979) to create an \"otherworldly pastiche\". Ottman said of his approach:\nWhen you throw a cat in the oven, it's easy to have someone in the orchestra slam a hammer down on an anvil, scaring the hell out of everyone. The hard part is manipulating the story and accenting the characters. In the beginning, when Todd is laying down the rules, there's a certain repetitive thematic idea you hear. You hear the same music when Dussander is turning the tables on Todd, which makes you remember the first scene ... You hope people are subliminally making the connection that the tables are turning back and forth.\nAnother scene in which Ottman meshed his editing and composing duties was when Dussander wakes up in the hospital with the television show \"The Jeffersons\" playing in the background. Ottman explained his intent for the scene, \"I used \"The Jeffersons\" as this innocuous thing\u2014going between him and the television\u2014so that when he does open his eyes, it scares the hell out of you ... I added this deafening Bartok pizz, which is when all the violins pluck their strings really loud and they create this gnarly, unsettling sound.\" Ottman recorded the film's score with the Seattle Symphony.\nCritical analysis.\nObsession with Nazism and the Holocaust.\nIn \"The Films of Stephen King\", Dennis Mahoney writes that the obsession with Nazism and the Holocaust that unfolds in \"Apt Pupil\" is the result of the paternal bond between Nazi war criminal Kurt Dussander and high school student Todd Bowden. Such bonds are common themes in Stephen King's works: \"King's portrayal of evil most often appears to require an active, illicit bond between a male (often in the role of a father or father surrogate) and a younger, formerly innocent individual (often in the role of a biological or surrogate progeny) who is initiated into sin\". In the film, the year 1984 highlights, in addition to Orwellian overtones, the time in American history in which the Holocaust is treated as a week-long course with little time \"to be tempered with self-questioning as to the motivations behind it\". Bowden's obsession with the Holocaust is a key plot device \"wherein the past has this unbreakable hold on the present\". The film's opening sequence shows how Bowden treats this history as a simulacrum in which the history becomes his own, as evidenced by his head's brief overlapping with the Nazis he is studying. Though history becomes alive for Bowden, he perceives it through the perpetrators (namely Dussander) and not through the victims, characterizing Bowden as \"apt\" in the sense of \"a natural tendency to ... undesirable behavior\".\nMahoney says language serves as \"a vehicle for corruption\", as Dussander tells Bowden horrific stories of his service at the fictional Death Camp of Patin. Bowden, in listening to the stories, becomes \"a vampiric extension of the evil\" that Dussander exhibits. The sharing of stories lead both Dussander and Bowden to have nightmares, and for Bowden, the nightmares are \"a past that is becoming ever more present\". One of the key motifs of the film is that \"a door was opened that could not be shut\", referring to Dussander's confession about following orders and being unable to hold back. The motif is also conveyed in the scene in which Bowden forces Dussander to put on a Schutzstaffel uniform and to march to Bowden's commands. Dussander continues marching despite Bowden's insistences to stop, emulating the premise of Goethe's poem \"The Sorcerer's Apprentice\" in which the untrained apprentice uses magic to enchant brooms and lacks the skill to stop them. The scene is \"the figurative and literal turning point in the film\".\nSadomasochism, homoeroticism, and homophobia.\nMahoney says that sadomasochism, homoeroticism, and homophobia are highlighted in Bryan Singer's retelling of Stephen King's novella. In \"Frames of Evil: The Holocaust as Horror in American Film\", Caroline Picart and David Frank write that the face of evil is represented in the film as Nazism, oft labeled as \"quintessentially innate [and] supernaturally crafty\", but also \"in a more subterranean way, dangerously blurring ... the boundaries between homoeroticism and homosexuality\". The Nazi monstrosity in \"Apt Pupil\" is structured through sexual \"abnormality\", where a series of binary dichotomies are introduced: \"normal versus monstrous, heterosexual versus homosexual, and healthy versus sick\". Picart and Frank go on to describe an additional dichotomy, \"victimizer (masculinized) versus victim (feminized)\", that reflects the film's \"hidden tensions\" in which Bowden and Dussander's roles of powers are reversible. While the \"set of perversions\" that unfold in the novella are misogynistic, the film unfolds the set as \"ambivalently homoerotic and homophobic\". The film removes the novella's misogyny and leaves intact the underlying homoeroticism of the central characters. The film also expounds the connection between homophobia and how male Holocaust victims are portrayed.\nThe central characters Todd Bowden and Kurt Dussander are onscreen most of the time, and they are frequently framed in close proximity, which Picart and Frank describe as \"[intensifying] a homoerotic intimacy [which is] punctuated by dread of contact with the monstrous\". Homoeroticism in \"Apt Pupil\" is further demonstrated by the focus on Todd's body. In the opening scene in which Bowden is in his bedroom during a stormy night, \"the ever-encroaching camera and the lighting fetishize Todd's youthful body\", similar to the fetishism of the female body in films like \"Psycho\" (1960). This depiction creates a dualism in which \"he is now simultaneously dangerous and endangered\" in his homophobic and homoerotic ties to Nazism.\nWhen Bowden gives Dussander an SS uniform to wear and in which to march under Bowden's orders, the student's demands are more heightened in the film as \"more dominant and voyeuristic\", according to Picart and Frank. Bowden tells Dussander, \"I tried to do this the nice way, but you don't want it. So fine, we'll do this the hard way. You will put this on, because I want to see you in it. Now move!\" The editing style of the Nazi march scene juxtaposes Dussander marching in the uniform and Bowden reacting to the march. Shots of Bowden's reaction are from a low angle, which reflects \"the sexual difference between the characters\"; Bowden is masculinized as \"the bearer of the [sexual] gaze\", and Dussander is feminized as \"the object of the gaze\". The cutting between Bowden and Dussander \"corroborates a homoerotic arrangement of images\" which visualizes the latent homoeroticism of the scene from the novella. When Dussander speeds up his march and Bowden tells him to stop, the sped-up shot reverse shot \"radically [ruptures] the structure of power\", where Bowden loses \"control of his sadistic power over Dussander\".\nDifferences between novella and film.\nStephen King's novella \"Apt Pupil\" begins in 1974, when Todd Bowden is in junior high, and it ends with him graduating from high school. In Bryan Singer's film, the story takes place fully in 1984, when Todd Bowden is in his last year in high school. In the novella, for three years leading to the end of the story, Todd Bowden and discovered Nazi war criminal Kurt Dussander independently murder a large number of hobos and transients, whereas in the film, the murders are condensed to Dussander's attempt to kill the homeless man Archie. Singer sought to reduce the novella's violence, not wanting it to appear \"exploitative or repetitive\". Unlike in the novella, animosity toward Jews was not explicitly displayed by the characters in the film. The novella's dream sequence in which Bowden rapes a sixteen-year-old Jewish virgin as a laboratory experiment under Dussander's guidance was replaced by the film's dream sequence in which Bowden sees three shower-gas chamber scenes unfold. Reduced in the film was Todd's encounter with the schoolgirl Betty (named Becky in the film). In the novella, he dreams of Betty as a concentration camp inmate whom he can rape and torture. In the film, he has a brief encounter with Becky where he finds himself unable to perform sexually.\nIn the novella, Bowden's high school counselor Edward French confronts the student with suspicions that Dussander is not really Bowden's grandfather, and Bowden murders French in cold blood. Bowden then embarks on a shooting spree from a tree overlooking a freeway, which results in his death five hours later. Singer felt unable to accomplish King's ending, \"I told [King] the ending reads so beautifully. I could never measure up to it; I would have killed it.\" In the film, Bowden intimidates French, who suspects Dussander's false relationship to the student, by threatening to destroy him with \"rumor and innuendo\". Stanley Wiater, author of \"The Complete Stephen King Universe\", wrote, \"As depicted on screen, Todd is much more consciously evil, in his way, than in the book. This switch, while making the ending less brutal, perhaps, achieves the impossible: it also makes the ending even darker.\"\nRelease and reception.\nBryan Singer previewed \"Apt Pupil\" at the Museum of Tolerance's L.A. Holocaust Center to assess feedback from rabbis and others about referencing the Holocaust. With a positive response, the director proceeded with the film's release. \"Apt Pupil\" was originally scheduled to be released in February 1998, but the film's distributor moved the release date to autumn, feeling that it belonged \"alongside other more serious-minded films\". It premiered at the Venice Film Festival in September 1998. It was then commercially released on October\u00a023, 1998 in 1,448 theaters in the United States and Canada, grossing $3.6 million on its opening weekend and placing ninth at the weekend box office. The film went on to gross $8.9 million in the United States and Canada. \"Apt Pupil\" was considered a critical and commercial disappointment. The film was less successful than Singer's previous film \"The Usual Suspects\", with critics describing it as \"a somewhat disturbing movie that works as a suspenseful thriller, yet isn't completely satisfying\".\nRoger Ebert, reviewing for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", wrote that the film was well-made by Bryan Singer and well-acted, especially by Ian McKellen, but that \"the film reveals itself as unworthy of its subject matter\". The critic felt that the offensive material lacked a \"social message\" or an \"overarching purpose\" and found the film's later scenes to be \"exploitative\". Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" applauded the production value of Bryan Singer's direction, liking Newton Thomas Sigel's \"handsomely shot\" cinematography and John Ottman's \"stunningly edited\" work. Maslin wrote of McKellen and Renfro's performances, \"Both actors play their roles so trickily that tensions escalate until the horror grows unimaginatively gothic.\" The critic felt that as the film approached the end, \"the story's cleverness is noticeably on the wane\".\nKathleen Murphy of \"Film Comment\" called McKellen and Renfro's performances \"skin-crawling\" but felt that it did not complete the film. Murphy wrote, \"[The acting] makes you wish \"Apt Pupil\" had the art and the courage actually to look into evil's awful abyss.\" The critic perceived that \"Apt Pupil\" came off as a conventional horror film, that it had Stephen King's \"characteristically unsavory\" touches, and that Singer's \"inept\" direction \"trivialize[s] the characters and the subject matter\". Lisa Schwarzbaum of \"Entertainment Weekly\" saw \"Apt Pupil\" as not a \"hunted-Nazi thriller\" nor a \"full-tilt Stephen King thriller\", but as a \"student-teacher parable\" that comes off as \"disturbing\". Schwarzbaum felt that Singer told \"a story with serious moral resonance\", though patience was needed to get past Singer's \"more baroque cinematic touches\" of \"visual furbelows ... and aural gimmicks\" in the film, citing as examples Dussander watching Mr. Magoo on television or the musical piece \"Liebestod\" being blared during a bloody scene.\nJay Carr of \"The Boston Globe\" called \"Apt Pupil\" \"most compelling for its moral dimension\", enjoying the \"duet between Renfro's smooth-cheeked latter-day Faust and McKellen's reawakened Mephistopheles\". While Carr found the film's framework to be realistic, he noted the change of pace, \"Perhaps sensing a narrative slackening and a smothering claustrophobia ... 'Apt Pupil' veers into melodramatic devices that yank the film out of its disquieting amorality and turn it into something much more ordinary and mundane.\" The critic concluded, \"It maintains a bleak integrity by not pretending to arrive at remorse. Never is there any discussion.\" Michael Wilmington of the \"Chicago Tribune\" described \"Apt Pupil\" as \"a good shocker that misses the ultimate horror\", finding the film's weakness to be the \"contrived\" bond between Dussander and Bowden. Wilmington called the plot \"overly slick\", asking, \"How can Todd not only conveniently find a Nazi war criminal in his hometown but also instantly coerce and control him?\"\nAccolades.\nRenfro won the Best Actor award at the Tokyo International Film Festival for his performance in \"Apt Pupil\". Ian McKellen won a Critics' Choice Award for Best Actor and a Florida Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor for his performance in both \"Apt Pupil\" and \"Gods and Monsters\". The Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy &amp; Horror Films awarded a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor to McKellen for his performance and awarded the film a Saturn Award for Best Horror Film of 1998.\nLawsuit.\nFor \"Apt Pupil\", Bryan Singer filmed a shower scene in which Todd Bowden, saturated with horrific stories from Kurt Dussander, imagines his fellow showering students as Jewish prisoners in gas chambers. The scene was filmed at Eliot Middle School in Altadena, California on April\u00a02, 1997, and two weeks later, a 14-year-old extra filed a lawsuit alleging that Singer forced him and other extras to strip naked for the scene. Two boys, 16 and 17 years old, later supported the 14-year-old's claim. The boys claimed trauma from the experience, seeking charges against the filmmakers including infliction of emotional distress, negligence, and invasion of privacy. Allegations were made that the boys were filmed for sexual gratification. The local news shows and national tabloid programs stirred the controversy. A sexual crimes task force that included local, state, and federal personnel investigated the incident. The Los Angeles District Attorney's office determined that there was no cause to file criminal charges, stating, \"The suspects were intent on completing a professional film as quickly and efficiently as possible. There is no indication of lewd or abnormal sexual intent.\" The scene was filmed again with adult actors so the film could finish on time.\n\"The Hollywood Reporter\" wrote in 2020, \"Singer was one of several defendants named in the suits, which reportedly were settled for an undisclosed sum, with the plaintiffs bound by confidentiality agreements.\"\nSee also.\nNazi Next Door films\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64005", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64005", "title": "Bresenham's line algorithm", "text": "Line-drawing algorithm\nBresenham's line algorithm is a line drawing algorithm that determines the points of an \"n\"-dimensional raster that should be selected in order to form a close approximation to a straight line between two points. It is commonly used to draw line primitives in a bitmap image (e.g. on a computer screen), as it uses only integer addition, subtraction, and bit shifting, all of which are very cheap operations in historically common computer architectures. It is an incremental error algorithm, and one of the earliest algorithms developed in the field of computer graphics. An extension to the original algorithm called the \"midpoint circle algorithm\" may be used for drawing circles.\nWhile algorithms such as Wu's algorithm are also frequently used in modern computer graphics because they can support antialiasing, Bresenham's line algorithm is still important because of its speed and simplicity. The algorithm is used in hardware such as plotters and in the graphics chips of modern graphics cards. It can also be found in many software graphics libraries. Because the algorithm is very simple, it is often implemented in either the firmware or the graphics hardware of modern graphics cards.\nThe label \"Bresenham\" is used today for a family of algorithms extending or modifying Bresenham's original algorithm.\nHistory.\nBresenham's line algorithm is named after Jack Elton Bresenham who developed it in 1962 at IBM. In 2001 Bresenham wrote:\nI was working in the computation lab at IBM's San Jose development lab. A Calcomp plotter had been attached to an IBM 1401 via the 1407 typewriter console. [The algorithm] was in production use by summer 1962, possibly a month or so earlier. Programs in those days were freely exchanged among corporations so Calcomp (Jim Newland and Calvin Hefte) had copies. When I returned to Stanford in Fall 1962, I put a copy in the Stanford comp center library.\nA description of the line drawing routine was accepted for presentation at the 1963 ACM national convention in Denver, Colorado. It was a year in which no proceedings were published, only the agenda of speakers and topics in an issue of Communications of the ACM. A person from the IBM Systems Journal asked me after I made my presentation if they could publish the paper. I happily agreed, and they printed it in 1965.\nMethod.\nThe following conventions will be applied:\nThe endpoints of the line are the pixels at formula_1 and formula_2, where the first coordinate of the pair is the column and the second is the row.\nThe algorithm will be initially presented only for the octant in which the segment goes down and to the right (formula_3 and formula_4), and its horizontal projection formula_5 is longer than the vertical projection formula_6 (the line has a positive slope less than 1).\nIn this octant, for each column \"x\" between formula_7 and formula_8, there is exactly one row \"y\" (computed by the algorithm) containing a pixel of the line, while each row between formula_9 and formula_10 may contain multiple rasterized pixels.\nBresenham's algorithm chooses the integer \"y\" corresponding to the pixel center that is closest to the ideal (fractional) \"y\" for the same \"x\"; on successive columns \"y\" can remain the same or increase by 1.\nThe general equation of the line through the endpoints is given by:\nformula_11.\nSince we know the column, \"x\", the pixel's row, \"y\", is given by rounding this quantity to the nearest integer:\nformula_12.\nThe slope formula_13 depends on the endpoint coordinates only and can be precomputed, and the ideal \"y\" for successive integer values of \"x\" can be computed starting from formula_9 and repeatedly adding the slope.\nIn practice, the algorithm does not keep track of the y coordinate, which increases by \"m\" = \"\u2206y/\u2206x\" each time the \"x\" increases by one; it keeps an error bound at each\nstage, which represents the negative of the distance from (a) the point where the line exits the pixel to (b) the top edge of the pixel. \nThis value is first set to formula_15 (due to using the pixel's center coordinates), and is incremented by \"m\" each time the \"x\" coordinate is incremented by one. If the error becomes greater than \"0.5\", we know that the line has moved upwards\none pixel, and that we must increment our \"y\" coordinate and readjust the error to represent the distance from the top of the new pixel \u2013 which is done by subtracting one from error.\nDerivation.\nTo derive Bresenham's algorithm, two steps must be taken. The first step is transforming the equation of a line from the typical slope-intercept form into something different; and then using this new equation to draw a line based on the idea of accumulation of error.\nLine equation.\nThe slope-intercept form of a line is written as\nformula_16\nwhere formula_17 is the slope and formula_18 is the y-intercept. Because this is a function of only formula_19, it can't represent a vertical line. Therefore, it would be useful to make this equation written as a function of both formula_19 \"and\" formula_21, to be able to draw lines at any angle. The angle (or slope) of a line can be stated as \"rise over run\", or formula_22. Then, using algebraic manipulation,\nformula_23\nLetting this last equation be a function of formula_19 and formula_21, it can be written as\nformula_26\nwhere the constants are\nThe line is then defined for some constants formula_30, formula_31, and formula_32 anywhere formula_33. That is, for any formula_34 not on the line, formula_35. This form involves only integers if formula_19 and formula_21 are integers, since the constants formula_30, formula_31, and formula_32 are defined as integers.\nAs an example, the line formula_41 then this could be written as formula_42. The point (2,2) is on the line\nformula_43\nand the point (2,3) is not on the line\nformula_44\nand neither is the point (2,1)\nformula_45\nNotice that the points (2,1) and (2,3) are on opposite sides of the line and formula_46 evaluates to positive or negative. A line splits a plane into halves and the half-plane that has a negative formula_46 can be called the negative half-plane, and the other half can be called the positive half-plane. This observation is very important in the remainder of the derivation.\nAlgorithm.\nThe starting point is on the line\nformula_48\nonly because the line is defined to start and end on integer coordinates (though it is entirely reasonable to want to draw a line with non-integer end points).\nKeeping in mind that the slope is at most formula_49, the problem now presents itself as to whether the next point should be at formula_50 or formula_51. Perhaps intuitively, the point should be chosen based upon which is closer to the line at formula_52. If it is closer to the former then include the former point on the line, if the latter then the latter. To answer this, evaluate the line function at the midpoint between these two points:\nformula_53\nIf the value of this is positive then the ideal line is below the midpoint and closer to the candidate point formula_54; i.e. the y coordinate should increase. Otherwise, the ideal line passes through or above the midpoint, and the y coordinate should stay the same; in which case the point formula_55 is chosen. The value of the line function at this midpoint is the sole determinant of which point should be chosen.\nThe adjacent image shows the blue point (2,2) chosen to be on the line with two candidate points in green (3,2) and (3,3). The black point (3, 2.5) is the midpoint between the two candidate points.\nAlgorithm for integer arithmetic.\nAlternatively, the difference between points can be used instead of evaluating f(x,y) at midpoints. This alternative method allows for integer-only arithmetic, which is generally faster than using floating-point arithmetic. To derive the other method, define the difference to be as follows: \nformula_56\nFor the first decision, this formulation is equivalent to the midpoint method since formula_57 at the starting point. Simplifying this expression yields:\nformula_58\nJust as with the midpoint method, if formula_59 is positive, then choose formula_54, otherwise choose formula_55.\nIf formula_55 is chosen, the change in formula_63 will be: \nformula_64\nIf formula_54 is chosen the change in formula_63 will be:\nformula_67\nIf the new D is positive then formula_68 is chosen, otherwise formula_69. This decision can be generalized by accumulating the error on each subsequent point.\nAll of the derivation for the algorithm is done. One performance issue is the 1/2 factor in the initial value of D. Since all of this is about the sign of the accumulated difference, then everything can be multiplied by 2 with no consequence.\nThis results in an algorithm that uses only integer arithmetic.\n plotLine(x0, y0, x1, y1)\n dx = x1 - x0\n dy = y1 - y0\n D = 2*dy - dx\n y = y0\n for x from x0 to x1\n plot(x, y)\n if D &gt; 0\n y = y + 1\n D = D - 2*dx\n end if\n D = D + 2*dy\nRunning this algorithm for formula_70 from (0,1) to (6,4) yields the following differences with dx=6 and dy=3:\n D=2*3-6=0\n Loop from 0 to 6\n * x=0: plot(0, 1), D\u22640: D=0+6=6\n * x=1: plot(1, 1), D&gt;0: D=6-12=-6, y=1+1=2, D=-6+6=0\n * x=2: plot(2, 2), D\u22640: D=0+6=6\n * x=3: plot(3, 2), D&gt;0: D=6-12=-6, y=2+1=3, D=-6+6=0\n * x=4: plot(4, 3), D\u22640: D=0+6=6\n * x=5: plot(5, 3), D&gt;0: D=6-12=-6, y=3+1=4, D=-6+6=0\n * x=6: plot(6, 4), D\u22640: D=0+6=6\nThe result of this plot is shown to the right. The plotting can be viewed by plotting at the intersection of lines (blue circles) or filling in pixel boxes (yellow squares). Regardless, the plotting is the same.\nAll cases.\nHowever, as mentioned above this only works for octant zero, that is lines starting at the origin with a slope between 0 and 1 where x increases by exactly 1 per iteration and y increases by 0 or 1.\nThe algorithm can be extended to cover slopes between 0 and -1 by checking whether y needs to increase or decrease (i.e. dy &lt; 0)\n plotLineLow(x0, y0, x1, y1)\n dx = x1 - x0\n dy = y1 - y0\n yi = 1\n if dy &lt; 0\n yi = -1\n dy = -dy\n end if\n D = (2 * dy) - dx\n y = y0\n for x from x0 to x1\n plot(x, y)\n if D &gt; 0\n y = y + yi\n D = D + (2 * (dy - dx))\n else\n D = D + 2*dy\n end if\nBy switching the x and y axis an implementation for positive or negative steep slopes can be written as \n plotLineHigh(x0, y0, x1, y1)\n dx = x1 - x0\n dy = y1 - y0\n xi = 1\n if dx &lt; 0\n xi = -1\n dx = -dx\n end if\n D = (2 * dx) - dy\n x = x0\n for y from y0 to y1\n plot(x, y)\n if D &gt; 0\n x = x + xi\n D = D + (2 * (dx - dy))\n else\n D = D + 2*dx\n end if\nA complete solution would need to detect whether x1 &gt; x0 or y1 &gt; y0 and reverse the input coordinates before drawing, thus\n plotLine(x0, y0, x1, y1)\n if abs(y1 - y0) &lt; abs(x1 - x0)\n if x0 &gt; x1\n plotLineLow(x1, y1, x0, y0)\n else\n plotLineLow(x0, y0, x1, y1)\n end if\n else\n if y0 &gt; y1\n plotLineHigh(x1, y1, x0, y0)\n else\n plotLineHigh(x0, y0, x1, y1)\n end if\n end if\nIn low level implementations which access the video memory directly, it would be typical for the special cases of vertical and horizontal lines to be handled separately as they can be highly optimized.\nSome versions use Bresenham's principles of integer incremental error to perform all octant line draws, balancing the positive and negative error between the x and y coordinates.\n plotLine(x0, y0, x1, y1)\n dx = abs(x1 - x0)\n sx = x0 &lt; x1 ? 1 : -1\n dy = -abs(y1 - y0)\n sy = y0 &lt; y1 ? 1 : -1\n error = dx + dy\n while true\n plot(x0, y0)\n e2 = 2 * error\n if e2 &gt;= dy\n if x0 == x1 break\n error = error + dy\n x0 = x0 + sx\n end if\n if e2 &lt;= dx\n if y0 == y1 break\n error = error + dx\n y0 = y0 + sy\n end if\n end while\nSimilar algorithms.\nThe Bresenham algorithm can be interpreted as slightly modified digital differential analyzer (using 0.5 as error threshold instead of 0, which is required for non-overlapping polygon rasterizing).\nThe principle of using an incremental error in place of division operations has other applications in graphics. It is possible to use this technique to calculate the U,V co-ordinates during raster scan of texture mapped polygons. The voxel heightmap software-rendering engines seen in some PC games also used this principle.\nBresenham also published a Run-Slice computational algorithm: while the above described Run-Length algorithm runs the loop on the major axis, the Run-Slice variation loops the other way. This method has been represented in a number of US patents: \nThe algorithm has been extended to:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64006", "revid": "212006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64006", "title": "Stephen King short fiction bibliography", "text": "This is a list of short fiction works by Stephen King (b. 1947). This includes short stories, novelettes, and novellas, as well as poems. It is arranged chronologically by first publication. Major revisions of previously published pieces are also noted. Stephen King is sometimes credited with \"nearly 400 short stories\" (or a similarly large number). However, all the known published pieces of short fiction are tabulated below. In all, 218 works are listed. Most of these pieces have been collected in King's seven short story collections: \"Night Shift\" (1978), \"Skeleton Crew\" (1985), \"Nightmares &amp; Dreamscapes\" (1993), \"Everything's Eventual\" (2002), \"Just After Sunset\" (2008), \"The Bazaar of Bad Dreams\" (2015), and \"You Like It Darker\" (2024); in King's five novella collections: \"Different Seasons\" (1982), \"Four Past Midnight\" (1990), \"Hearts in Atlantis\" (1999), \"Full Dark, No Stars\" (2010), and \"If It Bleeds\" (2020); and in the compilation \"Secret Windows: Essays and Fiction on the Craft of Writing\" (2000). Some of these pieces, however, remain uncollected.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64008", "revid": "18660484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64008", "title": "GNU Mach", "text": "Operating system kernel\n \nGNU Mach is an implementation of the Mach microkernel. It is the default microkernel in the GNU Hurd. GNU Mach runs on IA-32 and x86-64 machines. GNU Mach is maintained by developers on the GNU project. It is distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL).\nHistory.\nEarly versions of the Hurd were developed on top of CMU's Mach 3.0.\nIn 1994, CMU stopped working on Mach, and the GNU Project switched to the University of Utah's Mach 4. The kernel known as \"GNU Mach\" was derived from Mach 4 once Utah stopped development. The first ChangeLog entry by Thomas Bushnell (rather than by a Utah researcher) is from 16 December 1996.\nIn 2002, Roland McGrath branched the OSKit-Mach branch from GNU Mach 1.2, intending to replace all the device drivers and some of the hardware support with code from OSKit. After the release of GNU Mach 1.3, this branch was intended to become the GNU Mach 2.0 main line; however, as of 2006, OSKit-Mach is not being developed due to lack of activity in OSKit itself. Around 2006, an attempt to replace GNU Hurd's kernel with the Coyotos kernel also ended in failure.\nGNU Mach 1.4 was released on 27 September 2013, eleven years after 1.3.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64009", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64009", "title": "Operating system/kernel", "text": ""}
{"id": "64010", "revid": "50537834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64010", "title": "The Eyes of the Dragon", "text": "Novel by Stephen King\nThe Eyes of the Dragon is a fantasy novel by American writer Stephen King, first published as a limited edition slipcased hardcover by Philtrum Press in 1984, illustrated by Kenneth R. Linkhauser. The novel would later be published for the mass market by Viking in 1987, with illustrations by David Palladini. This trade edition was slightly revised for publication. The 1995 French edition did not reproduce the American illustrations; it included brand new illustrations by Christian Heinrich, and a 2016 new French version also included brand new illustrations, by Nicolas Duffaut.\nBackground.\nAt the time of publication, this type of novel was a deviation from the norm for King, who was best known for his horror fiction. His daughter Naomi didn't read her father's books because she didn't like horror. When she was a teenager, he asked her what she did like, and she told him she liked dragons. So he wrote a fantasy novel, and dedicated it to her. The book is a work of epic fantasy in a quasi-medieval setting, with a clearly established battle between good and evil, and magic playing a lead role. \"The Eyes of the Dragon\" was originally titled \"The Napkins\".\nPlot.\n\"The Eyes of the Dragon\" takes place entirely within the realm of Delain (which itself is located within In-World from \"The Dark Tower\" series, as established in \"The Little Sisters of Eluria\"). It is told from the perspective of an unnamed storyteller/narrator, who speaks casually and frankly to the reader, frequently adding his own commentary on characters' motivations and the like.\nKing Roland's magician, Flagg, seeking to destroy the Kingdom of Delain, sees his plans being ruined by the good-hearted Queen Sasha. After Sasha gives birth to Peter, a noble and worthy future king, Flagg realizes that his position, his plans, and his life may be in danger because of Peter. While Sasha is pregnant with a second son, Flagg seizes the opportunity. He forces the Queen's midwife to ensure that Sasha bleeds to death while giving birth to her second son, Thomas. Sasha dies and Flagg begins plotting to remove Peter.\nAs both boys grow into adolescence, Peter becomes established as his father's favorite, and Thomas becomes increasingly jealous of him. Flagg sees this and befriends Thomas, showing him the secrets of the castle. He teaches him how to spy on his father from a secret hiding-place behind a mounted dragon head in Roland's study. Peter begins the custom of bringing a glass of wine to his father before bed each night. Flagg decides to use this as a means of framing Peter. He dissolves a poison called Dragon Sand in a glass of wine and delivers it to the king. Unbeknownst to Flagg, Thomas watches this through the glass eyes of the dragon. Roland dies in terrible agony, and Flagg plants evidence incriminating Peter.\nAfter a brief trial, Peter is declared guilty, and is locked up in a high tower called the Needle in the center of the city. Thomas is then crowned King, although he is only twelve years old; due to his youth and his fearful inexperience, he allows Flagg enormous amounts of power. At the start of his long stay in the Needle, Peter manages to send a note to the judge who convicted him, Anders Peyna, with the seemingly innocuous requests to have his mother's old dollhouse with him, and also to have napkins brought with his meals. Peyna is puzzled by the requests, but, seeing no harm in them, grants them. Five years later, Peter escapes from the Needle, having used the toy loom in the dollhouse and threads from the napkins to make a rope. After the escape, he and his allies try to find King Roland's bow and arrow, which is now in Thomas' possession. Flagg, now revealed as a demonic being, is about to kill them when Thomas arrives and reveals how he watched Flagg poison Roland. Thomas shoots Flagg in the eye, but Flagg uses magic to disappear and escape. At the end of the novel, Peter is declared to be the rightful king. Thomas, who has become deeply hated in Delain, sets off alongside his butler, Dennis, to find Flagg. They find him and confront him, but the narrator does not reveal the outcome. \nReception.\n\"The Eyes of the Dragon\" was warmly received by professional critics. Barbara Tritel of \"The New York Times\" described \"The Eyes of the Dragon\" as drawing clear influence from European fairy tales and wrote that the novel was \"more elegant than any other novel Mr. King has written so far.\" Some of King's established fans rejected the novel, considering it a children's book \u2013 King originally wrote the novel for his children. Another reason for fan rejection of \"The Eyes of the Dragon\" was that it was epic fantasy, with little to no elements of the horror that typified King's most successful work of this era. Negative fan reaction to \"The Eyes of the Dragon\" was an inspiration for King's subsequent novel \"Misery\". The protagonist of \"Misery\" was a successful romance novelist who killed off his most popular character to allow himself to write in other styles of fiction, only to be imprisoned by an angry, deranged fan; King saw \"Misery\" as a metaphor for being chained to writing horror fiction.\nAdaptations.\nFilm.\nInitially \"The Eyes of the Dragon\" was to be created as an animated film produced through the French company WAMC Entertainment. The film would have a budget of $45 million and was expected to release in late 2001 or early 2002. However the film did not progress into active production and the rights lapsed in 2000.\nTelevision adaptation.\nIn 2012 Syfy announced that it was developing several projects for potential television adaptations, one of which was \"The Eyes of the Dragon\". If successfully developed, the book would be made into either a movie or miniseries. Michael Taylor and Jeff Vintar were confirmed to be penning the script and Taylor and Bill Haber would act as executive producers.\nIn 2019 news broke that Hulu was adapting the book as a television series. In September 2020, Seth Grahame-Smith, a producer and screenwriter for the Hulu adaptation, appeared on The Kingcast podcast with news that Hulu decided to cancel the project due to budgetary concerns and changes to the Hulu's executive team.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64011", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64011", "title": "Hearts in Atlantis", "text": "1999 short story collection by Stephen King\nHearts in Atlantis (1999) is a collection of three novellas and two short stories by Stephen King, all connected to one another by recurring characters and taking place in roughly chronological order. The stories are loosely autobiographical; in an author's note, King writes that while the places in the book are fictionalized, \"Although it is difficult to believe, the sixties are not fictional; they actually happened.\"\nStories.\n\"Low Men in Yellow Coats\".\nIn the first and longest work in the book, the year is 1960. A young boy named Bobby Garfield lives in Harwich, Connecticut, with his mother, Liz, a widow. He befriends a man named Ted Brautigan, who possesses psychic abilities. He confesses to Bobby that he is being stalked by \"low men\" who wear yellow coats and drive garish cars. Although Bobby agrees to let Ted know when he starts seeing \"lost pet\" signs that indicate that the low men are near, Bobby says nothing when he eventually starts seeing them for fear of losing his friend.\nOne day, Bobby finds his friend Carol has been beaten by three bullies with a baseball bat and left in a grove of trees. He takes her to his apartment, where Ted has to remove her shirt in order to set her dislocated shoulder. Liz comes home (herself having just been violently raped at a real estate seminar) and assumes that Ted has been molesting Carol. They resolve the misunderstanding, and Liz takes Carol home. Suspecting that his mother has told the low men of Ted's whereabouts, Bobby catches up to Ted just as they are about to take him away. Bobby is given the choice to go with Ted\u2014destination unknown. He decides to stay, but despises himself for his decision.\nAfter leaving Harwich with his mother and twice being put in a juvenile detention facility, Bobby receives an envelope from Ted filled with red rose petals. He knows that Ted is once again free of the low men.\n\"Hearts in Atlantis\".\nThe next part of the book, \"Hearts in Atlantis\", takes place in 1966. Peter Riley, a freshman at the University of Maine, gets addicted to playing hearts in the all-male dormitory where he lives. Although their student draft deferments have shielded them from serving in the Vietnam War, Riley and the growing number of students addicted to the game (led by student Ronnie Malenfant, who introduced the game to the dorm) put themselves at risk as their studies suffer.\nPeter eventually meets Carol, Bobby Garfield's childhood friend. Carol herself uses student activism as an escapist addiction of her own. Although they fall in love, Carol comes to announce that she will be leaving school. She explains that her decisions are forever influenced by the help that Bobby had given her when they were 11. She and Riley make love for the first time in his car. The next morning, she leaves a note warning him to stop playing hearts.\nWhen Stokely Jones, a disabled student activist (who specifically asks for a third floor dorm room, in spite of being on crutches), slips and falls in a rainstorm, Riley is disturbed by the strange way he and the other boys laughed at Jones's misfortune. He finds he is shaken from his hearts addiction and resolves to turn his grades around. Shortly afterward, Jones is accused of having sprayed \"Fuck Johnson\" on a campus wall, with the dormitory floor proctor reasoning that the peace signs accompanying the message lead to Jones. However, Riley and the others point out that they, too, have been toting peace signs, undermining the accusation and saving Jones from punishment.\nRiley barely passes his classes and receives a package from Carol containing a newspaper article of a protest she participated in.\n\"Blind Willie\".\nThis short story was originally published in the October 1994 issue of \"Antaeus\", and in 1997 was published as part of King's limited edition collection \"Six Stories\". For its inclusion in \"Hearts in Atlantis\", the story was heavily revised.\nWillie Shearman is a Vietnam veteran who lives in Connecticut but sits in a particular sidewalk location in downtown New York City each day. He pretends to be blind to receive money from people passing by, becoming blind every afternoon at the time of day that he was caught in a firefight and temporarily blinded. He believes that his blindness and begging is a form of penance for his involvement in the childhood beating of Carol (from \"Low Men in Yellow Coats\") and continuously writes apologies to her in notebooks that he carries around. Willie also keeps a scrapbook about her: her involvement in activist groups became increasingly militant under the guidance of a Svengali-like leader named Raymond Fiegler (a name with the initials R.F., suggesting that he is Randall Flagg). The group became responsible for a bombing at a recruiting office, giving Carol the name \"Red Carol\" (though she may have tried to stop the bomb). Carol was believed killed when their headquarters was raided and the building accidentally set afire.\nAt the end of the day, Willie's sight returns, signifying it is time to return home to his suburban lifestyle. The story ends just as he gains inspiration for how to deal with the policeman he's been bribing to keep from getting arrested.\n\"Why We're in Vietnam\".\nTwo veterans, John Sullivan (another childhood friend of Bobby Garfield's) and a man named Dieffenbaker reunite at the funeral of a third. They revisit an incident that almost escalated into a My Lai-type massacre: stressed by the effort at rescuing survivors of a helicopter crash, Ronnie Malenfant (who first appears as another Hearts player in \"Hearts in Atlantis\") vows to burn a village in Dong Ha as a message to the enemy. After Malenfant stabs a woman with his bayonet and things are spiralling out of control, Dieffenbaker has a soldier shoot dead another rampaging soldier to stop the impending massacre. Later, Sullivan is gravely wounded. When he is airlifted out of combat, he sees the old woman who had been stabbed (\"mamasan\") sitting in the chopper with him, a hallucination that has continued in perpetuity.\nA recurring theme of the conversation between Sullivan and Dieffenbaker is the growing sense between the two men that the various characters of their youths \"sold out\" in various ways to the allure of materialism and conformity.\nDuring the drive home from the funeral, Sullivan is caught in a traffic jam. Evidently hallucinating, he begins to see things fall from the sky: cordless phones, a grand piano, appliances, and a long yellow coat like the \"low men\" wear. He is struck by one more object, and picks it up to discover it is Bobby Garfield's Alvin Dark glove. Mamasan, glowing brightly, speaks for the first time, saying she will keep him safe. He abruptly finds himself back in his car. All objects which fell from the sky are gone, except the glove, which Sullivan wears on his hand. Sullivan grows very tired, closes his eyes, and dies of an apparent heart attack.\n\"Heavenly Shades of Night Are Falling\".\nBobby Garfield returns to Harwich to attend John Sullivan's funeral. He also visits the park where he once came upon Carol Gerber with her arm injured after being beaten by neighborhood boys. In the park, he encounters Carol, alive but scarred and burned. She says that she now goes by the name Denise Schoonover. Bobby reveals that he had come because Sullivan's probate lawyer sent him his old Alvin Dark fielder's mitt with his current address in Ted's handwriting. He then produces what was in the glove: the copyright page from \"Lord of the Flies\", showing that although it came from the 1960 edition, it is still brand new. On it is written a message for Carol from Ted, \"Tell her she was as brave as a lion\", and the equation she had written for Peter Riley on his copy (\"\u2661 + \u262e = INFORMATION\") in \"Hearts in Atlantis.\"\nReception.\nCharles de Lint praised \"Hearts in Atlantis\" as \"the Great American Baby Boomer Novel\", saying that, \"when he's at the top of his form, as he certainly is here, he [King] can be as provocative and inspired as &lt;insert your favorite literary author here&gt;.\"\nFilm adaptation.\n\"Low Men in Yellow Coats\" and \"Heavenly Shades of Night Are Falling\" formed the basis of a 2001 film entitled \"Hearts in Atlantis\", starring Anthony Hopkins as Ted Brautigan, Anton Yelchin as Bobby Garfield, Mika Boorem as Carol Gerber and Hope Davis as Liz Garfield. Major story elements are common to the film and the story, but many of the details were changed. In addition, all the references to \"The Dark Tower\" were removed and the final destinies of the characters, revealed in the latter stories of the original novel, are excluded. A further consequence of the changes is that the film's title is completely impenetrable to those unfamiliar with the novel, although a snatch of dialogue attempts to remedy this: Ted remarks that childhood is a lost city like Atlantis.\nConnection to King's other works.\nThe town of Derry is mentioned several times to be near the University of Maine. Derry is a recurring setting for King's novels and short stories, like \"It\" and \"Insomnia\".\n'The Regulators' are mentioned, and appear in several stories linked with the \"Dark Tower\" universe.\nWhen Ted has 'gone blank' he uses language that occurs often in the \"Dark Tower\" universe, as when he says \"There will be water if God wills it\" and \"All things serve the Beam.\"\nWhen Ted sends Bobby a letter toward the end of the novel, the envelope is filled with red rose petals; the Dark Tower stands in a field of red roses called Ca\u0144-Ka No Rey.\nInsofar as \"The Dark Tower\" series' overall plot is concerned, it is revealed in the that Ted is essential to the Crimson King's quest to break the beams that hold the Dark Tower up, which in turn holds the universe together.\n\"Low men\" also appear in King's novella \"Ur\", published for Amazon's Kindle in 2009.\nOne of the bullies who beat Carol, Harry Doolin, shares a surname with minor characters in \"\", Molly and Eamon Doolin, as well as the villain John Doolin (alias Jim Dooley and ZackMcCool) in \"Lisey's Story\".\nRaymond Fiegler, who is identified near the novel's end as leader of an activist group when he prevents Carol Gerber from retrieving an unexploded bomb on a college campus, is very likely another alias of Randall Flagg, a recurring villain in many of King's works. King never identifies Fiegler as Flagg, but Christopher Golden and Hank Wagner suggest in \"The Complete Stephen King Universe\" that there is little doubt Fiegler is Flagg. Golden and Wagner cite evidence such as Fiegler's ability to make himself appear \"dim\" (an ability shared by Flagg in \"The Eyes of the Dragon\"), his manipulation of Carol Gerber and her activist friends and Flagg's frequent use of aliases (usually with the initials \"R.F.\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64012", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64012", "title": "Umney's Last Case", "text": "\"Umney's Last Case\" is a short story by American author Stephen King, first published in King's collection \"Nightmares &amp; Dreamscapes\" (1993). In July 1995, it was published as a separate paperback as part of Penguin's 60th anniversary.\n\"Umney's Last Case\" is an example of metalepsis in narratology.\nBackground information.\nPrior to the story's original appearance in the \"Nightmares &amp; Dreamscapes\" collection, Viking Press made the text available online three weeks prior to the book's publication in September 1993 via OBS (The Online Bookstore) for $5.\nPlot summary.\nThe story begins as a Raymond Chandler pastiche, and follows a private investigator named Clyde Umney as he goes about what he thinks is just another morning in 1930s Los Angeles. He soon discovers that his life as he knows it is falling apart. All of his lifelong friends and associates are abruptly departing in one fashion or other, for reasons ranging from winning the lottery to terminal cancer, and many of them express disdain towards Umney in place of farewells.\nUmney is brooding alone in his office when he receives his final client: Landry, the crime-fiction author who created him. Having suffered the loss of his wife and child as well as a severe case of shingles, Landry took an overdose of medication and found himself in the world of his creation. He demonstrates that his will is law in this world, and explains to a helpless Umney that he intends to take Umney's place to live a life of eternal adventure and excitement. Umney is cast into oblivion\u2014or so it seems.\nUmney finds himself in the year 1994, occupying the vacated body of his creator. Although he realizes/acknowledges that his previous existence was a sham (and falling apart), he also finds himself equally despising the ugly, bland, and generally inadequate nature of the \"real\" world. He announces that he has begun to practice the craft of writing so that he might return to his fictional home in order to take back his world and his life, and end Landry's.\nAdaptations.\n\"Umney's Last Case\" was included as the third installment of TNT's \"\", starring William H. Macy in a dual role as both Umney and the author. It originally aired on July 19, 2006. Macy was nominated for an Emmy for his performance.\nJon Condit of DreadCentral rated the episode two out of five stars. Condit said that the episode deviates too highly from King's original story, and the changes only make the story worse. Brian Pope of DVD Verdict rated it a B+ and said that Macy's performance was worthy of an Emmy. Christopher Noseck of DVD Talk said that the episode is \"not completely satisfying\" but is the best of the episodes on that disc. Virginia Heffernan of \"The New York Times\" called it \"a gonzo noir special with some postmodern curlicues\" that emphasizes class issues common to King's work.\nThe audiobook of this story is read by crime novelist Robert B. Parker, creator of the detective characters Spenser and Jesse Stone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64013", "revid": "1303726781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64013", "title": "Nightmares &amp; Dreamscapes", "text": "Short story collection by Stephen King\nNightmares &amp; Dreamscapes is a short story collection by American author Stephen King, published in 1993.\nDedication.\nKing dedicated this collection of stories to Thomas Williams, a writing instructor who taught for many years at the University of New Hampshire. Since the book's publication, King has singled out Williams' 1974 National Book Award-winning novel \"The Hair of Harold Roux\" as a favorite of his, and one he returns to \"again and again.\"\nThe dedication reads:\nIn memory of\nTHOMAS WILLIAMS,\n1926\u20131990:\npoet, novelist, and\ngreat American storyteller.\nAdaptations.\nFilm and television.\n\"Sorry, Right Number\" was telecast as a season 4 episode of \"Tales from the Darkside\" in 1987 before it was published in \"Nightmares &amp; Dreamscapes\". \"The Moving Finger\" was adapted into a season 3 episode of \"Monsters\" in 1991. \"Chattery Teeth\" was adapted into a segment of the 1997 film \"Quicksilver Highway\". \"The Night Flier\" and \"Dolan's Cadillac\" were both adapted into films of the same respective names, in 1997 and 2009, respectively. \"Home Delivery\" and \"Rainy Season\" were adapted into short films.\nMiniseries.\nDuring the summer of 2006, TNT produced the eight-episode miniseries \"\". Despite the title, three of the eight stories were not culled from the book: \"Battleground\", from \"Night Shift\" (1978); and \"The Road Virus Heads North\" and \"Autopsy Room Four\", from \"Everything's Eventual\" (2002).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64014", "revid": "1319846999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64014", "title": "Lillehammer", "text": "Municipality in Innlandet, Norway\nLillehammer () is a municipality in Innlandet county, Norway. It is located in the traditional district of Gudbrandsdal. The administrative centre of the municipality is the town of Lillehammer. Some of the more notable villages in the municipality include F\u00e5berg, Hunderfossen, J\u00f8rstadmoen, Vingnes, and Vingrom.\nThe municipality is the 210th largest by area out of the 357 municipalities in Norway. Lillehammer Municipality is the 39th most populous municipality in Norway with a population of 29,011. The municipality's population density is and its population has increased by 6.4% over the previous 10-year period.\nThe town of Lillehammer is the largest urban centre in the municipality. It lies in the central part of the municipality and it is surrounded by more rural areas. The town centre is a late nineteenth-century concentration of wooden houses, which enjoys a picturesque location overlooking the northern part of lake Mj\u00f8sa and the river L\u00e5gen, surrounded by mountains.\nLillehammer hosted the 1994 Winter Olympics, 2004 Junior Eurovision Song Contest, 2004 European Taekwondo Championships and 2016 Winter Youth Olympics.\nGeneral information.\nThe municipality was established on 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt law). Initially, the municipality only included the town of Lillehammer. On 1 January 1906, a small adjacent area of the neighboring F\u00e5berg Municipality (population: 140) was annexed by Lillehammer Municipality to make room for more expansion as the town grew. During the 1960s, there were many municipal mergers across Norway due to the work of the Schei Committee. On 1 January 1964, the town of Lillehammer (population: 5,905) was merged with F\u00e5berg Municipality (population: 13,381) to form a new, much larger Lillehammer Municipality.\nHistorically, the municipality was part of the old Oppland county. On 1 January 2020, the municipality became a part of the newly-formed Innlandet county (after Hedmark and Oppland counties were merged).\nName.\nThe municipality (originally the parish) is named after the old \"Hamar\" farm () since the first Lillehammer Church was built there. The name is identical with the word which means \"stone\" or \"rocky hill\". To distinguish it from the nearby town of Hamar and Diocese of Hamar, it began to be called \"little Hamar\": and , and finally Lillehammer. It is also mentioned in the Old Norse sagas as (\"Little Trading Place\").\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms was granted on 4 April 1898. The arms have are divided with a diagonal line. The field (background) above the line has a tincture of blue. Below the line, the field has a tincture of argent which means it is commonly colored white, but if it is made out of metal, then silver is used. The charge is a birkebeiner, carrying a spear and a shield, who is skiing down the mountainside under a blue sky. The design symbolizes the historical importance of when the Birkebeiners carried the future King Haakon from Lillehammer to Rena on skis. There is a mural crown above the escutcheon. The arms were designed by Andreas Bloch.\nChurches.\nThe Church of Norway has six parishes () within Lillehammer Municipality. It is part of the S\u00f8r-Gudbrandsdal prosti (deanery) in the Diocese of Hamar.\nHistory.\nThe town of Lillehammer is located at the northern end of Norway's largest lake, Mj\u00f8sa. There have likely been settlements here since the Iron Age and the market here was mentioned in H\u00e5kon H\u00e5konson's saga in 1390. It is also mentioned as a site for Thing assembly in 1390. Tradition states that it was here in Lillehammer where the birkebeiners Torstein Skjevla and Skjervald Skrukka joined up with the King's son (and future King), Haakon, in 1205 before they traveled to \u00d8sterdalen (an event which is commemorated in March every year to this day). Since medieval times, the Lillehammer Church has been located here.\nThe town was granted market town rights on 7 August 1827 as a kj\u00f8pstad. At that time, 50 people lived within the boundaries of the newly established town. This site was chosen because there were no other towns in all of Christians amt (county) and this site was located along the Gudbrandsdalsl\u00e5gen river and the whole Gudbrandsdal valley was a major transportation route from the capital to northern Norway. Within two years of the establishment of the town, the population had risen to 360 people. The merchant Ludvig Wiese has been counted as the founder of the town (a statue of him was erected in the town in connection with the town's 100th anniversary in 1927). The laying of the main railway line from the capital in Christiania to Eidsvoll was completed in 1852. This railway line was connected with steamships along the lake Mj\u00f8sa which travelled to Lillehammer and from there a newly laid road made connections further up into the Gudbrandsdalen valley. This transport system made the transit of timber and agricultural goods from all over the county to the capital possible, and it contributed to the growth of the town of Lillehammer.\nIn 1973, Mossad killed a Moroccan waiter, having mistaken him for Palestinian terrorist Ali Hassan Salameh, which became known as the \"Lillehammer affair\".\nLillehammer is known as a typical venue for winter sporting events; it was host city of the 1994 Winter Olympics, and the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics, and was part of a joint bid with applicant host city Oslo to host events part of the 2022 Winter Olympics until Oslo withdrew its bid on 1 October 2014.\nLillehammer is home to the largest literature festival in the Nordic countries and, in 2017, was designated as a UNESCO City of Literature.\nEducation.\nA number of schools are located in Lillehammer, including the Hammartun Primary and Lower Secondary School, S\u00f8re \u00c5l Primary School and Kringsj\u00e5 Primary and Lower Secondary School. Lillehammer Upper Secondary School consists of two branches, North and South, both situated near the city center. The private high school Norwegian College of Elite Sports, NTG, also has a branch in Lillehammer. The Lillehammer campus of Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences is situated just north of the town itself.\nLillehammer is also the home of the Nansen Academy - the Norwegian Humanistic Academy. The Nansen Academy is an educational institution for adult students with varied political, religious, and cultural backgrounds. The Academy was founded on the core principles of humanism and aims at strengthening the knowledge of these principles.\nThe 14th World Scout Jamboree was held from 29 July to 7 August 1975 and was hosted by Norway at Lillehammer.\nGovernment.\nLillehammer Municipality is responsible for primary education (through 10th grade), outpatient health services, senior citizen services, welfare and other social services, zoning, economic development, and municipal roads and utilities. The municipality is governed by a municipal council of directly elected representatives. The mayor is indirectly elected by a vote of the municipal council. The municipality is under the jurisdiction of the Gudbrandsdal District Court and the Eidsivating Court of Appeal.\nMunicipal council.\nThe municipal council of Lillehammer Municipality is made up of 39 representatives who are elected to four year terms. The tables below show the current and historical composition of the council by political party.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMayors.\nThe mayor () of Lillehammer Municipality is the political leader of the municipality and the chairperson of the municipal council. Here is a list of people who have held this position:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeography.\nLillehammer Municipality is situated in the lower part of the Gudbrandsdal valley, at the northern end of lake Mj\u00f8sa. It is located to the south of \u00d8yer Municipality, to the southeast of Gausdal Municipality, northeast of Nordre Land Municipality, to the north of Gj\u00f8vik Municipality, and to the southeast of Ringsaker Municipality. The highest point in the municipality is the tall mountain Nevelfjell in the northeast part of the municipality.\nClimate.\nLillehammer has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb\") and used to have a subarctic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfc\"), with the Scandinavian mountain chain to the west and north limiting oceanic influences. The record high of was recorded in June 1970. The record low of was recorded in December 1978 and January 1979, and the same low was recorded in January 1987. There has been no overnight air frost in the month of August since 1978 with the record low for that month being . The coldest recorded temperature after 2000 is in January 2010. The average date for the last overnight freeze (low below ) in spring is May 10 and average date for first freeze in autumn is September 30 (1981-2010 average) giving an average frost-free season of 142 days. The current weather station Lillehammer-S\u00e6therengen became operational in 1982; extremes are also from two earlier weather stations in Lillehammer.\nPopulated places.\nLillehammer Municipality is subdivided into the following populated places (i.e.: neighborhoods, quarters, villages, localities, settlements, communities, hamlets, etc.):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nThe basis for the economy of the municipality is its position as the northernmost point of the lake Mj\u00f8sa and as the gateway for the Gudbrandsdal region, through which the historical highway from Oslo to Trondheim passes. The Mesna river has provided the basis for several small industries through the years, but Lillehammer is now all but industry-less. \u2013\nMedia.\nThe regional newspaper Gudbrandsd\u00f8len Dagningen has its editorial office in Lillehammer.\nThe main offices of the commercial radio channel P4 Radio Hele Norge is in Lillehammer.\nTransport.\nOne of the major Norwegian rail lines, the Dovre Line, runs from Hamar to the north through Lillehammer on its way up the Gudbrandsdal valley, to terminate in the city of Trondheim. The European route E6 highway also passes through Lillehammer.\nAttractions.\nIn addition to the Olympic site, Lillehammer offers a number of other tourist attractions:\nCulture.\nLillehammer is the main location for several annual festivals and events.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLillehammer has sister city agreements with the following places:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendly cities.\nLillehammer has also friendly relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64015", "revid": "1317971489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64015", "title": "Skeleton Crew (short story collection)", "text": "1985 short story collection by Stephen King\nSkeleton Crew is a short story collection by American writer Stephen King, published by Putnam in June 1985. A limited edition of a thousand copies was published by Scream/Press in October 1985 (), illustrated by J. K. Potter, containing an additional short story, \"The Revelations of 'Becka Paulson\", which had originally appeared in \"Rolling Stone\" magazine (July 19 \u2013 August 2, 1984), and was later incorporated into King's 1987 novel \"The Tommyknockers\". The original title of this book was \"Night Moves\".\nOverview.\nThe collection features 22 works, which include 18 short stories, two novellas (\"The Mist\" and \"The Ballad of the Flexible Bullet\"), and two poems (\"Paranoid: A Chant\" and \"For Owen\"). In addition to the introduction, in which King directly addresses his readers in his signature conversational style, \"Skeleton Crew\" also features an epilogue entitled \"Notes\" wherein King discusses the origins of several stories in the collection. The stories are collected from science-fiction and horror anthologies (\"Dark Forces\", \"Shadows\", \"Terrors\", and \"New Terrors\"), genre magazine publications (\"Twilight Zone\", \"Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine\", \"Startling Mystery Stories\", \"Weirdbook\" and \"Fantasy and Science Fiction\"), and popular magazines (\"Redbook\", \"Gallery\", \"Yankee\" and \"Playboy\").\nAlthough published in 1985, the stories collected in \"Skeleton Crew\" span 17 years from \"The Reaper's Image\" (King's second professional sale when he was just 18 years old) to \"The Ballad of The Flexible Bullet\" which was completed in 1983.\nThe collection also features more personal works, including \"For Owen\", the poem he wrote for his son, and \"Gramma\", a horrific tale from an 11-year-old boy's perspective that seems to recall King's horrors living with his invalid grandmother.\nOf one of the stories in the collection, King says: \"As far as short stories are concerned, I like the grisly ones the best. However, the story \"Survivor Type\" goes a little bit too far, even for me.\"\nAdaptations.\nFilm and television.\n\"The Raft\" was adapted as a segment of the 1987 New World Pictures anthology film \"Creepshow 2\", with a script by George A. Romero, and directed by Michael Gornick.\n\"Word Processor of the Gods\" (1984 Laurel TV, directed by Michael Gornick) was a 22-minute episode of \"Tales from the Darkside\".\n\"Gramma\" was adapted into an episode of the 1985 iteration of \"The Twilight Zone\", written by Harlan Ellison. In 2014, it was loosely adapted into a film called \"Mercy\", starring Chandler Riggs and Dylan McDermott.\n\"The Revelations of 'Becka Paulson\" was adapted into a June 1995 episode of the television series \"The Outer Limits\"; Brad Wright wrote the teleplay, and Steven Weber directed.\n\"The Mist\" was adapted into the film \"The Mist\" (2007 The Weinstein Company, written and directed by Frank Darabont), which was released on November 21, 2007; it was later adapted as a 2017 Spike TV series.\n\"Survivor Type\" was adapted as an animated segment for a special episode of the 2019 \"Creepshow\" TV series with the main character voiced by Kiefer Sutherland.\n\"The Jaunt\" will be made into a feature film by production company Plan B Entertainment, with Andy Muschietti set to direct.\nA film adaptation of \"The Monkey\" directed by Osgood Perkins with James Wan as executive producer through his Atomic Monster production label was released by Neon on February 21, 2025.\nDollar Baby adaptations.\nThe following stories have been adapted as Dollar Baby short films:\nOther media adaptations.\n\"The Mist\" was adapted as a 90-minute full-cast audio recording in 1986 in \"3-D Sound\" from ZBS Productions, released by Simon &amp; Schuster, Inc.\nIn 1985, the American Library Association issued a series of posters that featured celebrities encouraging Americans to patronize their local libraries. In one of these, Michael J. Fox holds a copy of \"Skeleton Crew\" while a skeletal hand rests on his shoulder.\nReception.\nNeil Gaiman reviewed \"Skeleton Crew\" for \"Imagine\" magazine, and described it as \"500 pages of gorious goodies.\"\n\"Skeleton Crew\" is critically held as showing King as a maturing writer with greater breadth and depth than his previous short works.\n\"Skeleton Crew\" won the Locus Award for Best Collection in 1986.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64016", "revid": "3636441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64016", "title": "Night Shift (short story collection)", "text": "Book by Stephen King\nNight Shift is Stephen King's first collection of short stories, first published in 1978. In 1980, \"Night Shift\" won the Balrog Award for Best Collection, and in 1979 it was nominated as best collection for the Locus Award and the World Fantasy Award.\nDetails.\nThe book was published on the heels of \"The Shining\" (1977 Doubleday) and is King's fifth published book (including \"Rage\", which was published under the pseudonym of Richard Bachman). Nine of the twenty stories had first appeared in issues of \"Cavalier Magazine\" from 1970 to 1975; others were originally published in \"Penthouse\", \"Cosmopolitan\", \"Gallery\", \"Ubris\", and \"Maine Magazine\". The stories \"Jerusalem's Lot\", \"Quitters, Inc.\", \"The Last Rung on the Ladder\", and \"The Woman in the Room\" appeared for the first time in this collection.\nKing had wanted to cut \"Gray Matter\" in favor of his 1972 story \"Suffer the Little Children\", but deferred to editor Bill Thompson who chose to keep \"Gray Matter\" in the collection (\"Suffer the Little Children\" was ultimately collected in \"Nightmares &amp; Dreamscapes\" in 1993).\nForeword and introduction.\n\"Night Shift\" is the first book for which King wrote a foreword. The introduction was written by one of King's favorite authors, John D. MacDonald. MacDonald writes that \"Stephen King is a far, far better writer at thirty than I was at thirty, or at forty. I am entitled to hate him a little bit for this.\" He adds, \"I will say that I do not give a diddly-whoop what Stephen King chooses as an area in which to write. The fact that he presently enjoys writing in the field of spooks and spells and slitherings in the cellar is to me the least interesting fact about the man anyone can relate\", predicting that \"Stephen King is not going to restrict himself to his present area of intense interest.\"\nDeluxe edition.\nIn 2020, a deluxe edition of \"Night Shift\" published by Cemetery Dance Publications. The deluxe edition included two other short stories by King: \"The Glass Floor\" (1967) and \"Weeds\" (1976).\nFilm, television or theatrical adaptations.\nWith the publication of \"Night Shift\" and the rise in King's popularity as a best-selling author, and with the success of Brian De Palma's motion picture adaptation of \"Carrie\" (1976), student film makers began submitting requests to King to adapt stories from the collection. King formed a policy he deemed the Dollar Deal, which allowed the students the permission to make an adaptation for $1.\nIn the 1980s, entrepreneurial film producer Milton Subotsky purchased the rights to six of the stories in this collection to produce feature films and a television anthology based on multiple stories. Although Subotsky was involved with several King adaptations (\"Cat's Eye\", \"Maximum Overdrive\", \"Sometimes They Come Back\", \"The Lawnmower Man\") the television series never happened due to conflicts with the networks' Standards and Practices.\nThe following film, television, and theatre adaptations are adapted from the stories in \"Night Shift\":\n\"The Stephen King Collection: Stories from\" Night Shift.\nIn 2000, Random House released a recorded compilation of selected stories from \"Night Shift\", each read by John Glover. The full track list of unabridged stories is as follows:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64017", "revid": "4145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64017", "title": "Philtrum Press", "text": "American publisher\nPhiltrum Press is a small publishing house run by Stephen King. This small press operation, operating out of King's front business offices in Bangor, Maine, is primarily run by King's personal assistant, Marsha DeFillipo (who is also the moderator of the Stephen King Website Message Board).\nAt least the following have been published:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64019", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64019", "title": "Riding the Bullet", "text": "2000 novella by Stephen King\nRiding the Bullet is a horror novella by American writer Stephen King. It marked King's debut on the Internet. Simon &amp; Schuster, with technology by SoftLock, first published \"Riding the Bullet\" in 2000 as the world's first mass-market e-book, available for download at $2.50. That year, the novella was nominated for the Bram Stoker Award for Superior Achievement in Long Fiction and the International Horror Guild Award for Best Long Form. In 2002, the novella was included in King's collection \"Everything's Eventual\".\nPublication.\nDuring the first 24 hours, over 400,000 copies of \"Riding the Bullet\" were downloaded, jamming SoftLock's server. Some Stephen King fans waited hours for the download.\nWith over 500,000 downloads, Stephen King seemed to pave the way for the future of publishing. The actual number of readers was unclear because the encryption caused countless computers to crash.\nThe total financial gross of the electronic publication remains uncertain. Initially offered at $2.50 by SoftLock and then Simon &amp; Schuster, it was later available free for download from Amazon and Barnes &amp; Noble.\nIn 2009, Lonely Road Books announced the impending release of \"Riding the Bullet: The Deluxe Special Edition Double\", by Stephen King and Mick Garris, as an oversized slipcased hardcover bound in the flip book or t\u00eate-b\u00eache format (like an Ace Double) featuring the novella \"Riding the Bullet\", the original script for the eponymous 2004 film by Mick Garris, and artwork by Alan M. Clark and Bernie Wrightson. The book was available in three editions:\nPlot summary.\nAlan Parker is a student at the University of Maine who is trying to find himself. He gets a call from a neighbor in his hometown of Lewiston, telling him that his mother has been taken to the hospital after having a stroke. Lacking a functioning car, Parker decides to hitchhike the 120 miles (200 km) south to visit his mother.\nHe ends up riding with an old man who continually tugs at his crotch in a car that stinks of urine. Eventually frightened and glad to escape the vehicle, Alan starts walking, hitchhiking his next ride. Coming upon a graveyard, he begins to explore it and notices a headstone for a stranger named George Staub, which reads: \"Well Begun, Too Soon Done\". Sure enough, the next car to pick him up is driven by George Staub, complete with black stitches around his neck where his head had been sewn on after being severed and wearing a button saying, \"I Rode The Bullet At Thrill Village, Laconia.\"\nDuring the ride, George talks to Alan about the amusement park ride he was too scared to ride as a kid: The Bullet in Thrill Village, Laconia, New Hampshire. George tells Alan that before they reach the lights of town, Alan must choose who goes on the death ride with George: Alan or his mother. In a moment of fright, Alan saves himself and tells him: \"Take her. Take my mother.\"\nGeorge shoves Alan out of the car. Alan reappears alone at the graveyard, wearing the \"I Rode the Bullet at Thrill Village\" button. He eventually reaches the hospital, where he learns that despite his guilt and the impending feeling that his mother is dead or will die any moment, she is fine.\nAlan takes the button and treasures it as a good (or bad) luck charm. His mother returns to work. Alan graduates and takes care of his mother for several years, and she suffers another stroke.\nOne day, Alan loses the button and receives a phone call; he knows what the call is about. He finds the button underneath his mother's bed and, after a final moment of sadness, guilt, and meditation, decides to carry on. His mother's \"ride\" is over.\nFilm.\nA movie adaptation of the story, starring Jonathan Jackson, Barbara Hershey and David Arquette, was released in 2004.\nReception.\n\"F&amp;SF\" (\"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\") reviewer Charles de Lint praised the novella as \"a terrific story, highlighting King's gift for characterization and his sheer narrative drive.\" \nIn contrast, \"The New York Times\"' Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, who read the book in both available online formats (computer download and an e-book supplied by the publisher, neither of which permitted a user to print out a copy), was more critical. He disliked reading digital content on a backlit monitor (\"I was also restlessly aware of the unusual effort it was taking to read onscreen\") and the book's content (\"after getting off to such a strong start, Mr. King writes himself into a corner that makes Alan's scary adventure seem something of a shaggy dog story\"). He concluded: \"reading 'Riding the Bullet,' I sorely missed the solidity of good old print on paper. And who knows, maybe old-fashioned print would have made Mr. King's story seem a little more substantial?\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64020", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64020", "title": "Multiprocessing", "text": "Use of two or more central processing units (CPUs) within a single computer system\nMultiprocessing (MP) is the use of two or more central processing units (CPUs) within a single computer system. The term also refers to the ability of a system to support more than one processor or the ability to allocate tasks between them. There are many variations on this basic theme, and the definition of multiprocessing can vary with context, mostly as a function of how CPUs are defined (multiple cores on one die, multiple dies in one package, multiple packages in one system unit, etc.).\nA multiprocessor is a computer system having two or more processing units (multiple processors) each sharing main memory and peripherals, in order to simultaneously process programs. A 2009 textbook defined multiprocessor system similarly, but noted that the processors may share \"some or all of the system\u2019s memory and I/O facilities\"; it also gave tightly coupled system as a synonymous term.\nAt the operating system level, \"multiprocessing\" is sometimes used to refer to the execution of multiple concurrent processes in a system, with each process running on a separate CPU or core, as opposed to a single process at any one instant. When used with this definition, multiprocessing is sometimes contrasted with multitasking, which may use just a single processor but switch it in time slices between tasks (i.e. a time-sharing system). Multiprocessing however means true parallel execution of multiple processes using more than one processor. Multiprocessing doesn't necessarily mean that a single process or task uses more than one processor simultaneously; the term parallel processing is generally used to denote that scenario. Other authors prefer to refer to the operating system techniques as multiprogramming and reserve the term \"multiprocessing\" for the hardware aspect of having more than one processor. The remainder of this article discusses multiprocessing only in this hardware sense.\nIn Flynn's taxonomy, multiprocessors as defined above are MIMD machines. As the term \"multiprocessor\" normally refers to tightly coupled systems in which all processors share memory, multiprocessors are not the entire class of MIMD machines, which also contains message passing multicomputer systems.\nKey topics.\nProcessor symmetry.\nIn a multiprocessing system, all CPUs may be equal, or some may be reserved for special purposes. A combination of hardware and operating system software design considerations determine the symmetry (or lack thereof) in a given system. For example, hardware or software considerations may require that only one particular CPU respond to all hardware interrupts, whereas all other work in the system may be distributed equally among CPUs; or execution of kernel-mode code may be restricted to only one particular CPU, whereas user-mode code may be executed in any combination of processors. Multiprocessing systems are often easier to design if such restrictions are imposed, but they tend to be less efficient than systems in which all CPUs are utilized.\nSystems that treat all CPUs equally are called symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) systems. In systems where all CPUs are not equal, system resources may be divided in a number of ways, including asymmetric multiprocessing (ASMP), non-uniform memory access (NUMA) multiprocessing, and clustered multiprocessing.\nMaster/slave multiprocessor system.\nIn a master/slave multiprocessor system, the master CPU is in control of the computer and the slave CPU(s) performs assigned tasks. The CPUs can be completely different in terms of speed and architecture. Some (or all) of the CPUs can share a common bus, each can also have a private bus (for private resources), or they may be isolated except for a common communications pathway. Likewise, the CPUs can share common RAM and/or have private RAM that the other processor(s) cannot access. The roles of master and slave can change from one CPU to another.\nTwo early examples of a mainframe master/slave multiprocessor are the Bull Gamma 60 and the Burroughs B5000.\nAn early example of a master/slave multiprocessor system of microprocessors is the Tandy/Radio Shack TRS-80 Model 16 desktop computer which came out in February 1982 and ran the multi-user/multi-tasking Xenix operating system, Microsoft's version of UNIX (called TRS-XENIX). The Model 16 has two microprocessors: an 8-bit Zilog Z80 CPU running at 4\u00a0MHz, and a 16-bit Motorola 68000 CPU running at 6\u00a0MHz. When the system is booted, the Z-80 is the master and the Xenix boot process initializes the slave 68000, and then transfers control to the 68000, whereupon the CPUs change roles and the Z-80 becomes a slave processor responsible for all I/O operations including disk, communications, printer and network, as well as the keyboard and integrated monitor, while the operating system and applications run on the 68000 CPU. The Z-80 can be used to do other tasks.\nThe earlier TRS-80 Model II, which was released in 1979, could also be considered a multiprocessor system as it had both a Z-80 CPU and an Intel 8021 microcontroller in the keyboard. The 8021 made the Model II the first desktop computer system with a separate detachable lightweight keyboard connected with by a single thin flexible wire, and likely the first keyboard to use a dedicated microcontroller, both attributes that would later be copied years later by Apple and IBM.\nInstruction and data streams.\nIn multiprocessing, the processors can be used to execute a single sequence of instructions in multiple contexts (single instruction, multiple data or SIMD, often used in vector processing), multiple sequences of instructions in a single context (multiple instruction, single data or MISD, used for redundancy in fail-safe systems and sometimes applied to describe pipelined processors or hyper-threading), or multiple sequences of instructions in multiple contexts (multiple instruction, multiple data or MIMD).\nProcessor coupling.\nTightly coupled multiprocessor system.\nTightly coupled multiprocessor systems contain multiple CPUs that are connected at the bus level. These CPUs may have access to a central shared memory (SMP or UMA), or may participate in a memory hierarchy with both local and shared memory (SM)(NUMA). The IBM p690 Regatta is an example of a high end SMP system. Intel Xeon processors dominated the multiprocessor market for business PCs and were the only major x86 option until the release of AMD's Opteron range of processors in 2004. Both ranges of processors had their own onboard cache but provided access to shared memory; the Xeon processors via a common pipe and the Opteron processors via independent pathways to the system RAM.\nChip multiprocessors, also known as multi-core computing, involves more than one processor placed on a single chip and can be thought of the most extreme form of tightly coupled multiprocessing. Mainframe systems with multiple processors are often tightly coupled.\nLoosely coupled multiprocessor system.\nLoosely coupled multiprocessor systems (often referred to as clusters) are based on multiple standalone relatively low processor count commodity computers interconnected via a high speed communication system (Gigabit Ethernet is common). A Linux Beowulf cluster is an example of a loosely coupled system.\nTightly coupled systems perform better and are physically smaller than loosely coupled systems, but have historically required greater initial investments and may depreciate rapidly; nodes in a loosely coupled system are usually inexpensive commodity computers and can be recycled as independent machines upon retirement from the cluster.\nPower consumption is also a consideration. Tightly coupled systems tend to be much more energy-efficient than clusters. This is because a considerable reduction in power consumption can be realized by designing components to work together from the beginning in tightly coupled systems, whereas loosely coupled systems use components that were not necessarily intended specifically for use in such systems.\nLoosely coupled systems have the ability to run different operating systems or OS versions on different systems.\nDisadvantages.\nMerging data from multiple threads or processes may incur significant overhead due to conflict resolution, data consistency, versioning, and synchronization.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64021", "revid": "3499011", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64021", "title": "Multiprocessor", "text": ""}
{"id": "64022", "revid": "50797542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64022", "title": "Selkirk Rex", "text": "Breed of cat\nBreed of cat\nThe Selkirk Rex is a cat breed with curly hair that was developed in the United States in the late 1980s. The Selkirk Rex is distinct from the other Rex breeds by the thick quality of its coat, while LaPerm, Devon Rex and Cornish Rex have sparser curly coats. The Selkirk Rex are known for their placid, social and cuddly nature.\nHistory.\nThe Selkirk Rex originated in Montana, USA in 1987, with a litter born to a rescued cat. The only unusually coated kitten in the litter was ultimately placed with breeder Jeri Newman, who named her Miss DiPesto, after a curly-haired character in the TV series \"Moonlighting\" played by Allyce Beasley. This foundation cat was bred to a black Persian tomcat, producing three Selkirk Rex and three straight-haired kittens. This demonstrated that the gene had an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. All Selkirk Rex trace their ancestry back to the cat Miss DiPesto. Jeri Newman named the breed after her stepfather, \"Selkirk,\" making this the first (and currently only) breed of cat to be named after an actual person.\nAmerican Shorthairs, Persians, Himalayans, Exotic Shorthairs, and British Shorthairs have been used as outcrosses to develop this breed.\nThe breed was accepted by The International Cat Association in 1992, the American Cat Fanciers Association in 1998, and the Cat Fanciers' Association in 2000.\nIn 2020 Cat Fanciers' Association (CFA) discontinued using Persian cats as an outcross, and in 2025 - British Shorthair or Exotic. Starting from 2025 Selkirk Rex kittens registered with CFA must have only Selkirk Rex parents. As of 2024, TICA permits Selkirk Rex to be outcrossed with British Shorthair, British Longhair, American Shorthair, Persian, Himalayan and Exotic cat breeds.\nAppearance.\nSelkirk Rex is a medium to large cat with a solid, muscular body and heavy boning. Adult males weigh between 12 and 15 pounds, females are somewhat smaller. The head of a Selkirk is round and full-cheeked. Their eyes are round and set well apart, as are the medium-sized ears.\nSelkirk Rex comes in shorthair and longhair varieties with unstructured, loose, random curls. Curliness tends to manifest more around the neck, the tail and the belly. On shorthair Selkirks, the hair is the same length all over the body, while longhairs have longer ruff and tail hair. Their whiskers are curly, fragile, and tend to break off. Unlike other Rex breeds with reduced amounts of hair, the Selkirk Rex is not recommended for those who might be allergic to cat allergens.\nThe breed is accepted in all colors, including pointed, bicolor, cinnamon, silver/smoke and chocolate.\nHealth.\nThere are no known health problems specific to the Selkirk Rex breed. Like other Rex breeds, irritation of the inside of the ear by curly fur can occur, increasing the production of ear wax. Homozygous cats (with two copies of the dominant Selkirk Rex gene) may have a tendency towards excessive greasiness, requiring more bathing. Other health problems may be inherited from the outcross breeds used, including polycystic kidney disease from Persians and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy from British Shorthairs.\nIn the UK, all Selkirk Rex cats registered with the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy (GCCF) for breeding are genetically tested for Polycystic Kidney Disease or are from two genetically tested parents.\nGenetics.\nThe Selkirk Rex is defined by an autosomal incomplete dominant woolly rexoid hair (ADWH) abnormality that is characterized by tightly curled hair shafts. Heterozygous cats exhibit a full, randomly curled coat, whereas homozygous cats have a tight, soft and wavy curl, similar to the Cornish Rex. In addition to the curl pattern, homozygous cats also display a more slender body composition with bigger ears and a less rounded appearance of the head. The inbreeding coefficient of the Selkirk Rex population is low, on par with domestic cats of no specific breed.\nA splice variant in the gene KRT71 was found to be associated with the curly coat phenotype. KRT71 is a crucial gene for keratinization of the hair follicle. An allele of this gene is also responsible for the hairless (hr) Sphynx and the Devon Rex (re) hair. Three mutations in KRT71 have now been identified in cats, forming the allelic series, KRT71SADRE &gt; KRT71+ &gt; KRT71re &gt; KRT71hr, where SADRE is the suggested locus designation for the Selkirk autosomal dominant rex 21 allele."}
{"id": "64023", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64023", "title": "Blood and Smoke", "text": "Audiobook\nBlood and Smoke (1999) is an audiobook in which Stephen King reads three of his own short stories. At the time, King said that the two short stories which had not been published wouldn't be, but all three appeared in the \"Everything's Eventual\" collection.\nAll three stories in \"Blood and Smoke\" involve smoking in one way or another. The audiobook packaging resembles a pack of cigarettes, including the flip top.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64024", "revid": "1317954564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64024", "title": "Dolores Claiborne", "text": "1992 novel by Stephen King\nDolores Claiborne () is a 1992 psychological thriller by Stephen King. The novel is narrated by the titular character, and introduces the fictional community of Little Tall Island, which Stephen King later used as the setting for the original TV mini-series \"Storm of the Century\". It was the best-selling novel of 1992 in the United States.\nThe novel led to a 1995 movie adaptation starring Kathy Bates that \"Time\" named among the top 10 greatest Stephen King film adaptations in 2013. A two-act opera adaptation premiered in San Francisco in 2013. In 2017, the New York City Opera performed the world premiere of a new chamber version of the opera at the 59E59 Theater, directed by Michael Capasso. In 2019, it was produced by the Boston University Opera Institute.\nPlot summary.\nDolores Claiborne, an opinionated 65-year-old widow living in the tiny Maine community of Little Tall Island, is suspected of murdering her wealthy, elderly employer, Vera Donovan. The novel is presented as a transcript of her statement, told to the local constable and a stenographer. Dolores wants to make clear to the police that she did not kill Vera, whom she had looked after for years, but does confess to orchestrating the death of her husband, Joe St. George, almost thirty years previously. Dolores's confession develops into the story of her life, her troubled marriage, and her relationship with her employer. \nDolores first describes the arrival of Vera and her millionaire husband, who have bought a summer home on Little Tall Island in 1949. Able to cope with Vera's exacting standards, Dolores first takes a job as a maid, then becomes housekeeper at the Donovan home. After Vera's husband dies in a car crash in 1960, she spends increasing time at her island house, eventually moving there permanently. Vera suffers a series of strokes in the 1980s, whereupon Dolores becomes the woman's live-in caretaker and reluctant companion. As Vera slips into dementia, she experiences terrifying hallucinations. When lucid, she subjects Dolores to a series of mind games and power plays. \nDolores reveals that when she began working at the Donovan house, her marriage to Joe was already in difficulties due to his alcoholism, temper, and domestic violence. Their children, Selena, Joe Jr., and Pete, are unaware of the abuse. The marriage problems escalate one night in 1960 when Joe viciously hits Dolores in the back with a piece of stove wood over a perceived slight. In retaliation, Dolores smashes a ceramic jug over his head and threatens him with a hatchet, swearing she will kill him if he ever strikes her again. This confrontation is witnessed by Selena. Joe stops beating Dolores, but Selena does not realize Dolores was acting in self-defense, and Joe uses the incident to gain sympathy from her. A rift grows between mother and daughter.\nIn 1962, Dolores notices Selena becoming increasingly withdrawn. After some speculation, Dolores finally confronts her daughter as they return home on the island ferry. She explains the truth of the hatchet incident and Selena reluctantly admits that Joe molested her. Dolores vows to protect her. That night, she considers murdering Joe, but instead, she confronts him, promising to have him arrested if he ever touches Selena again. \nDolores resolves to leave Joe, but when she attempts to withdraw her savings to fund their escape, she discovers Joe has stolen everything. In despair, she confides in Vera. An unusually sympathetic Vera casually remarks that men like Joe often die in accidents, leaving their wives everything. As she departs, she implies that she arranged the car crash that killed her husband and advises Dolores that \"sometimes, an accident can be an unhappy woman's best friend.\"\nDolores begins plotting Joe's death, but she does not find an opportunity to execute her plan until the following summer. Vera becomes obsessed with a total solar eclipse that will be visible from the island, believing that the event will convince her estranged children to visit her. She plans a massive viewing party on the island ferry. Seeing the distraction as an opportunity, Dolores sends Selena to camp, and Joe Jr. and Pete are sent to visit family on the mainland. Dolores marks the location of a dried-up well in a patch of brambles on the edge of her property. When it becomes clear her children will not be joining her for the eclipse, Vera becomes despondent and lashes out at her hired help, calming only after Dolores confronts her over the unjust firing of one of the maids. \nOn the day of the eclipse, Dolores buys Joe a bottle of scotch and makes him a sandwich, lowering his guard, and they share their first moment of affection in many years. As the eclipse begins, Dolores has a vision of a young girl in the path of the eclipse who is being sexually abused by her father at that same moment. Reminded of what she has set out to do, she deliberately enrages Joe by claiming she has recovered the money he had stolen, provoking him into attacking her. She flees into the brambles, leading Joe to the well and tricking him into stepping on the rotted boards that cover it. The planks break and Joe falls into the well, severely injured. \nJoe calls out for help for some time before eventually losing consciousness. Dolores returns to the house and falls asleep. She has a nightmare, then checks the well. She arrives to discover that Joe has regained consciousness and has nearly managed to climb out. He grabs at Dolores and attempts to pull her in with him. She hits him in the face with a rock, and he falls back into the well, dead.\nDolores reports Joe missing, and his body is found after several days of searching. His death is ruled an accident despite the suspicions of the local coroner. Dolores is free of Joe, but her actions have damaged her relationship with Selena, who has her own suspicions. Rumors begin to circulate that she has gotten away with murder.\nThe narrative finally arrives at the circumstances of Vera's death, the event which has led Dolores to tell her story. She confesses that Vera, during one of her hallucinations, managed to leave her wheelchair and fell down a flight of stairs. As she falls, Dolores has a terrifying vision of Joe's ghost. Still alive and lucid in spite of her injuries, Vera begs Dolores to help end her suffering. Dolores fetches a rolling pin, meaning to dispatch her, but Vera dies before she can use it. The incriminating scene is discovered by the local mailman, who suspects Dolores of killing the old woman and forces her to call the police. \nThat night, Dolores is harassed by members of the community who believe she has already escaped punishment for murder in the past. The next day, she receives a phone call from Vera's lawyer, who informs a shocked Dolores that she has inherited Vera's entire fortune\u2014nearly $30 million. Dolores initially refuses the money, believing it should go to Vera's estranged children, but learns that the children were killed in a car crash in 1961, and that Vera has spent the last thirty years of her life pretending to herself that they were still alive. Knowing the inheritance will be seen as a motive and worsen the case against her, Dolores realizes that the only way to clear her name is to confess everything. Feeling at peace with herself at long last, she ends her statement. \nSeveral newspaper articles provide an epilogue to the story, revealing that Dolores was cleared of any blame in Vera's death and has anonymously donated Vera's fortune to the New England Home for Little Wanderers. The final article implies that Dolores and Selena have reconciled and that Selena will be coming home for the first time in twenty years.\nStyle.\nAtypically for a King novel, \"Dolores Claiborne\" has no chapters, double-spacing between paragraphs, or other section breaks; thus, the text is a single continuous narrative, which reads like the transcription of a spoken monologue. It is written entirely in the first person, in a local dialect.\nThemes.\nUnlike many other works by King, little focus is given here to the supernatural. Although supernatural occurrences are implied, the only such events that clearly occur in the book are two telepathic visions of a nameless young girl sexually victimized by her father, which, along with the solar eclipse backdrop, form a link to King's novel \"Gerald's Game.\"\nReception.\nThe book has been praised for its characterization of the main protagonist, although some reviewers are ambivalent about King's use of dialect.\"The Guardian\" refers to it as: \"one of King\u2019s most extraordinarily heartfelt books.\" \"Publishers Weekly\" says: \"King, even without the trappings of horror and suspense, is a magnificent storyteller whose greatest strength has always been characterization.\"\nAdaptations.\nThe novel was adapted into a 1995 film directed by Taylor Hackford. It starred Kathy Bates as Dolores, with Jennifer Jason Leigh as her daughter Selena, and Judy Parfitt as Vera Donovan. David Joss Buckley adapted the novel for the stage. It was produced in Germany and France and nominated for Globe De Crystal by Paris Premiere, 2007. \"Dolores Claiborne\", the operatic adaptation of the novel composed by Tobias Picker to a libretto by J. D. McClatchy, premiered at San Francisco Opera on September 18, 2013, with Patricia Racette in the title role. The play has also been made into a couple of Finnish plays both called \"Doloreksen tunnustus\": in 2009 presented by Tukkateatteri, and in 2012 presented by Ad Astra Teatteri.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64025", "revid": "16495000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64025", "title": "Gerald's Game", "text": "1992 suspense novel by Stephen King\nGerald's Game is a 1992 suspense novel by American writer Stephen King. The story is about a woman whose husband dies of a heart attack while she is handcuffed to a bed, and, following the subsequent realization that she is trapped with little hope of rescue, begins to let the voices inside her head take over.\nThe book is dedicated to King's wife Tabitha and her five sisters. Originally, the book was intended to be a companion piece to King's novel \"Dolores Claiborne\", with the connecting theme of two women in crisis caught in the path of an eclipse, though this aspect was greatly reduced by the time the books were published. The book was adapted into a 2017 film directed by Mike Flanagan.\nPlot.\nJessie Burlingame and her husband Gerald, a successful lawyer, travel from Portland to their secluded lake house in western Maine near Kashwakamak Lake for a spontaneous romantic getaway. The titular \"game\" involves handcuffing Jessie to the bedposts during sex, a new practice that Jessie only pretends to enjoy, though Gerald finds it exciting. This time, however, Jessie finds herself reluctant after being handcuffed and asks to stop. She is ignored by Gerald, who pretends her protests are only part of their game. Realizing her husband is deliberately feigning ignorance and that he intends to rape her, Jessie lashes out, kicking Gerald in the stomach and groin. The shock causes him to have a fatal heart attack. He dies, leaving Jessie handcuffed to the bed.\nAt first, Jessie is horrified at her husband's death and fears the humiliation of being discovered semi-naked and handcuffed, but she realizes the situation is far more dire: it is unlikely that she or Gerald will be missed for several days, no one will think to look for them at the lake house, and all the usual lake residents have gone for the season. There is a possibility that Jessie will die if she cannot escape.\nWhile Jessie frantically considers her options, a combination of panic and thirst causes her to hallucinate voices: \"The Goodwife\" or \"Goody Burlingame,\" a Puritanical version of herself that insists things will be fine and that she should wait to be rescued; \"Punkin\", a representation of Jessie as a 10-year-old girl; Ruth Neary, a college roommate whom Jessie abandoned after a conversation that strayed dangerously close to uncovering Jessie's childhood trauma; and Nora, Jessie's former psychologist, whom Jessie likewise abandoned when Nora questioned Jessie's relationship with her father.\nGuided by these voices, Jessie realizes that Goody's advice to wait for rescue stems from a subconscious belief that she deserves to be trapped in this situation, even if it means her death. When she probes for the reason why, she is able to recall a long-repressed memory of being sexually abused by her father during a solar eclipse when she was ten. Jessie's father manipulated Jessie into believing that she was complicit, resulting in lifelong feelings of shame and guilt. She remembers an inexplicable event in the aftermath of the abuse, during which she experienced a momentary psychic connection with an unknown woman (\"Dolores Claiborne\"). The memories cause Jessie to acknowledge how unhappy and controlling her marriage to Gerald was, leading her to suspect she gave up her independence for the security of being Gerald's trophy wife.\nWaking from an imaginary confrontation with all these characters to a dark bedroom, Jessie sees a tall, gaunt apparition whom she initially mistakes for the spirit of her long-dead father and whom she nicknames \"Space Cowboy\" (after a 1969 Steve Miller song). The figure shows her a wicker basket of jewelry mixed with human bones. Unsure if the figure is another hallucination, Jessie dismisses it, saying aloud it is \"only made of moonlight\", which seems to make it vanish. Her inner voices, however, believe the figure is real and that it will return to harm Jessie if she does not escape by the next night.\nThe following morning, Jessie manages to secure a drink of water from a glass on the bedside table. Refreshed and encouraged by her own ingenuity in getting the water, she renews her efforts to escape, first by trying to break the headboard, then by trying to slip off the bed and push it to the bureau where the keys are placed. Inspired by her memory of the eclipse, in which her father warned her not to cut herself on the smoked glass panes they used as eclipse viewers, Jessie breaks the water glass and uses a sharp shard to slice her wrist, giving herself a degloving injury to lubricate her skin enough to slide her right hand from the cuff. She is able to escape the bed, reach the keys, and free her other hand, but faints from blood loss. When she awakens, it is nearly dark and the Space Cowboy has returned. Jessie throws her wedding ring at his box of jewelry and bones, thinking that is what he wanted all along. Still weak from blood loss, she reaches her car and drives away, with the Space Cowboy hidden in the back seat. Jessie crashes and is knocked unconscious.\nMonths later, Jessie is recuperating from her ordeal. An attorney at Gerald's law firm assists her in covering up the incident to protect her and the firm from scandal, but Jessie feels this is another version of burying her trauma, just as she buried her childhood abuse. To free herself, Jessie writes to the real Ruth, with whom she has not spoken in decades, detailing what really happened at the lake house and subsequent events. The \"Space Cowboy\" had turned out to be a serial killer and necrophile named Raymond Andrew Joubert who had been robbing and squatting in lake houses in the area. Jessie confronts Joubert at his court hearing, where he mocks her \"made of moonlight\" statement, confirming that the encounter really occurred and causing Jessie to spit in his face. Being able to directly confront the man who once terrified her allows Jessie to face the other manipulative men in her life, freeing her of fear and allowing her to deal more honestly with her past. She apologizes for abandoning Ruth, acknowledging that Ruth had confronted her with a truth she could not face, and hopes they can resume their friendship. After mailing the letter, Jessie is able to sleep without nightmares for the first time since her ordeal at the lake house.\nFilm adaptation.\nIn May 2014, \"Deadline Hollywood\" reported that Mike Flanagan had been set to direct a film adaptation. In an interview with Rue Morgue in September 2016, Flanagan said that the film adaptation would premiere on Netflix. In October 2016, Deadline reported that Carla Gugino and Bruce Greenwood would star in the film as Jessie and Gerald Burlingame. On October 17, 2016, Flanagan tweeted indicating the first day of production had begun. The film premiered on Netflix on September 29, 2017.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64026", "revid": "21797043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64026", "title": "The Girl Who Loved Tom Gordon", "text": "Novel by Stephen King\nThe Girl Who Loved Tom Gordon (1999) is a psychological horror novel by American writer Stephen King. In 2004, a pop-up book adaptation was released with design by Kees Moerbeek and illustration by Alan Dingman. A film adaptation to be produced by Chris Romero was announced in 2019.\nPlot summary.\nDuring a family hiking trip, 9-year-old Trisha's mother and brother Pete constantly squabble about the mother's divorce from their father as well as other topics. Falling back to avoid listening to their argument then wandering off the trail for a bathroom break, Trisha is unable to find her family. \nTrying to catch up by taking shortcut, Trisha slips and falls down a steep embankment and ends up hopelessly lost, heading deeper into the heart of the forest. She is left with a bottle of water, two Twinkies, a boiled egg, celery sticks, a tuna sandwich, a bottle of Surge, a poncho, a Game Boy, and a Walkman. She listens to her Walkman to keep her mood up, either to learn of news of the search for her, or to listen to the baseball game featuring her favorite player Tom Gordon.\nAs Trisha starts attempting to stretch her meager supplies by consuming edible flora, her family return to their car and call the police. The rescuers search in the area around the path, but not as far as Trisha has gone. The girl decides to follow a creek because of what she read in \"Little House on the Prairie\" (though it soon turns into a swamp-like river), rationalizing that all bodies of water lead eventually to inhabited areas.\nAs the cops stop searching for the night, Trisha huddles up underneath a tree to rest. Eventually, a combination of fear, hunger, and thirst causes her to hallucinate. She imagines several people from her life, as well as her hero, Tom Gordon, appearing to her.\nDays pass with Trisha wandering further into the woods. Eventually, she begins to believe that she is headed for a confrontation with the God of the Lost, a wasp-faced evil entity who is hunting her down. Her trial becomes a test of a girl's ability to maintain sanity in the face of seemingly certain death. Wracked with pneumonia and near death, she comes upon a road, but just as she discovers signs of civilization, she is confronted by a bear, which she interprets as the God of the Lost in disguise. Facing down her fear, she realizes it's the bottom of the ninth, and she must close the game. In imitation of Tom Gordon, she takes a pitcher's stance and throws her Walkman like a baseball, hitting the bear in the face, and startling it enough to make it back away. A hunter, who has come upon the confrontation between girl and beast, frightens the animal away and takes Trisha to safety, but Trisha knows that she earned her rescue.\nTrisha wakes up in a hospital room. She finds her divorced parents and older brother waiting near her bedside. A nurse tells the girl's family that they must leave so that Trisha can rest because \"her numbers are up and we don't want that\". Her father is the last to leave. Before he does Trisha asks him to hand her a Red Sox hat (autographed by Tom Gordon) and she points towards the sky, just as Tom Gordon does when he closes a game.\nFilm adaptation.\nAlthough George A. Romero was attached to write and direct a film adaptation, plans for it stalled in October 2005 before his death.\nIn August 2019, the project was revived, with Romero's production company still attached. Involved parties with the new production include Chris Romero as producer, \"It\" producer Roy Lee, Jon Berg of Vertigo Entertainment and Ryan Silbert of Origin Story. The production company is Sanibel Films, the production company of Chris Romero and her late husband George Romero. As of the announcement on August 21, 2019, a writer or director had yet to be announced. Andrew Childs serves as executive producer. On November 16, 2020, it was announced that Lynne Ramsay had been picked to direct the film. In July 2025, Lionsgate optioned the rights to the film and brought on JT Mollner to write and direct.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64027", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64027", "title": "The Breathing Method", "text": "Novella by Stephen King\nThe Breathing Method is a novella by American writer Stephen King, originally released as part of his \"Different Seasons\" collection in 1982. It is placed in the section entitled \"A Winter's Tale\". It is the only one of the four stories in the collection not to have been adapted for film.\nPlot.\nDavid, the narrator of the frame tale, is a middle-aged Manhattan lawyer. At the invitation of a senior partner, he joins a strange gentlemen's club where the members, in addition to reading, chatting and playing billiards and chess, like to tell stories, some of which range into the bizarre and macabre.\nOne Thursday before Christmas, the elderly physician Dr. Emlyn McCarron tells a story about an episode that took place early in his long and varied career: that of a patient, Sandra Stansfield, who was determined to give birth to her illegitimate child, no matter what, despite financial problems and social disapproval. McCarron comes to admire her bravery and humor, and the implication is that he has even fallen a bit in love with her.\nSandra masters Dr. McCarron's unusual (for the 1930s) breathing method intended to help her through childbirth. However, when she goes into labor and is on the way to the hospital on an icy winter night, her taxi crashes and she is decapitated. McCarron arrives at the crash site and realizes that Sandra is somehow still alive. Her lungs in her decapitated body are still pumping air, as her head, some feet away, is working to sustain the breathing method so that the baby can be born. McCarron manages to deliver the infant alive and well.\nOn a sweet but haunting end note, Sandra whispers \"Thank you\"\u2014her severed head mouthing the words, which are distortedly heard from the throat jutting from her headless body. McCarron is able to tell her that her baby is a boy and to see that she has registered this before she dies. McCarron and his office nurse pay for the woman's burial, for she has no one else.\nThe child is adopted, and despite the confidential nature of adoption records, McCarron is able to keep track of him over the years. When the man is \"not yet 45\", and an accomplished college professor, McCarron arranges to meet him socially. \"He had his mother's determination, gentlemen,\" he tells the club members, \"and his mother's hazel eyes.\"\nRelation to other works.\nLike King's short story \"The Man Who Would Not Shake Hands\", \"The Breathing Method\" takes the form of a nested narrative told in a strange 'club' in Manhattan.\nReception.\n\"The Breathing Method\" was a finalist for the 1983 World Fantasy Award for Best Novella.\nAdaptation.\nA film adaptation of \"The Breathing Method\" was announced in 2012 as being in development, with Scott Derrickson directing and Scott Teems screenwriting. Later, in 2019, another announcement was made, again involving Derrickson. As of 2024[ [update]] the project is in development hell.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64028", "revid": "50210759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64028", "title": "Locality of reference", "text": "Tendency of a processor to access nearby memory locations in space or time\nIn computer science, locality of reference, also known as the principle of locality, is the tendency of a processor to access the same set of memory locations repetitively over a short period of time. There are two basic types of reference locality \u2013 temporal and spatial locality. Temporal locality refers to the reuse of specific data and/or resources within a relatively small time duration. Spatial locality (also termed \"data locality\") Equidistant locality occurs when the linear traversal is over a longer area of adjacent data structures with identical structure and size, accessing mutually corresponding elements of each structure rather than each entire structure. This is the case when a matrix is represented as a sequential matrix of rows and the requirement is to access a single column of the matrix.\nGeneral usage.\nIf most of the time the substantial portion of the references aggregate into clusters, and if the shape of this system of clusters can be well predicted, then it can be used for performance optimization. There are several ways to benefit from locality using optimization techniques. Common techniques are:\nSpatial and temporal locality usage.\nHierarchical memory.\nHierarchical memory is a hardware optimization that takes the benefits of spatial and temporal locality and can be used on several levels of the memory hierarchy. Paging obviously benefits from temporal and spatial locality. A cache is a simple example of exploiting temporal locality, because it is a specially designed, faster but smaller memory area, generally used to keep recently referenced data and data near recently referenced data, which can lead to potential performance increases.\nData elements in a cache do not necessarily correspond to data elements that are spatially close in the main memory; however, data elements are brought into cache one cache line at a time. This means that spatial locality is again important: if one element is referenced, a few neighboring elements will also be brought into cache. Finally, temporal locality plays a role on the lowest level, since results that are referenced very closely together can be kept in the machine registers. Some programming languages (such as C) allow the programmer to suggest that certain variables be kept in registers.\nData locality is a typical memory reference feature of regular programs (though many irregular memory access patterns exist). It makes the hierarchical memory layout profitable. In computers, memory is divided into a hierarchy in order to speed up data accesses. The lower levels of the memory hierarchy tend to be slower, but larger. Thus, a program will achieve greater performance if it uses memory while it is cached in the upper levels of the memory hierarchy and avoids bringing other data into the upper levels of the hierarchy that will displace data that will be used shortly in the future. This is an ideal, and sometimes cannot be achieved.\nTypical memory hierarchy (access times and cache sizes are approximations of typical values used as of 2013[ [update]] for the purpose of discussion; actual values and actual numbers of levels in the hierarchy vary):\nModern machines tend to read blocks of lower memory into the next level of the memory hierarchy. If this displaces used memory, the operating system tries to predict which data will be accessed least (or latest) and move it down the memory hierarchy. Prediction algorithms tend to be simple to reduce hardware complexity, though they are becoming somewhat more complicated.\nMatrix multiplication.\nA common example is matrix multiplication:\nfor i in 0..n\n for j in 0..m\n for k in 0..p\n C[i][j] = C[i][j] + A[i][k] * B[k][j];\nBy switching the looping order for codice_1 and codice_2, the speedup in large matrix multiplications becomes dramatic, at least for languages that put contiguous array elements in the last dimension. This will not change the mathematical result, but it improves efficiency. In this case, \"large\" means, approximately, more than 100,000 elements in each matrix, or enough addressable memory such that the matrices will not fit in L1 and L2 caches.\nfor i in 0..n\n for k in 0..p\n for j in 0..m\n C[i][j] = C[i][j] + A[i][k] * B[k][j];\nThe reason for this speedup is that in the first case, the reads of codice_3 are in cache (since the codice_2 index is the contiguous, last dimension), but codice_5 is not, so there is a cache miss penalty on codice_5. codice_7 is irrelevant, because it can be hoisted out of the inner loop -- the loop variable there is codice_2.\nfor i in 0..n\n for j in 0..m\n temp = C[i][j]\n for k in 0..p\n temp = temp + A[i][k] * B[k][j];\n C[i][j] = temp\nIn the second case, the reads and writes of codice_7 are both in cache, the reads of codice_5 are in cache, and the read of codice_3 can be hoisted out of the inner loop.\nfor i in 0..n\n for k in 0..p\n temp = A[i][k]\n for j in 0..m\n C[i][j] = C[i][j] + temp * B[k][j];\nThus, the second example has no cache miss penalty in the inner loop while the first example has a cache penalty.\nOn a year 2014 processor, the second case is approximately five times faster than the first case, when written in C and compiled with codice_12. (A careful examination of the disassembled code shows that in the first case, GCC uses SIMD instructions and in the second case it does not, but the cache penalty is much worse than the SIMD gain.)\nTemporal locality can also be improved in the above example by using a technique called blocking. The larger matrix can be divided into evenly sized sub-matrices, so that the smaller blocks can be referenced (multiplied) several times while in memory. Note that this example works for square matrices of dimensions SIZE x SIZE, but it can easily be extended for arbitrary matrices by substituting SIZE_I, SIZE_J and SIZE_K where appropriate.\nfor (ii = 0; ii &lt; SIZE; ii += BLOCK_SIZE)\n for (kk = 0; kk &lt; SIZE; kk += BLOCK_SIZE)\n for (jj = 0; jj &lt; SIZE; jj += BLOCK_SIZE)\n maxi = min(ii + BLOCK_SIZE, SIZE);\n for (i = ii; i &lt; maxi; i++)\n maxk = min(kk + BLOCK_SIZE, SIZE);\n for (k = kk; k &lt; maxk; k++)\n maxj = min(jj + BLOCK_SIZE, SIZE);\n for (j = jj; j &lt; maxj; j++)\n C[i][j] = C[i][j] + A[i][k] * B[k][j];\nThe temporal locality of the above solution is provided because a block can be used several times before moving on, so that it is moved in and out of memory less often. Spatial locality is improved because elements with consecutive memory addresses tend to be pulled up the memory hierarchy together.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64029", "revid": "147410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64029", "title": "The Green Mile (novel)", "text": "Serial novel by Stephen King\nThe Green Mile is a 1996 serial novel by American writer Stephen King. It tells the story of death row supervisor Paul Edgecombe's encounter with John Coffey, an unusual inmate who displays inexplicable healing and empathetic abilities. The serial novel was released in six volumes before being republished as a single-volume work. The book is an example of magical realism. The subsequent film adaptation was a critical and commercial success. \"The Green Mile\" won the Bram Stoker Award for Best Novel in 1996. In 1997, \"The Green Mile\" was nominated as Best Novel for the British Fantasy Award and the Locus Award. In 2003 the book was listed on the BBC's The Big Read poll of the UK's \"best-loved novel\".\nPlot.\nFeaturing a first-person narrative told by Paul Edgecombe, the novel switches between Paul as an old man in the Georgia Pines nursing home writing down his story in 1996, and his time in 1932 as the block supervisor of the Cold Mountain Penitentiary death row, nicknamed \"The Green Mile\" for the color of the floor's linoleum. This year marks the arrival of John Coffey, a 6\u00a0ft 8 in (2.03 m) tall powerfully built black man who has been convicted of raping and murdering two young white girls. During his time on the Mile, John interacts with fellow prisoners Eduard \"Del\" Delacroix, a Cajun arsonist, rapist, and murderer; and William \"Wild Bill\" Wharton, an unhinged and dangerous multiple murderer who is determined to make as much trouble as he can before he is executed. Other inhabitants include Arlen Bitterbuck, a Native American convicted of killing a man in a fight over a pair of boots, Arthur Flanders, a real estate executive who killed his father to perpetrate insurance fraud; and Mr. Jingles, a mouse Del teaches various tricks.\nPaul and the other guards are irritated throughout the book by Percy Wetmore, a sadistic guard who enjoys antagonizing the prisoners. The other guards have to be civil to him despite their dislike of him because he is the nephew of the Governor's wife. When Percy is offered a higher paying job, an administrative position at the nearby Briar Ridge psychiatric hospital, Paul thinks they are finally rid of him. However, Percy refuses to leave until he is allowed to supervise an execution, so Paul hesitantly allows him to run Del's. Percy deliberately avoids soaking a sponge in brine that is supposed to be tucked inside the electrode cap to ensure a quick death in the electric chair. When the switch is thrown, the current causes Del to catch fire in the chair and suffer a prolonged, agonizing demise.\nOver time, Paul realizes that John Coffey possesses inexplicable healing abilities through touch, which he uses to cure Paul's urinary tract infection and revive Mr. Jingles after Percy stomps on him. Simple-minded and shy, John is very empathic and sensitive to the thoughts and feelings of others around him. One night, the guards drug Wharton, then put a straitjacket on Percy and lock him in the padded restraint room so that they can smuggle John out of prison and take him to the home of Warden Hal Moores. Hal's wife Melinda has an inoperable brain tumor, which John cures by drawing the disease out through his hands and into his body, causing him terrible pain. When they return to the Mile, John discharges the disease from Melinda into Percy, causing him to go mad and shoot Wharton to death before falling into a catatonic state from which he never recovers. Percy is then committed to Briar Ridge as a patient.\nPaul's long-simmering suspicions that John is innocent are proven right when he discovers that it was actually Wharton who raped and killed the two girls and that John was trying to revive them. Later, John tells Paul he had touched Wharton and saw how he coerced the sisters to be silent by threatening to kill one if the other made a noise, using their love for each other. Paul is unsure how to help John, but John tells him not to worry, as he is ready to die anyway, wanting to escape the cruelty of the world. John's execution is the last one in which Paul participates.\nAs Paul approaches the conclusion of his written story, he offers it to his friend Elaine to read. After she finishes, he introduces Mr. Jingles to her just before the mouse dies \u2013 it had been alive the past 64 years. Paul explains that those healed by John gained an unnaturally long lifespan. Elaine dies shortly after, never learning that, on the day of his wife's death, Paul saw the ghost of John Coffey. The novel ends with Paul all alone, now 104 years old, wondering how much longer he will live.\nThe protagonist and narrator of the book and the death row supervisor at Cold Mountain Penitentiary. He is 40 years old when the bulk of the story takes place, in 1932. He is a caring man and takes excellent care of the men on his block, avoiding conflict and keeping the peace whenever possible. He is the first character to discover John Coffey's amazing abilities, when the prisoner cures his urinary tract infection. It is also his idea to take Coffey to try to cure Melinda, Warden Hal Moores' wife, of her brain tumor. He transferred to Boy's Correctional with Brutus Howell shortly after Coffey's execution, and he is still alive at age 104 as of 1996, when he decides to write down John Coffey's story, possibly to publicly reveal the latter's innocence.\nHe is second in command on the Green Mile and Paul's best friend. He is a tall, imposing man but not violent at all unless necessary. His nickname of \"Brutal\" is intended as irony, as he is normally calm and soft-spoken. A former football tackle who had gone on to play at Louisiana State University (LSU) in his youth, he eventually suffers a fatal heart attack at home, presumably in his late fifties, about twenty-five years after Coffey's execution.\nHe is an African American with a massive build (6\u00a0ft 8 in tall), having been convicted of the rape and murder of two young girls and sentenced to death. He is very quiet and prefers to keep to himself, weeps almost constantly, and is afraid of the dark. Even at the end, during his execution, he asks Paul Edgecombe not to put on the traditional black silk mask used to block the view of the prisoner's face because he fears the dark. Coffey is described as \"knowing his own name and not much else\" and lacks the capability to do so much as tie a simple knot. At his trial, though, the prosecution contends he lured the girls away from their home, disposed of the watchdog, and carefully planned the crime using abilities Paul believes to be far beyond his reach. He is the calmest and mildest prisoner the guards have ever seen, despite his hulking form. He turns out to be innocent of the rape and murder of the two girls, but allows himself to be executed regardless because he is tired of all the cruelty in the world.\nThe secondary antagonist of the story. He is a young and sadistic guard. He is disliked by Paul and the other guards because of his cruelty, but they can't do anything about it because he is the nephew of the state governor's wife. He is very homophobic and attacks Eduard Delacroix for allegedly touching him, although it was an accident caused by Del stumbling out of the prison truck. He is later attacked by \"Wild Bill\" Wharton, consequently wets himself, and is teased by Delacroix for it. In retaliation, Percy deliberately sabotages Delacroix's execution. \nThe main antagonist of the story. He is on death row for various crimes, including an armed robbery in which he killed a pregnant woman and two other innocent bystanders. He does not like the nickname \"Wild Bill\" but prefers to be called \"Billy the Kid\", a name he has tattooed on his forearm. When he first arrives he manages to convince the guards he is in a drugged stupor, only to attack and attempt to strangle to death Dean Stanton when they reach E Block. He continues to wreak havoc on the Mile and plays tricks such as urinating on the guards and spitting a chewed-up Moon Pie into Brutal's face. He is punished by being placed in solitary confinement countless times, but never learns his lesson. As John Coffey is being smuggled to Hal Moores's house, Wild Bill grabs his arm and Coffey sees that he actually committed the crimes for which Coffey was convicted. Therefore, Coffey gives Percy the \"sickness\" he took from the warden's wife, indirectly killing Wild Bill.\nHe is a Cajun prisoner with a fairly slow grasp of the English language, and has no family. He raped and murdered a young girl before starting a fire, which caused the deaths of six more people (including two children), resulting in his being sent to death row. While on the Mile, Del befriends a mouse named Mr. Jingles, who becomes his best friend in his last days on death row. Percy, his enemy, sabotages his execution, causing Del to die a slow and gruesome death in the electric chair.\nCalled Steamboat Willie by Brutal, he is an unusually intelligent mouse. He becomes a friend to Eduard Delacroix, who renames him Mr. Jingles in the few days before the man is executed. He is healed by John Coffey after being stomped on by Percy Wetmore. This gives him increased longevity and he finally dies 64 years later.\nAn inmate on death row, convicted of killing his father in an insurance fraud scheme. His sentence is commuted to life imprisonment, but he is later murdered by another inmate 12 years after Coffey was put to death.\nA Washita Cherokee death row inmate, convicted of killing a man in a drunken brawl over a pair of boots. His execution is the first of three mentioned in Paul's story.\nPaul Edgecombe's wife. Dies at the age of 59 in a bus accident on the way to her grandchild's graduation in 1956.\nThe warden at Cold Mountain Penitentiary. After Coffey cured his wife, he somehow suspected the truth of Coffey's supposed guilt of the double murder he was convicted of. Hal died from a stroke around the same time as the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.\nWarden Moores's wife, who is dying of a brain tumor and is cured by John Coffey. She dies of a heart attack ten years later.\nThe assistant warden.\nA guard on E Block who is strangled and nearly killed by William Wharton. A father of young children, Paul ensures he takes no part in the taking of John Coffey to Melinda Moores due to the risk of losing his job. He applies for relocation to C Block after John Coffey's death, where he is murdered by an inmate four months later.\nOne of the main guards on E Block along with his friends Paul Edgecombe, Brutus Howell and Dean Stanton. He eventually dies of cancer in 1982, 50 years after John Coffey's execution.\nA \"floater\" guard on E Block (not permanently assigned there).\nA guard who is part of the execution team. He operates the switch room.\nA trustee who stands in for the condemned during execution rehearsals and sells snacks to prisoners and guards.\nA reporter who wrote on the Detterick twins' murders and John Coffey's trial. Despite believing himself to be an \"Enlightenment\" man, he displays prejudice in his stance on \"Negroes\" and tries to convince Paul of John Coffey's guilt.\nA friend of Paul in the present-day nursing home where he tells his story. She is later revealed to be the grandmother of the Speaker of the Georgia House of Representatives and uses her influence to prevent Brad Dolan from harassing Paul. She dies from a heart attack three months after hearing Paul's story about John Coffey.\nThe Sheriff of Trapingus County, where the murders of the Detterick twins took place. Despite playing no part in apprehending John Coffey, he later shows up at the execution. An outspoken Baptist with strong racial prejudice and immensely overweight, he later succumbs to a heart attack while having sex with a 17-year-old African American in his office.\nThe Deputy Sheriff of Trapingus County, who led the search party that found John Coffey. While displaying strong doubt about Coffey's guilt after being shown signs of innocence by Paul Edgecombe, he is still powerless to call for an appeal as he is subordinate to Sheriff Cribus, whom he allegedly hopes to succeed.\nA malicious nursing home employee who harasses Paul Edgecombe. Paul strongly compares him to Percy Wetmore, and several times mistakes him for Percy, despite the latter having died in 1965.\nThe two young girls whom John Coffey was convicted of raping and murdering, though the crime was actually committed by William Wharton.\nThe parents of Kathe and Cora. Marjorie was killed in a car accident 18 years after John Coffey's execution while Klaus died from a stroke in March 1933 shortly after John Coffey's execution.\nKlaus and Marjorie's son and Kathe and Cora's brother who goes with his dad to find the twins after they were taken.\nFilm adaptation.\nFrank Darabont adapted the novel into a screenplay for a feature film of the same name. Released in 1999, the film was directed by Darabont and stars Tom Hanks as Paul Edgecombe and Michael Clarke Duncan as John Coffey. The setting is changed from 1932 to 1935 in order to include the film \"Top Hat\", which does not appear in the book. The film was nominated for four Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Supporting Actor for Duncan.\nPublication history.\n\"The Green Mile\" was first published in six paperback volumes. The first, subtitled \"The Two Dead Girls\" was published on March 28, 1996, with new volumes following monthly until the final volume, \"Coffey on the Mile\", was released on August 29, 1996. The novel was republished as a single paperback volume on May 5, 1997. On October 3, 2000, the book was published in its first hardcover edition (). In 2007, Subterranean Press released a 10th anniversary edition of the novel in three different versions, each mimicking the original six-volume release: the Gift Edition, limited to 2,000 copies, containing six unsigned hardcover volumes of each separate part, housed in a slipcase; the Limited Edition, limited to 148 numbered copies, and signed by Stephen King, housed in a slipcase; and the Lettered Edition, limited to 52 lettered copies, and signed by Stephen King, housed in a traycase. Every edition contained new illustrations by Mark Geyer, the novel's original illustrator. Each version had its own design, and cost $150, $900, and $2,500, respectively.\nThere were other versions published as well, including a \"pocketbook\" sized hardcover by Paw Prints ().\nKing was first made aware of the possibility to publish stories in shorter installments by Ralph Vicinanza, who, after a conversation with British publisher Malcolm Edwards, learned that Charles Dickens had often published his stories in shorter installments by either folding them into magazines, or by publishing the installments on their own as a chapbook. After a lengthy struggle to write the novel, Vicinaza pitched the idea of writing the book \"the same way it would be read - in installments\" to King the year before the initial release of the first installment. The idea of serialized publication appealed to King on multiple levels; from the writer's responsibility to finish the story once the first installment is published, to the readers' inability to skip to the end of the story and ruin the suspense. In the introduction to the first collected edition of the story, King also explains the financial aspect of initially publishing the book in six installments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The part-by-part publication was a sore point with me and some readers as well, because the price was very high for a paperback; about nineteen dollars for all six installments (considerably less if bought at a discount store). For that reason a boxed set never seems like the ideal solution. This volume, a trade paperback available at a more sane price, seemed to be the ideal solution.\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64031", "revid": "50843869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64031", "title": "Four Past Midnight", "text": "1990 novella collection by Stephen King\nFour Past Midnight is a collection of novellas written by Stephen King in 1988 and 1989 and published in August 1990. It is his second book of this type, the first one being \"Different Seasons\". The collection won the Bram Stoker Award in 1990 for Best Collection and was nominated for a Locus Award in 1991. In the introduction, King says that, while a collection of four novellas like \"Different Seasons\", this book is more strictly horror with elements of the supernatural.\nNovellas.\n\"The Langoliers\".\nPlot.\nPilot Brian Engle, immediately after a difficult flight from Tokyo to Los Angeles, learns that his ex-wife Anne has died in an accident and boards a red-eye flight to Boston as a passenger. A flight attendant speaks of an unusual phenomenon over the Mojave Desert that resembles an aurora. Brian falls asleep during takeoff, having been awake throughout his previous flight. Dinah Bellman, a young blind girl with psychic abilities, also falls asleep, and awakes to find that her aunt and several other passengers have disappeared.\nDinah, mistaking a wig for a scalp, screams and awakes Brian and nine other passengers: teacher Laurel Stevenson, English diplomat Nick Hopewell, writer Bob Jenkins, violinist Albert Kaussner, recovering addict Bethany Simms, businessman Rudy Warwick, mechanic Don Gaffney, mentally ill bank manager Craig Toomy and an unknown heavily intoxicated passenger. The passengers find that the crew and the passengers who were awake have disappeared, leaving the airliner under the control of the autopilot. Brian takes control of the plane but is unable to make any outside contact, and the passengers can only see a dark void below. Brian manages to land in Bangor, Maine, despite furious protests from Toomy, who insists on reaching Boston for an important board meeting.\nUpon arrival, the group finds the airport deserted. The clocks have stopped, there is no electricity and the environment seems generally lifeless. As all products and substances have lost their quality, fuel does not burn, thus preventing further flight. Dinah hears an approaching and threatening sound, and the group agrees to leave before it arrives. The unhinged Toomy considers the situation to be a conspiracy against him and takes Bethany hostage at gunpoint, but the environment has robbed the gun of its potency, and the passengers subdue Toomy.\nBob concludes that the aforementioned phenomenon was a \"time rip\" that has sent their plane into the past. As Dinah reports that the sound is growing closer, Toomy relates to Dinah and Laurel that the sound is emitted by the \"Langoliers\", which were said by his abusive father to hunt and devour negligent and unmotivated boys. Albert theorizes that time is still flowing inside the plane, which is proven when food brought on board is restored to its normal properties. With the realization that fuel pumped into the airliner will also return to normal, Brian has the plane refueled and manages to start the engines. Meanwhile, Toomy frees himself from his bonds and stabs Dinah, perceiving her to be a Langolier. Despite this, Dinah insists that Toomy must not be killed because the group needs him alive. As Albert and Don search for a stretcher for Dinah, Toomy kills Don before Albert subdues him. Dinah, while being transported onto the plane, telepathically leads Toomy to the runway, where he hallucinates his board meeting. The Langoliers appear in the form of toothed spherical creatures, and they are distracted from the departing plane as they devour Toomy and the surrounding reality.\nBob proposes that the Langoliers' purpose is to clean up what is left of the past by devouring it. Dinah succumbs to her injuries, and the plane approaches the time rip. Bob realizes that the passengers must be asleep when passing through the rip, otherwise they will disappear. Albert suggests lowering the cabin pressure to induce unconsciousness, which would require one passenger to sacrifice themself by remaining conscious to restore the pressure just before the plane passes through the rip. Nick volunteers, wishing to atone for mistakenly shooting and killing three Irish children, and asks Laurel to go to his father to ask forgiveness. Nick, wearing an emergency oxygen mask, flies the plane through the rip and disappears. Brian awakes and lands the plane at Los Angeles, but the passengers are again met with a deserted airport. Realizing that they are in the near future, the passengers take shelter against a wall to avoid the airport's human traffic and wait for the present to catch up to them. A wave of rising noise and motion hits them and they find themselves in the present again.\nAdaptations.\n\"The Langoliers\" was adapted for a two-part TV movie in 1994. The TV movie stars Kate Maberly, Kimber Riddle, Patricia Wettig, Mark Lindsay Chapman, Frankie Faison, Baxter Harris, Dean Stockwell, David Morse, Christopher Collet, and Bronson Pinchot.\nThe movie version of \"The Langoliers\", produced for broadcast on ABC-TV, was filmed almost exclusively in and around the Bangor International Airport in Bangor, Maine (where author Stephen King attended college) during the summer of 1994. King himself, echoing Alfred Hitchcock's famous numerous cameos, made a cameo appearance in the film as Craig Toomy's boss during Toomy's hallucination.\nIn 2021, Greek filmmaker Aristotelis Maragkos created an experimental film using footage from the miniseries of \"The Langoliers\", titled \"The Timekeepers of Eternity\". Maragkos re-edited the series to a single hour to focus more closely on Toomy\u2019s deterioration, and printed each individual frame onto black and white copy paper in order to hand-animate each scene with stop-motion.\nThe audiobook of this story is read by actor Willem Dafoe.\n\"Secret Window, Secret Garden\".\n\"Secret Window, Secret Garden\" is similar to King's earlier novel \"The Dark Half\". Both are about authors who are thinly veiled analogues of King himself\u2014Thad Beaumont in \"The Dark Half\" and Mort Rainey in \"Secret Window, Secret Garden\".\nPlot.\nMorton Rainey, a successful novelist in Maine, is confronted by a man from Mississippi named John Shooter, who claims Mort plagiarized a story he wrote. Mort vehemently denies ever plagiarizing anything. Shooter leaves, but not before leaving his manuscript, \"Secret Window, Secret Garden\". Mort throws the manuscript into the trash can. When his housemaid recovers the manuscript\u2014thinking it belongs to Mort\u2014he finally reads Shooter's story, discovering that it is almost identical to his short story \"Sowing Season\". The only differences are the title, the character's name, the diction, and the ending. Mort is disturbed by these findings.\nShooter returns a few days later. Having learned that \"Sowing Season\" was published two years before Shooter claimed to have written \"Secret Window, Secret Garden\", Mort confronts him with this information. An enraged Shooter accuses Mort of lying and demands proof, giving Mort three days to show him his published story. Overnight, he kills Mort's cat and burns down the house of his ex-wife, which contained the magazine issue in which \"Sowing Season\" was published. Mort orders a new copy of the magazine. He also asks his caretaker, Greg Carstairs, to tail Shooter and to talk to a man named Tom Greenleaf, who drove past Mort and Shooter. Shooter, angry that Mort has involved other people in their business, kills both men and plants evidence framing Mort for the murders. Upon receiving the magazine and returning home, Mort finds that \"Sowing Season\" has been removed.\nMort realizes that Shooter is really his own split personality. He had created \"Shooter\" out of guilt for stealing the story \"Crowfoot Mile\" early in his career and had recently been suspected of another act of plagiarism, although he was innocent the second time. Tom had not seen Shooter while driving by\u2014he saw Mort, by himself. Mort realizes he burned down his own home, killed his own cat, and murdered two people. Mort hears who he believes to be Shooter pulling into his driveway. Desperate for any sign of his own sanity, he looks outside only to see his ex-wife, Amy. Devastated, he loses control of his body and mind to Shooter. He blacks out. Amy discovers that Mort has gone insane, having written the word \"Shooter\" all over his house. She goes to Mort's study, where \"Shooter\" attempts to kill her in an ambush. She manages to escape. \"Shooter\", chasing Amy outside, is shot by her insurance investigator. Mort becomes himself again, addresses Amy, and dies.\nLater, Amy and Ted Milner\u2014a man she had an affair with before divorcing Mort\u2014discuss her ex-husband's motives. She insists that Mort had become two people, one of them a character so vivid it became real. She then recalls something Tom witnessed\u2014when he drove past Mort alone, he saw Shooter and Mort in his rearview mirror, but Shooter was transparent. Amy then reveals that while digging through Mort's house, she found Shooter's trademark hat. She left it right-side up on a trash bag. When she returned, she found a note from Shooter inside the overturned hat, revealing that he has traveled back to Mississippi with the story he came for, \"Crowfoot Mile\". Amy remarks that Mort had created a character so vivid, he actually came to life.\nAdaptations.\nA 2004 film adaptation called \"Secret Window\" was made, starring Johnny Depp, John Turturro, Maria Bello and Timothy Hutton. The storyline of the movie differs from that of the novel, most notably in their respective endings. In the movie, Mort kills his wife and her lover, while in the novel he is killed before he has a chance to do so. In the movie, after months it is shown that Mort grew corn in his wife's garden, where it is implied that he buried her and her lover, thus removing any proof that he murdered them. Another difference is the titles of the short stories: in the movie, Mort Rainey wrote a story called \"Secret Window\" and John Shooter wrote \"Sowing Season\". The story in the movie version is set in upstate New York instead of Maine.\nA three-episode radio adaptation was first broadcast in 1999 on BBC Radio 4 starring Henry Goodman, William Roberts, Barbara Barnes, Lee Montague and Kerry Shale.\nThe audiobook of this story is read by actor James Woods.\nInspiration.\nKing has been the subject of unfounded accusations of plagiarism. A woman claimed that King stole several of her story ideas and based characters from his books on her. All of her cases have been dismissed. In another incident, a deranged man broke into King's home, and when discovered by King's wife, claimed that King stole the plot of \"Misery\" from the intruder's aunt and that he had a bomb in the shoebox he was holding and was going to blow up the house. The fake bomb was made of pencils with paperclips wrapped around the erasers.\n\"The Library Policeman\".\n\"The Library Policeman\" tells of Sam Peebles and his battle against an age-old fear.\nPeebles is asked to give a speech to his local Rotary Club. An office assistant named Naomi Higgins directs him to the public library to check out books that might help with his speechwriting. At the library, he receives a library card and assistance in finding books from an elderly librarian, Ardelia Lortz. Having noticed a series of disturbing posters in the children's section, including one featuring a frightening \"Library Policeman\" character, he discusses their appropriateness with Ardelia. After being rebuffed by her, Sam checks out the books with the warning that they must be returned on time or else \"I'll have to send the Library Policeman after you.\"\nThe speech is a success, but Naomi informs Sam that Ardelia Lortz has been dead for many years. Ardelia, as a young woman, died by suicide in 1960 after murdering two children and a local deputy sheriff. The books are accidentally destroyed and a menacing Library Policeman terrorizes Sam at his house. Through Naomi, Sam meets Dave \"Dirty Dave\" Duncan, an alcoholic former sign painter and a former lover of Ardelia's. From Dave's recollections, Sam discovers that Ardelia is not a person but a being which feeds on fear and that Duncan was a sometimes unwilling companion/conspirator in helping her feed from the fear of children. Dave believes Ardelia is seeking revenge and a new host. While the trio attempt to stop Ardelia's return, Sam recalls a repressed memory: a man claiming to be a \"Library Policeman\" raped and threatened Sam when he was a young child in St. Louis. However, the new Library Policeman is not just a recreation of the man from Sam's past, but also an embodiment of Ardelia, who wants Sam as her new host.\nDave dies defending Sam and Naomi from Ardelia. Sam and Naomi defeat the Library Policeman/Ardelia, only to discover that Ardelia has already attached to Naomi in the form of a blistery growth. Sam removes the creature from Naomi's neck and destroys it under the wheels of a passing train.\nAdaptations.\nThe audiobook of this story is read by actor Ken Howard.\n\"The Sun Dog\".\nWhen Kevin Delevan receives a Sun 660 Polaroid camera for his fifteenth birthday, he discovers a strange defect: the only photos it produces are of a malicious black dog which seems to move closer with each shot as though to attack the photographer. On a recommendation, Kevin seeks help from Reginald \"Pop\" Merrill, the wealthy and unscrupulous owner of a junk shop in the town of Castle Rock, Maine. While just as unsettled by the phenomenon as Kevin, Merrill sees an opportunity to further his own interests; namely, selling the camera to a paranormal enthusiast for a great deal of money. He manages to switch out the camera for another of the same model, which Kevin destroys. Much to his dismay, however, Merrill cannot rid himself of the Sun as his customers either dismiss it as a hoax or decline to purchase it due to the discomfort and unease they feel upon viewing the photos. Furthermore, he finds himself increasingly compelled to use the Sun\u2013the dog slowly advancing and transforming into something more savage and monstrous with every picture he takes.\nIn the meantime, Kevin is plagued by recurring nightmares about the dog. Realizing that Merrill tricked him and the Sun was never destroyed, he sets out to prevent Merrill from taking any more photos for fear that the dog will \"break through\" into the real world. By this point, the camera's influence over Merrill has caused him to lose his grip on sanity. After waking up one night to find himself holding the Sun and repeatedly pressing its trigger, he resolves to smash it in the morning. However, he hallucinates that one of the cuckoo clocks hanging on the wall of his store is really the camera and smashes that instead. Under the illusion that he is repairing a clock at his workbench, Merrill starts taking pictures again. At this moment, Kevin and his father arrive to confront Merrill, but are too late to stop him. The dog tears its way out of the final photograph, killing Merrill in the process. Inspired by his nightmares, Kevin has brought another Sun with him, and just as the dog is about to release itself, he takes its picture, trapping it once more in the \"Polaroid world\".\nIn the epilogue, Kevin gets a computer for his following birthday. In order to test its word processor function, he types \"The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.\" Rather than a printout of this text, the page reads, \"The dog is loose again. It is not sleeping. It is not lazy. It's coming for you, Kevin. It's very hungry. And it's \"VERY\" angry.\"\nAdaptations.\nIn April 1999, White Cap Productions and IMAX Corporation announced a film adaptation of \"The Sun Dog\". The proposed film, helmed by Lawrence D. Cohen (who had previously adapted King's \"Carrie\" and \"It\"), was to be filmed in IMAX's giant-screen 3D format, and distributed exclusively to IMAX theaters. Production was expected to begin in 2000, however by May of that year the project had been placed on hold. It was ultimately dropped from IMAX's production slate in October 2001.\nThe 2016 Audible audiobook of this story is read by Maine humorist Tim Sample.\nReception.\nUpon its release, Michael A. Morrison in \"Washington Post\" called the collection \"exceptionally well crafted\" with the exception of \"Sun Dog\", praising King's \"unexpected similes\" and his use of \"dreams to reveal character\". Robert Chatain called it possibly King's best book and \"a serious, heavyweight effort\", characterising the tales as \"rich\" as well as \"fast, tricky, even perverse, like carnival rides that look easy from the ground but turn unexpectedly nasty and vertiginous when we're up in the air\".\nHowever, Josh Rubins in \"Entertainment Weekly\" graded the anthology a \"C+\" and considered it formulaic with \"enthusiasm\" and contemporary setting. Rubins compared \"The Langoliers\" to\u2014quoting characters of the novella\u2014a \"stupid disaster [movie]\" and a \"bad [television] movie.\" He found \"Secret Window, Secret Garden\" bearably suspenseful with a \"gimmicky, least convincing [finale].\" He called \"The Sun Dog\" the \"simplest, most distinctive story\" and praised it as mostly \"a delicious black comedy.\" Andy Solomon in \"The New York Times\" commented that King's mass appeal comes \"ironically from his cliched diction,\" referring to the anthology's reliance on popular culture for descriptions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64032", "revid": "37763213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64032", "title": "Celebrian", "text": ""}
{"id": "64033", "revid": "37763213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64033", "title": "Celebr\u00edan", "text": ""}
{"id": "64035", "revid": "45375014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64035", "title": "The Long Walk (novel)", "text": "1979 novel by Stephen King\nThe Long Walk is a dystopian horror novel by American writer Stephen King, published in 1979, under the pseudonym Richard Bachman. Set in a dystopian alternative version of the United States ruled by a totalitarian regime, the plot follows the contestants of a grueling annual walking contest. While not the first of King's novels to be published, \"The Long Walk\" was the first novel he wrote, having begun it in 1966\u201367 during his freshman year at the University of Maine, some eight years before his first published novel, \"Carrie\", was released in 1974.\nIt was collected in 1985 in the hardcover omnibus \"The Bachman Books\", and has seen several reprints since, as both paperback and hardcover. In 2023, Centipede Press released the first stand-alone hardcover edition. In 2000, the American Library Association listed \"The Long Walk\" as one of the 100 best books for teenage readers published between 1966 and 2000.\nPlot.\nSet in an alternative, dystopian version of the United States, the plot revolves around the Long Walk, an annual contest in which 100 young men walk continuously along a pre-arranged route (presumably on Route 1). Walkers must keep a minimum pace of and are issued verbal warnings by soldiers monitoring their progress if they fall below this speed for 30 seconds. A walker can lose one warning if he walks for an hour without earning another. If a walker receives three warnings and falls below the minimum speed for 30 seconds again, he is shot and killed by the soldiers. There are no breaks or rest periods of any sort, although the walkers do receive food and water, and the Walk does not have a set distance or time limit; it ends only when one walker remains alive, receiving whatever he wants for the rest of his life as his prize.\nRay Garraty, from Androscoggin County, Maine, arrives at the start of the Walk on the Canada\u2013Maine border, where he meets the other walkers, among them the sardonic Pete McVries, the friendly Art Baker, the cocky Hank Olson, and the enigmatic Stebbins. The Major, the leader of the secret police force known as the Squads, starts the Walk. Throughout the first day, Garraty befriends Baker, Olson, and several other walkers such as Abraham and Pearson, growing particularly close to McVries and becoming intrigued by Stebbins. The men speculate on who will be the first walker to be eliminated. A walker named Gary Barkovitch reveals to a reporter that he is in the Long Walk to \"dance on the graves\" of other participants and later provokes another walker into attacking him, resulting in the latter's death and Barkovitch being ostracized.\nGarraty succeeds in surviving the night. Scramm, the odds-on favorite in Vegas, tells Garraty that he has a pregnant wife and will have sufficient motivation to keep going. Garraty decides that his motivation is to survive until Freeport, where he hopes to see his girlfriend Jan in the crowd. The walkers begin to resent the Major, and McVries stops walking in an attempt to fight the soldiers but is saved by Garraty. In return, McVries saves Garraty's life after Garraty experiences a panic attack. This camaraderie infuriates Olson, who is now severely fatigued. Garraty reveals to the others that the Squads took his father away, and a fight almost breaks out between McVries and another walker, Collie Parker, when Parker claims that only \"damn fools\" are \"Squaded\".\nStebbins tells Garraty that he believes he will win but that all walkers have a death wish. McVries tells Garraty that he will sit down when he cannot walk farther. Stebbins advises Garraty to watch Olson, who has become unresponsive. After Garraty brings Olson out of this state, Olson attacks the soldiers and is executed. Scramm falls ill with pneumonia and seems likely to collapse. The other walkers agree that the winner should provide financial security for Scramm's wife. Garraty asks Barkovitch to join the agreement, and Barkovitch agrees, as he has suffered in isolation from the others. Scramm thanks the others and is killed in an act of defiance against the soldiers.\nAfter developing a charley horse, Garraty receives three warnings but recovers and resumes walking with less than two seconds to spare. To distract himself until he can lose a warning, he tells McVries about how he felt a compulsion to join the walk and that his mother allowed herself to be persuaded by the thought of financial security. McVries reveals that he joined the walk against his family's wishes. Abraham tells Garraty that he did not withdraw after being accepted due to the amusement it provided to his town. Garraty begins to suffer from doubts about his sexuality and masculinity due to suppressed memories re-emerging, especially after McVries hints that he is sexually attracted to Garraty. This causes Garraty to lash out at a deteriorating Barkovitch, and Barkovitch kills himself when the rest of the walkers begin taunting him. The next morning, Garraty finds that many walkers (including Pearson) have died overnight, as Barkovitch predicted.\nWhen the walkers arrive in Freeport, Garraty attempts to die in Jan's arms but is saved by McVries. As a response, Abraham convinces the walkers to make a promise to stop helping each other, which Garraty does reluctantly. This has disastrous consequences: Parker starts a revolution against the soldiers but is killed when nobody joins in; Abraham removes his shirt and catches a cold overnight because nobody can offer him a replacement, resulting in his death; Baker falls over and gains a severe nosebleed and is given three warnings as nobody helps him up. On the morning of the 5th day, Stebbins reveals to Garraty and McVries that he is the Major's son, and his prize would be acceptance into the Major's household. However, Stebbins has become aware that the Major is using him as a \"rabbit\" to cause the walk to last longer, which has worked, as seven walkers make it into Massachusetts. Baker, now delirious, tells Garraty that he cannot walk any farther and thanks Garraty for being his friend. Garraty unsuccessfully tries to talk him out of suicide. \nWith Baker dead, the only remaining walkers are Garraty, Stebbins, and McVries. As Garraty tells him a fairy tale, McVries falls asleep and walks towards the crowd. Garraty breaks his promise and saves him; however, McVries chooses to sit down and die peacefully. A distraught Garraty is beckoned by a dark figure further ahead and decides to give up because Stebbins cannot be beaten. When he tries to tell Stebbins, Stebbins clutches at him in horror and falls over dead.\nThis leaves Garraty the uncomprehending winner. He ignores the Major and keeps following the dark figure (whom he believes to be another walker), declaring that there is \"still so far to walk\" and, hoping to catch up, even finds the strength to run.\n The novel's main character and point-of-view character, a 160-lb. 16-year-old boy from Pownal. Garraty's father was Squaded for his outspoken political opinion when Garraty himself was very young, shaping his identity over time and leaving his mother - and himself - alone and with very little money. Garraty is a natural leader, demonstrating sincerity, benevolence, and a considerable measure of discipline. He also tends to be sensitive and somewhat na\u00efve, as well as insecure in his masculinity. Garraty is more familiar with the Long Walk area, and the boys find themselves consulting and relying on him throughout their struggles; he is also one of the few Walkers who has seen a previous Walk in person. He felt a compulsion to join the Walk that he struggles to understand, but exhibits a tenacious will to live. He is played by Cooper Hoffman in the film adaptation.\n Garraty's closest companion and staunch ally; one of the original \"Musketeers\", a 167-lb. 16-year-old boy from Passaic, New Jersey, where he lived with his mother, father, and his four-year-old sister, Katrina. He is described as very fit, with black hair and a bad scar along one cheek that stands out when he is nervous, frightened, or angry. A natural leader in his own right, McVries demonstrates wit, charisma, and compassion; he is also very bitter, and despises himself after a recent traumatic breakup. McVries struggles to reconcile his own altruistic nature with the brutally competitive reality of the Walk. He encourages and often saves his companions through his actions, advice, and quick thinking; conversely, in several instances, he intentionally goads them into pushing him away. McVries is Barkovitch's foil and openly detests the other boy for his deliberate cruelty. He is played by David Jonsson in the film adaptation.\n A loner who walks at the rear of the group, Stebbins is described as \"skinny and blond, wearing purple pants and a blue chambray shirt under an old green zip sweater.\" Stebbins is enigmatic, sardonic, and self-assured. He is also intelligent and very insightful, with an uncanny ability to predict others' thoughts, feelings, and reactions, which he uses to rattle the other boys. He later reveals himself to be one of the Major's many illegitimate children and presumes that he was chosen for the Walk as a tool to galvanize the other Walkers and prolong the competition. He is played by Garrett Wareing in the film adaptation.\n One of the original Musketeers, a 17-year-old former Night Rider from a large impoverished family in Louisiana; before the Long Walk, he was considering a career as a mortician. He is described as \"young and beautiful,\" walks with \"deceptive leisure,\" and speaks \"with a very slight Southern accent\" that he consciously suppresses. Baker is gentle, thoughtful, and soft-spoken, but he is also elusive, acquisitive, and somewhat morbid: death intrigues him, and he dwells on it constantly. He is played by Tut Nyuot in the film adaptation.\n One of the original Musketeers, Olson is a boy of unknown background who is full of bluster and bravado. His audacity quickly fades, however: he becomes panicky, helpless, withdrawn, and\u2014eventually\u2014nearly unresponsive, though he persists with the help of McVries and Garraty. He considers himself a man of simple needs and doesn't believe in love as an earthly concept. Olson is deeply religious; his profound devotion to the Catholic faith shines through in moments of desperation and despair. He is played by Ben Wang in the film adaptation.\n A boy from Washington, DC, described as a \"dark, intense-looking boy\" with olive skin, a rather sharp nose, and hooded dark brown eyes. Barkovitch is sadistic and provocative, with narcissistic tendencies. He demonstrates a craving for attention, but due to his personality, he tends to be either ignored or ridiculed, which agitates him; he is ostracized after goading a boy to his death. Scramm speculates that Barkovitch willingly joined the Walk in order to watch others suffer and die. He is loathed by most, if not all, of the other Walkers, but particularly by McVries. He is played by Charlie Plummer in the film adaptation.\n The predicted winner of the current Long Walk, he's from Arizona, where he lives with his pregnant 17-year-old wife, Cathy. He is described as a \"big bull of a fellow\" with a moon face, a crew cut, a \"mooselike\" build, and few remaining teeth. Though he is considered dim-witted, Scramm is friendly and remarkably dignified. He appears to have a great deal of respect for the Hopi. He does not appear in the film adaptation.\n One of Garraty's companions, a 17-year-old described as \"a tall boy with reddish hair in jeans and a T-shirt\" as well as Oxford shoes. Abraham is droll, somber, and irritable; he applied to the Walk on an impulse, then followed through out of spite after his acceptance\u2014an achievement he was proud of\u2014was treated as a joke by his loved ones. He is understandably bitter about his resulting participation. He does not appear in the film adaptation.\n One of Garraty's companions, a boy from Joliet, Illinois, described as \"a big-muscled blond in a polo shirt.\" Parker is naturally cocky, rowdy, and abrasive; Garraty initially dislikes Parker, believing him to be a bully. Parker mellows over time, however, and they earn each other's respect. Parker demonstrates an astonishing capacity for camaraderie and fortitude; he is the only Walker known to have successfully killed a half-track soldier. He is played by Joshua Odjick in the film adaptation.\n One of Garraty's companions. He is described as a tall young man with glasses and pants that are too big for him. Pearson is morose and enjoys poetry, game theory, and chess, and views the Walk as a competition that can be solved logically. For luck, Pearson keeps 99 pennies in one pocket and moves a penny to his other pocket whenever another Walker dies. He is played by Thamela Mpumlwana in the film adaptation.\n One of Garraty's companions, a boy described as wearing \"glasses and a crewcut,\" with a naturally florid face. He carries a notebook to record the other Walkers' names and numbers and aspires to write a book about the Long Walk from an insider's perspective. He is played by Jordan Gonzalez in the film adaptation.\n The first walker to die. After he gets a charley horse in his leg, he is unable to maintain the limit despite encouragement from Garraty, and is promptly executed. He is played by Roman Griffin Davis in the film adaptation.\n The Major is described as \"a tall, straight man with a deep desert tan\" and a salt-and-pepper mustache wearing khakis, reflective sunglasses, and a pistol strapped to a Sam Browne belt. He appears intermittently throughout the novel, riding a \"dun-colored jeep\" and speaking seldomly through a battery-powered loudhailer. He is an authoritative, almost mythical figure who awes and haunts the boys in turn throughout the Walk; he is compared to both God and Mammon. He is played by Mark Hamill in the film adaptation.\nOrder of character eliminations.\nNotes&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnalysis.\nHeidi Strengell describes the book as a naturalistic novel, noting King's representation of human nature through the characters. She called it one of King's \"most pessimistic novels\". Critic Douglas Winter similarly viewed the novel as King's most despairing work, calling it a \"bleak science-fictional mirror of contemporary America\". Reviewers have also categorized the novel as a metaphor for the Vietnam War. James Smythe of \"The Guardian\" connects several elements of the novel to the conflict: \"the televised draft, the horror of seeing new friends die, the seeming lack of reason for it occurring in the first place\".\nFilm adaptation.\nIn 1988, George A. Romero was approached to direct the film adaptation, but it never materialized. By 2007, Frank Darabont had secured the rights to the film adaptation of the novel. Darabont said that he would \"get to it one day\" and planned to make it low-budget, \"weird, existential, and very contained\". In April 2018, it was announced that New Line Cinema would develop a film adaptation of the novel. Darabont's rights to the film had lapsed, and filmmaker James Vanderbilt stepped in to write and produce the film with Bradley Fischer and William Sherak of the Mythology Entertainment production company. On May 21, 2019, New Line announced that Andr\u00e9 \u00d8vredal would direct the adaptation, and on November 28, 2023, \u00d8vredal was no longer attached to direct and Francis Lawrence was announced to direct the adaptation and the rights were moved to Lionsgate after it lapsed from New Line. On June 10, 2024, Cooper Hoffman and David Jonsson were announced to be in talks to star. In July, Hoffman and Jonsson were confirmed to star as Ray Garraty and Pete McVries respectively, along with Garrett Wareing, Tut Nyuot, Charlie Plummer, Ben Wang, Jordan Gonzalez, Joshua Odjick, and Roman Griffin Davis.\nThe film\u2019s plot differs from the novel\u2019s in several ways. King himself asked the filmmakers to reduce the walking pace from 4 miles per hour to 3 miles per hour (the average walking pace), as he felt the original speed was unrealistic for the duration of the marathon. The number of initial walkers is reduced to 50, with one contestant from each state. Scramm and Abraham are not present, with some of their traits instead incorporated into other characters. In the film, Garraty declares that if he wins he will use his wish to ask for the Major\u2019s carbine and then kill the Major with it to avenge his father, who was executed by the Major. After Stebbins dies third-to-last instead of as the runner-up, Garraty sacrifices himself to allow McVries to win, and McVries fulfills Garraty's wish.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64036", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64036", "title": "Celeborn", "text": ""}
{"id": "64037", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64037", "title": "Lorien", "text": ""}
{"id": "64039", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64039", "title": "Lothl\u00f3rien", "text": "Realm of the Elves in Tolkien's legendarium\nIn J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium, Lothl\u00f3rien or L\u00f3rien is the fairest realm of the Elves remaining in Middle-earth during the Third Age. It is ruled by Galadriel and Celeborn from their city of tree houses at Caras Galadhon. The wood-elves of the realm are called Galadhrim.\nThe realm, a broad woodland between the Misty Mountains and the River Anduin, is the Elven centre of resistance against the Dark Lord Sauron in \"The Lord of the Rings\". Galadriel had one of the Three Elf-Rings, and used it to keep Sauron from seeing into Lothl\u00f3rien. The Company of the Ring spent some time in Lothl\u00f3rien after passing through Moria. Galadriel prepared them for their quest with individual gifts.\nScholars have noted that Lothl\u00f3rien represents variously an Earthly Paradise; an Elfland where time is different, reflecting the traditions of European folklore; and a land of light striving biblically with the darkness of evil.\nFictional description.\nNames.\nTolkien gave the forest many different names, reflecting its fictional history and the way it is perceived by the different peoples of Middle-earth.\nHistory.\nEarly in the First Age, some of the Eldar left the Great March to Valinor and settled in the lands east of the Misty Mountains. These elves became known as the Nandor, and later as the Silvan Elves. Galadriel made contact with an existing Nandorin realm, Lind\u00f3rinand, in what became Lothl\u00f3rien, and planted there the golden \"mallorn\" trees which Gil-galad had received as a gift from Tar-Aldarion.\nThe culture and knowledge of the Silvan elves was enriched by the arrival of Sindarin Elves from west of the Misty Mountains, and the Silvan language was gradually replaced by Sindarin. Amongst these arrivals was Amd\u00edr, who became their first lord, as well as Galadriel and Celeborn, who fled the destruction of Eregion during the War of the Elves and Sauron. In the Third Age, Amroth, the former Lord of Lothl\u00f3rien, went to the south of Middle-earth with his beloved Nimrodel, but drowned in the Bay of Belfalas after she went missing in the \"Ered Nimrais\" and never returned. Control of Lothl\u00f3rien passed to Galadriel and Celeborn. Galadriel's Ring of Power preserved the land from death and decay, and warded off Sauron's gaze.\nAs the War of the Ring loomed, the Company of the Ring, emerging from the dark tunnels of Moria and seeing their leader Gandalf perish, was brought through Lothl\u00f3rien to Caras Galadhon, and there met the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim. The Fellowship spent roughly a month in Lothl\u00f3rien, though it seemed to them only a few days. Before they left, Galadriel allowed Samwise and Frodo to look in the Mirror of Galadriel, giving them a glimpse of events in the future or at other times; she also tested the loyalty of Fellowship members, and gave each of them a gift for their quest.\nAfter the fall of Sauron, Galadriel and Celeborn rid Dol Guldur of Sauron's influence. Galadriel left for Valinor at the beginning of the Fourth Age, and Celeborn later followed her. The city slowly became depopulated and Lothl\u00f3rien faded. By the time of the death of Queen Arwen, Celeborn and Galadriel's granddaughter, Lothl\u00f3rien itself was deserted.\nGeography.\nLothl\u00f3rien lay in the west of Wilderland. To its west stood the Misty Mountains, with the Dwarf-realm of Moria, and on its east ran the great river Anduin. Across the Anduin lay the forest of Mirkwood and the fortress of Dol Guldur, which could be glimpsed from high points in Lothl\u00f3rien. The river Silverlode or Celebrant flowed through Lothl\u00f3rien and joined the Anduin; it had a tributary from the west, the river Nimrodel. The realm lay primarily to the north of the Silverlode, with a small strip of forested land to the south. The main part of the realm was the triangular region between the converging rivers Silverlode and Anduin, called the Naith (Sindarin for \"spearhead\") by the Elves or the Gore or Angle in the Common Speech. The tip of the Naith was called the Egladil (Sindarin for \"elven-point\").\nCaras Galadhon (from \"galadh\" (\"tree\") was the city of Lothl\u00f3rien and the main settlement of the Galadhrim in Middle-earth. Founded by Amroth in the Third Age, deep in the forest, the city's dwellings were atop tall \"mallorn\" trees; the mallorn had been brought to that land by Galadriel. The city was \"some ten miles\" from the point where the rivers Silverlode (Sindarin: \"Celebrant\") and Anduin met, close to the eastern border of the realm. In the trees there were many tree-platforms, which could be elaborate dwellings or simple guard-posts. Stairways of ladders were built around the main trees, and at night the city was lit by \"many lamps\" \u2013 \"green and gold and silver\". The city's entrance was on the southern side.\nAnalysis.\nLand of light.\nThe Tolkien scholar Paul H. Kocher writes that Galadriel perceives Sauron with Lothl\u00f3rien's light, \"but cannot be pierced by it in return\". The good intelligence has the \"imaginative sympathy\" to penetrate the evil intelligence, but not \"vice versa\". The Christian author Elizabeth Danna writes that the Elf Haldir's explanation of this [from a \"flet\" or tree-platform high above Cerin Amroth], \"In this high place you may see the two powers that are opposed to one another, and ever they strive now in thought; but whereas the light perceives the very heart of the darkness, its own secret has not yet been discovered\" echoes a biblical description: \"The light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.\" The scholar of humanities Susan Robbins notes that Tolkien, a devout Roman Catholic, associated light as the Bible does with \"holiness, goodness, knowledge, wisdom, grace, hope, and God's revelation\", and that Galadriel was one of the bearers of that light.\nEarthly paradise.\nLothl\u00f3rien is a \"locus amoenus\", an idyllic land that Tolkien describes as having \"no stain\". The Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey notes that to get there, the Fellowship first wash off the stains of ordinary life by wading the River Nimrodel. He compares this perfect place to the Earthly Paradise that the dreamer speaks of in the Middle English poem \"Pearl\". But then, Shippey writes, the Fellowship have to cross a rope-bridge over a second river, the Silverlode, which they must not drink from, and which the evil Gollum cannot cross. What place can they have come to then, he wonders: could they be \"as if dead\"?\nShippey notes however that it might be old England, the \"'mountains green' of 'ancient time'\" in William Blake's \"Jerusalem\". As evidence, Shippey explains that when they come to the deepest part of Lothl\u00f3rien, the Elf Haldir welcomes them, calling the area the \"Naith\" or \"Gore\", both unfamiliar words for the land between two converging rivers, the Hoarwell or \"Mitheithel\", and the Loudwater or \"Bruinen\", and then giving a third word with a special resonance: the \"Angle\". Shippey states that the name \"England\" comes from the Angle between the Flensburg Fjord and the River Schlei, in the north of Germany next to Denmark, the origin of the Angles among the Anglo-Saxons who founded England. He suggests that Frodo's feeling that he has \"stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of the Elder Days, and was now walking in a world that was no more\" may be exactly correct.\nAround late 1940, Tolkien attempted to illustrate Lothl\u00f3rien in his pencil and coloured pencil painting \"The Forest of Lothlorien in Spring\". Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull question whether any artist could possibly capture \"the sublime Elvish beauty of the mallorn-trees of Lothl\u00f3rien\". They write that this was when he was starting to write about the Elvish land, and that the painting \"closely illustrates\" Legolas's description of Lothl\u00f3rien. They comment that it does not illustrate any of the scenes in \"The Lord of the Rings\", since the Fellowship saw Lothl\u00f3rien in winter, not spring. In their view, the painting demonstrates \"Tolkien's mature coloured pencil technique\" and is \"very delicately drawn\", but for the most part \"without life\".\nElfland where time is different.\nShippey writes that in Lothl\u00f3rien, Tolkien reconciles otherwise conflicting ideas regarding time-distortion in Elfland from European folklore, such as is exemplified in the medieval \"Thomas the Rhymer\", who was carried off by the Queen of Elfland, and the Danish ballad \"Elveh\u00f8j\" (\"Elf Hill\").\nThe Tolkien scholar Verlyn Flieger writes that the Fellowship debated how much time had passed while they were there, Sam Gamgee recalling that the moon was waning just before they arrived, and was new when they left, though they all felt they had only been there for a few days. She notes that Sam actually exclaims \"Anyone would think that time did not count in there!\", while Frodo sees Galadriel as \"present and yet remote, a living vision of that which has already been left far behind by the flowing streams of Time\" and Legolas, an Elf who ought to know how things work in Elven lands, says that time does not stop there, \"but change and growth is not in all things and places alike. For Elves the world moves, and it moves both very swift and very slow. Swift, because they themselves change little, and all else fleets by. Slow, because they do not count the running years\".\nShippey considers Legolas's explanation to resolve the apparent contradiction between the mortal and Elvish points of view about Elvish time. Flieger however writes that there is a definite contradiction between Frodo's position, that there is an actual difference in time between Lothl\u00f3rien and everywhere else, and Legolas's, that it is a matter of perception. She considers Aragorn's view to reconcile these two positions, agreeing that time has passed as Legolas said, but that the Fellowship felt time as the Elves did while they were in Lothl\u00f3rien. That is not, writes Flieger, the end of the matter, as she feels that Aragorn reintroduces the dilemma when he says that the moon carried on changing \"in the world outside\": this suggests once again that Lothl\u00f3rien had its own laws of nature, as in a fairy tale.\nFlieger writes that while time is treated both naturally and supernaturally throughout \"The Lord of the Rings\", his \"most mystical and philosophical deployment of time\" concerns Elves. It is therefore \"no accident\", she writes, that Frodo has multiple experiences of altered time in Lothl\u00f3rien, from feeling he has crossed \"a bridge of Time\" on entering that land, to seeing Aragorn on Cerin Amroth as he was as a young man, dressed in white. Flieger notes that in \"The Monsters and the Critics\" Tolkien writes \"The human-stories of the elves are doubtless full of the Escape from Deathlessness\". In her view, this explains the exploration of time in his mythology, death and deathlessness being the \"concomitants\" of time and timelessness.\nA remembered Warwickshire.\nThe author John Garth writes of a possible Warwickshire connection for Lothl\u00f3rien. The young Tolkien and his fianc\u00e9e Edith Bratt visited Warwick; in 1915 he wrote a celebration of Warwickshire, \"Kortirion Among the Trees\". Garth suggests that the central green hill of Cerin Amroth in Lothl\u00f3rien recalls the grassy Motte of Warwick Castle, known as Ethelfleda's Mound and the happy time he spent there in his youth.\nAdaptations.\nLothl\u00f3rien's appearance in Peter Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy was based on the artwork of the conceptual designer Alan Lee. Some of the Lothl\u00f3rien scenes were shot on locations in Paradise Valley near Glenorchy, New Zealand.\nIn \"\", Lorien was a region introduced to the game in March 2009, which allows players to visit Caras Galadhon and other places, and complete quests from the elves.\nEnya's song \"Lothl\u00f3rien\" on her album \"Shepherd Moons\" is an instrumental composition named for the Elvish realm.\nThe Dutch composer Johan de Meij wrote music inspired by the Lothl\u00f3rien woods, as the second movement, \"Lothl\u00f3rien (The Elvenwood)\", of his Symphony No. 1 \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n "}
{"id": "64040", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64040", "title": "Khazad-d\u00fbm", "text": ""}
{"id": "64041", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64041", "title": "Khazad-dum", "text": ""}
{"id": "64042", "revid": "44874777", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64042", "title": "Balrog", "text": "Race of evil fire-demons in J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth\nBalrogs () are a species of powerful demonic monsters in J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth. One first appeared in print in his high-fantasy novel \"The Lord of the Rings\", where the Company of the Ring encounter a Balrog known as Durin's Bane in the Mines of Moria. Balrogs appear also in Tolkien's \"The Silmarillion\" and his legendarium. Balrogs are tall and menacing beings who can shroud themselves in fire, darkness, and shadow. They are armed with fiery whips \"of many thongs\", and occasionally use long swords.\nIn Tolkien's later conception, Balrogs could not be readily vanquished\u2014a certain stature was required by the would-be hero. Only dragons rivalled their capacity for ferocity and destruction; during the First Age of Middle-earth, they were among the most feared of Morgoth's forces. Their power came from their nature as Maiar, angelic beings like the Valar, though of lesser power.\nTolkien invented the name \"Balrog\", providing an in-universe etymology for it as a word in his invented Sindarin language. He may have gained the idea of a fire demon from his philological study of the Old English word \"Sigelwara\", which he studied in detail in the 1930s.\nBalrogs appear in the film adaptations of \"The Lord of the Rings\" by Ralph Bakshi and Peter Jackson, in the streaming series \"\", and in computer and video games based on Middle-earth.\nContext.\nAccording to the mythology in \"The Silmarillion\", the evil Vala Melkor, later called \"Morgoth\", corrupted lesser Maiar (angelic beings) to his service, as Balrogs, in the days of his splendour before the making of Arda. After the awakening of the Elves, the Valar captured Melkor and destroyed his fortresses Utumno and Angband. But they overlooked the deepest pits, where, with many of Melkor's other allies, the Balrogs fled into hiding. When Melkor returned to Middle-earth from Valinor, he was attacked by the evil giant spider Ungoliant; his scream drew the Balrogs out of hiding to his rescue.\nCharacteristics.\nTolkien's conception of Balrogs changed over time. In all his early writing, they are numerous. A host of a thousand is mentioned in the \"Quenta Silmarillion\", while at the storming of Gondolin Balrogs in the hundreds ride on the backs of the Dragons. They are roughly of twice human size, and were rarely killed in battle. They were fierce demons, associated with fire, armed with fiery whips of many thongs and claws like steel, and Morgoth delighted in using them to torture his captives.\nIn the published version of \"The Lord of the Rings\", however, Balrogs became altogether more sinister and more powerful. Christopher Tolkien notes the difference, saying that in earlier versions they were \"less terrible and certainly more destructible\". He quotes a very late marginal note that was not incorporated into the text saying \"at most seven\" ever existed; though in the \"Annals of Aman\", written as late as 1958, Melkor still commands \"a host of Balrogs\". In later writings they ceased to be creatures, but are instead Maiar, lesser Ainur like Gandalf or Sauron, spirits of fire whom Melkor had corrupted before the creation of the World. Power of the order of Gandalf's was necessary to destroy them, as when Gandalf at the Bridge of Khazad-d\u00fbm tells the others \"This is a foe beyond any of you.\"\nAs Maiar, only the physical form of a Balrog could be destroyed. Tolkien says of the Valar and the Maiar that they can change their shape at will, and move \"unclad in the raiment of the world\", meaning invisible and without form. But it seems that Morgoth, Sauron, and their associated Maiar could lose this ability: Morgoth, for example, was unable to heal his burns from the Silmarils or wounds from Fingolfin and the eagle Thorondor; and Sauron lost his ability to assume a fair-seeming form after his physical body was destroyed in the downfall of N\u00famenor.\nTolkien does not address this specifically for Balrogs, though in his later conception, as at the Bridge of Khazad-d\u00fbm, the Balrog appears \"like a great shadow, in the middle of which was a dark form, of man-shape maybe, yet greater\". Though previously the Balrog had entered the \"large square chamber\" of Mazarbul, at the Bridge of Khazad-d\u00fbm it \"drew itself to a great height, and its wings spread from wall to wall\" in the vast hall.\nThe Balrog's size and shape, therefore, are not given precisely. When Gandalf threw it from the peak of Zirakzigil, the Balrog \"broke the mountain-side where he smote it in his ruin\". \nWhether Balrogs had wings (and if so, whether they could fly) is unclear. This is due both to Tolkien's changing conception of Balrogs, and to the imprecise but suggestive and possibly figurative description of the Balrog that confronted Gandalf.\nThe Balrog of Moria used a flaming sword (\"From out of the shadow a red sword leapt flaming\") and a many-thonged whip that \"whined and cracked\" in its battle with Gandalf. In \"The Silmarillion\", they also used black axes and maces. Earlier writings also speak of steel claws and iron mail.\nIn earlier drafts of \"The Lord of the Rings\", some further indications of Tolkien's evolving conceptions appear, as when\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt this writing Tolkien contemplated an edict of the Valar concerning Balrogs, having Gandalf challenge the Balrog by saying \"It is forbidden for any Balrog to come beneath the sky since Fionw\u00eb son of Manw\u00eb overthrew Thangorodrim.\"\nIndividual Balrogs.\nGothmog.\nGothmog is developed in successive versions of \"Silmarillion\" material. He is physically massive and strong, and in one version he is some 12 feet tall. He wields a black axe and whip of flame as his weapons. He holds the titles of the Lord of the Balrogs, the High Captain of Angband, and Marshal of the Hosts. In the Second Battle, Dagor-nuin-Giliath, he leads a force that ambushes F\u00ebanor and wounds him mortally. He leads Balrogs, Orc-hosts, and Dragons as Morgoth's commander in the field in the Fifth Battle, N\u00edrnaeth Arnoediad, and slays Fingon, High King of the Noldor. In that same battle, he captures H\u00farin of Dor-l\u00f3min, who had slain his personal guard of Battle-trolls, and brings him to Angband. As Marshal of the Hosts, he is in command of the Storming of Gondolin. He is about to kill Tuor when Ecthelion of the Fountain, a Noldorin Elf-lord, intervenes. Gothmog fights Ecthelion in single combat, and they kill each other.\nIn \"The Book of Lost Tales\", Tolkien describes \"Kosomot\", the original version of Gothmog, as a son of Morgoth and the ogress Fluithuin or Ulbandi. \"Gothmog\" is Sindarin for \"Dread Oppressor\". \"Kosomot\" is often considered Gothmog's Quenya name; however, in the Quenya name-list of \"The Fall of Gondolin\" another version appears, \"Kosomoko\".\nIn Tolkien's early \"Lay of the Children of H\u00farin\" is \"Lungorthin, Lord of Balrogs\". This might be another name for Gothmog, though Christopher Tolkien thought it more likely that Lungorthin was simply \"a Balrog lord\".\nDurin's Bane.\nThis Balrog appears in \"The Lord of the Rings\", encountered by the Company of the Ring in the Mines of Moria. It survived the defeat of Morgoth in the War of Wrath, escaping to hide beneath the Misty Mountains. For more than five millennia, the Balrog remained in its deep hiding place at the roots of Caradhras, one of the Mountains of Moria, until in the Third Age, the \"mithril\"-miners of the Dwarf-kingdom of Khazad-d\u00fbm disturbed it. The Balrog killed Durin VI, the Dwarf-King of Khazad-d\u00fbm, whereafter it was called Durin's Bane by the Dwarves. Avarice, principally for \"mithril\", drove the dwarves to go too deep and awaken the Balrog.\nThe Dwarves attempted to fight the Balrog, but its power was far too great for them. In their efforts to hold Khazad-d\u00fbm against it, many Dwarves were killed: Durin's successor N\u00e1in ruled for only a year. The survivors were forced to flee. This disaster reached the Silvan Elves of Lothl\u00f3rien, many of whom fled the \"Nameless Terror\". From this time Khazad-d\u00fbm was known as \"Moria\", Sindarin for \"Black Pit\" or \"Black Chasm\".\nFor another 500 years, Moria was left to the Balrog; though according to \"Unfinished Tales\", Orcs crept in soon after the Dwarves were driven out, leading to Nimrodel's flight. Sauron began to put his plans for war into effect, and he sent Orcs and Trolls to the Misty Mountains to bar the passes.\nDuring the reign of Thr\u00e1in II, the Dwarves attempted to retake Moria in the War of the Dwarves and Orcs, culminating in the Battle of Azanulbizar before the eastern gate of Moria. This was a victory for the Dwarves, but the Balrog prevented them from reoccupying Moria. D\u00e1in II Ironfoot, having slain the Orc Azog near the gate, perceived the terror of the Balrog within and warned Thr\u00e1in that Moria was unachievable until some greater force could remove the Balrog. The Dwarves departed and resumed their exile. Despite D\u00e1in's warning, Balin made another attempt to retake Moria. His party managed to start a colony, but was massacred a few years later.\nThe Fellowship of the Ring travelled through Moria on the quest to destroy the One Ring in Mount Doom. They were attacked in the Chamber of Mazarbul by Orcs. The Fellowship fled through a side door, but when the wizard Gandalf the Grey tried to place a \"shutting spell\" on the door to block the pursuit behind them, the Balrog entered the chamber on the other side and cast a \"terrible\" counterspell. Gandalf spoke a word of Command to stay the door, but the door shattered and the chamber collapsed. Gandalf was weakened by this encounter. The company fled with him, but the Orcs and the Balrog, taking a different route, caught up with them at the Bridge of Khazad-d\u00fbm. The Elf Legolas instantly recognized the Balrog and Gandalf tried to hold the bridge against it. As Gandalf faced the Balrog, he proclaimed, \"You cannot pass, flame of Ud\u00fbn!\", and broke the bridge beneath the Balrog. As it fell, the Balrog wrapped its whip about Gandalf's knees, dragging him to the brink. As the Fellowship looked on in horror, Gandalf cried \"Fly, you fools!\" and plunged into the darkness below.\nAfter a long fall, the two crashed into a deep subterranean lake, which extinguished the flames of the Balrog's body; however it remained \"a thing of slime, stronger than a strangling snake\". They fought in the water; the Balrog clutched at Gandalf to strangle him, and Gandalf hewed the Balrog with his sword, until finally the Balrog fled into the primordial tunnels of Moria's underworld. Gandalf pursued the monster for eight days, until they climbed to the peak of Zirakzigil, where the Balrog was forced to turn and fight, its body erupting into new flame. Here they fought for two days and nights. In the end, the Balrog was defeated and cast down, breaking the mountainside where it fell \"in ruin\". Gandalf himself died shortly afterwards, but he returned to Middle-earth with greater powers, as \"Gandalf the White\", \"until his task was finished\". Critics such as Jerram Barrs have recognised this as a transfiguration similar to that of Jesus Christ, suggesting Gandalf's prophet-like status.\nThe critic Clive Tolley notes that the contest between Gandalf and the Balrog on Durin's bridge somewhat recalls a shamanistic contest, but that a far closer parallel is medieval vision literature, giving the example of \"St Patrick's Purgatory\", and even Dante's \"Divine Comedy\".\nIn-universe origins.\nThe name \"Balrog\", but not the meaning, emerges early in Tolkien's work: it appears in \"The Fall of Gondolin\", one of the earliest texts Tolkien wrote, around 1918. Tolkien began a poem in alliterative verse about the battle of Glorfindel with the Balrog in that text, where both were killed by falling into the abyss, just like Gandalf and the Balrog in \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nAn early list of names described \"Balrog\" as \"an Orc-word with no pure equivalent in Tolkien's invented language of Quenya: 'borrowed Malaroko-'\u00a0\". \nIn Gnomish (another of Tolkien's invented languages), \"Balrog\" is parsed as \"balc\" 'cruel' + \"graug\" 'demon', with a Quenya equivalent \"Malkarauke\". Variant forms of the latter include \"Nalkarauke\" and \"Valkarauke\".\nBy the 1940s, when Tolkien began writing \"The Lord of the Rings\", he had come to think of Balrog as Noldorin \"balch\" 'cruel' + \"rhaug\" 'demon', with a Quenya equivalent \"Malarauko\" (from \"nwalya-\" 'to torture' + \"rauko\" 'demon'). \nThe last etymology, appearing in the invented languages Quendi and Eldar, derives \"Balrog\" as the Sindarin translation of the Quenya form \"Valarauko\" (Demon of Might). This etymology was published in \"The Silmarillion\".\nGandalf on the bridge of Khazad-d\u00fbm calls the Balrog \"flame of Ud\u00fbn\" ( the Sindarin name of Morgoth's fortress \"Utumno\").\nReal-world origins.\n\"Sigelwara\".\nTolkien was a professional philologist, a scholar of comparative and historical linguistics. The Balrog and other concepts in his writings derived from the Old English word \"Sigelwara\", used in texts such as the \"Codex Junius\" to mean \"Aethiopian\". He wondered why the Anglo-Saxons would have had a word with this meaning, conjecturing that it had formerly had a different meaning. He emended the word to \"Sigelhearwan\", and in his essay \"Sigelwara Land\", explored in detail the two parts of the word. He stated that \"Sigel\" meant \"both \"sun\" and \"jewel\"\", the former as it was the name of the Sun rune *sowil\u014d (\u16cb), the latter connotation from Latin \"sigillum\", a seal. He decided that \"Hearwa\" was related to Old English \"heor\u00f0\", \"hearth\", and ultimately to Latin \"carbo\", \"soot\". He suggested from all this that \"Sigelhearwan\" implied \"rather the sons of Muspell than of Ham\", a class of demons in Northern mythology \"with red-hot eyes that emitted sparks and faces black as soot\". The Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey states that this both \"helped to naturalise the Balrog\" and contributed to the Silmarils, which combined the nature of the sun and jewels. The Aethiopians suggested to Tolkien the Haradrim, a dark southern race of men.\nOld Norse, Old English.\nA real-world etymological counterpart for the word \"Balrog\" existed long before Tolkien's languages, in Norse mythology; an epithet of the Norse god Odin was \"B\u00e1leygr\", \"fire-eyed\".\nJoe Abbott, writing in \"Mythlore\", notes that the Old Norse \"Voluspa\" mentions that the fire-demon Surt carries both a sword and a \"sviga laevi\", a deadly whipping-stick or switch; he suggests that it is \"a short step\" from that to the Balrog's flaming whip. Abbott makes a connection, too, with the \"Beowulf\" poet's account of the monster Grendel: he notes that Tolkien wrote that Grendel was \"physical enough in form and power, but vaguely felt as belonging to a different order of being, one allied to the malevolent 'ghosts' of the dead\", and compares this with Aragorn's description of the Balrog as \"both a shadow and a flame, strong and terrible\".\nMoria and the Battle of Maldon.\nTolkien felt acutely the error made by the English commander, the ealdorman Byrhtnoth, at the Battle of Maldon, allowing the Vikings to step ashore and win the battle. Alexander Bruce, in \"Mythlore\", comments that Tolkien may have used Gandalf's battle with the Balrog on the narrow bridge in Moria to \"correct the behavior of the self-serving Byrhtnoth through the actions of the self-less Gandalf\". Bruce notes that the Tolkien scholar Janet Brennan Croft also contrasts the two leaders.\nThe fall of Gondolin and the fall of Troy.\nThere are multiple parallels between the \"Fall of Gondolin\" and the fall of Troy, as told in the \"Iliad\", but again the tales differ. The Elf Ecthelion leads the charge against the Orcs, and fights Gothmog, the greatest Balrog; they wound each other and both fall into the king's fountain in Gondolin; both drown. Bruce compares this to how Aeneas rallies the Trojans, but fails, and sees king Priam perish.\nAdaptations.\nThe Balrog in Ralph Bakshi's 1978 animated version was named Durin's Bane and had large wings like those of a bat. Peter Jackson's 2001 and 2002 films ' and ' had similar wings, expressing its \"satanic, demonic nature\". Earlier artists such as Ted Nasmith had depicted Balrogs without wings; Jackson's films used the design of Tolkien illustrator John Howe, making wings standard, in the same way that Jackson has made pointed ears standard for elves. A Balrog appears in \", with a similar visual design to Jackson's monster.\nBalrogs appear in Middle-earth computer and video games and merchandise. In the real-time strategy game ', and its , both based on Jackson's movies, the Balrog can use its wings, although only in short leaps. In the role-playing game ', also based on the Jackson movies, the Balrog uses its wings to fly into the air, and comes crashing down, sending a damaging shockwave of flames at the player. In another game based on Jackson's movies, \", the Balrog is a playable hero.\nA Balrog features in King Gizzard &amp; the Lizard Wizard's 2017 album \"Murder of the Universe\" (2017) as a giant reanimated monster. Songwriter Stu Mackenzie explained: \"It might not be the Balrog from Middle Earth, but he is a sort of fire demon.\"\nEarly \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" books featured Balrogs among other Middle-earth characters like Hobbits and Ents; after a lawsuit brought by the Tolkien Estate, these Tolkien-specific names were changed, the Balrogs becoming Balor, after the one-eyed monster of Irish mythology.\nIn culture.\nA now-defunct fantasy writing prize, the Balrog Award, was named after the monsters. The Japanese anime series \"Restaurant to Another World\" introduces a Balrog as a butler; this Balrog is described as polite. A character simply named \"Balrog\" appears as an antagonist in the Indie game \"Cave Story\". It has no similarities to the monsters in The Lord of the Rings and is instead an anthropomorphic bar of soap, according to Cave Story's developer.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "64043", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64043", "title": "Durin", "text": ""}
{"id": "64044", "revid": "45718847", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64044", "title": "Michael Heseltine", "text": "British politician (born 1933)\nMichael Ray Dibdin Heseltine, Baron Heseltine, (; born 21 March 1933) is a British politician. Having begun his career as a property developer, he became one of the founders of the publishing house Haymarket Media Group in 1957. Heseltine served as a Conservative Member of Parliament from 1966 to 2001. He was a prominent figure in the governments of Margaret Thatcher and John Major, and served as Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State under Major from 1995 to 1997.\nHeseltine entered the Cabinet in 1979 as Secretary of State for the Environment, where he promoted the \"Right to Buy\" campaign that allowed people to purchase their council houses. He was considered an adept media performer and a charismatic minister, although he was frequently at odds with Thatcher on economic issues. He was one of the most visible \"wets\", whose \"One Nation\" views were epitomised by his support for the regeneration of Liverpool in the early 1980s when it was facing economic collapse; this later earned him the award of Freeman of the City of Liverpool in 2012. As Secretary of State for Defence from 1983 to 1986, he was instrumental in the political battle against the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. He resigned from the Cabinet in 1986 over the Westland affair and returned to the backbenches, becoming a vocal critic of Thatcher, mostly because of her Eurosceptic views and confrontational approach in Parliament. Following Geoffrey Howe's resignation speech in November 1990, Heseltine challenged Thatcher for the party leadership, polling well enough to deny her an outright victory on the first ballot. Following Thatcher's subsequent resignation, Heseltine lost to John Major on the second ballot, but returned to the Cabinet in his former post of Environment Secretary when Major became prime minister.\nAs a key ally of Major, Heseltine was appointed President of the Board of Trade and Secretary of State for Trade and Industry following the 1992 general election. He supported Major when his leadership was challenged in 1995, and was promoted to Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State in return for his support. He declined to seek the leadership of the party following Major's 1997 election defeat, and served in Major's shadow cabinet as Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Shadow Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry while the leadership election to succeed him was taking place.\nHeseltine was created a life peer in 2001 and has remained a vocal advocate of modernisation within the party. He has continued to make political interventions, criticising Brexit and Boris Johnson following the 2016 Brexit referendum result. In 2019, Heseltine had the whip suspended after saying he would vote for the Liberal Democrats, rather than the Conservatives, at the 2019 European Parliament election. Heseltine had the whip restored in July 2024.\nEarly life.\nMichael Heseltine was born at Eaton Crescent, in Swansea in Wales on 21 March 1933. He was the son of Territorial Army Colonel Rupert Dibdin Heseltine (1902\u20131957), TD, of the Royal Engineers during the Second World War, a factory owner and South Wales local director of Dawnays Ltd, bridge and structural engineers, and Eileen Ray (\"n\u00e9e\" Pridmore). The Heseltine family were in the tea trade: Michael Heseltine's great-grandfather, William Heseltine, was a clerk who worked his way up to being manager of Tetley, later being involved in establishing a chain of grocers; he killed himself after suffering the loss of his fortune through debt and bad investments. Michael Heseltine's grandfather, John William Dibdin Heseltine (whose mother was a great-granddaughter of the composer and songwriter Charles Dibdin), became a tea salesman and relocated from Huntingdonshire to Swansea, the docks being a major arrival point for tea shipments. Earlier generations had been farm labourers in Pembrey.\nHeseltine's mother originated in West Wales, daughter of James Pridmore, a dock labourer who unloaded coal from ships, later hiring others to do so and founding West Glamorgan Collieries Ltd, a short-lived company that briefly worked two small mines on the outskirts of Swansea (1919\u20131921); his father, also James, worked at the Swansea docks. Due to this heritage Heseltine was later made an honorary member of the Swansea Dockers Club.\nHeseltine was brought up in relative luxury at No. 1, Eaton Crescent, Swansea (now No. 5). He told \"Tatler\" interviewer Charlotte Edwardes in 2016: \"At prep school, I started a birdwatching club called the Tit Club. Every member was named after a member of the tit family: the Marsh Tit, the Blue Tit. I was the Great Tit\". He once feared the story might reach the press: \"I just know if that had got out when I was in active politics, I would never have recovered\". Heseltine enjoyed angling in Brynmill Park and won a junior competition. He was educated at Broughton Hall in Eccleshall, Staffordshire, when it was briefly amalgamated with Brockhurst Preparatory school, Bromsgrove School, Worcestershire, and Shrewsbury School, Shropshire.\nOxford.\nHeseltine campaigned briefly as a volunteer in the October 1951 general election before going up to Pembroke College, Oxford. While there, in frustration at his inability to be elected to the committee of the Oxford University Conservative Association, he founded the breakaway Blue Ribbon Club. Along with undergraduates Guy Arnold, Julian Critchley and Martin Morton he canvassed workers at the gates of the Vickers Shipyard in Barrow-in-Furness. Julian Critchley recounted a story from his student days of how he plotted his future on the back of an envelope, a future that would culminate as prime minister in the 1990s. A more detailed apocryphal version has him writing down: 'millionaire 25, cabinet member 35, party leader 45, prime minister 55,' though Heseltine himself disputes this and instead recalls a lack of self-belief. He became a millionaire and was a member of the Cabinet from the age of 46, but narrowly failed to become Party Leader or prime minister.\nHis biographers Michael Crick and Julian Critchley (who was a contemporary of Heseltine's at Brockhurst Prep School) recount how, despite not having an innate gift for public speaking, he became a strong orator through much effort, which included practising his speeches in front of a mirror, listening to tape recordings of speeches by television administrator Charles Hill, and taking voice-coaching lessons from a vicar's wife. (In the 1970s and 1980s, Heseltine's conference speech was often the highlight of the Conservative Party Conference, despite his views being well to the left of the then leader Margaret Thatcher.) He was eventually elected to the Library Committee of the Oxford Union for Hilary (Spring) Term 1953. The Oxford Union minutes record after a debate on 12 February 1953 that \"Mr Heseltine should guard against artificial mannerisms of voice and calculated flourishes of self-conscious histrionics; this is only worth saying because he has the makings of a first class speaker\".\nHeseltine was then elected to the Standing Committee of the Oxford Union for Trinity (summer) Term 1953. On 30 April 1953 he opposed the setting up of the Western European Union (a European defence treaty), not least because it might antagonise the USSR following the supposed \"recent change of Soviet attitudes\" (i.e. after Stalin's death). On 4 June 1953, he called for the development of the British Commonwealth as a third major power in the world (after the US and USSR). At the end of that summer term he stood unsuccessfully for the Presidency but was instead elected to the top place on the committee. In his third year (1953\u201354) he served in top place on the committee, then as Secretary, and finally as Treasurer. As Treasurer he attempted to solve the Union's financial problems not by cost-cutting but by an ultimately successful \"Brighter Union\" policy of bringing in more students for food and drink, and by converting the Union cellars into a venue for events. The Union's Senior Member (the university don that every society was required to have) resigned in protest at what he saw as Heseltine's profligacy, and was replaced by the young Maurice Shock.\nAt the end of the Trinity (summer) Term 1954, Heseltine was elected President of the Oxford Union for Michaelmas term 1954, largely on the strength of his business management, and with the assistance of Union contemporaries Jeremy Isaacs and Anthony Howard, the then chairman and chairman-elect of the Oxford University Labour Club; Heseltine had even, for a brief period that term, joined a protest group against the Conservative government's testing of an H-Bomb. He had done little study at University, and passed his finals with the help of last-minute coaching from friends. After graduating with a second-class degree in Philosophy, politics and economics, described by his tutor Neville Ward-Perkins as \"a great and undeserved triumph\", he was permitted to stay on for an extra term to serve as Union President.\nThe Union cellars were opened on 30 October 1954, and Heseltine persuaded the visiting Sir Bernard and Lady Docker to contribute to the considerable cost. Debates over which he presided included censorship of the Arts (no vote taken), welcoming the decline of British Imperialism (defeated 281\u2013381) and calling for a \"change in the principles and practice of British Trade Unions\" (carried 358\u2013200). Guest speakers that term included Rajani Palme Dutt, Lady Violet Bonham Carter, his old headmaster John Wolfenden and Jacob Bronowski, whilst Aneurin Bevan addressed a packed meeting of the University Labour Club, chaired by Anthony Howard, in the Union Chamber.\nBusiness career.\nEarly business career.\nHeseltine began articles at Peat Marwick &amp; Mitchell in January 1955. Whilst training as an accountant, he also built up a property business in the London property boom of the late 1950s. He and his Oxford roommate Ian Josephs had each inherited around \u00a31,000 (around \u00a323,000 at 2016 prices). They formed a property company called \"Michian\" (after their first names) and with the aid of a mortgage bought a 13-year lease on the so-called Thurston Court Hotel at 39 Clanricarde Gardens (near Notting Hill) for \u00a33,750. They evicted the existing tenants so that Josephs' father could renovate the property and let out the rooms for a total rent of around \u00a330 per week. A year later, they were able to sell the property at a profit, doubling their capital to \u00a34,000.\nWith the aid of a \u00a323,000 mortgage, Heseltine and Josephs now bought a group of five adjacent houses for \u00a327,000 in Inverness Terrace, Bayswater. They arranged for some medical students to decorate and remodel the property into a 45-bedroom boarding house, which they called the \"New Court Hotel\". Heseltine would sometimes cook breakfast himself, although he rejects tales that he would get up early to mix margarine in with the butter. Many of the tenants were American servicemen who, he later recorded, were for the most part respectful but sometimes rowdy at weekends.\nEdward Heath, then a government whip whom he had met at the Oxford Union, was his referee when he applied for the Conservative Party Parliamentary Candidates' List in October 1956. Heseltine bought his first Jaguar, second hand and cheap because of the rise in the price of petrol owing to the Suez Crisis, for \u00a31,750 in December 1956, upgrading to newer and more expensive models in future years.\nNew Court Hotel was sold in 1957. At this point Heseltine went into business with another Oxford friend, Clive Labovitch, who brought out \"Opportunities for Graduates\" that year. Heseltine arranged for this to be distributed free, expanded from 40 pages to a 169-page hardback book, to final year students at all British universities, paid for by advertising. Heseltine ended his partnership with Josephs and with the aid of a \u00a34,500 investment by Heseltine's mother (following the death of his father in 1957) he and Labovitch were able to buy a group of houses at 29\u201331 Tregunter Road (south of Earl's Court), adding two more in neighbouring Cathcart Road.\nNational service.\nHeseltine had transferred his articles to a partner at a smaller firm of accountants located off Haymarket, feeling that this would allow him more chance of hands-on involvement in the affairs of the firms whose books he examined, rather than being a cog in a bigger machine. It took him three attempts and special coaching to pass his intermediate exams, and he had little immediate prospect of passing his accountancy finals. He also estimated that he was earning more from his property business than the partner to whom he was articled. With the expiry of his articles in January 1958 he could no longer avoid conscription into National Service.\nHeseltine later wrote that he admired the military, for his father had been a lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Engineers in the Second World War and active in the Territorial Army thereafter, but that he had felt that his business career was too important to be disrupted. He and his father had taken the precaution of arranging interviews to increase his chances of attaining an officer's commission in case he had to serve. He had been lucky not to be called up for the Korean War in the early 1950s or the Suez Crisis in 1956; and in the final years of National Service, already due for abolition by 1960, an effort was made to call up men who had so far managed to postpone service. Despite having almost reached maximum call-up age, recently reduced from thirty to twenty-six, Heseltine was conscripted into the Welsh Guards in January 1959.\nHeseltine spent nine weeks in the ranks as a Guardsman before being sent for three months of officer training at Mons Officer Cadet School, Aldershot, alongside men from other regiments. He was a capable cadet, reaching the rank of Junior Under-Officer and graduating with an A-Grade, but he was not awarded the Sword of Honour or promoted to the rank of Senior Under-Officer, as it was felt his age had given him an unfair advantage over younger cadets. Throughout his training he had been troubled by an old ankle sprain, but he declined the offer of a medical discharge. He was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 11 June 1959.\nHeseltine was granted leave to contest the general election in October that year; according to Ian Josephs this had been his plan from the start. Afterward he applied on business grounds for exemption from return to the Army, in part because of difficulties caused by an employee's embezzlement, and partly including the need to sort out his late father's affairs, and was exempted from his remaining sixteen months of service. During the 1980s his habit of wearing a Guards regimental tie, sometimes incorrectly knotted with a red stripe on the neck, was the subject of much acerbic comment from military figures and from older MPs with distinguished war records. Crick estimated that he must have worn the tie on more days than he actually served in the Guards.\nBusiness career: expansion and near disaster.\nBy now the property boom was in full swing. Heseltine and Labovitch established first one, then a group of companies under the name \"Bastion Properties\". Heseltine later recorded that he and Labovitch bought at least three properties in W1 and W2 which they were able to sell at a profit before they had completed the original purchases. They also built eight small houses in Queensborough Mews, Bayswater. They bought a 58-year lease on a block of seven properties at Stafford Terrace, off Kensington High Street, which they converted into flats and built houses for Stepney Borough Council. Bastion also planned to build an estate of up to 126 houses at Tenterden, Kent, which failed to sell. In order to attract other buyers to the empty estate Heseltine had to accept an offer of \u00a34,000 for the first house, which had been valued at \u00a37,250. The estate was beset with repair problems until after Heseltine's election to Parliament.\nHeseltine and Labovitch also founded the magazine publishing company Cornmarket, and brought out \"Directory of Opportunities for School Leavers\" and \"Directory of Opportunities for Qualified Men\", which earned a steady income from advertising. Canadian, French and German versions were also launched, although these were less profitable. In late 1959, using \u00a310,000 of a \u00a330,000 profit on selling a freehold site off Regents Park, they acquired the famous (but unprofitable) magazine \"Man About Town\" whose title was shortened to \"About Town\" then simply \"Town\". In 1962, they paid \u00a310,000 for \"Topic\", a weekly newspaper that had been launched the previous year by a group of entrepreneurs including the Prime Minister's son Maurice Macmillan, and which was now owned by Norman Mascall (a pyramid scheme fraudster of the era). By then the economic climate was too difficult, and like many publishers they found that there is limited appetite for weekly papers in the UK. \"Topic\" ceased publication at the end of 1962, but its journalists later became \"The Sunday Times\" Insight Team.\nHeseltine became managing director of Bow Group Publications in 1960, mainly looking after advertising and circulation for its \"Crossbow\" magazine (he does not seem to have written any articles or pamphlets himself). He contemplated suing \"The Observer\" for a limerick mocking his dress sense (spelling \"Bow\" as \"Beau\") for implying him to be homosexual, but was talked out of it. He remained a director until 1965.\nBastion Properties was in trouble because of building costs and an unsatisfactory building manager. After rapid expansion, Heseltine's businesses were badly hit by the Selwyn Lloyd financial squeeze of 1961 and, still not yet thirty years old, he eventually owed \u00a3250,000 (around \u00a34.5 million at 2016 prices). He states he was lent a badly needed \u00a385,000 in December 1962 by a bank manager who retired the same day. He avoided bankruptcy by such tactics as paying bills only when threatened with legal action, although he eventually settled all his debts. It was during this stressful period of his life that he took up gardening as a serious hobby. Later, during the 1990s, Heseltine committed a minor gaffe when he joked in a speech about how he had strung creditors along.\nBetween 1960 and 1964, Heseltine also worked as a part-time interviewer for ITV, very likely, in Crick's view, to maintain his public profile as an aspiring politician.\nFormation of Haymarket.\nDespite Heseltine's later insistence on management controls in government departments which he ran, Cornmarket was a highly disorganised company, with little in the way of accounting or business plans and cheques and invoices often going astray. One of its most lucrative ventures, the \"Graduates Appointments Register\" (albums of anonymous graduate CV; companies had to pay for the names and addresses of those whom they wished to interview), went ahead after an employee simply ignored Heseltine's instructions to abandon the project. Heseltine and Labovitch brought a great deal of energy and openness to new ideas (for example the in-house magazine for Hilton Hotels, or new owners' packs for people who bought Ford cars), talent-spotting able young men and leaving it to them to sort out the details.\nLindsay Masters, who had joined the Heseltine-Labovitch publishing business as an advertising manager in spring 1958, and Simon Tindall, who had joined in his early twenties as an advertising salesman while Heseltine had been doing his National Service, played an increasingly large role in managing the company. Masters kept a tight grip on the selling of advertising space, banning boozy lunches and setting targets for calling of clients, followed by chase-up calls, whilst keeping a public league table of salesmens' success rates; these were relatively innovative techniques at the time.\nBy 1964, Cornmarket owed a great deal of money to their printers, Hazell Watson &amp; Viney, which was then merging with the British Printing Corporation (BPC). Heseltine was summoned by BPC to be told to sort out his firm's debts, but instead persuaded them to accept, instead of payment, an equity stake of at least 40% in a new, merged business. The portmanteau name \"Haymarket\" was suggested by Sir Geoffrey Crowther, chairman of BPC.\nHaymarket grows.\nFrom the autumn of 1964, Haymarket set out aggressively to acquire magazines, approaching them from the list in the media directory BRAD. They acquired small, modestly profitable magazines for tape recorder and camera, and camping and caravan, enthusiasts, and using a loan from BPC bought a series of leisure and medical publications for \u00a3250,000 from a Canadian publisher, in competition with Thomson Group.\nIn 1965 Heseltine's businesses had a turnover of around \u00a3700,000 per annum, and employed around 50 staff. Although the \"Opportunities for Graduates\" series continued to generate profits, \"Town\" magazine continued to lose money, hampered by the cost of printing (much more expensive at that time than nowadays) and by Heseltine's reluctance, for political reasons, to include pictures of nude girls or cartoons disrespectful of the Royal Family.\nHaymarket launched a bid for the British Institute of Management's magazine \"The Manager\", again in competition with Thomson Group, in late 1965. It was envisaged that Haymarket would take a 25% stake, as would the \"Financial Times\" and \"The Economist\", of both of which Crowther was also chairman. Over the weekend Heseltine, inspired by how Donald Stokes had once won a Scandinavian bus contract for British Leyland by building a model bus, had a team led by Labovitch prepare a 96-page mock copy of what they envisaged, mostly using text cut from \"The Economist\". Robert Heller was brought in as the first editor of what became \"Management Today\" \u2013 Heseltine initially irritated him by taking him to lunch at the Carlton Club and talking of his political aspirations, but Heller soon recognised that Labovitch was the front man whose job was to impress those who needed to be impressed, and Heseltine was \"the dynamic and real entrepreneurial brain\". The first edition came out in April 1966, just after Heseltine's election to Parliament. Haymarket went on to publish similar magazines for Marketing, Personnel Management and Computing Institutes.\nLabovitch left Haymarket at the end of 1965. Heseltine stated he spent three days trying to persuade him to stay. Labovitch wanted to establish himself as a successful educational and careers publisher, and may well have been pushed by his then wife, the socialist journalist Penny Perrick, who disliked Heseltine both personally (as best man at their wedding he had, she said, welcomed various business figures in his speech as if he were at a board meeting) and politically and whom he had refused to include on the Haymarket board. Labovitch was a generator of ideas but he lacked Heseltine's business skills. Although he took his profitable \"Directories\" with him, he had to sell them back to Haymarket when his business failed in 1973, causing him to attempt suicide. Heseltine offered him a position as consultant to Haymarket. The two former partners remained on friendly terms until Labovitch's death in 1994.\nVery few staff left with Labovitch. Lindsay Masters stayed behind, very likely in the knowledge that he might soon be running the company as Heseltine's political career took off. However, Heseltine continued as managing director of Haymarket even after being elected to Parliament in March 1966, and based himself at the company offices near Oxford Circus rather than in the House of Commons. Heseltine's Oxford friend Julian Critchley was editor of \"Town\" for around a year from 1966 until he was sacked by Masters, ending his friendship with Heseltine who had shrunk from delivering the blow himself.\nFurther growth.\nIn April 1967, Heseltine persuaded BPC to inject a further \u00a3150,000 into Haymarket, increasing its ownership stake to 60%, whilst Heseltine and other directors retained smaller shareholdings. Haymarket doubled their magazine portfolio by taking over the management of twenty of BPC's magazines (many of which had been acquired by BPC in lieu of bad debts by other publishers), including \"Autosport\". However, they were now effectively a subsidiary of BPC; Heseltine, Masters and Tindall could potentially be outvoted or even sacked by the four BPC directors on the board. BPC installed a new financial controller who installed cost and cashflow management for the first time, and insisted on finally closing \"Town\" magazine at the end of 1967. \"Town\" had never made a profit, but Heseltine writes that its quality was instrumental in establishing Haymarket's reputation as a publishing house. Around that time, \"Management Today\" became Haymarket's first big success. A BPC manager recorded that Heseltine kept the initiative at board meetings by \"poker-faced nit-picking\" about the quality and timing of BPC's printing, rather than by employing what came to be considered his usual \"I will transform the world\" rhetoric.\nIn 1968, there were rumours that BPC was planning to sack Heseltine. Another of the titles acquired from BPC was \"World's Press News\", largely a compilation of world press releases, which was relaunched by Masters and Robert Heller as \"Campaign\" in September 1968 (Heseltine initially opposed the title, thinking it sounded too political). It rapidly became standard reading in the world of advertising and Public Relations, for its gossipy reporting, often obtained by trading information, of who was gaining or losing accounts or being promoted or sacked. Within a year it had overtaken \"Advertisers Weekly\" for its volume of classified ads. Heseltine was forced, in the face of a strike, to recognise the National Union of Journalists among his staff. Josephine Hart (later a novelist and the wife of Maurice Saatchi, who was Heseltine's assistant at this time), further improved the advertising sales operation by recruiting a team of largely female sales staff.\nAs part of his ongoing campaign to buy titles off other publishers, Heseltine noticed a magazine called \"The Accountant\" which was easily paid for by vast amounts of advertising. Robert Heller produced a dummy edition of a Haymarket version, modelled on the \"Daily Telegraph\", which became \"Accountancy Age\". Following an international phone call between Heller, who was on holiday in Portugal, and Heseltine who was on a political trip to Singapore, the launch date was brought forward by three months on learning that a rival publication was to be launched. \"Accountancy Age\" was launched in December 1969, largely by Haymarket's business development manager Maurice Saatchi, and was profitable from the start.\nBuoyed by the success of \"Management Today\", \"Campaign\" and \"Accountancy Age\", Haymarket made pre-tax profits of \u00a33,000 in 1968, \u00a3136,000 in 1969 and \u00a3265,000 in 1970. Heseltine resigned as managing director of Haymarket on his promotion to principal opposition spokesman on transport in 1969, although he continued as chairman of the board until he became a minister in 1970, at which point he resigned from the board altogether, whilst remaining a major shareholder.\n1970s: Heseltine takes ownership of Haymarket.\nIn 1970, Heseltine turned down the chance to invest \u00a325,000 in the advertising agency Saatchi &amp; Saatchi when it was set up (his former employee Maurice Saatchi said that he had learned a great deal from Heseltine's aggressive techniques of acquiring magazine titles, and from publicity in \"Campaign\" magazine), believing wrongly that it was against the code for ministers to make such an investment. Lindsay Masters did invest, but was eventually bought out by the Saatchi brothers; Heseltine later believed that he and Masters together could have made another fortune if they had reinforced one another with large shareholdings in Saatchi and Saatchi.\nWith Heseltine a government minister from June 1970, Haymarket was being run by Masters and Tindall, who had secured another coup by publishing \"Computing\" for the British Computing Society. BPC was in financial trouble in 1971, and Heseltine, Masters and Tindall assembled a consortium of County Bank, Charterhouse Development, ICFC and Wren Investments to help buy out BPC's 60% stake for \u00a31m, a very low price given that Haymarket had made over \u00a3250,000 the previous year. The consortium took a 40% stake in Haymarket, and loaned the company \u00a3820,000, while Heseltine took out a large personal loan at this time to buy both another 20% of Haymarket's shares (the rest of the BPC shareholding, bringing Heseltine's own shareholding to just under 50%). At the meeting to close the deal, one of the bankers recorded, \"Michael thought he was President of the Oxford Union again, and entered into a grand oration and bored everyone stiff\". In 1971 Heseltine placed his shares in a trust controlled by his ministerial boss Peter Walker and by his solicitor Charles Corman. Haymarket's pretax profits were \u00a3453,000 in 1971 and \u00a3704,000 in 1972. Haymarket was due to be floated as a public company in the autumn of 1973, although this was cancelled because of the rise in the oil price, which reduced the profitability of the publishing industry. They thus avoided the stock market crash which followed. The company remains privately owned to this day.\nHeseltine acted as a consultant to Haymarket during his period out of government office between 1974 and 1979. His role was to bring in new publishing ideas. He believed he increased performance, although Robert Heller later recorded that he did very little, for he was too busy as a member of the Shadow Cabinet. He worked from an office at Haymarket, near Regent Street, rather than in the House of Commons. Under the management of Masters and Tindall, Haymarket continued to grow. By 1976 it was making annual profits of round \u00a31.75m. In 1976\u20131977 Heseltine, Masters, Tindall and the Finance Director David Fraser bought out the consortium's 40% share, using money borrowed from them, giving Heseltine and his family over 50% control of Haymarket. Heseltine had taken out large personal loans both to increase his stake in the company and to buy his country mansion Thenford House. Masters had also done the same to buy himself a property. Several titles, including \"Accountancy Age\" and \"Computing\" were sold to the rival company VNU in 1980. The transaction raised \u00a317m, half of which went to Heseltine, but in Crick's view was a bad move for Haymarket. During Heseltine's second period out of office (1986\u20131990), Masters threatened to resign if Heseltine returned to Haymarket, but once again he became a consultant on \u00a3100,000 per annum.\nAfter 1997: return to business.\nBy 1997, when his career as a Cabinet minister ended, Haymarket was making an annual profit of over \u00a310m and employing around 1,000 people. Heseltine resumed management of the company after Masters' retirement in 1999. Haymarket has seen reduced profitability in the UK since 1999, but has expanded further into foreign markets (for example India). It has also laboured under heavy borrowings of over \u00a3100 million to buy back Masters' and Tindall's large minority shareholdings, which have been reduced to some extent by the sale of properties. Heseltine has now retired from day-to-day management, handing over to his son Rupert.\nHeseltine's ownership of Haymarket has made him a large personal fortune. As of 2013 he was ranked 311th in \"The Sunday Times\" Rich List with an estimated wealth, including shareholdings held by members of his immediate family, of \u00a3264 million.\nElectoral history and Parliamentary career.\nGower 1959 and Coventry 1964.\nHeseltine contested the safe Labour seat of Gower at the October 1959 general election. He had been the only applicant for the Conservative (technically, Conservative and National Liberal) candidacy. He would at times attend Labour meetings and attempt to heckle the speakers, including Aneurin Bevan and the Labour candidate Ifor Davies, whom he kept trying to challenge to a debate. He obtained plenty of publicity in the local paper and obtained a swing to the Conservatives slightly better than the national average.\nIn 1961, Heseltine was one of 29 applicants\u2014of whom half were interviewed\u2014for the Conservative candidacy in the marginal constituency of Coventry North. He clinched the selection after bringing his fianc\u00e9e Anne Williams to the meeting. He got on well with the incumbent Labour member Maurice Edelman (whose daughter was a friend of Anne Heseltine, as she became in 1962) and they met for dinner sometimes during the campaign. Many of his Oxford contemporaries had already entered Parliament, but, to his disappointment, in the 1964 general election he was defeated by 3,530 votes. The swing to Labour was slightly less than the national average.\nSelection for Tavistock.\nIn March 1965, Heseltine applied to be candidate for the safe Conservative seat of Tavistock in Devon, where the incumbent MP had announced his retirement two months earlier. Of the 51 applicants, 14 were considered, six of whom had local connections. Heseltine reached the final short list of three, the others being a dairy farmer in a senior position at the Milk Marketing Board (thought to be the favourite), and a local authority lawyer, who later recalled that on the train down from London Heseltine kept jumping out at every stop to check that his magazines were on display at the station newsagents. Heseltine had already spent several days driving round talking to locals and had ordered a year's worth of back copies of Tavistock's two weekly papers. Such effort is nowadays common in Parliamentary selections but was unusual at the time. He was selected by a clear majority of the Tavistock Conservative Association's Finance and General Purposes Committee (which contained between 100 and 120 people).\nHeseltine was picked in part as a young, dynamic candidate who could face the challenge of the resurgent Liberal Party in the West Country, where Jeremy Thorpe, Peter Bessell and Mark Bonham Carter had recently won seats. The Liberals had halved the Conservative majority at Tavistock in 1964.\nTrouble then arose at his adoption by a full general meeting of the Conservative Association, which should have been a formality. Criticism arose that a person with farming links should have been chosen, for the bikini-clad girls on the cover of \"Town\" magazine, which were considered risqu\u00e9 at the time, and for jokes in the magazine at the expense of the Royal Family. He was selected after a stirring speech to around 540 assembled members of the local Conservative Association on Friday 26 March 1965. Crick believes that this is a rare example in politics of a single speech determining a career. Only 27 members supported an amendment to refer the matter back to the selection committee and 14 opposed Heseltine's adoption altogether. Thereafter his name stopped appearing as \"publisher\" on his magazines. He had to learn about farming, an important issue in the seat, about which he knew almost nothing.\nMP for Tavistock: 1966\u201374.\nIn the March 1966 general election both the Conservative leader Edward Heath and Liberal leader Jo Grimond spoke at Tavistock. Heseltine stressed his agreement with Liberal principles and fought extremely hard, achieving a small swing to the Conservatives, bucking the national trend. He was elected Member of Parliament (MP) for Tavistock.\nHeseltine's liberal stance on race issues and his opposition to hanging (he felt it was barbaric and not an effective deterrent, although he later expressed openness to the idea of hanging terrorists) was unpopular with many of his constituents, as was his continued unease with agricultural issues, and his dressing as a city businessman in pale grey suits, kipper ties and driving a Jaguar. Despite the huge demands on his time as both an MP and running Haymarket Press, and the distance of the seat from London, he remained relatively active at constituency casework at weekends and during the late summer recess, touring rural areas in a caravan and using a small tape recorder (relatively new technology at the time) to dictate answers to constituents' problems in front of them.\nAs soon as Heseltine was elected in March 1966, the seat of Tavistock was recommended for abolition by the Boundary Commission, divided between the new seats of West Devon (effectively a rural seat, where Heseltine would have had to compete for the candidacy with the sitting MP Peter Mills who had a strong local following) and Plymouth Sutton (which had a strong Powellite/Monday Club element\u2014they eventually selected the right-winger Alan Clark). Several of his activists attempted to persuade him to apply for Plymouth Sutton, but he was not interested, wanting a seat nearer London.\nIn the event, the implementation of the Boundary Review was postponed for partisan reasons until after the next general election by Home Secretary James Callaghan (on the pretext of waiting until after the Redcliffe-Maud Report on local government reorganisation). Heseltine therefore defended Tavistock at the 1970 general election, achieving a better than average swing to the Conservatives.\nMP for Henley: 1974\u20132001.\nHeseltine, by now a junior minister in the Heath government, was now forced to apply for a new candidacy, often in competition with other sitting Conservative MPs whose seats were also due for abolition. He applied for Mid Sussex in competition with Ian Gilmour, but they lost to Tim Renton. He also applied for Mid-Oxfordshire but lost to Douglas Hurd.\nIn 1972, Edward Heath attempted to persuade Heseltine, a strong supporter of his, to challenge Powellite MP Ronald Bell for the Conservative nomination for the new seat of Beaconsfield. Heseltine wrote that he was \"tempted\" to enter the lists at Beaconsfield, but did not actually do so. Crick writes that he reached the final shortlist of four against Bell, before being \"apparently persuaded\" to withdraw. Bell's campaign within the local Conservative ranks was masterminded by Hugh Simmonds, chairman of the Young Conservatives, and he narrowly won.\nHeseltine was one of 180 applicants for the safe Conservative seat of Henley (the constituency association of which was known as North Oxfordshire), whose MP John Hay was stepping down. He reached the final shortlist of three along with two other sitting MPs, William Shelton and Norman Fowler, and in September 1972 was selected as candidate with a clear majority at the first ballot. Part of the reason was that the Association wanted a wealthy MP who would not be distracted by the need to earn money in business as Hay had been. He maintained a constituency home in Crocker End, near Nettlebed, and still maintained a London home at Wilton Crescent. The constituency is around 40 miles west of central London, and has excellent transport links, making it a prime residential area for London-based professionals.\nHeseltine was MP for Henley from February 1974 until his retirement from the House of Commons in 2001.\nCareer under Heath: 1966\u201374.\nOpposition front bencher: 1967\u201370.\nIn 1967, Peter Walker invited Heseltine to be opposition spokesman on transport (not a Shadow Cabinet-level position, but reporting to Walker), after he had arranged a successful speaking tour of the West Country for him. Heseltine's duties included opposing Barbara Castle's 1967 Transport Bill (which eventually became the Transport Act 1968). Heseltine led opposition to the parts of the bill which nationalised small bus companies into the National Bus Company (UK) and set up Passenger transport executives (PTEs) in major urban areas. He criticised Castle for wanting to give PTEs the right to manufacture or produce anything necessary for their function, which as she pointed out was almost word-for-word identical to a clause in the Conservatives' Transport Act 1962. In 1968 Margaret Thatcher became Heseltine's boss for a year; he found her \"embarrassingly rude\". Unusually for the time, he employed a full-time researcher, Eileen Strathnaver.\nHeath allowed his shadow ministers more leeway than would be normal nowadays. Heseltine was one of a group of 15 Conservative MPs to vote against the 1968 Commonwealth Immigration Bill on second reading (Conservative whips advised their MPs to support it, but it was a free vote). He also voted against the bill on three subsequent votes, arguing that it was based on \"sheer naked racialism\" and that Britain should honour promises previously made to the Kenyan Asians. Following Enoch Powell's Rivers of Blood speech Heseltine publicly urged Heath to deal firmly with him\u2014to the consternation of many in his local party at Tavistock, where Powell enjoyed strong support. Three days later, Heseltine was one of around two dozen Conservative MPs who defied the whip to abstain rather than vote against the second reading of the 1968 Race Relations Bill (which banned racial discrimination). He argued that the Conservatives should state their own alternative policy rather than just oppose.\nHeseltine was promoted to principal opposition spokesman on transport in November 1969, although unlike his predecessors Thatcher and Walker, he was not a member of the Shadow Cabinet. He went on a six-week tour of India, Hong Kong, Singapore, Australia and the US to study how their docks were run, in readiness for Labour's planned 1970 Docks Bill (which in the event was cancelled because of that year's general election).\nMinister: 1970\u201374.\nTransport and Local Government.\nFollowing the Conservative victory in the 1970 general election, new Prime Minister Edward Heath appointed Heseltine a junior minister at the Department of Transport. Transport had been demoted from a Cabinet position in 1969, when Barbara Castle had been replaced by Fred Mulley. To his disappointment Heseltine, who had been principal spokesman in opposition, was appointed a Parliamentary Under-Secretary, the lowest rung on the ministerial ladder, to John Peyton (himself only a Minister of State rather than a Cabinet Minister). Officials found him brash, arrogant and overbearing, with a very limited attention span for paperwork, although quick to complain if he was not told about things (the trick, they found, was to submit the two-page summaries on each topic which he demanded, but with extensive background documents). He complained to Lord Jellicoe, Minister for the Civil Service, about being given inexperienced civil servants fresh out of university to work in his office. \"Pussy \u2013 that's what they called us. The scum of the earth, tolerated by civil servants\" he told the \"Sunday Times\" (1 May 1983). One of his first duties was to open the Westway A40 (M), and he also opened the stretch of the M4 west of Maidenhead, on which he was shortly afterwards fined \u00a320 for speeding. He insisted on being shown maps' of where protesters lived, so that he could see the reasons for public concerns at new roads and motorways.\nAfter four months Transport was absorbed into the new \"monster ministry\" of the Department for the Environment, under Heseltine's ally Peter Walker. Heseltine was still responsible for transport, but also for local government reform, covered in the Local Government Act 1972. Redcliffe-Maude's proposals for unitary councils (i.e. merging the two layers of county and borough/district councils) were abandoned. Many historic counties were abolished. Large Metropolitan counties were created around the big cities, but many smaller cities lost their county borough status. One such was Plymouth, the eastern suburbs of which lay in Heseltine's seat of Tavistock. Plymouth opinion was particularly angry that education was now to be run by Devon County Council in Exeter, 40 miles away. Heseltine declined to support a campaign by Plymouth MP Dame Joan Vickers to create a Tamarside Metropolitan county, and was rebuked by Sir Henry Studholme, his predecessor as MP for Tavistock, for declining to support (on the grounds that as minister he might have to adjudicate any dispute) Plymouth Council's attempt to buy more land near Sparkwell to develop light industry under its control.\nAerospace.\nIn April 1972 Heseltine was promoted to be Minister for Aerospace, a Minister of State rather than a Cabinet minister but effectively running his own department within the Department of Trade and Industry, another of Heath's new mega ministries. The department had been given major new powers by the 1972 Industry Act. Later in the year Peter Walker was appointed Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, making him Heseltine's boss once again. Heseltine appointed Cecil Parkinson, whom he had met on an accountancy course in the mid-1950s, as his Parliamentary Private Secretary, ostensibly on the grounds that he knew even less about aerospace than he did. Parkinson was impressed by Heseltine's vigour and his insistence that civil servants produce results for him quickly, later writing in his memoirs (1992) \"in his constructive and deliberate unreasonableness he reminds me in many ways of Mrs Thatcher\". Heseltine arguably did not make aerospace policy any more interventionist than it already was.\nOne of Heseltine's main jobs was to sell Concorde, which was difficult because of its cost and limited range (it could fly from New York to London or Paris, but not the short extra distance to Rome or Frankfurt) and capacity (a quarter that of a Boeing 747). It had been initiated by Macmillan in 1962 as an Anglo-French project to try to get Britain into the EEC, although by the early 1970s Heath was already broaching cancellation with President Pompidou. BOAC threatened to cancel its order, and Heseltine several times summoned the board, who had threatened to resign \"en masse\", to his office, impressing Parkinson by his skills of persuasion. Civil Servants were happy that his love of generating headlines helped the cause of Concorde sales. The Queen, Princess Margaret and Princess Anne were all seen accompanying Heseltine on board Concorde to drum up publicity. In the summer of 1972 he sent Concorde 002 on a tour of Iran, India, Singapore, Japan and Australia. Heseltine and his wife Anne accompanied the plane as far as Singapore (the press joked that Lee Kuan Yew might not let him in with such long hair), and he met it at Toulouse on the way back, but not a single plane was sold. By this stage there were options to sell 74 Concordes to 17 airlines around the world (the original hope had been to sell 30), but this went wrong because of the rises in the oil price in 1973 and 1979; in the event only 10 were ever sold, five each to British Airways (as BOAC had become in 1974) and Air France. Heseltine won praise for his efforts at salesmanship, but some civil servants felt that he was more committed to the plane than Tony Benn had been, and that he should have acted decisively to cut back marketing efforts sooner than he did. He did not mention Concorde at all in his books \"Where There's A Will\" or \"The Challenge of Europe\".\nHeseltine was a key mover in the setting up of the European Space Agency (ESA) in 1973. He cancelled the British Geostationary Technological satellite and handed back the grant to the Treasury. He was less successful in persuading colleagues to centralise British space expenditure, which was split between the DTI, Defence, the Post Office and the Science Research Council \u2013 his attempt to get Margaret Thatcher, Secretary of State for Education and Science, to give up control of the latter, soured their relations. He also favoured pan European cooperation on civil aviation.\nHeseltine had almost daily dealings with the industrialist Arnold Weinstock, Head of GEC \u2013 as transport minister Heseltine had once summoned him in to the ministry to ask why the electronic signs on the motorway, built by GEC, did not work properly. By May 1973, Weinstock was thought by Cecil King to have a very low opinion of Heseltine, but this later improved and they became friends. Heseltine had started almost from nothing, but Haymarket had only succeeded when bought out by the big conglomerate BPC. This may explain his corporatism, in Crick's view, although unlike Jim Prior or Heath, Heseltine had never shown much interest in involving trade unions.\nDuring this period, Heseltine's opponent Stanley Clinton-Davis coined his nickname of Tarzan, due to his similarity to Johnny Weissmuller, the actor who had played Tarzan in a number of films in the 1930s and 1940s. The media were quick to follow in Clinton-Davis's example. He was caricatured as such, complete with loin-cloth, in the \"If\" series drawn by satirical political cartoonist Steve Bell. Heseltine has claimed never to have been bothered what people called him, although the nickname amused his wife: \"It was quite fun to be married to Johnny Weissmuller\".\nHovertrain.\nEarly in 1973, rumours began to circulate that the Tracked Hovercraft (known as the \"Hovertrain\"), a planned 300\u00a0mph floating train on which work had begun in 1967, was to be cancelled. On 12 February 1973, Heseltine gave a written answer on Peter Walker's behalf to a written question from Labour MP David Stoddart, that a further injection of government money was still \"under consideration\". However, two days later Heseltine appeared before the Select Committee, and revealed that the government had already decided to pull the plug on the Hovertrain on 29 January. Airey Neave believed Heseltine had been lying and urged Stoddart to pursue the matter. The Hovertrain incident came to be regarded as the worst example of lying to the House of Commons since the Profumo affair a decade earlier, and Heseltine survived because full details only emerged during the Parliamentary summer recess.\nThe committee's report in September accused Heseltine of having given an \"untrue\" answer on 12 February. Heseltine immediately gave a press conference (7 September 1973) in which he denied that he had lied. On the orders of Chief Whip Francis Pym he apologised to the House of Commons on 16 October 1973 for having made a statement which was open to \"more than one interpretation\". Heseltine said that his statement that further investment was \"under consideration\" was not just the normal euphemism for a decision that had not yet been announced, but was actually technically true, as at that time he was still talking to Hawker Siddeley and British Rail about buying part of the Hovertrain business. The row deflected attention from the committee's anger at the cancellation decision. Neave's real target, in the view of Heseltine's PPS Cecil Parkinson, was Heath, whom Neave detested and later helped to topple as party leader in 1975, but he and Sir Harry Legge-Bourke, both of whom had distinguished war records, also deplored Heseltine's cutting short of his National Service and his brashness and new money.\nHeath does not appear to have been overly bothered about the cancellation of Hovertrain, but was bothered about the mooted third London Airport at Maplin Sands on the Essex Coast, which was seen as a major prestige project along with the Channel Tunnel which was begun at this time. The Bill was threatened by a revolt of Tory backbenchers whose seats were affected, and Heath gave Heseltine a dressing down for his lack of energy in promoting it.\nAssessments.\nHeseltine was not popular with his ministerial peers at this time. A story was told of how ministers had volunteered him to be the one \"taken hostage by terrorists\" in a mooted training exercise. Nonetheless, Heseltine emerged from the Heath government with an enhanced reputation. He had avoided the worst crises of that government: the two miners' strikes, incomes policy, industrial relations policy and Northern Ireland, as well as any direct involvement in British entry into the EEC. Heseltine's career under Heath's ministry saw him associated with local government reorganisation, prestige projects, Europe and state aid to industries, themes which would recur throughout his career. He had attained a higher public profile than many Cabinet ministers, and by 1974 he was being seriously tipped as a future prime minister.\nHeseltine was promoted to the Shadow Cabinet in June 1974 as Industry spokesman. If the Conservatives had won either of the general elections in 1974 (February or October) he would almost certainly have joined the Cabinet. He was shadowing Tony Benn, who planned a major expansion of public ownership through the National Enterprise Board. In the summer of 1974, Heseltine put together a team of over 20 Conservative MPs, each a specialist in a particular industry, to campaign against Benn's plans.\n1975 leadership election.\nHeseltine had lost faith in Heath over the second miners' strike and over Heath's personal abrasiveness (Heath had apparently once told him to his face that he was too openly ambitious); his patron Peter Walker had also come to have similar doubts about Heath. Ten days before the October 1974 election, at which Heseltine bucked the national swing by increasing his majority at Henley, he urged Heath to consider his position by the end of the year.\nIt is unclear how Heseltine voted in the first ballot of the 1975 Conservative leadership election, in which the challenger Margaret Thatcher defeated Heath. Norman Tebbit stated that he and John Nott persuaded him to vote for Thatcher so as to open up the way for his preferred candidate Willie Whitelaw to stand on the second ballot. Another (anonymous) close friend later told Michael Crick that Heseltine voted for Thatcher. The Thatcher team had him down as an abstainer, while he refused at the time to reveal how he voted. In his memoirs Heseltine wrote that he abstained in the first ballot, but that he would have voted for Whitelaw in the first ballot had he stood against Heath. Whitelaw admired his drive and energy but looked down on him as \"new Money\" and is said to have commented that Heseltine was \"the sort of man who combs his hair in public\".\nHeseltine toyed with standing himself for the second ballot (in Crick's view his vote would very likely have been derisory), but voted for Whitelaw. Thatcher, whom Heseltine like many others had initially regarded as something of a joke candidate, defeated Whitelaw and became party leader.\nCareer under Thatcher: 1975\u201386.\nOpposition: 1975\u201379.\nHeseltine did not work easily with women as senior colleagues, as was shown by the difficulty experienced by Elinor Goodman in obtaining promotion from secretary to journalist at \"Campaign\", and his reluctance to let Josephine Hart sit on the Haymarket Board. Heseltine fully expected to be sacked from the Shadow Cabinet by the new leader (as Peter Walker was at this time), but was retained, in part because Thatcher was impressed by his fierce opposition to Benn's Industry Bill, and partly because a senior figure, possibly Geoffrey Howe, argued for his retention.\nHeseltine first emerged as a platform orator at the Conservative National Council in March 1975, and then at the autumn conferences in 1975 and 1976 (where he likened Labour to a one-legged army marching \"Left, left, left\"). He dictated his speech ideas beforehand to his scriptwriters, who had to discard a good deal of unintelligible material. His reputation was derived not from any factual content or argument, but from the force and brio of his delivery \u2013 it was said of him that he could \"find the party's clitoris\". There was talk of his being appointed Party Chairman (in charge of the party organisation and of campaigning across the country) in place of Peter Thorneycroft.\nIn the summer of 1975, Heseltine persuaded the Shadow Cabinet not to oppose the Labour Government's bailout of British Leyland because of the risk to marginal seats (including some Cowley workers in northern wards of his own Henley seat). Industry Secretary Tony Benn thought Heseltine intellectually shallow (describing one of his speeches as \"an awful old flop\" and another as \"another flayling attack\") but admired his ability to make headlines in opposition.\nThe infamous mace incident took place on 27 May 1976 during the Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Bill, a measure whose passage had already lasted a year and seen 58 Committee sessions. The Speaker had ruled the bill to be hybrid, as it excluded one shipbuilding company (although there was dispute as to whether the company in question actually was a shipbuilder). All interested parties were therefore entitled to put their case to a special select committee. An earlier vote in favour of the Speaker's ruling had been tied, and defeated after the Speaker had been obliged by convention to use his casting vote against his own ruling. The Labour Government now moved to suspend the normal Parliamentary standing order to allow the bill to proceed as normal. This time the Conservatives expected the Speaker to use his casting vote \"against\" the government's motion to suspend the standing order. Instead the Labour motion was carried, after a Labour whip broke his pair. Amid riotous scenes of Labour left-wingers singing \"The Red Flag\" Heseltine picked up the Mace, the symbol of Parliament's authority, until Jim Prior grabbed it off him. Accounts of exactly what happened vary but it seems likely that he was mockingly offering it to the Labour benches, not, as some alleged, \"brandishing\" it \u2013 an illusion caused by Prior pulling his other arm down. Thatcher was furious. Speaker Thomas suspended the sitting and made Heseltine wait until next day to apologise so that tempers could cool. Heseltine was faced with calls for his resignation from the Shadow Cabinet; he thought it would play well with the public, but in Crick's view it helped to cement a reputation for impulsiveness and poor judgement.\nIn autumn 1976 Heseltine was reshuffled, against his will, to the job of Shadow Environment Secretary. He was particularly cross at having to give up the job of Shadow Industry Secretary to John Biffen. He accepted on condition that he would not have to take the Environment job when the Conservatives returned to office. As Benn had given way to Eric Varley there was no longer such a need for aggressive campaigning on Industry, and Thatcher, who had herself been Shadow Environment Secretary in 1974, wanted campaigning on council house sales (Heseltine offered up to 50% discounts for tenants who bought their homes) and reform of the rates, and thought his predecessor Timothy Raison ineffective.\nSecretary of State for the Environment 1979\u201383.\nAppointment and political stance.\nThatcher was impressed by Heseltine's campaigning and love of headlines during the May 1979 election, in contrast to most of the Shadow Cabinet. After the Conservatives had won, and mindful of her earlier promise that he need not take on the Environment job in government, she offered him the Energy Department (an important job following the 1979 energy crisis caused by the Iranian Revolution). He preferred to be Secretary of State for the Environment after all, entering the Cabinet for the first time.\nDuring the macroeconomic disputes of the early 1980s, Heseltine was sometimes associated with the Cabinet \"wets\" (Peter Walker, Jim Prior, Ian Gilmour, Lord Carrington and Norman St John Stevas) but was not seen as one of them, nor was he invited to their private meetings. Both Nigel Lawson and Cecil Parkinson agreed in their memoirs (1992) that he accepted in principle the need to control public expenditure. He opposed the abolition of exchange controls in 1979 and opposed Geoffrey Howe's tight budget in 1981, suggesting a public sector pay freeze instead.\nHeseltine favoured privatisation of state owned industries, a novel idea in 1979 as the Conservatives were initially only proposing to denationalise the industries nationalised by Labour in the 1970s.\nDespite his initial reluctance to take on the job, Heseltine later described it as \"four of the happiest years of my life\". He passed the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, a conservation measure. He also vetoed the \"Green Giant\", a skyscraper on the South Bank, initiated plans for the National Gallery extension (the winning entry was famously described by Prince Charles as \"a monstrous carbuncle\" and was never built) and signed off on the building of the Queen Elizabeth II Centre on a bomb site near Westminster; when he was unable to secure private funding as planned the Treasury were forced to pay for the building. Some of the DoE's responsibilities were hived off into English Heritage, a new body.\nAdministering the department.\nThe Permanent Under-Secretary at the Environment Department, Sir John Garlick, described Heseltine's arrival as a change from \"a very conservative Labour Secretary of State, Peter Shore, to a very radical Conservative Secretary of State\". On his first day Heseltine took him out to lunch at the Connaught and drew up a list of what he wanted to accomplish in office (the list appears in Heseltine's book \"Where There's A Will\", and was returned to him at the end of his time at the Environment). Only a quarter of Heseltine's agenda consisted of manifesto commitments and other political goals; the rest of it consisted of administrative and organisational changes. Peter Hennessy observed that Heseltine was more interested in the nuts and bolts of Whitehall reform than any minister since David Lloyd George. Heseltine was quite ruthless about moving civil servants with whom he was dissatisfied, but nonetheless staff thought he had mellowed somewhat since the early 1970s, and was more relaxed and fun to work with. His permanent secretaries Sir John Garlick and Sir George Moseley thought highly of him. He preferred to reach decisions through informal discussion rather than wading through paperwork. He instituted Peter Walker's custom of morning \"prayer\" meetings (ministers and PPSs with no civil servants present), now common in Whitehall but an innovation at the time.\nThe department had a budget of \u00a314 billion a year and employed 52,000 people. The Conservatives were pledged to cut 100,000 off the 730,000 strong civil service. On the advice of his junior minister Lord Bellwin, a former leader of Leeds City Council, Heseltine ordered that nobody was to be hired without his personal approval.\nHeseltine instituted an internal audit system called \"MINIS\" (\"management information system for ministers\"), ironically, in Crick's view, as Heseltine's own company Haymarket had often been chaotically organised. Peter Hennessy likened it to \"a Domesday Book\". Heseltine personally interrogated the heads of department (many of whom felt he was interfering in internal civil service matters). The lengthy reports, showing organisation charts of each of the 66 directorates, expenditure, staff costs and forward plans, were made publicly available. Staff numbers were cut more deeply than in any other Whitehall department; one in twelve had gone within a year and nearly 30%, 15,000, by 1983; local government finance, under Terry Heiser, was the only department to receive extra resources. Thatcher was impressed by MINIS, and in February 1983 Heseltine was invited to give a presentation about them to other senior ministers and civil servants, in the hope that they might be adopted by other departments. There was little interest, but similar concepts were later adopted by Derek Rayner's Financial Management Initiative across Whitehall.\nCouncil house sales.\nHeseltine was a convert to the sale of council houses, a policy pioneered by some Conservative local authorities, e.g. Birmingham. He also favoured the policy of giving away houses, a policy first mooted from the backbenches by Peter Walker in the mid-1970s, not least as some local authorities were spending more on maintenance than they were recouping in rents. Thatcher, who was concerned at the reaction from those who had made financial sacrifices to buy their homes, was initially sceptical. After taking office Heseltine issued a circular enabling councils, if they chose, to sell houses at 30% discount and to offer 100% mortgages. The Housing Act 1980 enacting Right to Buy was delayed by a Lords amendment and did not reach the statute book until the end of 1980. Some councils were slow in processing applications (one even threatened to house \"problem\" families next door to those who bought) and Heseltine made an example of Norwich by setting up a DOE sales office there; Norwich council took him to court and lost. At the time Heseltine permitted councils to use up to 75% of sales receipts for renovating the housing stock, and was angry in later years when this was cut back by the Treasury. Heseltine also insisted on the doubling of rents to encourage buying.\nDuring the 1980s over a million council houses, around 20% of the stock, were sold, and by 1987 Labour had dropped their opposition to the Right to Buy. This was an enormous social change, doing much to increase Conservative support amongst new homeowners and which Heseltine often cites as one of his major achievements. Heseltine noted that, \"no single piece of legislation has enabled the transfer of so much capital wealth from the state to the people.\" He said that the 'right to buy' policy had two main objectives: to give people what they had wanted, and to reverse the trend of ever-increasing dominance of the State over the life of the individual. He said: \"There is in this country a deeply ingrained desire for home ownership. The Government believe that this spirit should be fostered. It reflects the wishes of the people, ensures the wide spread of wealth through society, encourages a personal desire to improve and modernize one's own home, enables parents to accrue wealth for their children and stimulates the attitudes of independence and self-reliance that are the bedrock of a free society.\" Many of the homes sold were \"street properties\" rather than flats, which arguably helped to ghettoise the remaining council tenants on run-down inner city estates. In fact, in Crick's view, he deserves only limited credit; it had been a Conservative commitment since 1974, and much of the detailed work was done by his juniors Hugh Rossi (in opposition) and John Stanley (in government).\nLocal government finance.\nIn 1979 the Conservatives were strongly represented in local government, as a result of the unpopularity of the outgoing Labour government. Four of the five council associations were Conservative-controlled. Heseltine was able to persuade them to rein in their spending by 1% each year. Whereas previously overspending councils had received extra rate support grants from Whitehall, after six months Heseltine announced a list of fourteen overspending councils who were to have their grant \"cut\", most of them inner London councils and only one of them, Hammersmith &amp; Fulham, Conservative controlled. The move appeared blatantly political as many of the other 114 overspenders were Conservative councils. Council leaders who came to appeal to Heseltine were often humiliated by being interrogated about their budget, to demonstrate their lack of detailed knowledge, before the council treasurer was allowed to speak.\nFrom 1980 to 1981 relations with local government became increasingly confrontational, as Labour made large gains in local elections, with a new generation of council leaders such as Ken Livingstone in London and David Blunkett in Sheffield seeking to generate employment through their councils. Council spending now began to rise again, largely as a result of increases by the GLC, Merseyside and West Midlands councils; whereas Labour votes tended to be poorer and eligible for rate rebates, the burden of higher spending tended to fall on businesses and middle class homeowners. Although councils had already suffered deep cuts under Labour in the 1970s, Heseltine was under pressure from Thatcher and from Conservative MPs and newspapers to cut more. Heseltine's initial suggestion, that councils who wanted to increase the rates be forced to submit to re-election, was rejected by the Cabinet, in favour of a proposal that such increases be put to referendum (in Coventry, voters had recently voted by over 7:1 for spending cuts rather than a supplementary rate increase). This proposal in turn was attacked by Conservative backbenchers, both as an infringement of council freedom and a risky precedent for national taxation, both in the Environment Committee and in the debate on a bill which Heseltine introduced and had to withdraw. Heseltine then banned supplementary rates and imposed stiffer sanctions on overspending councils.\nThatcher's 1974 pledge to abolish the rates and replace them with a new form of local government funding was still in force. However, the 1979 manifesto made clear that income tax cuts took priority over rates reform. Thatcher also blocked the upward revaluation of property rating values in 1982. A review of rates reform was begun in 1981, in which his junior minister Tom King personally spoke to every single backbench Conservative MP to canvass opinion about the various options. A Green Paper was produced in December 1981, recommending that no single alternative to the rates suggested itself. Thatcher wrote \"I will not tolerate failure in this area\" in the margin of the report and in the summer of 1982 a new committee was set up under Willie Whitelaw, only to come to much the same conclusion (The eventual solution, a \"poll tax\", was rejected both by the Green Paper and by Whitelaw's committee).\nHeseltine resisted demands by Leon Brittan, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury with whom he already enjoyed a somewhat antagonistic relationship, that central government have power to cap the spending of local authorities. He argued that the worst offenders were the large metropolitan counties (which, ironically, he had helped to create a decade earlier) and that the simplest solution was simply to abolish them. In the event, the 1983 manifesto, after Heseltine had moved to his next job, committed the Conservatives both to abolition of the metropolitan boroughs and to rate capping. When Heseltine objected after the election, Thatcher gave him \"one of the most violent rebukes I have ever witnessed in Cabinet\" according to Jim Prior, who believed that the issue helped fuel the hostility between Heseltine and Thatcher and Brittan, which would later exhibit itself as the Westland Affair.\nIn opposition, in the late 1970s, Heseltine had been committed to reducing central government control over local government. In the 1980s, the opposite happened, with no less than 50 Acts of Parliament reducing the powers of local government. In Crick's view, although he opposed both rate capping and the poll tax, the overall trend towards centralisation was too strong for him to resist. During his time at Environment Heseltine also brought in compulsory competitive tendering for council services, and helped set up the Audit Commission, whose initial role was to act as an independent supervisor of district auditors of council activities.\nRiots.\nHeseltine became the troubleshooter to deal with the explosion of violence in Britain's inner cities in the aftermath of the Brixton and Toxteth riots of 1981. Unemployment had reached 20% in Liverpool as a whole, but 60% among young black residents in Toxteth. Tear gas had had to be used, and the Cabinet contemplated deploying the Army. A few weeks before the riots, a Cabinet thinktank had proposed that the area be left to go into \"managed decline\". Thatcher visited Merseyside and it was decided that a minister should go for a longer visit. Heseltine was already chairman of the Merseyside Partnership, set up by his predecessor Peter Shore, to channel government money into Liverpool (six other partnerships existed).\nHeseltine visited Liverpool accompanied by a dozen or so officials from different ministries. Timothy Raison, a junior Home Office minister, went ostensibly to check on race matters but actually to ensure that Heseltine did not interfere in police matters. Heseltine visited council estates, often accompanied by gangs of grinning children trying to be noticed on television, and his flamboyance as a self-made man went down surprisingly well in a City famous for turning out flamboyant figures in the entertainment industry. He talked to black community leaders, who complained about police bias and brutality, and he later had an awkward private meeting with the Chief constable Kenneth Oxford about the matter. He arranged for the bosses of the leading banks and building societies to tour the area in a coach (they were reluctant until Heseltine's PPS Tim Sainsbury persuaded Robin Leigh-Pemberton of NatWest to come), and asked them to each second a bright young manager to the DOE for a year.\nHeseltine circulated a 21-page minute to Cabinet on his return, entitled \"It Took a Riot\". He proposed a regional office and a review of the status of the Metropolitan Counties, as well as greater government emphasis on Merseyside in future. He had prepared the ground with a small dinner for Whitehall mandarins including Robert Armstrong (Cabinet Secretary) and Ian Bancroft (Head of the Civil Service). However, Thatcher was not impressed, although she agreed to his appointment as Minister for Merseyside for twelve months. Neither was Keith Joseph (Secretary of State for Industry) nor Howe (Chancellor of the Exchequer), who favoured enterprise zones where businesses would be given favourable tax treatment.\nShortly after his appointment as Minister for Merseyside, Heseltine gave his annual party conference speech, in which he condemned talk of repatriation and called for more public spending on inner cities. Although he felt he had taken a risk \u2013 the speech was in marked contrast to Norman Tebbit's \"On Your Bike\" speech a few hours later \u2013 he received his usual standing ovation and later recorded that it was the one of his speeches of which he was most proud.\nIn autumn 1981 he visited Liverpool again, this time with a thirty-strong task force of representatives of local employers and civil servants (unusually for the time, drawn from different departments \u2013 DOE, DTI and Employment, but not the Home Office this time \u2013 Heseltine had been pushing for greater cooperation between departments since the setting up of the European Space Agency in 1973). For the next fifteen months he visited Liverpool for a day almost every week, refusing police protection and often driving himself, persuading business and local government to work together. Colette Bowe, a DTI official who was deputy director of the task force, recorded that Heseltine was the most effective minister she had ever seen at getting the official machine to do his bidding through a mixture of charm and tough questions.\nInner city development.\nHeseltine faced initial suspicion from Labour-led Merseyside Council, but got on well with Sir Trevor Jones, Liberal leader of Liverpool City Council. Jones, also a self-made businessman, got on well with Heseltine, and Jones claimed that Heseltine admitted to him late one night that he was a Liberal at heart, but could not bear the thought of having no realistic chance to win power.\nInspired by the Bundesgartenschauen which had helped to regenerate German cities after the war, Heseltine arranged for the first of five biennial National garden festivals to be held in Liverpool in 1984 (Jones arranged for the council to delegate the bid to the Merseyside Development Corporation, of which he was a director). More than 3 million people eventually attended.\nHeseltine arranged for Liverpool to receive unused government grants for other cities (from the Urban Programme), although the money was less than had been clawed back from Liverpool through council spending cuts. He also played an important role in the redevelopment of Albert Dock, the development of Wavertree Technology Park (the land purchased by \u00a310 million of public money) and the development of Cantril Farm estate into Stockbridge Village, arranging for Barratt Developments to build many new houses for owner occupiers.\nHeseltine also played an important role in the development of Urban Development Corporations, directly appointed by the minister and overriding local authority planning controls to spend government money on infrastructure. This was a controversial measure in Labour strongholds such as East London, Merseyside and North East England. He obtained a Treasury grant of \u00a377 million to build the Docklands Light Railway, although transport links to Docklands remained inadequate. He opened Britain's first Enterprise Zone at Corby in Northamptonshire.\nSome criticism was made of his time in Liverpool that he spent a lot of money but generated little in the way of new employment (\"I would not blame him for that: Liverpool had defeated better men than Michael Heseltine\" commented Lady Thatcher acidly in her memoirs in 1993). Local Labour politicians tended to feel that he had accomplished little, although they acknowledged his good intentions. However a more positive assessment was offered by Michael Parkinson, Professor of Urban Affairs at John Moores University: although he had been sceptical in the 1980s, by 1997 he had come to favour the policies championed by Heseltine: assignment of ministers to regions, development of housing associations and cooperatives, and the channelling of government money through business-led agencies rather than through local government.\nSecretary of State for Defence 1983\u201386.\nAppointment.\nIn October 1982 Secretary of State for Defence John Nott announced that he was stepping down from Parliament at the next election. As defence was expected to be a major issue at the election, it made sense to appoint his successor as soon as possible, and Heseltine's name was widely touted. Over the winter of 1982\u20131983 there were frequent rumours that military top brass were lobbying against his appointment, strongly denied to the press by Willie Whitelaw (Home Secretary and \"de facto\" Deputy Prime Minister) and Chief of Defence Staff Edwin Bramall. Heseltine was appointed in January 1983, with the backing of Nott and Party Chairman Cecil Parkinson.\nBramall had hoped for a period of consolidation after the reorganisations of the early 1980s and the Falklands War. Thatcher felt that Heseltine was \"restless\" at the Environment, and that he would bring efficiency reforms to Defence, whilst she also wanted to keep him away from economic and social issues. She appointed her Principal Private Secretary Clive Whitmore as Permanent Under-Secretary for Defence (head civil servant for the department \u2013 the job had coincidentally fallen vacant).\nNuclear disarmament and 1983 election.\nOne of Heseltine's main jobs was to campaign against the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND), which had grown in size from 3,000 to 10,000 in three years amid public disquiet about the deployment of Trident and Cruise missiles, and the hawkish rhetoric often employed by Thatcher and US President Ronald Reagan. Nott had had little interest in campaigning and had left the matter to the Minister of State, Peter Blaker, Heseltine's contemporary from Oxford. Heseltine put together a small group of seven civil servants called Defence Section 19 (DS19) to brief MPs and other opinion formers, and argue the case for Britain to have nuclear weapons. Some, both in the civil service and out of it, had qualms about using civil servants for what amounted to a political campaigning role. Opinion polls showed the public to be opposed to Trident and Cruise missiles, but also opposed to \"unilateral\" (\"one-sided\" as Heseltine insisted on calling it) disarmament, so Heseltine steered the debate away from the former and towards the latter.\nAt the advice of John Ledlie Heseltine visited at the US Air Base at RAF Greenham Common, and after long prior discussion Heseltine insisted on wearing a combat jacket (not, as was often wrongly asserted, a Flak jacket; Ledlie does not accept Heseltine's later claim that he was simply handed it by a military figure to protect his coat from the rain). The jacket was a gift to cartoonists and he wore it on several subsequent visits to military bases. In February 1983 he fell over in the mel\u00e9e (he said at the time that he was pushed) when CND protestors surrounded a meeting of Newbury Conservatives, a propaganda gift, and on Good Friday 1983 he was filmed in West Berlin looking over the wall to the communist east, distracting attention from CND's linking of arms round Greenham Common that day.\nWith a general election looming, Heseltine was keen to associate Labour with CND, and CND with communists and the Soviet Union (ignoring earlier comments by Party Chairman Cecil Parkinson that this was \"manifest nonsense\" \u2013 the media did not pick up on this). He made such a claim in a speech at Exeter in April 1983, and distributed to Tory candidates information about the background of leading members of CND. This had been assembled by Ray Whitney MP, but some of it was suspected of having come from intelligence sources. MI5 agent Cathy Massiter later wrote, in 1985 in \"The Observer\", that from 1981 onwards and especially from 1983 she had been asked to pass on to DS19 (the propaganda unit at the Ministry of Defence) information obtained by wiretaps and by an MI5 mole in CID. MI5 bosses refused to pass on classified material about security matters but agreed to pass on information about the political links of CND members. Even this was in breach of the 1952 Directive from Home Secretary David Maxwell-Fyfe that the security services not provide information for party political purposes. Heseltine allowed his deputy Peter Blaker to debate with CND, but refused to do so himself, believing that he would be at a disadvantage against the attractive Joan Ruddock. Blaker did much of the work while Heseltine got the publicity. DS19 was wound up three months after the 1983 election, at which Heseltine was widely credited with helping the Conservatives achieve a landslide victory.\nAdministering the department.\nAlthough the Ministry of Defence already had its own \"Management Audit\" system, Heseltine insisted on introducing his own version of the MINIS system which he had introduced at the Environment. The Ministry of Defence had a budget of \u00a317 million per annum, and employed 246,000 civilians as well as 300,000 in uniform. Whereas the Department of the Environment had 66 directorates, Defence had 156, each headed by a two-star officer or a civil servant of equivalent seniority. The organisation chart took months to design and covered four large sheets of paper. In the event Heseltine was too preoccupied by the political matters to pay much attention to the MINIs reports which had taken so long to produce. Heseltine disliked dealing with paperwork, and insisted on having plenty of time to take decisions, and that all reports sent to him had to be first run past one of his advisers for comments. Staff numbers fell by 20,000 (one in twelve) during Heseltine's time at Defence, and many services were privatised, including the Royal Ordnance Factories whilst the Royal Navy Dockyards at Devonport and Rosyth were put under private management.\nThe three separate service ministries (Admiralty, War and Air) had merged into a single Ministry of Defence in 1981. Heseltine drew up plans on a flight back from Kuwait to merge the services further, so that the three chiefs of staff reported directly to the Chief of Defence Staff instead of being treated as colleagues, whilst some supply services were to be merged. The plans were bounced onto the Chief of Defence Staff, Field Marshal \"Dwin\" Bramall, over a weekend before publication on Monday, so senior officers had minimal time to drum up opposition in Parliament and the press. There was around three months of protest in the press, including from Bramall's predecessor Admiral of the Fleet Sir Henry Leach. Bramall obtained the concession that the individual service chiefs would be allowed to retain small staffs of their own and have a right of appeal to the Prime Minister. The changes took effect at the start of 1985.\nBramall admired Heseltine's \"great drive\" and his \"style, energy and vision about Europe\", but was displeased at Heseltine's rudeness. It was not uncommon for Heseltine to summon him to a meeting early in the day, then keep Bramall \"on hold\" all day as he kept putting back the meeting, and eventually earning himself a rebuke for failing to display the respect with which every officer in the armed forces is trained to treat his subordinates. A number of senior officers spoke of Heseltine in scathing terms, for example for his self-centredness, to Michael Crick when he was researching his biography. Crick observes that with the exception of some defence chiefs, many people who worked with Heseltine came to \"admire and respect him\", although those who see him from afar are more suspect.\nThe sinking of the \"Belgrano\".\nHeseltine took a hard line on civil liberties issues. He supported Thatcher's attempt to ban trade unions from GCHQ. He supported the prosecution of Sarah Tisdall for leaking his public relations plans for the arrival of cruise missiles in 1983.\nBefore Heseltine's arrival at the Ministry of Defence, Tam Dalyell had exposed inconsistencies in ministerial accounts of the sinking of the Argentinian warship \"ARA General Belgrano\" during the Falklands War of 1982, and alleged that the ship had been sunk to sabotage Foreign Office attempts to negotiate peace via Washington and Peru. Heseltine, apparently worried that there might be a scandal comparable to Watergate, asked Clive Ponting, a civil servant who had played an important role in Derek Rayner's efficiency reforms, to draw up a detailed report into the sinking of the \"Belgrano\". At the end of March 1984 Ponting attended a series of meetings with Heseltine. He and the Permanent Under-Secretary Clive Whitmore wanted to disclose further information to reveal that the \"Belgrano\" had been spotted a day earlier than had previously been admitted. John Stanley, thought to be Thatcher's eyes and ears in the Ministry of Defence, initially opposed it, but Thatcher was persuaded that a letter should be sent to the Opposition Defence Spokesman Denzil Davies. However, both Heseltine and Thatcher rejected Ponting's draft which would have admitted for the first time that the Belgrano had been sighted a day earlier and stated that she was sailing away from the British taskforce when sunk. Ponting later stated that Stanley had asked Thatcher to overrule Heseltine on the matter; he withheld information not just from Dalyell but from the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, which was conducting its own inquiry, citing national security considerations.\nSix days after Heseltine's letter to Denzil Davies, Ponting sent Davies an anonymous note stating that the letter had been written according to the advice of John Stanley, but contrary to the advice of civil servants, and suggesting other potential lines of inquiry. Three months later he sent two documents exposing the alleged cover up. Heseltine strongly supported, and by some accounts pushed for, the prosecution of Ponting (Ministry of Defence police had advised against, but the Solicitor-General Sir Patrick Mayhew urged that he should be). Heseltine later said that Thatcher had not been involved in the decision to prosecute. Neither Heseltine nor Stanley were called as witnesses at Ponting's trial in January 1985 (Richard Mottram, Heseltine's Private Secretary, gave evidence on behalf of the Ministry of Defence). To general surprise Ponting was acquitted. A week later Heseltine launched a stinging seventy-minute attack on Ponting in the House of Commons, and a year later he walked out of a Channel 4 News studio on being told that a recorded interview with Ponting was also to be shown. Stanley was seen as the villain of the piece, whereas Heseltine had merely declined to correct false statements made by others.\nNATO.\nThe Foreign Secretary, Geoffrey Howe, spoke highly of Heseltine's contribution to NATO and WEU conferences. Heseltine was as angry as Thatcher at the US invasion of Grenada, a Commonwealth country. He wanted warmer relations with the Soviets and was sceptical about the US Strategic Defense Initiative (\"Star Wars\"), putting in a brief and grudging appearance at Caspar Weinberger's Ditchley Park Conference about the topic in 1985.\nHeseltine came close to misleading the House of Commons over the meeting of NATO defence ministers at Montebello, Quebec, in October 1983. He stated that no \"specific\" proposals had been made to update NATO short range and tactical nuclear weapons. In fact a decision had been made \"in principle\" to do so. Crick describes Heseltine's answers as \"highly disingenuous and deceitful\". At the time NATO was claiming to be cutting back on such weapons, and the peace movement was still powerful in Germany where such weapons might be used.\nDefence procurement.\nThe Defence budget was protected by a NATO commitment to increase defence spending by 3% per annum until 1986, but was still subjected to cuts in the proposed budget during Heseltine's tenure. Some senior military figures felt that Heseltine was obsessed with the minutiae of running the department rather than thinking strategically about defence priorities and procurement. Dwin Bramall recalled that Heseltine never showed an interest in the strategy papers he sent him. Thatcher was highly critical of him for failing to take a decision on the development of the Nimrod early-warning plane, on which \u00a3660 million was spent over a ten-year period, only for the project to be cancelled by his successor. Some accusations were raised (the Commons Select Committee on Defence thought him \"vague and evasive\" on the issue in 1985) that the accounts were being massaged to push costs into the period after 1986, when cuts would become inevitable. The journalist Hugo Young later recalled Heseltine briefing journalists confidentially that spending and funding could be reconciled until 1986, by which time he expected \"to be gone\".\nIn Cabinet, Heseltine resented being kept out of economic debates and suspected he might be reshuffled to the job of Secretary of State for Northern Ireland as Jim Prior had been. He had tried to pursue a one-man industrial policy, as defence spent \u00a317 billion per annum, 5% of UK GDP, half of it on procurement, and 90% of that in the UK, with 700,000 British jobs dependent on it. Heseltine was unhappy at the way defence contracts were often awarded on a cost-plus basis (i.e. agreeing to pay the supplier a certain amount over and above his costs, leaving no incentive to keep costs to a minimum). In 1985 he promoted his special adviser Peter Levene to be Chief of Defence Procurement; special arrangements had to be made to ensure that Levene did not make decisions affecting his own defence company United Scientific Holdings, of which the former Permanent Secretary Sir Frank Cooper was now chairman, and he was paid \u00a395,000 per annum plus \u00a312,000 in pension contributions, more than the Prime Minister or senior civil servants. Thatcher agreed to Levene's appointment over civil service objections. He abolished cost-plus pricing of contracts and stated that he had trimmed 10% off the defence equipment budget by 1989 through greater competitive tendering; enough, as Heseltine put it, to pay for the Trident nuclear missile programme.\nIt had been agreed to spend \u00a3280m for two Type 22 frigates. Norman Tebbit (Trade and Industry Secretary), with the backing of the Cabinet, wanted them built at Swan Hunter in the North East, but Heseltine threatened resignation in January 1985 unless at least one was built at Cammell Laird on Merseyside, at a cost of an extra \u00a37 million, where Type 22s had been built before. Thatcher let him have his way after he persuaded her that it would reward shipyard workers who had crossed picket lines during a recent strike, but was privately furious, and keen to keep defence costs down in future by buying American equipment.\nHeseltine also favoured European cooperation in defence procurement, feeling that this allowed Europe to compete with US firms which receive huge orders from The Pentagon. Crick argues that his experience of Concorde in the early 1970s should have warned him that such multinational ventures are problematic and, because of the political capital invested, hard to cancel when things go wrong. Heseltine played an important role in persuading West German defence minister Manfred W\u00f6rner to back the joint Anglo-German-Spanish-Italian Eurofighter, and contrary to the wishes of Thatcher (and previous defence secretary John Nott) who preferred an American or British fighter. Cabinet refused to allow a loosening of the specifications to allow French company Dassault to become involved in the consortium. Agreement was reached at Turin in August 1985.\nHeseltine also sold 132 Tornados for \u00a34bn to Saudi Arabia later in 1985, accepting oil instead of cash (to the displeasure of Peter Walker, Energy Secretary) so that they would buy British rather than US aircraft. This later formed part of the controversial Al-Yamamah arms deal, the main part of which was signed in 1988.\nWestland Affair.\nBackground.\nIn spring 1985 Heseltine displayed little interest in Westland helicopters when approached by Tebbit (then Secretary of State for Trade and Industry) at the time of Alan Bristow's bid for the company, as plenty of American helicopters were available to meet Britain's defence requirements. He attended two meetings about the company's future in June 1985, chaired by Thatcher. Heseltine, who had a poor opinion of Westland's management, was willing to inject \u00a330 million, provided the Treasury contributed half. The idea was not approved.\nHeseltine took against the new chairman Sir John Cuckney's plan that Westland merge with United Technologies Corporation, of which the US company Sikorsky was a subsidiary, after realising that Westland would probably become responsible for assembling the Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk helicopter, which the Ministry of Defence would then be under great pressure to buy, whereas he preferred Westland to go into receivership so that GEC and British Aerospace could buy the viable parts of the business.\nIn mid-October Heseltine suggested a European consortium (which would include French A\u00e9rospatiale, German MBB and Italian Agusta). The new Trade and Industry Secretary Leon Brittan at first urged Thatcher to consider a European option (Heseltine later said Brittan \"preferred\" this option, although Brittan denied this). The Government was officially neutral (i.e. arguing that it was a matter for Westland directors and shareholders) but by November Heseltine was pushing the European option hard. In late November Peter Levene, Chief of Procurement, had a meeting at the Ministry of Defence with his French, German and Italian counterparts (the National Armaments Directors) and the representatives of the consortium, and agreed to \"buy European\" for certain classes of helicopters, although Heseltine was not actually present. The meeting was later praised by the House of Commons Defence Select Committee. Thatcher, who only learned of the meeting through Cuckney, was displeased, as were Brittan and the Treasury, who thought the US option might be cheaper.\nThe cancelled meeting.\nIn early December Thatcher had two \"ad hoc\" meetings with Heseltine, Brittan, Tebbit, William Whitelaw (Deputy Prime Minister), Geoffrey Howe (Foreign Secretary) and Nigel Lawson (Chancellor of the Exchequer). Howe and Tebbit were not unsympathetic to Heseltine's proposed consortium, and the decision was deferred to the Cabinet Economic Affairs Committee (E(A)) on Monday 9 December 1985. After that meeting Thatcher, who complained that three hours had been spent discussing a company with a market capitalisation of only \u00a330m (a tiny amount in government terms), allowed Heseltine until 4pm on Friday 13 December to submit a viable proposal for a European deal. He did (with British Aerospace and GEC now part of his consortium), but Westland's directors rejected it. Heseltine had expected that there would be a second meeting of E(A) to discuss his consortium, but no such meeting was called; Thatcher later stated that the Monday meeting had agreed to leave the decision to Westland to take, but it later emerged that Ridley and Lord Young \"had\" placed such a meeting in their diaries and had been told by Number Ten that it had been cancelled. Heseltine threatened resignation for the first time.\nHeseltine raised his concerns with Tebbit, Whitelaw and John Wakeham (Chief Whip). At Cabinet on Thursday 12 December he had an angry exchange with Thatcher about the cancelled meeting, but Westland was not on the agenda for the meeting and Thatcher refused to permit a discussion on the matter, arguing that Cabinet could not do so without the necessary papers. Heseltine asked for his dissent to be minuted, and this was not done, although Cabinet Secretary Robert Armstrong stated that this had been an error and added it himself. On Monday 16 December Heseltine sat on the front bench with obvious disapproval when Brittan told the House that it was up to Westland to decide; on Wednesday 18 December he won the backing of the Commons Defence Committee for the European Consortium. On Thursday 19 December the matter was discussed at Cabinet for ten minutes: Cabinet approved leaving the decision to Westland and Heseltine was ordered to cease campaigning for the European option. Heseltine had failed to drum up enough support among possible allies like Tebbit, Howe, Walker, Norman Fowler and Tom King. A ministerial colleague at the time described him as \"absolutely looney, completely hyped up with the thing\" and of having a \"persecution mania\".\nMayhew's leaked letter.\nBy now the political row was being discussed in the media, partly because of the lack of other news in December. Cuckney wrote to Thatcher, at her behest, asking for reassurance that the Sikorsky deal would not damage Westland's business prospects in Europe. Heseltine was not satisfied with Thatcher's draft reply when he saw it and consulted Sir Patrick Mayhew (Solicitor-General and acting Attorney-General as Sir Michael Havers was ill) on the grounds that the government might be legally liable for any incorrect advice. Heseltine supplied extra material about the risk of losing European business, which Thatcher did not include in her reply to Cuckney. Heseltine then wrote to David Horne of Lloyds Merchant Bank, who was advising the European consortium (in reply to planted questions from Horne which had been dictated to him over the phone by one of Heseltine's staff), giving him the advice which Thatcher had declined to include in her letter to Cuckney (that the Sikorsky deal would be \"incompatible with participation\" in European helicopter projects). Heseltine's letter was also leaked to the press. This was a blatant challenge to Thatcher's authority as Heseltine had not consulted Downing Street, the Department of Trade and Industry or Mayhew before writing to Horne.\nThatcher discussed sacking Heseltine with close colleagues over Christmas; but, as she later admitted in her memoir, refrained from doing so as he was too popular and important as a political figure. She also decided against sending him a letter threatening him with the sack, which had been drafted. Instead she asked Mayhew to write to Heseltine complaining of what he thought were \"material inaccuracies\" in his letter to Horne, and asking Heseltine to write to Horne again, correcting them. Mayhew's letter of rebuke to Heseltine \u2013 marked \"Confidential\" \u2013 reached Heseltine at lunchtime on Monday 6 January and was immediately leaked to the press by Colette Bowe, an information officer at the Department of Trade and Industry, at Brittan's request (some years later he admitted that he acted on the \"express\" instructions of Charles Powell and Bernard Ingham, Thatcher's two senior advisers). Heseltine was able to produce extra documents which Mayhew accepted as backing up his letter to Horne, but not before \"The Sun\" had called Heseltine \"You Liar!\" on its front page (the newspaper was later required to make a donation to charity in lieu of libel damages).\nResignation.\nCabinet met on the morning of Thursday 9 January, with Thatcher already having agreed her position with close colleagues at Chequers that weekend, and arranged that Scottish Secretary George Younger should take over as Defence Secretary if Heseltine resigned. Westland was first on the agenda, and Heseltine and Brittan were permitted to put their cases. Heseltine had won the moral high ground over the leaking saga, but Lawson recorded that he seemed obsessive at Cabinet and attracted little sympathy. Thatcher then reiterated her position, which had already been endorsed by the Cabinet, that Westland's future was a matter for Westland to decide, and announced that on grounds of Collective responsibility all answers to questions about Westland must in be cleared through the Cabinet Office. In response to a question by Nicholas Ridley (a friend of Heseltine) she confirmed that this also applied to statements which had \"already\" been made. \nAfter further questions from Heseltine, and another summing up by Thatcher, Heseltine protested that there had been no collective responsibility, gathered up his papers and left the Cabinet Room. Eyewitness accounts differ as to his exact words, or even whether he explicitly resigned. By one account he declared, \"I can no longer be a member of this Cabinet.\" Having allegedly paid a quick visit to the lavatory to straighten his hair and his Guards tie, Heseltine announced his resignation to the waiting press outside Number Ten, the first Cabinet minister to resign from a Cabinet meeting since Joseph Chamberlain in 1886. Some ministers (for example Peter Walker) and civil servants believed Heseltine could have been persuaded to return had it not been for the public announcement.\nAt 4pm that day Heseltine delivered a 3,000 word, 22 minute resignation statement at the Ministry of Defence (rather than waiting to make a statement to the House of Commons when it resumed four days later). He may well have prepared this earlier, although his private secretary Richard Mottram says not. To Thatcher's fury Defence officials had helped him throughout the crisis and in preparing this document. His statement denounced Thatcher's managerial style and suggested she was a liar who lacked integrity. Thatcher later said during a television interview that she had not sacked him or called him to order before the incident because, \u201cHad I done that, I know exactly what the press would have said: there you are, old bossyboots at it again.\u201d\nFallout from the affair.\nUnlike when Peter Thorneycroft (Chancellor of the Exchequer) resigned in 1958 or Lord Carrington (Foreign Secretary) in 1982, Heseltine's junior ministers Norman Lamont and John Lee did not resign with him. Heseltine was portrayed by \"Spitting Image\" as a swivel-eyed lunatic holding a toy helicopter.\nBrittan had to resign, partly as a result of fallout from the leak of the Mayhew letter, and partly because of his failure to give an entirely truthful answer to the House of Commons about Heseltine's accusation that he had pressured British Aerospace to withdraw from the European Consortium. Thatcher survived the Westland debate on 27 January, aided by a poor and long-winded speech by Opposition Leader Neil Kinnock. Sikorsky bought Westland.\nUp until Westland, Thatcher had approved of most of what Heseltine had done, even though their politics were rather different. Heseltine and Thatcher had quarrelled openly over a question of relations between Britain and the European Community (as it then was). Apart from the clash of personalities, and the escalation of small issues into bigger issues, it has been suggested that Heseltine, concerned at impending Defence cuts in 1986, and worried that Thatcher was unlikely to promote him further, was looking for an excuse for a resignation, which would put him in good stead to be elected party leader after, as seemed likely at the time, the Conservatives would lose the next election due by summer 1988.\nOut of office: 1986\u201390.\nCampaigning.\nHeseltine was not one to befriend and gossip with colleagues or backbenchers. He did not regard this as an insurmountable problem, as neither Heath nor Thatcher had been particularly \"clubbable\" either. From about the mid-1970s, he began a campaign of addressing local associations, sometimes using a helicopter to speak to several in one day. Heseltine had often had a reputation for being very cold and aloof with backbench MPs and party activists (Steven Norris said that after a visit to his constituency in 1983, local activists used a poster of Heseltine as a dartboard). However, in 1986\u20131990 he was a frequent visitor to local constituency dinners, although he usually attacked Labour rather than the Conservative government, and he used his wealth to afford a chauffeur and a helicopter.\nHeseltine campaigned in 100 constituencies in the 1987 election, attracting more publicity than many Cabinet ministers, although seldom mentioning Thatcher by name.\nDuring this period Heseltine enjoyed excellent relations with the media: among TV journalists he was in regular touch with Elinor Goodman of \"Channel 4 News\" (herself a former Haymarket employee), James Mates of ITN (son of his lieutenant Michael Mates) and John Cole, whilst among print journalists he was close to his old friend Anthony Howard (Deputy Editor of the Observer), Peter Jenkins, and especially close to Anthony Bevins of \"The Independent\" and the young Alastair Campbell of the \"Daily Mirror\".\nBooks.\nHeseltine's book \"Where There's A Will\" was written by a team of ghostwriters directed by Keith Hampson and Julian Haviland (former political editor of ITN and \"The Times\"). Academics, businessmen and economists contributed, and he often had them thresh out ideas in front of him. \"He acquires by social intercourse the knowledge that other people acquire by reading\", one adviser commented. The collated drafts were then rewritten by Haviland to \"give it one voice\". Hugo Young called it \"the most impressive [book of its kind] I've read by a modern Conservative\".\nHeseltine's second book, \"The Challenge of Europe: Can Britain Win?\", appeared in 1989. Heseltine was in close touch with President of the European Commission Jacques Delors, who paid a 3-hour visit to his Victoria office, diplomats Nicholas Henderson and Antony Acland and economist Christopher Johnson, who is thought to have persuaded him of the merits of European monetary union. The book won a \u00a310,000 Adolphe Bentincke prize for advancing European unity. Heseltine was a qualified supporter of the social charter (a stronger precursor to the Social Chapter from which John Major would later opt out in the Maastricht Treaty). He was seen as devoted to Europe as a matter of what he perceived as Britain's self-interest, not on an emotional level like Edward Heath, Roy Jenkins or Kenneth Clarke.\nPolicies.\nOut of office Heseltine called for money, including the receipts from council house sales, to be spent on infrastructure investment instead of tax cuts. He also called for reductions in tax relief on mortgage interest payments and pension contributions, in the hope of encouraging investment into industry rather than into property and finance, echoing views being promoted by Will Hutton at the time.\nHeseltine also took an interest in the reduction of long-term unemployment, advocating Swedish-style Workfare. A pamphlet by Richard Layard on the topic would have been published under Heseltine's name had it not been for his return to government at the end of 1990. Several of Heseltine's advisers at this time were SDP supporters, and in some cases later defected to Labour; Crick commented (in 1997) that Heseltine's views at this time were very similar to those later advocated by Tony Blair's New Labour.\nDifferences with the government.\nHeseltine's resignation in January 1986 had been just before the only occasion on which the Poll Tax was discussed in Cabinet. He spoke against the tax when it was enacted into law in 1987\u20131988, but abstained rather than voting against as Edward Heath did, although he voted for Michael Mates' amendment which tried to introduce an element of banding according to ability to pay. Heseltine remained aloof from factional plotting in the Commons, and voted with the left-wing Lollard faction in backbench committee elections. Heseltine later said that he regretted resigning from the Cabinet in 1986, as he subsequently often wondered if he and Nigel Lawson might have been able to persuade Thatcher to abandon the tax.\nHeseltine clashed bitterly at this time with his former friend Nicholas Ridley. Ridley was a Eurosceptic, a free marketer, a champion of the poll tax and a key ally of Thatcher. Heseltine argued that there was too much green belt building (although in fact only slightly more so than he had himself authorised as Environment Secretary) and stated that as a property developer he had never built on a \"green\" site, forgetting that he had done so in Tenterden in the early 1960s.\nLeadership rival.\nAlthough (or perhaps because) many of Heseltine's policy positions were not far removed from those of Labour, which was shifting to the right under Kinnock, he kept up his Conservative credentials at this time. In alliance with Norman Tebbit he persuaded ministers to abolish the Inner London Education Authority. He also supported the government's planned market-led reforms to the NHS and water privatisation in 1989. He also spoke out frequently on defence matters, supported the government's ban on \"Spycatcher\", the new Official Secrets Act 1989 and called for an independent Bank of England, although perhaps as a stepping stone to the setting up of a European Central Bank.\nOne of the reasons which Thatcher gave to close confidants for not retiring on her tenth anniversary as Prime Minister (May 1989) was worry that Heseltine would defeat Geoffrey Howe in any subsequent leadership election. Opinion polls showed that Heseltine would boost Conservative support by 13 percentage points \u2013 enough to overtake Labour. Sir Anthony Meyer wanted to see Heseltine as leader and only went ahead with his December 1989 leadership challenge to Thatcher on being assured by Keith Hampson that it would not damage Heseltine's chances; in the event Heseltine apparently walked up and down the corridor outside the voting booth making clear that he was abstaining. While Thatcher won the contest, winning the votes of 85% of Conservative MPs, the next day's \"Glasgow Herald\" reported that Heseltine's supporters predicted that unless she changed \"her style of leadership\", she would \"be on her way out next year\".\nIn spring 1990 Thatcher's political fortunes were looking weaker, as the Conservatives were badly defeated at the Mid Staffordshire by-election and the Poll tax riots took place. But despite Conservative losses at the local elections, Party Chairman Kenneth Baker spun the result as a success by pointing to the Conservative hold of Westminster and Wandsworth Councils, where the poll tax was low. In May 1990, following the elections, Heseltine wrote an article in \"The Times\" proposing reform of the poll tax \u2013 he called for the tax to be banded according to income, for councils which spent more than a certain level to face mandatory elections, for elected local mayors and for the restoration of the unitary county boroughs (i.e. making smaller cities into counties in their own right, so ending the confusion as to whether county or district council were responsible for high spending) which he himself had abolished. However, the Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, which made war seem likely, boosted Thatcher's popularity.\n1990 leadership contest.\nHeseltine was being quietly urged to challenge Thatcher for the party leadership by David Mellor, the Arts Minister, but in a carefully worded formula Heseltine had repeatedly insisted that he could \"not foresee ... circumstances\" in which he would do so. Then came the Conservative defeat at the Eastbourne by-election (18 October) and the resignation of Deputy Prime Minister Geoffrey Howe (1 November).\nHeseltine wrote a six-page public letter to his local Association chairman, calling for more regard for the wide range of opinions in the party. Heseltine then left for the Middle East to visit King Hussein of Jordan and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. Association officers sent him a 97-word reply (5 November) saying that they supported Thatcher's leadership. The party's regional agent had been present at their meeting, but they insisted he had not interfered with their reply. Round about the same time Thatcher's press secretary Bernard Ingham briefed journalists that Heseltine had \"lit the blue touch paper then retired\", although he denied having demanded that Heseltine \"put up or shut up\"; the \"Daily Mail\" front page asked \"does he have the courage?\" and \"The Times\" commented that if he did not throw his hat into the ring he would deserve to have it \"stuffed down his throat\". Thatcher brought the annual leadership election forward by a fortnight, causing Alastair Campbell to write in the \"Daily Mirror\" that \"Tarzan the Tory Ape Man had made a right monkey of himself\". A week later, after meeting Heseltine, the constituency officers issued another letter saying that they regretted how their reply had been construed as criticism.\nThen came Howe's resignation speech in the Commons on 13 November, in which he launched a strong attack on Thatcher; next morning Heseltine announced his candidacy for the leadership, saying that over 100 MPs had asked him to stand and that he was better placed than Thatcher to lead the Tories to a fourth election victory.\nDuring the subsequent leadership election on 20 November, he polled 152 votes (40.9%) in the first round of voting by Conservative MPs, enough to prevent an outright Thatcher victory. (The rules required an incumbent leader to obtain a majority of at least 15% on a first ballot; Thatcher polled 204 votes, equal to 54.8%). Heseltine was thought by many pundits to be on course to beat her in the second ballot as many Conservative MPs were now rumoured to be ready to switch support from Thatcher and only 27 would have had to have done so to give Heseltine the overall majority he would need in the second ballot.\nWith lukewarm support from her Cabinet, most of whom had told her that she could not win and faced with the bitter prospect of a Heseltine premiership, Thatcher withdrew from the contest and announced her resignation on the morning of 22 November, although she continued to serve as prime minister until a new party leader had been chosen.\nHeseltine was disappointed not to receive the support of old allies on the second ballot; these included Secretary of State for Defence Tom King (whom he asked in vain to second his nomination, but who was angry at a leadership contest when British troops were soon to go to war in Kuwait and supported Douglas Hurd), Cecil Parkinson and Norman Lamont (who managed John Major's campaign). Over the weekend on 24\u201325 November, many Conservative MPs were faced with the anger of their local party members who overwhelmingly supported Thatcher but did not at that time have a vote in leadership elections, and opinion polls showed that chancellor John Major would also boost Conservative support if leader (previously Heseltine's unique selling-point). Heseltine had never done much to court support among younger MPs the way Major had, and was seen as aloof even by his own supporters. In the second ballot, a week after the first, Heseltine's vote actually fell to 131 (just over 35%) as some MPs had voted for him in the first ballot as a protest against or to try to oust Thatcher but preferred to vote for other candidates now that they had a wider choice. John Major, with 185 votes, was only two votes short of an overall majority. Heseltine immediately and publicly conceded defeat, announcing that he would vote for Major if the third ballot went ahead (it did not, as Hurd, who had finished a distant third, also conceded).\nAlthough for the rest of his career Heseltine's role in Thatcher's downfall earned him enmity from Thatcher's supporters in the Conservative party, this opprobrium was not universal. In a reference to the reluctance of the Cabinet to support Thatcher on the second ballot, Edward Leigh said of Heseltine: \"At least he stabbed her in the front\".\nHeseltine believed that he would have defeated Thatcher if she had contested the second ballot. It has been suggested that \"he\" should have withdrawn after weakening her on the first ballot, and that he would have been restored to the Cabinet whether or not she continued as prime minister; he writes that this was never seriously suggested at the time.\nCareer under Major: 1990\u20131997.\nSecond term as Environment Secretary: 1990\u20131992.\nHeseltine disappointed many of his supporters by not pushing for them to get jobs in Major's new administration. Ian Grist was sacked from the Welsh Office and Michael Mates was eventually given a Minister of State position following the 1992 election. There were suggestions that Heseltine might be appointed Home Secretary, but Heseltine advertised his lack of interest in the position, and Major insisted that he had not offered it to him. By contrast, his enthusiasm for industrial policy made it impossible for him to be appointed Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, the job he most coveted.\nAfter a handshake of reconciliation on the steps of 10 Downing Street, Major appointed Heseltine to the Environment, the same job he had held a decade earlier. Civil servants found him a more secure and mature character the second time round, and keener to conciliate local councils, but at the same time a grander and more detached individual, aware that he had already earned a place in history and had the aura of a political heavyweight.\nIn a May 1990 article Heseltine had proposed that the Poll Tax be reformed rather than abolished. He now had a remit to reform it, and invited the opposition parties to take part in his review of options (Labour did not; the Liberal Democrats did, and proposed a local income tax). Heseltine insisted that Michael Portillo, who had been a major cheerleader for the tax, be retained as Minister of State for Local Government. Portillo and Robert Key handled the detail and presented Heseltine with a list of options. Various options were leaked to the press to test public reaction, and at one point Heseltine appeared to have settled on a tax graded both according to the size of the property and the number of adults living in it. Major was exasperated by the lack of progress and intervened, and \u2013 at Major's insistence \u2013 Chancellor Norman Lamont increased VAT by 2.5 percentage points to 17.5% in his April 1991 budget so as to provide a \u00a34.5bn subsidy to bring poll tax bills down. Eventually, as expected, the poll tax was abolished and the new Council Tax was graded according to the size of a property, with the only concession to headcount being a single-person discount. In Crick's view, the outcome was much more Sarah Hogg's and Portillo's and Major's doing than Heseltine's.\nHeseltine was permitted by his colleagues to explore the option of elected city mayors, although it did not meet with Cabinet approval; other ministers were concerned at the likelihood that cities would elect Labour mayors or that there might be deadlock between mayors and local councils. Heseltine also explored the option of unitary authorities (i.e. merging district and county councils), setting up what came to be known as the Banham Commission. Crick regards the commission as a mistake for which Heseltine has received too little blame. The proposals rumbled on for several years, causing annoyance to many Conservative councillors and to their backers in Parliament. The commission was reconstituted and scaled down by the then Environment Secretary John Gummer in 1995.\nIn the summer of 1991 Heseltine also launched a City Challenge process, whereby cities competed for government grants for capital projects, and played a key role in Major's decision to back Manchester's (unsuccessful as it turned out) bid to host the 1996 Olympic Games. He also proposed plans for developing an East Thames corridor (christened \"Hezzaville\" or \"Heseltown\" by the media).\nHeseltine received a standing ovation at the October 1991 Party Conference, seen as a sign of his rehabilitation with party activists, and was included on the A-Team to prepare for the 1992 election. He mocked Shadow Chancellor John Smith's \"prawn cocktail offensive\" to try to butter up City opinion (\"Never have so many crustaceans died in vain\"). He was a leading performer in the election and it was felt that had the Conservatives lost he might well have won the party leadership and been Leader of the Opposition, while if they won he would probably be given Trade and Industry, the job he had always wanted.\nPresident of the Board of Trade: 1992\u20131995.\nIndustrial policy.\nFollowing the 1992 general election he was appointed Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, choosing to be known by the title, dormant since 1974, of \"President of the Board of Trade\". He insisted on being addressed as \"President\" (\"not\" \"Mr President\") and being referred to as \"the President\". The Board had not met since 1850, but it did not need to as it had a quorum of one.\nOn the backbenches Heseltine had praised the Japanese MITI, and had been planning a book on the subject. He promised to intervene \"before breakfast, dinner and tea\" to help British companies, but had little opportunity for intervention as the DTI budget had dropped from over \u00a33bn in the early 1980s to \u00a31bn in 1992\u20131993, a fifth the budget of the Welsh Office. NEDO, which had been set up to coordinate industrial policy in the early 1960s, was abolished by Chancellor Norman Lamont in June 1992, although Heseltine was able to absorb some of the staff into the DTI to set up working parties to shadow specific industries. His junior ministers were Neil Hamilton and Edward Leigh, both Thatcherites. Gordon Brown mocked him (6 July 1992) as having \"absolute power over a department which has become absolutely powerless\" and \"the tiger that was once the king of the jungle is now just the fireside rug \u2013 decorative and ostentatious, but essentially there to be walked all over\".\nHeseltine was seen as more interested in large than in small and medium-sized companies, and in 1992 was only with difficulty persuaded to refer Lloyds Bank's takeover bid for Midland Bank to the Office of Fair Trading.\nPit closures.\nHeseltine's responsibilities also included Energy, as the separate Energy ministry was abolished.\nElectricity companies now decided on their own contracts, rather than being obliged by the government to choose British coal. With plans being made for the privatisation of British Coal, on 13 October 1992 Heseltine and British Coal both separately announced that 31 of British Coal's 50 pits were to close, with the loss of 30,000 jobs. Most of the detailed work had been done by the Minister of State Tim Eggar. Many of the mines in Nottinghamshire that had continued working during the 1984\u20131985 strike were to close. Although this policy was seen by the Nottinghamshire miners as a betrayal, there was hardly any organised resistance to the programme. The government stated that since the pits were losing money they could be sustained only through unjustifiable government subsidies. Mine supporters pointed to the mines' high productivity rates and to the fact that their monetary losses were due to the large subsidies that other European nations were giving to their coal industries.\nAn early leak had seen little reaction but Heseltine was taken aback by the public anger. Over 100 pits had closed since the 1984\u20131985 strike. The closures were to be rushed because the Treasury, under pressure from Major, had agreed to make money for generous redundancy settlements available only in the 1992\u20131993 fiscal year. It looked terrible coming at the fag end of the recession, when the government had a tiny majority, and just after the fiasco of Black Wednesday and the scandal of David Mellor's resignation. Heseltine was attacked by Marcus Fox, Jim Pawsey, Nicholas Winterton, Bill Cash, Rhodes Boyson and his former supporter David Evans who called openly for him to be sacked.\nThe High Court found that Heseltine and British Coal had acted \"unlawfully and irrationally\". Faced with likely defeat in the House of Commons, Heseltine was forced to agree to a moratorium, during which time he attempted, largely unsuccessfully, to seek new markets for British coal and to obtain government subsidies for pits.\nThe band Chumbawamba released the critical song \"Mr Heseltine meets the public\" that portrayed Heseltine as an out-of-touch figure; the same group had once dedicated a song to the village of Fitzwilliam, West Yorkshire, which was reduced to a ghost village by the closure of the local coal pits.\nIn February 1993, Heseltine announced that unlike the Dutch and Belgian governments, Britain would not be contributing to any bailout of Anglo-Dutch DAF Trucks (which in the event went bankrupt in June). By early 1993 Heseltine's fortunes were at a low ebb, with his future as a minister being called into question.\nA review into the pit closures appeared in March 1993. By this time, public anger had cooled. By the start of 1997, British Coal had been reduced to 28 pits.\nHeart attack.\nOn 21 June 1993, Heseltine suffered a serious heart attack in Venice (especially worrying as Heseltine was sixty, and his father had died of a heart attack aged fifty-five). The pains had already stopped by the time he reached hospital. Heseltine was shown looking unwell and using a wheelchair \u2013 in fact the result of gout in his foot from the medication which he was taking. He took four months off from work, and did not make a speech at the party conference in October 1993, instead amusing the audience by appearing on the platform and performing mock exercises with his arms.\nThere were concerns about his ability to remain in government. In 1994 Chris Morris jokingly implied on BBC Radio 1 that Heseltine had died, and persuaded MP Jerry Hayes to broadcast an on-air tribute. Morris was subsequently suspended.\nPolitical resurgence.\nHeseltine, who had been seen as an \"arriviste\" in his younger days, was now something of a grandee and elder statesman. In 1994 he re-emerged as a serious political player, beginning with his testimony for the Scott Report during the Arms-to-Iraq Inquiry (whose report eventually appeared in 1996). It was revealed that he had refused to sign the Public Interest Immunity Certificates (attempting to withhold evidence from the trial in 1992, on grounds of national security) as demanded by the Attorney-General Sir Nicholas Lyell, who advised him that ministers were \"obliged\" to sign such a certificate. In fact after half a dozen meetings over the course of a week, and Heseltine insisting on reading Bingham LJ's judgement in the Makanjuola case, Heseltine had agreed to sign a slightly different version of the PII which made clear his reservations. However, this was not picked up on at the trial, nor were Heseltine's concerns \u2013 contrary to assurances given to him by Lyell \u2013 that some of the documents might be useful to the defence passed on to the trial judge.\nNonetheless, his evidence in February 1994 was seen as an attack on Lyell and on the ministers (Kenneth Clarke, his potential rival for the leadership, Rifkind and Tristan Garel-Jones) who had signed the certificates without demur. The cover of \"Private Eye\" announced \"A Legend Lives\" and one major newspaper ended an editorial by proclaiming that the \"balance of probability\" was that Heseltine would be prime minister before the end of the year \u2013 this being at a time when John Major's leadership had lost much credibility after the scandals following the \"Back to Basics\" campaign the previous autumn.\nHeseltine also acted to enforce a squeaky clean image at this time, by announcing an inquiry in July 1994, into allegations of insider dealing by Jeffrey Archer (there was insufficient evidence to prosecute), and by personally (rather than in writing) announcing an inquiry into whether a weapons manufacturing company called BMARC had broken government guidelines on trading with Iraq in the late 1980s.\nHeseltine launched a White Paper on Competitiveness in 1994. He was active in leading British trade delegations to South Africa, South America, India and Russia, but despite his enthusiasm for European Unity was seen to display little interest in the nuts and bolts of trade negotiations with the continent.\nIn 1994 Heseltine planned to privatise 40% of the Post Office, a move which the Conservatives had previously shied away from. He was seen as imperious and intolerant by backbench opponents concerned at the threat to local postal services (\"he seemed to have lost touch\" one commented after a meeting), and the plan was abandoned by the Cabinet as unlikely to pass the House of Commons, as the Major government's majority had dropped to 14 by then. However, Heseltine was gaining some popularity with the Tory Right at this time, helped by his opposition to lowering the gay age of consent from 21 to 18, and his attack on the European Community as overregulated and sclerotic. (The popularity of his rival Kenneth Clarke, by contrast, was suffering among Tory MPs after his unpopular autumn 1994 budget and his overt enthusiasm for the mooted Single European Currency). However, there was to be no leadership election that autumn.\nEurosceptics had been floating the idea of a referendum on membership of the Single Currency or even of membership of the European Community, since at least 1994. In November 1994 Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, with Major's approval and supported by Malcolm Rifkind, had advocated a referendum on joining the euro or on the upcoming 1996 Intergovernmental Conference, but Heseltine and Clarke were opposed (only these five senior ministers appear to have been involved) and the proposal was shelved for the time being.\n1995 leadership election.\nJohn Major was consistently opposed by Eurosceptics in his party (known as the Maastricht Rebels \u2013 a small minority of MPs before 1997, but enjoying much wider support among party activists). Heseltine always stated categorically that he would \"never\" stand for party leader against Major.\nIn mid-1995 Major challenged his critics to \"put up or shut up\" by resubmitting himself to a leadership election in which he was unsuccessfully opposed by John Redwood the Secretary of State for Wales. There was speculation that Heseltine's supporters would engineer Major's downfall in the hope that their man would take over, but they stayed loyal to Major. Heseltine had been listening to regular reports about his potential support from his lieutenants Keith Hampson, Richard Ottaway, Michael Mates and Peter Temple-Morris, and in the event of a second ballot hoped to receive Major's endorsement. Peter Tapsell refused to support him because of the European issue. Hampson believed that Heseltine might have won, as did Philip Stephens of the \"Financial Times\". Michael Crick does not agree, pointing out that many of Heseltine's supporters from 1990 had retired from the Commons and the 1992 intake was more right-wing and eurosceptic.\nHeseltine, who showed his ballot paper to the returning officers to prove that he had voted for Major, commented that \"John Major deserves a great deal better than that from his colleagues\". Major was re-elected leader.\nDeputy Prime Minister: 1995\u20131997.\nHeseltine had a two-hour meeting with Major on the morning of the leadership vote. He was promoted to Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State. He was given a swipe card to enter 10 Downing Street whenever he liked and the right to attend any committee he wished. He chaired four Cabinet Committees, including Environment and Local Government, and two new committees: Competitiveness Committee (effectively, industrial strategy) and the Coordination and Presentation of Government Policy (EDCP) which met every weekday at 8.30am.\nThe matter of a referendum on joining the euro, after much press speculation, was raised again at Cabinet by Douglas Hogg in the spring of 1996, very likely (in Clarke's view) with Major's approval; Clarke records that Heseltine spoke \"with passionate intensity\" at Cabinet against a referendum, believing both that referendums were pernicious and that no concession would be enough to please the Eurosceptics. Clarke, who had already threatened resignation over the issue, also opposed the measure and, although Clarke and Heseltine were in a small minority, Major once again deferred a decision. Major, Heseltine and Clarke eventually reached agreement in April 1996, in what Clarke describes as \"a tense meeting \u2026 rather like a treaty session\", that there would be a commitment to a referendum before joining the euro, but that the pledge would be valid for one Parliament only (i.e. until the general election after next), with the Government's long-term options remaining completely open; Clarke threatened to resign if this formula were departed from. Heseltine had opposed a referendum on euro membership when Thatcher proposed it in 1990. Clarke, writing in 2016 after the Brexit Referendum, comments that he and Heseltine later agreed that they had separately decided to give way because of the pressure Major was under, and that the referendum pledge \"was the biggest single mistake\" of their careers, giving \"legitimacy\" to such a device.\nHeseltine made several visits to Manchester in the aftermath of the IRA bomb on 15 June 1996 \u2013 he won the praise of opposition politicians for cutting red tape to arrange remedial measures. However, Crick recounts complaints about his aloofness from small shopkeepers, and Crick comments that he seemed to have lost the common touch which he had displayed in Liverpool in the early 1980s.\nIn 1996 Heseltine was also one of the more hawkish ministers in urging non-cooperation with the European Community over the beef ban. However, after press speculation in December 1996 that he might abandon the government's \"wait and see\" policy on the euro in the hope of winning Eurosceptic votes, he took to the airwaves \u2013 in apparent unison with Clarke \u2013 to insist that the government retained a free choice as to whether or not to join, angering Eurosceptics.\nHeseltine played an important role in taking charge of the Millennium Exhibition in Greenwich and ensuring that it happened, even having a meeting with Tony Blair, Leader of the Opposition, in January 1997 to agree that a Labour Government would back it.\nAfter government.\nOn 3 May, the day after the government was defeated at the 1997 general election, Heseltine suffered an attack of angina and had a tube inserted into an artery; at 64, and twenty years older than the new prime minister, he declined to stand for the Conservative Party leadership again. However, he was less unpopular with eurosceptics than Clarke, and on the third ballot of the subsequent leadership election Clarke, facing imminent defeat by William Hague, offered to stand aside in Heseltine's favour, but he declined on medical advice. He became active in promoting the benefits for Britain of joining the Single European Currency, appearing on the same stage as Tony Blair, Gordon Brown and Robin Cook as part of an all-party campaign to promote Euro membership. He was also made a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour in the 1997 resignation Honours List. In November 1999 Heseltine was invited by Hague to be the Conservative candidate for the new position of Mayor of London (in place of Jeffrey Archer who had had to stand down because of scandal), but he declined.\nIn the interim Shadow Cabinet of John Major he served as Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Shadow Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.\nRetirement.\nHeseltine stood down from his Henley constituency at the 2001 election, being succeeded by \"Spectator\" editor and future prime minister Boris Johnson, but he remained outspoken on British politics. He was created a life peer on 12 July 2001 taking the title Baron Heseltine, \"of Thenford in the County of Northamptonshire\".\nIn December 2002, Heseltine controversially called for Iain Duncan Smith to be replaced as leader of the Conservatives by the \"dream-ticket\" of Clarke as leader and Michael Portillo as deputy. He suggested the party's MPs vote on the matter rather than party members as currently required by party rules. Without the replacement of Duncan Smith, the party \"has not a ghost of a chance of winning the next election\" he said. Duncan Smith was removed the following year. In the 2005 party leadership election, Heseltine backed young moderniser David Cameron.\nFollowing Cameron's election to the leadership he set up a wide-ranging policy review. Chairmen of the various policy groups included ex-Chancellor Kenneth Clarke and other former Cabinet ministers John Redwood, John Gummer, Stephen Dorrell and Michael Forsyth as well as ex-leader Iain Duncan Smith. Heseltine was appointed to head the cities task force having been responsible for urban policy twice as Environment Secretary under Thatcher and Major.\nIn 2008 Heseltine took part in the BBC Wales programme \"Coming Home\" about his Welsh family history. He said in this programme that he regarded Wales as his home and identified strongly with his Welsh ancestry.\nIn March 2012, he was asked to head an audit of the UK's industrial performance for Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne and HM Treasury, upon which\u2014after 11 years as a member of the House of Lords\u2014he made his maiden speech in the chamber.\nHeseltine was interviewed in 2012 as part of The History of Parliament's oral history project.\nIn 2023, Heseltine appeared as the guest star in the first episode of The Rest Is Politics: Leading, a podcast hosted by Alastair Campbell and Rory Stewart.\nNo stone unturned.\nFollowing the arrival of the Coalition into power in 2010, he was commissioned to draw up \"Plan H\" or \"No Stone Left Unturned\" to stimulate growth in local areas. Since then, 81 out of his 89 recommendations have been adopted. At the 2013 Budget, the Coalition pledged to pool billions of pounds of regional spending into a single fund in a bid to de-centralise public spending and boost economic growth outside London.\nOther Heseltine comments.\nHeseltine criticised the Coalition's policy on Europe, but he did support the tightening of immigration laws. He also supported George Osborne's Budget measures in 2013 and Iain Duncan Smith's welfare reforms, but showed concerns over the legalisation of same-sex marriage. In June 2013, he voted against Lord Dear's wrecking amendment, thus ratifying the same-sex marriage act.\nViews on Brexit and involvement in the campaign for a People's Vote.\nHe described the 2016 Brexit referendum result to leave the European Union as \"the greatest constitutional crisis of modern times\" and condemned Leave campaigner Boris Johnson as a coward for pulling out of the Conservative leadership election after winning the referendum, likening him to \"a general who has led his troops to the sound of guns, and, at first sight of battle, has left the field.\" Lord Heseltine queried the way Theresa May as home secretary campaigned to remain in the EU though \"within a few weeks\" of becoming PM, she insisted \"Brexit means Brexit\". Heseltine mentioned a speech by Theresa May before the EU referendum, where she urged Britain to \"stand tall and lead in Europe\". Heseltine said: \"I don't know how someone who made that speech can, within a few weeks, say Brexit is Brexit and ask the nation to unite behind it...[unlike Margaret Thatcher] this lady was for turning.\"\nIn March 2017 he was sacked from a number of advisory roles within government after rebelling over the article 50 legislation in the House of Lords, but said he would continue working to avert the \"disaster\" of Brexit. He later said that it was \"quite unacceptable\" for Germany to be in dominant position in Europe, having lost the Second World War. Heseltine feels the 48% of British voters who voted 'remain' are being ignored. He sees Brexit as a historic loss of power for Britain and feels Britain's interests are in Europe.\nIn March 2018 Heseltine expressed concern over Theresa May's Brexit negotiations, commenting: \"Why is it that after 18 months since the referendum we have not got any closer with these issues? The answer is simple: because no one has got any answer about how to do it.\" He also said the gulf between what May wanted and what the EU was willing to give was not narrowing and may be widening, adding \"While that gap remains industry will continue to make assumptions that will involve moving investment from here to the continent. (...) The downsides are becoming more evident as time passes. We have had a serious devaluation of the currency. We have turned ourselves from the fastest growing to the slowest growing economy in Europe and we have made a complete Horlicks of the Irish border. I am totally with the view of Tony Blair and John Major that this matter has got to go back to parliament and possibly to a referendum or a general election.\"\nHeseltine was one of the signatories of a statement by senior Conservatives calling for a second referendum over Brexit. This stated, \"If we are to remain a party of government, it is absolutely critical that we increase our support among younger generations. To do this, we must listen to and engage with their concerns on Brexit. They voted overwhelmingly to Remain in the European Union in 2016 \u2013 and since then have become even stronger in their views. Since the referendum, nearly 2 million young people are now of voting age. Of those in this group who are certain to vote, an astounding 87% support the United Kingdom staying in the European Union. If we do not hear their voices, who could blame them for feeling excluded and powerless on this most vital issue. The truth is that if Brexit fails this generation, we risk losing young people for good. Our party's electoral future will be irrevocably blighted.\"\nHeseltine participated in various events organised by the People's Vote organisation, including a rally in December 2018 which called for a vote on the Brexit withdrawal agreement. In July 2019, he addressed a rally for a People's Vote in Birmingham and expressed himself critically of the government of Boris Johnson which he accused of being \"sworn to an extreme interpretation of the 2016 referendum, bound to articulation based on unfounded and reckless optimism, unrealistic assertions defended by evasion and bombast, blind to the world in which we live\".\nConservative whip suspension.\nIn May 2019, he had the Conservative Party whip suspended after saying he would vote for the Liberal Democrats, rather than the Conservatives, at the 2019 European Parliament election.\nOn 26 November 2019, in preparation for the 2019 general election, Heseltine said he could not support Boris Johnson because the Prime Minister was pursuing an \"utterly disastrous\" policy that would make Britain poorer and less influential, and he called on voters to back the Liberal Democrats to deny Johnson a majority in Parliament.\nIn June 2023, following the report by the Commons Privileges Committee, he said that Johnson had lied to parliament. Speaking on \"Sky News\", he said that Johnson had resigned before the Partygate report was published because he \"saw it coming\", adding \"We've had four days of this report and the story doesn't change: Boris Johnson told a pack of lies. Boris Johnson got out from under, he saw it coming, he knew he hadn't a case to defend. So he resigned before the suspension that he feared could be relevant.\" In July 2024, the Conservatives restored Heseltine's whip.\nFamily and personal life.\nHeseltine married Anne Harding Williams in 1962. They have three children: Annabel (born in 1963), Alexandra (born in 1966), and Rupert (born in 1967), as well as nine grandchildren. During the period Heseltine was the MP for Tavistock in Devon (from 1966 to 1974), he became part of a local 'fishing gang' with poet Ted Hughes. His wife was delighted, as an admirer of the poet, but Heseltine himself did not initially know who he was.\nAt the beginning of November 2016, drawing on an interview with \"Tatler\" magazine, it was reported that Heseltine had confessed to strangling his mother's Alsatian in 1964, after the animal had drawn blood, which was falsely interpreted as his having killed the dog. A rumour about such an incident had been in circulation since a 1990 article in \"The Observer\" and an unauthorised biography. Heseltine later stated that he had, in fact, subdued the animal using its choke collar after it had attacked him. In an interview with the Press Association, Heseltine said the dog was put down the next day at the vet's insistence, because it had become dangerous and a threat to his pregnant wife and elderly mother.\nIn January 2017, Heseltine was convicted of careless driving and fined \u00a35,000, following an incident on 19 June 2016 in which he pulled out into the path of a cyclist, causing serious injuries, including a broken arm and shattered knees, which required plates and pins.\nThenford gardens and arboretum.\nThe Heseltines purchased Thenford House and its grounds in 1976. The house was bought privately with the aid of a large loan, and they are thought to have paid around \u00a3750,000 (approximately \u00a34.5m at 2016 prices), and to have spent a similar sum on renovating the property. They also own a number of farms in the area.\nOver the next 25 years they restored of woodland together with the walled garden, medieval fish-ponds, and a lake. There is also a sculpture garden, which includes a large bronze bust of Lenin, from Latvia. At the turn of the century they decided to create various ornamental features in the garden and increase the range of trees and shrubs in the arboretum. Covering over the arboretum is stocked with over 3,000 different species. Their arboretum was featured in a one-off documentary on BBC Two in December 2005. In October 2016 the Heseltines were featured on BBC's \"Gardeners' World\", discussing their garden at Thenford House, parts of which were modelled after the gardens at Ch\u00e2teau de Villandry. The garden is open to the public by appointment only.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
